HONDURAS
Evidence came to light early in the year implicating the security forces in a series of extrajudicial executions. A Nicaraguan citizen "disappeared" in the custody of the Honduran police: he was subsequently found to have been executed. Two soldiers were jailed for the rape and murder of a student in 1991. The police and armed forces were also believed to be responsible for numerous threats against journalists, human rights workers and others. A government report found former and current government officials responsible for "disappearances" during the 1980s.
Several former police agents gave testimony implicating the police and army in unlawful killings, drug-trafficking, corruption and other crimes. In February a former agent of the Dirección Nacional de Investigaciones (dni), National Directorate of Investigations, the intelligence branch of the security forces, accused the dni of involvement in a string of killings of union and business leaders in the northern city of San Pedro Sula in preceding months. He also alleged that the former Batallón 3-16, 3-16 Battalion, a military intelligence body which the government said had been disbanded following allegations that it was responsible for killings and "disappearances" in the early 1980s, was still intact and had collaborated covertly with the dni in these abuses,
The national and international reaction to these events prompted the government to set up the Comisión Ad Hoc de A J to Nivel. High Level Ad Hoc Commission, to propose measures for the reform of the dni, the police, the judiciary and the Attorney-General's office. In mid-March the Commission recommended the formation of an arbitration commission to review dni personnel, to implement safeguards against
HONDURAS
torture and ill-treatment and to place those responsible for abuses before the courts. The Commission's final recommendations were published in April. It urged the creation of an autonomous Public Ministry empowered to initiate investigations and judicial proceedings and to discipline public officials where appropriate. It called for the transfer of the dni's functions to a new Departamento de Investigación Criminal (dig), Criminal Investigation Department, within the Public Ministry. In July the arbitration commission reported progress in the review of the dni, and said reports of abuses had decreased. Legislation creating the Public Ministrv was approved in December and the creation of the dig was pending at the end of the year.
The armed forces proved reluctant to relinquish their control over the police and their traditional immunity from prosecution for human rights abuses. Although publicly supportive of the transfer of the dni to civilian control, the armed forces High Council opposed moves by Congress to issue a clear interpretation of Articles 90 and 91 of the Constitution concerning the jurisdiction of military courts, Investigations into alleged human rights violations by army personnel had frequently been blocked by the military's claim for jurisdiction over all cases involving its members {see Amnesty International Report 1993]. Congress approved legislation in April restricting the scope of military jurisdiction.
The Partido Liberal, Liberal Party, led by Carlos Roberto Reina, defeated the ruling Partido Nacional, National Party, in presidential elections in November. Both main parties strove to implicate each other in over 100 "disappearances" which occurred in the 1980s until the Comisionado Nacional de Protección de los Derectjos Humanos. National Commissioner for the Protection of Human Rights, announced that his office would report on the "disappeared" by the end of the year. The report, published on 29 December, found former and current military and civilian officials responsible for the "systematic, clandestine and organized" "disappearance" of 184 individuals throughout the 1980s. Among the officials cited in the report as responsible were two former presidents and the current head of the armed forces. It also stated that military advisers from the usa and Argentina were involved in these crimes. The Commissioner recommended
that those named in the report be brought before the courts with a view to punishing those responsible, despite the 1991 amnesty law (see Amnesty International Report 1992). It also called for efforts to locate clandestine cemeteries where the "disappeared" were alleged to be buried, and for the disclosure of military archives relating to military counter-insurgency operations.
Several former armed opposition groups participated in the elections after renouncing armed struggle and reorganizing as political parties. A number of attacks were carried out in the name of former rebel groups, such as the Frente Patriótico Morazanista (fpm), Morazanist Patriotic Front, but there was compelling evidence that some such attacks, in fact, were carried out by members of the armed forces trying to discredit opposition groups.
On 29 January television journalist Eduardo Coto witnessed the killing of Eduardo Piiìa Van Tuyl, a businessman, in San Pedro Sula and filmed the three killers as they fled on a motorbike. A communique issued in the name of the fpm claimed responsibility. However, Eduardo Coto identified the killers as members of the army: this was subsequently confirmed by the Comité para la Defensa de los Dere-chos Humanos en Honduras (codeh), Committee for the Defence of Human Rights in Honduras, whose investigations linked the killers to the 3-16 Battalion, alleged to be operating from the 105 Infantry Brigade in San Pedro Sula. After receiving threats. Eduardo Coto went into hiding at the home of the editor of the opposition newspaper Tiempo, which was then the target of a bomb attack. Eduardo Coto then left the country.
The killing of Eduardo Pina Van Tuyl was one of seven killings since November 1992 which the former dni agent said in February had been committed by members of the army in San Pedro Sula. He also said that the 1992 killing of electricity workers' union leader Rigoberto Borjas (see Amnesty International Report 1993] and the killing of Guillermo Agurcia, a businessman, and his fiancée, Lourdes Enamorado, on 5 January had been carried out by a drug-trafficking and extortion network within the armed forces. After making these allegations the former dni agent was taken under the protection of the National Human Rights Commissioner and the government undertook to mount exhaustive
HONDURAS
investigations. Four dni officers were temporarily confined to barracks at the 105 Brigade headquarters in February pending their appearance before a court, but judicial proceedings did not appear to have progressed by the end of the year.
In December Juan Pablo Laguna Cruz, a Nicaraguan citizen, was detained by Hon-duran police near the border town of El Triunfo. Despite a habeas corpus petition, the Honduran authorities denied detaining him. He was subsequently found to have been killed.
A significant step towards overcoming impunity was taken in July when an army colonel and a sergeant were sentenced to 16 and 10 years' imprisonment respectively after being convicted of the rape and killing in 1991 of a 16-year-old student, Riccy Mabel Martinez (see Amnesty Internationa! Reports 1992 and 1993). The family of the victim lodged an appeal against the sentence, arguing that the officers should have been convicted of murder rather than the lesser crime of homicide, for which they were given minimum sentences. A test case of the military's accountability before the law, the trial was obstructed by threats against the judge and the prosecutor, and attempts by the military to have the accused tried before a military court, countered by intense pressure from fellow students and human rights campaigners.
A civilian court was also granted jurisdiction in the case of the army massacre at the El Astillero cooperative in Agua Caliente, Atlántida department, in 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992]. Proceedings against a colonel accused of ordering the killings had been opened before a military court. However, the Supreme Court upheld a complaint by codeh that military jurisdiction in this case was unconstitutional and the case was continuing before a civilian court at the end of the year. Those allegedly responsible for other human rights violations by the army in previous years, including the killings of Juan Humberto Sánchez in 1992 and of Manuel de Jesús Guerra in 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1993), remained ft'ee, the corresponding investigations having apparently stagnated.
A series of threats and attacks were directed at figures critical of abuses by the armed forces. In March Lucy Cantarero, the wife of a former armed forces chief.
Arnulfo Cantarero López, said she had received death threats after her husband made public statements about the existence of 3-16 Battalion and army corruption. In April anonymous leaflets appeared in the capital, Tegucigalpa, accusing codeh and the Comité de Familiares de Detenidos Desaparecidos de Honduras (cofadeh), the Committee of Relatives of the Disappeared, of bribing the opposition press and others such as Lucy Cantarero to mount a campaign to discredit the armed forces. Others who received threats throughout the year included several witnesses, lawyers and relatives involved in investigations into human rights abuses by the army.
Following the intervention of the Commissioner, two dni agents were detained in March in connection with the torture of three detainees in police custody in Jesús de Otero, Intibucá department, in December 1992. Jesús Arquímides Monzón Mejía, Miguel Angel Montoya and Benjamín Manzanares Castro had been beaten, kicked and nearly suffocated with a capucha (hood) at a local police station, in order to make them confess to a robbery they denied having committed. They had been released two days later for lack of evidence. The two dni agents were dismissed ft'om service, but no judicial proceedings were initiated against them.
A police officer who beat a 15-year-old boy in front of numerous witnesses in a Tegucigalpa bar in July was given 30 days' detention and dismissed ft'om the police in October, following investigations by the Oficina de Responsabilidad Profesional, Office of Professional Responsibility, which had been set up in 1991 to carry out internal investigations into security force abuses. However, the authorities did not appear to have investigated other cases of alleged ill-treatment of street children by security forces in Tegucigalpa - for example. the alleged ill-treatment of four children in May by security force agents in Colonia Cerro Grande. The security forces were also reported to have ill-treated people when forcibly recruiting young people into the army and in responding to strikes and demonstrations.
Amnesty International urged the government to ensure full investigation of the alleged killings and torture by the dni and expressed concern about the lack of progress in investigating the killings of Juan Humberto Sánchez, Manuel de Jesús
Guerra and others in 1992 (see Amnesty International Report 1993). In September Amnesty International wrote to the National Commissioner for the Protection of Human Rights about the cases of the "disappeared" to express disquiet at the way in which their cases had been dealt with during the election campaign and to call for a full and proper investigation to clarify the fate and whereabouts of the victims. In December Amnesty International welcomed the Commissioner's report and called on President-elect Reina to bring those responsible for these and more recent abuses to justice.
