LITHUANIA
Two people were executed.
In February Algirdas Brazauskas won Lithuania's first direct presidential elections. Adolfas Slezevicius was confirmed as Prime Minister by parliament in March.
Lithuania became a member of the Council of Europe in May and signed the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. It had not ratified this instrument by the end of the year,
In lune parliament repealed Article 122 (part one) of the Criminal Code under which homosexual acts between consenting adult males were criminal offences punishable by imprisonment.
Two people were executed following rejection of their petitions for clemency by President Algirdas Brazauskas. Vladimir Ivanov and Valentinas Laskys were sentenced to death in July and August respectively, both for premeditated murder under aggravated circumstances. It was not clear whether appeals against the sentences were heard in either of the cases. Two other men were believed to be still under sentence of death at the end of the year. Information from official sources indicated that another nine death sentences were
passed during the year, all of which were commuted.
In luIy Amnesty International asked the authorities whether anyone had been imprisoned under Article 122 (part one) at the time of its abolition, and if so, whether they had been released. No reply had been received by the end of the year.
In July Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of National Defence raising again its concern about the punitive length of alternative service — 24 months compared to 12 months for military service (see Amnesty International Report 1993]. No reply had been received by the end of the year. There were no reports of people imprisoned for refusing to perform military service on grounds of conscience.
Amnesty International appealed for the commutation of all the death sentences that it learned about during the year. In its letters to the authorities the organization asked whether the condemned prisoners' internationally guaranteed right to have their convictions and sentences examined by a court of higher jurisdiction had been respected. No reply was received. Amnesty International also urged the authorities to consider the complete abolition of the death penalty. In May the Procurator General informed the organization that it was "too early" for Lithuania to abolish the death penalty for exceptionally serious and cruel crimes.
In January the organization published a report entitled The Baltic States: Time to abolish the death penalty.
