KENYA
Dozens of peaceful protesters, human rights activists and government critics were detained for short periods. Many were prisoners of conscience. Most were released uncharged but others were charged with political offences then freed on bail. Treason charges against five government opponents arrested in 1990 and 1991 were withdrawn and they were freed, but some were rearrested on new charges and remained in prison a( the end of the year. There were reports of torture, including rape, and ill-treatment of prisoners. Scores of people were killed in ethnic clashes allegedly instigated or condoned by the government, many of them apparently victims of extrajudicial executions. Some 400 people were under sentence of death, including over 30 convicted during 1993, but no executions were reported.
Many people died in continued inter-ethnic clashes. Between late 1991 and the end of 1993. over 1,500 people were killed and tens of thousands displaced. The violence was in part alleged to have been instigated by the government of President
Daniel arap Moi or by the ruling Kenya African National Union (kanu) party and to have been carried out by groups recruited by them. Those protesting against government involvement in the violence were frequently arrested or threatened,
Koigi wa Wamwere, a former member of parliament and political prisoner, who had been arrested in 1990 (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1993), was released on 19 January when the prosecution withdrew treason charges. Three others held with him, including lawyers Mirugi Kariuki and Rumba Kinuthia, were also released. However, Koigi wa Wamwere was rearrested on 18 September in Burnt Forest town in the Rift Valley, together with Mirugi Kariuki, his lawyer, and six others. Initially held incommunicado, they were charged with possessing weapons and seditious publications, including documents of the National Democratic and Human Rights Organization, founded by Koigi wa Wamwere, and with illegally entering a restricted security zone - all of which they denied. Members of the Release Political Prisoners (rpp) campaigning group were also arrested. All were released on bail within a few days or weeks, but Koigi wa Wamwere was arrested again on 5 November in Nakuru and charged, with 14 others - including two relatives previously imprisoned with him -with attempted violent robbery, punishable by a mandatory death penalty. He seemed to have been arrested for his non-violent political activities. All 15 denied the allegations of involvement in an armed attack on a police station. Their trial, set for December, was adjourned. Among others held for several days in other arrests of suspected government opponents in Nakuru was Dr S.W. Mwangi, who was providing medical treatment to political prisoners.
Although opposition political parties operated openly and freely, opposition members of parliament, human rights activists. journalists and other government critics were arrested and detained for short periods in connection with peaceful demonstrations, speeches, publications or investigations into human rights abuses.
Some government critics were accused of sedition. John Makhanga, a pharmacist and human rights activist involved in relief work for victims of the ethnic clashes, was arrested in Nairobi on 25 February, beaten up by masked police officers, and taken to an unknown destination. In court a few
KENYA
days later he was charged with sedition but was freed on bail after two weeks in custody. In February and again in June, Njehu Gatabaki, editor of Finance magazine, was held briefly for alleged sedition. The Reverend Jamlick Miano, editor of The Watchman. and people selling his newspaper were arrested on two occasions when the newspaper criticized President Moi. Dominic Martin was held briefly in May for printing an allegedly seditious opposition magazine, and his printing press was damaged by unidentified assailants. Njenga Mungai, an opposition member of parliament, was arrested three times for publicly accusing the government of instigating ethnic clashes in his constituency in Molo. The General Secretary of the Central Organization of Trade Unionists (coTu). Joseph Mugalla, was arrested on 1 May after calling for a general strike: he was charged with inciting disobedience to the law but freed on bail. Sheikh Khalid Salim Balala. an Islamic Party of Kenya (ipk) activist arrested in 1992 for alleged treason and freed in January, was rearrested in May after threatening violence against the government; he was charged with treason but released on bail.
In all these cases, those arrested - who were mostly prisoners of conscience -were released on bail or without charge after a few days or weeks. Charges against some of them were later dropped. Sedition charges with penalties of up to 10 years' imprisonment, which had been brought in 1992 against several non-violent government critics, including Pius Nyamora and other Society magazine journalists (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1993], were also withdrawn, although sedition charges brought in 1992 and 1993 against Njehu Gatabaki were left pending.
Cases of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners were reported. In January Koigi wa Wamwere's food was allegedly poisoned in Kamiti prison. Rumba Kinuthia continued to be kept chained in custody in hospital until his release on 19 January. Several prisoners testified in court that they had been tortured by police to make them confess to crimes. Some suspected government opponents arrested with Koigi wa Wamwere in September and November were allegedly tortured by police, at least one of them suffering serious injuries.
Police assaulted peaceful demonstrators on several occasions. Refugees, especially
those fleeing civil war in Somalia, were frequently ill-treated and there were many reports of police raping Somali women refugees.
In April a court awarded Wanyiri Ki-horo, a former prisoner of conscience, compensation for torture and unlawful detention between 1986 and 1989 (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1989].
Scores of people were killed by government supporters or armed pro-government groups during 1993. particularly in areas near Burnt Forest, Molo and Nakuru towns in Rift Valley Province and near Mount Elgon in Western Province, many of them apparently victims of extrajudicial executions. In particular cases as in Londiani in June and Molo in August, the violence was carried out by organized groups, known as "Kalenjin warriors", armed with bows and arrows and composed of as many as 300 members of the Kalenjin ethnic group to which President Moi belongs. Police failed to protect victims or investigate complaints. Most victims, who were perceived as supporting opposition parties, belonged to other ethnic groups, particularly the Kikuyu, although Kalenjins also suffered violent reprisals in some areas. In September the government designated some of the disturbed areas as restricted security zones; this resulted in the blocking of independent investigations and relief activities by Kenyan church groups and others. Police arrested and prosecuted over 1,000 people for alleged involvement in the violence but often failed to stop or prevent violence by pro-government or Kalenjin elements.
The full facts of the alleged extrajudicial execution of former Foreign Minister Robert Ouko in 1990 were still unclear. The trial of former District Commissioner Jonah Anguka, who was accused of his murder, was continuing at the end of 1993.
Over 30 people were sentenced to death by the courts after being convicted of armed robbery or murder, with an estimated total of some 400 people under sentence of death. There were no reports of executions.
Amnesty International criticized the frequent arrests and short-term imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, and the use of charges such as sedition - or even violent robbery, in Koigi wa Wamwere's case - to punish and restrict peaceful political activities. The organization called for independent investigations into reports of torture
KENYA/KOREA (DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF)
by police officers, including rape and beatings, and also for thorough and impartial investigations into ethnic killings where any sort of involvement by the government. ruling party or security forces was suspected. Amnesty International urged commutation of all death sentences.
