GUINEA-BISSAU
Dozens of soldiers and two civilians were arbitrarily detained after an alleged coup attempt in March. Ten were released in June, apparently pending trial. Sixteen were formally charged and were to be tried in January 1994. Those arrested included two possible prisoners of conscience who were briefly redetained in August. Other political activists were detained during the year and reportedly
GUINEA-BISSAU
beaten in police custody. The death penalty was abolished.
In February the National Assembly approved a package of constitutional amendments to move the country to a multi-party political system, a process which started in 1991. The reforms were proposed by a multi-partv commission preparing for Guinea-Bissau's first multi-partv elections. President Joao Bernardo Vieira announced in July that elections would be held in March 1994. The reforms, which strengthened human rights protection, included the rights not to be arbitrarily arrested or subjected to torture or unfair trials. All the opposition parties and a significant number of members of the ruling Partido Africano para a Independencia de Guiñé e Cabo Verde (paigc), African Party for the Independence of Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verde, supported abolition of the death penalty which was abolished when the revised Constitution was published in early lune.
Dozens of soldiers and two civilians were arrested after an incident on 17 March in which a senior military officer was killed and several army units briefly mutinied. The detainees were held incommunicado while they were questioned by a military Commission of Inquiry set up to investigate the incident. The authorities ignored a Supreme Court order for one of the civilian detainees. loao da Costa, to be brought before a judge within 48 hours so that the legality of his detention could be tested. The non-governmental. Liga Guineense das Direitos do Homem, Guinea-Bissau Human Rights League, expressed concern that extracts of statements made before the Commission of Inquiry were broadcast on television, thereby
prejudicing the right of those accused to be presumed innocent until proved guilty. Concern was also expressed that detainees had been denied access to lawyers and relatives. The League's president, Fernando Gomes, subsequently received death threats.
In mid-June, 10 of the detainees were released, apparently pending trial. They included two possible prisoners of conscience: loao da Costa, a former government minister and president of the opposition Partido da flenovapao Democrática, Democratic Renewal Party, and Tagmé Na Waié, a member of the Resistencia da Guiné-Bissau-Movimento Bafatá (rcb-mb), Guinea-Bissau Resistance-Bafatá Movement, Neither they nor, apparently, the eight others had been charged with any offence. However, under the terms of their release both were prohibited from leaving Bissau, the capital, and ft-om engaging in political activities, although there appeared to be no basis in law for such a prohibition. Other detainees were reportedly released during the year but some remained in detention.
In early August loao da Costa and Tagmé Na Waié were rearrested by soldiers after publicly criticizing the government in defiance of their bail conditions. They were held in a military prison for four days before being released without charge. In December they and 14 others were charged and committed for trial by the Military Court in January 1994.
Police were reported on several occasions to have ill-treated political activists and others. They included Fo Na Nsofa and four others, some of whom apparently belonged to the rc;b-mb, who were detained in late June and early July in the south of the country and reportedly beaten in police custody. Four remained in detention without charge or trial until August. Fó Na Nsofa was released on bail in late October or early November.
Mussa Baldé, an rgb-mb official, was among several people briefly detained and beaten with rifle butts by police in August. They had been unable to produce identity cards and tax certificates when stopped by police.
In mid-May the procurator of the Regional Military Court of Bissau formally charged seven police officers,^ who had been arrested in late 1992, with complicity in the death in September 1992 of
GUINEA-BISSAU/GUYANA
Ussumane Quade (see Amnesty International Report 1993). The Interior Minister, who was apparently not arrested, was charged with failing to take appropriate action after receiving allegations that Ussumane Quade had died as a result of torture. However, those arrested in connection with the case were released in July and the eight accused had not been brought to trial by the end of the year.
In May Amnesty International published a report, Guinea-Bissau: In defiance of the law, and called publicly for all those detained after the 17 March incident to be properly charged and given a fair trial, or released. The organization said that the proceedings of the Commission of Inquiry were so flawed that any findings should be totally excluded as evidence at the trial.
Amnesty International expressed concern about the rearrest in August of Joao da Costa and Tagme Na Waie, who appeared to be prisoners of conscience. Amnestv International also appealed on behalf of F6 Na Nsofa and the four men detained with him.
Amnesty International welcomed the abolition of the death penalty,
