ARGENTINA
Journalists, students and human rights activists critical of the government were subjected to death threats and attacks by unknown assailants believed in many cases to be linked to the ruling political party. There were allegations of human rights violations by police in several provinces, including torture and ill-treatment of detainees. A student was believed to have "disappeared" and there was no progress in the investigation into the fate of four people who had "disappeared" in custody in previous years. The whereabouts of hundreds of children who "disappeared" in custody during the years of military government, many of whom are probably alive, remained unknown. One possible extrajudicial execution was reported.
The ruling Peronist party won parliamentary elections in October. In December Congress passed a law declaring the need for a constitutional reform that, among other changes, would allow President Menem to stand for re-election. Also in December thousands of workers demanding payment of their salaries sacked and burned government buildings in the north-em province of Santiago del Estero.
According to the Argentine Press Workers' Federation, between March 1992 and the end of August 1993, over 100 cases of death threats and assaults on journalists were recorded. No one was brought to justice for these attacks and there were widespread allegations that people associated with the ruling Peronist party were responsible for at least some of them. In one case, Hernán López Echague, a reporter on the Buenos Aires daily Página 12, was
twice violently attacked by unidentified men. He had published articles linking leading members of the ruling Peronist party with people who attacked journalists on 14 August at a farm fair addressed by President Menem. On 25 August Hernán López Echague was attacked by two unidentified men outside his home in Buenos Aires. The assailants hit him and slashed his face with a knife. On 8 September two unidentified men attacked him in the streets in Buenos Aires Province and forced him into a car. Inside the vehicle other men allegedly hit him and warned him to stop publishing such things or that next time they would kill him.
In September the government appointed a special attorney to investigate the attacks on jomnalists but no apparent progress had been made by the end of the year.
Students and human rights activists also received death threats believed in many cases to be sent by people involved with the ruling party. In July two student leaders - Andrés Petrillo and Mario Insúa - of the University of Buenos Aires were beaten by two unknown people. On 5 August several unidentified individuals visited the home of Hebe de Bonafini, president of the human rights organization Madres de Plaza de Mayo, Mothers of Plaza de Mayo, in La Plata, Buenos Aires Province. They told her: "If you do not shut your mouth we will shut it with bullets."
Police in several provinces were reported to have tortured or ill-treated detainees. In September Diego Ponce, aged 16, was reportedly severely beaten by the police in Comodoro Rivadavia, Chubut Province. As a result of the beatings he had emergency surgery which revealed extensive damage to his abdominal organs. A judicial inquiry was opened into this case, but no results were known by the end of the year.
Miguel Bru, a student, was alleged to have "disappeared" in August. He was last seen near the coastal resort of Punta Blanca, Buenos Aires Province. Miguel Bru had filed a complaint against members of La Plata 9th Police Station, who had earlier raided his house without a search warrant. No progress was reported in investigations aimed at establishing his whereabouts and identiiying those responsible for his apparent "disappearance".
There was also no progress reported in investigations into the reported "disappearances" of Pablo Cristian Guardatti in
ARGENTINA/ARMENIA
May 1992 and three others in 1990 (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1993).
An official commission set up in 1992 to investigate the fate of hundreds of children who "disappeared" during the so-called "dirty war" of the 1970s and 1980s continued its work. It reported that no new "disappeared" children had been identified in 1993. In December the Executive sent to Congress for approval a list of military promotions which included the promotions to very senior navy posts of two officers accused of serious human rights violations during the "dirty war".
Police officers were responsible for what appeared to be a possible extrajudicial execution. The victim, Carlos Ibarra, aged 17, was mortally wounded by police in May during an escape attempt at the Aráoz Alfaro II Institute for young offenders near La Plata, Buenos Aires Province. He was apparently mortally wounded while posing no threat to police officers. In the same institution, in August, a group of prison guards conducted a dawn search during which a number of young offenders were allegedly beaten. According to the director of the Institute, who was dismissed after denouncing the raid, 11 youths were injured in the incident, including one whose hip was broken.
Evidence emerged about a possible extrajudicial execution by police in 1991. Abel Soils was alleged to have "disappeared" in Corrientes in September 1991. His body was found a week later on the outskirts of the city. He had been shot in the back of the head at close range. At the time of his death Abel Solis, who had a criminal record for petty theft and other offences, was being sought by the Corrientes police. He had reportedly told relatives that he had received death threats from the police and that he was afraid of being tortured if taken into police custody, as had happened in the past. Relatives of Abel Soil's alleged that an official investigation into his murder was not conducted thoroughly: they said that crucial witnesses had not been interviewed and that a postmortem examination had been inadequate. Antonio Velozo, a friend of Abel Soil's who had campaigned for a full investigation into his death, had reportedly been detained without warrant in June 1992 by police officers from the Investigations Brigade in Corrientes, then taken to their headquarters, beaten, tortured and warned
he would meet the same fate as Abel Soil's if he did not cease campaigning.
In November the Supreme Court of Justice of Buenos Aires Province confirmed a lower court sentence of life imprisonment on three police officers convicted of the extrajudicial execution of three youths in March 1987.
During the year Amnesty International repeatedly expressed concern to the government about the attacks and death threats against journalists and others, and urged the authorities to take all possible steps to safeguard them and their families. The organization also called on several provincial authorities to investigate reports of "disappearances", possible extrajudicial executions, torture and ill-treatment in police custody and urged them to take steps to prevent such abuses.
