CYPRUS
At least 10 prisoners of conscience, all Jehovah's Witnesses, were held for refusing on conscientious grounds to perform military service or reservist exercises. Two Somali asylum-seekers were reportedly ill-treated.
Glafcos derides succeeded George Vas-siliou as President following elections in February.
Legislation passed in 1992 recognized the right to conscientious objection to military service and provided for "unarmed military service" inside and outside military camps (see Amnesty International He-port 1993). However, its provisions fall short of international standards in several respects: the length of alternative service -
42 months as against 26 months of ordinary military service - is punitive; and the right to transfer to alternative service from military service would be suspended during periods of emergency or general mobilizations. Moreover, the alternative service appears not to be entirely civilian and individuals must enlist before applying to do it: this may have deterred conscientious objectors from applying for alternative service. No conscientious objectors were known to have been offered the option of "unarmed military service" by the end of the year.
At least 10 conscientious objectors continued to serve prison sentences of up to 15 months, including Georgios Anastasi Petrou who was sentenced to six months' imprisonment in July for refusing to carry out the reservist exercises. This sentence, later reduced to one month by the Cyprus Appeal Court, was his fourth term of imprisonment for refusing to perform military service.
One conscientious objector was also prosecuted by the Turkish Cypriot authorities in northern Cyprus. Salih Askerogul was arrested in September and in November was sentenced to three months' imprisonment for failing to enlist for military service, and a further three years for "making propaganda against the armed forces" after he made a public statement on his reasons for refusing to perform military service.
Two foreign nationals, Martin Handke and Andreas Rabl. who visited northern Cyprus to monitor the trial of Salih Askerogul and were distributing leaflets on the case, were arrested together with a local photographer, Ahmet Serdar Giil, and held for nine days.
CYPRUS/DENMARK
Allegations of ill-treatment in police custody were received. In January two Somali brothers, Abdukarim and Abdukah-nan Mohamed Ibrahim, who had sought asylum on their arrival in Cyprus from Saudi Arabia, were reportedly ill-treated at Lamaca International Airport. They were allegedly punched, kicked and slapped by airport police who failed to provide them with food or a place to sleep while they were held. The brothers were returned to Saudi Arabia, apparently without the authorities obtaining any assurances that they would receive effective and durable protection there against being forcibly returned to Somalia.
Amnesty International received no response from the Cypriot authorities concerning the trials of two police officers charged with ill-treating Dimos Dimos-thenous in April 1992 (see Amnesty International Report 1993).
Amnesty International called for the immediate and unconditional release of all imprisoned conscientious objectors. It repeatedly urged the government to bring its legislation on conscientious objection fully into line with international standards.
Amnesty International also addressed the Turkish Cypriot authorities in northern Cyprus, calling for the immediate and unconditional release of Salih Askerogul, Martin Handke, Andreas Rabl and Ahmet Serdar Giil.
In March Amnesty International expressed concern to the government that Antonis Damianos could face imprisonment for refusing to perform military service, despite having been declared medically unfit for military service. In April the authorities replied that he had been exempted from military service on grounds of ill-health.
Amnesty International expressed concern to the government about the allegations of ill-treatment of asylum-seekers by police and called for an impartial investigation into the case. It urged the authorities not to return the two Somali brothers to Saudi Arabia in the absence of satisfactory assurances that they would not be forcibly returned from Saudi Arabia to Somalia, but received no response.
