MEXICO
Dozens of people detained on account of their peaceful political activities, including members of indigenous communities, were prisoners of conscience. Frequent torture and ill-treatment by law enforcement agents continued to be reported. The whereabouts of hundreds of people who had "disappeared" in previous years remained unknown. At least nine people were reported to have been extrajudicially executed.
The government adopted constitutional changes and modifications to the Penal Code, purportedly to help fight serious crimes including drug-trafficking. Human rights organizations expressed concern that these changes - including the extension of the maximum period for pre-judicial detention from 24 to 96 hours - could undermine defendants' right to a fair and prompt trial.
Governmental human rights bodies, such as the National Human Rights Commission and similar offices at state level, continued to receive hundreds of complaints, and issued dozens of recommendations to the relevant authorities regarding cases of human rights violations. Virtually none of the recommendations concerning gross human rights violations were fully implemented.
Dozens of people, including Indian peasant activists, were arrested for their peaceful political activities. On 6 June the Chiapas state police carried out violent raids on the Tzeltal and Tzotzil Indian communities of Chalam del Carmen, Rio Florido, Nuevo Sacrificio, Edén del Carmen and El Carrizal. Children, women and men were beaten, and scores of houses
were destroyed during the raids. Twenty-three peasants - including two children aged 14 and 15. and three elderly people aged 80, 90 and 102 - were arbitrarily arrested. apparently solely for their peaceful political activities, and transferred to Cerro Hueco, a prison in Tuxtla Gutiérrez. All those imprisoned were tortured and ill-treated to force confessions to crimes they did not commit (see below). On 25 June the elderly prisoners were released uncharged and the children were transferred to a juvenile detention centre. Another eight people, against whom charges were suspended, were released in September, but 10 remained in prison awaiting trial at the end of the year on a range of charges, including murder.
Prisoner of conscience Manuel Man-riquez San Agustín, an Otomi Indian and human rights activist, was sentenced on appeal to 23 years' imprisonment in April. He had been detained in Mexico City, the capital, in 1990 on false charges of murder based on a confession extracted from him under torture; he remained in prison at the end of the year. Pablo Molinet, a poet imprisoned in Salamanca, Guanajuato state, in 1992, was also sentenced on appeal to 23 years' imprisonment in November. He had been charged with murder based on confessions extracted from him under torture. There were indications that he may have been targeted because of his literary activities (see Amnesty International Report 1993).
Two prisoners of conscience were released uncharged in July. Gerardo Rubén Ortega Zurita and José Cruz Reyes Poten-ciano had been arrested in 1992 in connection with their peaceful attempts to oppose police harassment of members of the gay and lesbian communities in Mexico.
There were frequent reports of torture by law enforcement agents, particularly the state judicial police, throughout the country. The most common methods reported were beating, near-asphyxiation with plastic bags, forcing alcohol into the nose, and the application of electric shocks. Confessions extracted under duress continued to be admitted as evidence in courts, and medical treatment for detainees who had been tortured was frequently unavailable.
Juan Carbajal Sáenz was held incommunicado after his arrest by the judicial police in Mexico City in February. He was beaten, water was forced into his nostrils
MEXICO/MOLDOVA
and he received electric shocks to the testicles. He was eventually sentenced to nine years' imprisonment in September after being convicted of robbery despite a lack of evidence and his production of a medical certificate indicating the injuries he had sustained under torture. Thirteen members of the Tzotzil indigenous community of San Isidro el Ocotal, Chiapas state, were also tortured after being detained by army personnel in March. They were held incommunicado for two days during which they were beaten, subjected to semi-asphyxiation with plastic bags and mock executions to make them confess to a murder. They were released uncharged, but those responsible for the torture were not brought to justice. The 23 Tzeltal Indian peasant activists arrested in Chiapas in June (see above) were also held incommunicado and brutally tortured for three days by being beaten, by having alcohol forced into their nostrils, and with electric shocks. They were forced to sign statements in Spanish, which some could not understand, and charged with murder and other crimes. Domingo López Gómez, aged 102, required hospital treatment as a result of injuries sustained under torture when he was released in late June. No action was taken to investigate their torture allegations or bring to justice those responsible. Nor were those responsible for the torture of six Mixe and Zapotee Indian activists from La Trinidad Yaveo, Oaxaca state, in 1992, and Amir Aboud Sattar in 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1993), brought to justice in 1993.
Little progress was reported in investigating hundreds of "disappearances" which had occurred mostly during the 1970s and early 1980s. An investigation into the 1988 "disappearance" of José Ramón García, a political activist, did confirm the participation of government officials in his abduction (see Amnesty International Report 1993), but his fate and whereabouts remained unknown.
Omar Ricardo Mendoza Palacios, a 13-year-old, and three other youths, were killed in suspicious circumstances in May by the judicial police in Mexico City. The police said the four were killed during a gun battle with police, but eye-witness reports that the victims were unarmed when shot at close range were supported by forensic evidence. Those responsible had not been brought to justice by year-end.
Five other people, all suspected drug-traffickers. were reported to have been extrajudicially executed in June by members of the army in Mesa de la Guitarra, Chihuahua state. The five were said to have been detained three days earlier and tortured before being killed. Some of the soldiers alleged to be responsible were arrested, but their legal position was unclear at the end of the year. No one had been brought to justice by the end of the year in connection with the 1992 killing of Tomás Diego Garcia, a Mixe Indian from La Trinidad Yaveo, Oaxaca state (see Amnesty International Report 1993).
Amnesty International continued to call for full and impartial investigations into alleged human rights violations, and to urge the authorities to bring to justice those responsible for torture, "disappearances" and other grave violations. In June Amnesty International published a report, Mexico: The persistence of torture and impunity, which set out in detail the steps needed to bring an end to torture. Amnesty International's Secretary General held a meeting with Mexico's Ambassador to the United Kingdom in London in November, during which he expressed the organization's concern about continuing human rights violations in Mexico, including the rise in reports of arbitrary imprisonment and torture of indigenous peasants in rural areas of Chiapas. He reiterated calls for the effective implementation of Amnesty International's recommendations.
