BANGLADESH
Hundreds of critics and opponents of the government were detained without charge or trial under the Special Powers Act (spa) and an anti-terrorism law. They included prisoners of conscience. Torture in police custody continued to be reported, resulting in at least four deaths. Dozens of people were reported to have been killed by the security forces in suspicious cir-cumstances. At least three people were sentenced to death, one in absentia. Three men were executed.
Thousands of people were injured and hundreds arrested by the security forces during anti-govemment demonstrations. In
BANGLADESH
clashes between the security forces and university students affiliated to the major poHtical parties, including the ruling party, over 30 students were killed and some 2,250 were injured by September.
Trials of former government members continued and several further arrests were made. Former Air Vice Marshal Mam-tazuddin Ahmed was arrested in October on corruption charges. Former President Mohammad Ershad and his wife Raushan were each sentenced to another seven years' imprisonment for illegal transfer of assets.
In June the Law Minister announced the creation of a Law Commission to undertake law reform, but it had not been established by the end of the year.
Several rounds of talks between representatives of the tribal population of the Chittagong Hill Tracts and the government took place, but no political solution was found to end years of strife. Cease-fire agreements and amnesties for tribal militants who surrendered to the authorities were periodically extended. In May an agreement was signed with India for the repatriation of over 50,000 tribal refugees from camps in Tripura. The refugees refused to leave when the Bangladeshi Government failed to provide guarantees for their safety or for international supervision of the repatriation process.
By September some 48,000 of 260,000 Burmese Muslim refugees had returned to Myanmar. The repatriation process was interrupted in mid-January, but resumed in February after the un High Commissioner for Refugees was permitted to interview refugees in the transit camps preparing to return. Amnesty International received reports that Bangladeshi security forces
kicked, raped and beat some of the refugees with sticks to make them "volunteer" for repatriation. Hundreds of Burmese Muslim refugees who were detained without charge or trial at the end of 1992 under the spa or the Curbing of Terrorist Activities Act were released, but some 500 refugees still remained in detention in March 1993. Some new arrests took place; some newly arriving refugees were charged with "loitering" when they could not produce valid documents.
The spa was reportedly used to detain hundreds of people, including prisoners of conscience. The spa empowers the authorities to detain without charge or trial for an indefinitely renewable period anyone suspected of committing a "prejudicial act" likely to endanger public safety or order. In most of the cases which reached the High Court such detention was declared unlawful. Khaledur Rahman Tito, the secretary of the opposition latiya Party, detained in December 1992 under the spa, was released in May after the order for his detention was ruled illegal. Sanchoy Chakma, a tribal student leader, was arrested without warrant on 16 March; police interrogated him about human rights training he had received abroad. Eight days later he was served with a 120-day detention order under the spa. He was a prisoner of conscience. On 6 April he was informed that he was being charged with "being a spokesman of an anti-state people". However, he was released uncharged and untried on 25 May after the government revoked his detention order.
By June some 1,300 people had been arrested and 90 people, including members of opposition parties and dozens of trade unionists, had been tried and sentenced under the Curbing of Terrorist Activities Act, which had been passed in November 1992 (see Amnesty International Report 1993). Seven trade unionists were reportedly each sentenced in their absence to 10 years' imprisonment. Many of the trials may have been unfair (see Amnesty International Report 1993).
Torture in police custody continued to be reported. In July a 13-year old streetchild, Mohammad Shawkat, was allegedly raped by two police constables in Dhaka. The constables were suspended, but no charges were brought against them. Also in July, four men who had been arrested on criminal charges were allegedly
BANGLADESH
tortured with electric shocks in Saturia police station. No official action was known to have been taken.
At least four people died in custody reportedly as a result of torture. In January Rustam All died in a police station in Sylhet allegedly following torture; he had been arrested the same day and was reportedly in good health. No investigation was known to have been undertaken.
The government failed to take adequate action when the iirst cases of arbitrary punishments, including public flogging and the death sentence, imposed without legal authority by the salish, village arbitration councils, were reported. The salish try, convict and sentence individuals using a form of Islamic law which contravenes the civil law in force in Bangladesh. In January a 21-year-old woman sentenced to death by stoning in Chatakchara survived the stoning but died apparently after committing suicide. Another woman was publicly burned to death in Dokhin Sripur in June following a sahsh verdict. A 14-year-old girl in Dohar Thana was sentenced to 100 lashes in April after she was allegedly raped by an influential villager. The salish acquitted the alleged rapist but took her pregnancy as evidence of illicit sexual intercourse. In one case only was action known to have been taken: seven members of the salish in Chatakchara were charged with murder. The case was still pending at the end of the year.
Dozens of people were reported to have been killed by the security forces in suspicious circumstances. In January naval staff of the Essa Khan naval base near Chit-tagong reportedly attacked residents of Bandartila and Halishahar. two nearby villages, following a quarrel. Hundreds of people were injured and thousands rendered homeless when their homes were set on fire by the naval staff. Police stated that 10 people had been killed, but local human rights groups reported between 17 and 30 dead. An official inquiry was set up but its report had not been made public by the end of the year. Naval officials reported that several naval personnel had been dismissed and five officers and eight sailors were to be tried by court-martial for their direct involvement in the incident. It was not known whether the court-martial had concluded by the end of the year.
Nine men were reported to have been extrajudicially executed in two separate
incidents by the paramilitary Bangladesh Rifles (BDr). In April four men were shot dead in cold blood by the bdr at Kolar Haat village and in July five men were killed in Zakiganj. in Sylhet district, when the bdr opened fire on peacefully demonstrating villagers who were demanding that the local authorities open a dike.
In the Chittagong Hill Tracts violations of tribal people's human rights continued to be reported. Dozens of tribal people were arbitrarily detained under the spa. Several people were believed to have been extrajudicially executed on 17 November in Naniarchar, in Rangamati district, when a demonstration organized by tribal students was attacked by Bengali settlers and the army opened fire on the demonstrators. Officials said 13 people died, including 12 tribal people, but local human rights groups said that over 20 people had been killed. The Home Minister announced that an inquiry commission would investigate the incident but there had been no progress by the end of the year.
Amnesty International learned that disciplinary action had been initiated against seven police officers for their involvement in an attack on journalists in July 1992 (see Amnesty International Beport 1993); the report of the official inquiry was not made public. In July the government said that criminal proceedings had been initiated against eight people, including members of the paramilitary forces, for their alleged participation in the killings in April 1992 in Logang (see Amnesty International Beport 1993); one member of the paramilitary BDR who had been involved in the Logang incident was dismissed for "mishandling the excited non-tribals", according to an official report.
At least three people were sentenced to death, one of them in absentia. Home Ministry sources said in August that 115 people were then on death row. Three people were executed during the year after being convicted of murder.
In April Amnesty International published a report, Bangladesh: A summary of human rights concerns, which described unlawful detention of political prisoners, torture, extrajudicial executions and the use of the death penalty in 1992 and 1993. The government stated that it would investigate Amnesty International's allegations. However, there was no information to indicate that the government had taken
BANGLADESH/BARBADOS/BELARUS
any action by the end of the year.
When an agreement to repatriate refugees to the Chittagong Hill Tracts was signed with India in June. Amnesty International expressed its concern that insufficient measures had been provided to protect the human rights of returning refugees. In October Amnesty International published two reports: Bangladesh: Thirteen-year-old boy raped by police in custody - other children illegally detained, held in shackles or tortured-, and Bangladesh: Taking the law in their own hands - the village salish. Amnesty International called on the government to investigate the reported extrajudicial killings at Naniarchar.
In a written statement to the un Working Group on Indigenous Populations in July, Amnesty International described its long-term concerns regarding killings of defenceless tribal villagers by government forces in the Chittagong Hill Tracts. In an oral statement to the un Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns in Bangladesh.
