ALGERIA
Thousands of suspected supporters of Islamist groups were arrested and tried on terrorism charges; most were sentenced to prison terms by three newly constituted special courts after trials which violated international fair trial standards. Some were possible prisoners of conscience. Over 1,000 people arrested in 1992 remained administratively detained without charge or trial. Political detainees were routinely tortured and ill-treated to extract confessions; at least 12 were alleged to have died as a result. Suspected members of armed Islamist opposition groups were extrajudicially executed. Over 370 people were sentenced to death, most of them by special courts, and 26 were executed. Twelve asylum-seekers were forcibly returned to their countries. Armed Islamist opposition groups also committed grave human rights abuses; they deliberately killed over 130 civilians including foreign nationals.
Algeria continued to be run by a five-member Haut Comité d'Etat, Higher Council of State, headed by Ali Kafi. Multi-party elections which had been cancelled in 1992 were not rescheduled (see Amnesty Internationa} Report 1993). In February the state of emergency declared a year earlier was renewed indefinitely, in breach of the Constitution. A curfew imposed on three provinces in December 1992 was extended to seven other provinces and remained in place throughout the year. The authorities intensified the crack-down on armed Islamist opposition groups, applying emergency regulations and an anti-terrorist legislative decree of September 1992 which gave the security forces increased powers
ALGERIA
(see Amnesty International Report 1993). According to official sources, over 700 people were killed by the security forces in armed clashes with Islamist groups and raids on suspected safe houses. Unofficial sources said the death toll was significantly higher and that some of the victims had been extrajudicially executed.
After the renewal of the state of emergency in February, Islamist opposition groups such as the Mouvement islamique armé (mia). Armed Islamic Movement, and the Groups islamique armé (gia), Armed Islamic Group, stepped up their armed opposition to the government. They were responsible for grave human rights abuses, including deliberate killings of civilians, in some cases after kidnapping. Many of the victims were intellectuals who had criticized the political agenda of Islamist opposition groups and had openly condemned their use of violence. Over 300 members of the security forces, including off-duty officers, were also killed by Islamist opposition groups during the year in clashes and armed attacks.
Thousands of members and suspected supporters of Islamist opposition groups were arrested and tried on terrorism charges by three special courts in Algiers. Oran and Constantine. The trials violated international fair trial standards. The special courts, set up under the anti-terrorist decree of September 1992, provide for secret and accelerated trials of people accused of terrorist offences. The decree had extended the scope of the death penalty, doubled sentences for terrorist offences and lowered the age of criminal responsibility in such cases to 16 years. It had also limited the right of appeal and broadened the definition of "terrorist or subversive acts" to include offences such as reproducing or distributing "subversive" literature. The decree was applied retroactively. Cases begun before its promulgation were transferred to the special courts and defendants in such cases who were convicted were subject to the increased penalties which had been introduced after they committed the offences.
Detainees were routinely held for longer than the maximum legal period of garde à vue (incommunicado) detention, which was extended to 12 days under the anti-ter-rorist decree. Confessions extracted under torture were routinely used in the special courts, and were often the sole basis for
conviction. The courts systematically ignored defence lawyers' requests that defendants who alleged torture in garde a vue detention should be medically examined and there were no independent investigations into torture allegations.
Defence rights were seriously curtailed in the special courts. Defence lawyers were given insufficient time to prepare their case, were given access only to part of their client's file and were often not allowed to call defence witnesses. In April the anti-terrorist decree was amended to provide for the expulsion from the special courts and suspension for up to one year of lawyers whose behaviour the court considered objectionable. Scores of lawyers refused to plead in the special courts because of such constraints.
The composition of the special courts remained secret, so the independence of those presiding could not be assured. There is no right of appeal although the Supreme Court, which can rule only on procedure and does not re-examine the evidence, may review convictions. However, should the Supreme Court annul a special court verdict, the case must be sent back to the same special court "differently composed" or to another special court for retrial. Such limited form of appeal does not safeguard the accused's right to defence.
A trial known as the "Amir Noe Trial" from the nam de guerre of the group's leader. Abdennour Allam, was held in March before the Algiers Special Court. Fifty-one defendants, including 11 in absentia, were accused of murder, possession of arms and theft. The charges related to the period 1990 to 1992, before the promulgation of Decree 92-03 under which they were tried. Several lawyers refused to participate, slating that they had not had access to their clients' files. Many court-appointed lawyers also then withdrew for the same reason. The defendants had wounds and bruises when they appeared in court; they had reportedly been beaten by guards inside and outside the lawcourts. They were examined by doctors who stated that they were fit to stand trial. The prosecutor urged the court to sentence six of the defendants to death; in fact, the judge sentenced seven to death, The other defendants were sentenced to long prison terms. All the death sentences were confirmed by the Supreme Court in August.
ALGERIA
Pleas for clemency were submitted, but the prisoners were executed in October, before lawyers and families had been told the result of the pleas.
Over 1.000 people remained in administrative detention without charge or trial in Ain M'Guel and other camps, beyond the maximum one-year period allowed under state of emergency regulations. Conditions of detention remained harsh and the remote location of the camps in the south of the country meant that many detainees received no family visits (see Amnesty International Report 1993). About 2,000 administrative detainees were released during the year and several camps were closed.
Lieutenant Lembarek Boumaarif, who was arrested and accused of the assassination of President Mohamed Boudiaf in June 1992, had not been brought to trial by the end of the year.
The dramatic increase in torture and ill-treatment recorded in 1992 continued. Detainees were routinely tortured and ill-treated by members of the police, gendarmerie, national guard, and military security officials in police stations and detention centres, particularly when held in incommunicado detention for interrogation. Many detainees were also reportedly beaten at the time of arrest and by prison guards. The most common method of torture reported was the so-called chiffon (cloth), whereby the victim is tied to a bench and partially suffocated with a cloth soaked in dirty water or chemicals. Other methods used were the chalumeau (blowlamp), whereby a blowlamp is held near the victim's face and other parts of the body causing burning; cigarette bums; electric shocks; sexual abuse with bottles and other objects; beatings with bars, sticks and wires, especially on the genitals; and death threats.
Tassine Simozrag, who was arrested on 23 July and held in illegally prolonged garde à vue detention at the police station in Chateauneuf, was allegedly deprived of food for several days, tortured with the chiffon and the chalumeau, and severely beaten imtil he lost consciousness. His family and lawyer were unable to ascertain his whereabouts until 18 August, when they learned from the family of another detainee that he was in the prison in El Harrach. His lawyer's request for an independent medical examination was ignored
by the authorities. At the end of the year he was still imprisoned awaiting trial.
There were reports of at least 12 deaths in custody as a result of tortm-e. Mohamed Lamana, who had been arrested in December 1992, was held incommunicado for 40 days, during which he was allegedly tortured. He was released but rearrested in February by the same security force members. There was no news of him until his family was informed on 10 March that he had died. According to a death certificate dated the day of his rearrest, he died of asthma. However, relatives who saw his body said there were bruises on the head and neck. No official investigations were known to have been carried out into this or other cases of deaths in custody.
Extrajudicial executions of people posing no threat to the lives of the security forces were reported. For example, in June Mohamed Lecheb was allegedly shot dead by police wearing hoods when he opened the door of his parents' flat in El Harrach in answer to a police raid.
Twenty-six people were executed by firing-squad, the first death sentences to be carried out since 1989. Six people sentenced to death by a military court were executed in January and February: they had been convicted of carrying out attacks on a border post and the Navy Headquarters in 1991 and 1992 respectively. Seven people sentenced to death by the special court in Algiers in May were executed in August. They had been convicted of having planned and carried out the bombing of Algiers airport in August 1992. Some of them had confessed to the bombing on television, but all retracted their confessions in court saying they had been extracted under torture. Thirteen others, sentenced to death in the "Amir Noe Trial" and by the special courts in Constantine and Oran, were executed in October. Their families were not informed in advance of the executions.
More than 370 people were sentenced to death (more than half in absentia), most of them after unfair trials before the special courts. All the death sentences imposed by the special courts and referred to the Supreme Court for review were upheld. The only remaining recourse was a plea for clemency to the President of the Haut Comité d'Etat. Six death sentences were commuted by the President in October. In December the authorities announced that executions were suspended.
ALGERIA/ANGOLA
Ten Tunisian and two Moroccan asylum-seekers, all recognized as refugees by the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, were forcibly returned to their countries despite fears that they would be at risk of human rights violations. The Tunisians, in fact, were detained upon arrival in Tunisia and allegedly tortured while in illegally prolonged incommunicado detention (see Tunisia entry).
Over 150 civilians, including foreign nationals, were killed in attacks believed to have been carried out by armed Islamist opposition groups. The victims included Djilali Belkhenchir, a paediatrician at the Bir Traria Hospital in Algiers and Vice-President of the Comité algérien contre ¡a torture, Algerian Committee against Torture, who was killed by three armed men in the hospital courtyard in October. He may have been targeted because he was a member of the Comité national pour la sauvegarde de ¡'Algérie, National Committee to Save Algeria, which had called for the cancellation of the second round of elections after the Front Islamique du Salut (fis), Islamic Salvation Front, gained a large majority in the first round of national elections in December 1991. At least 10 individuals (most of them foreigners) were reportedly kidnapped by armed Islamist opposition groups: the majority were subsequently killed in captivity, although some were released.
Amnesty International appealed to the government to end the use of prolonged incommunicado detention and torture and ill-treatment of prisoners. It called for all those charged with politically motivated offences to be given fair trials and criticized the procedures of the special courts. Amnesty International also called for the commutation of all death sentences.
In March Amnesty International published a report, Algeria: Deteriorating Human Rights under the State of Emergency, and a further report, Algeria: Executions after Unfair Trials: a Travesty of Justice, in October. In April, during a visit to Algeria, Amnesty International's Secretary General met the Foreign Minister to discuss human rights and also called publicly for an end to abuses by both the government and opposition groups.
Amnesty International condemned the deliberate killings of civilians by Islamist opposition groups and urged all those responsible to call a halt to such killings.
57
