AFGHANISTAN
Hundreds of civilians were deliberately killed by government forces and by those of other Mujahideen groups in Kabul and elsewhere. Others, including children, were imprisoned and in some cases tortured or ill-treated. Some were reportedly raped; and deaths under torture were reported. Some of those detained were missing and unaccounted for at the end of the year. Several people were executed after they were apparently sentenced to death after unfair trials before Islamic law courts.
An accord, signed by most Mujahideen groups in March and guaranteed by Pakistan, Iran and Saudi Arabia, confirmed President Burhannudin Rabbani, leader of the famiat-e-Islami, Society of Islam, in office for 18 months. It also laid down a schedule for general and presidential elections. In May Mujahideen groups agreed on a new cabinet headed by Prime Minister Gulbuddin Hekmatyar of the Hesb-e-Is-¡ami. Party of Islam. It took office in June. A constitutional commission set up by the government presented a draft interim Constitution to the cabinet in September; its provision to introduce the Hanafi school of Islamic law was opposed by the country's Shi'a minority.
Government control remained restricted to parts of the capital, Kabul. The rest of the coimtry was controlled by provincial warlords, who set up local administrations loosely affiliated to factions of the government but were not held accountable to it. Some provincial authorities were believed to have established Islamic courts in their territories.
The scale of political instability and security problems made human rights information gathering extremely difficult during 1993. Details of individual cases were frequently incomplete and impossible to verify.
Throughout the year there were violent clashes between rival Mujahideen groups represented in the government who were competing for control over administrative institutions and territory. Hundreds of people died and thousands were injured in the fighting. The worst violence was reported from Kabul and the southern provinces. In May over 1,000 people were killed and more than 5,000 injured in the capital as the forces of the Hesb-e-Islami and troops loyal to the President bombarded each other's positions.
Between 60,000 and 90,000 Muslims from Tadzhikistan sought refuge in the northern provinces of Baikh, Kunduz and Takhar. An agreement was signed with Tadzhikistan in August to provide for the voluntary return of refugees under the supervision of the Office of the un High Corrunissioner for Refugees.
Approximately 130,000 Afghan refugees reportedly returned from Pakistan and over 300,000 from fran but some 1.4 million refugees remained in Pakistan and 2.2 million in fran at the end of the year. However. thousands of people became new refugees or were displaced by the factional fighting, and almost half of Kabul's population left the city. Educated women, members of the former government, liberal members of the professions and members of ethnic and religious minorities were particularly at risk of human rights violations: many sought asylum abroad.
Against the background of widespread factional fighting, human rights abuses were committed with impunity and there was a virtually total absence of the rule of law.
All Mujahideen groups and the central government were reported to have imprisoned political rivals, frequently to be held for exchange with prisoners of their own faction, or for money. Repeated cease-ffre agreements referred to releases of prisoners, but few releases appeared to have taken place.
Tortiue, including rape, was widely reported both in official detention centres and those run by the different Mujahideen groups. The victims included members of
AFGHANISTAN
52
rival political factions and their families as well as civilians not associated with any particular group. According to reports received in May, female inmates of a mental asylum in Kabul had been repeatedly raped by Mujahideen of different factions in previous months. In September Nasir Khan, the brother of Shomali Khan, the deputy governor of Nangahar province (see below), was allegedly tortured to death by the local council authorities in Jalalabad.
Hundreds of deliberate and arbitrary killings were perpetrated by government forces and Mujahideen groups but often in circumstances which made it impossible to determine who was responsible, given the security and other obstacles to effective human rights monitoring. The victims included former and current government officials, members of rival Mujahideen groups, unarmed civilians and members of ethnic minorities.
General Abdul Haq Ulomi, a member of the previous government, was killed in Kabul in March. In Ghazni province, dozens of members of the Watan Party, which was formerly in government under President Najibullah, were reportedly deliberately and arbitrarily killed between April 1992 and the end of 1993, including 14 members of the party's Parcham faction who were killed in July. Other victims included some 200 suspected supporters of the Kbaiq faction of the Watan Party in Helmand province who were reportedly killed in mid-1993 by forces under the joint command of the governors of Herat and Kandahar, affiliated to President Rab-bani's Jamiat-e-lslami group. Also in mid-1993. some 20 people, including Rozi Khan, a member of the Afghan Socialist Party, and several former government officials, were reportedly extrajudicially executed in Jalalabad after being detained by members of the famiat-e-lslami.
Several officials and civilians were among those deliberately and arbitrarily killed. Nasrollah Mansoor, the governor of Paktia province, was killed in February near Gardez. The same month four un relief workers were killed near Jalalabad. In September Shomali Khan, the deputy governor of Nangahar province, was shot dead in Jalalabad: members of the local administration reportedly claimed responsibility for the killing.
Deliberate and indiscriminate bombings of homes, hospitals and mosques in Kabul
left hundreds of people dead and thousands injured, among them children. Members of particular ethnic and religious groups were frequently targeted by various groups, including government troops loyal to the President, Mujahideen groups supporting the government and those opposed to it.
Such victims included civilians belonging to the Shi'a minority who were attacked in Kabul's Afshar district in February by troops loyal to President Rab-bani and members of the Ittehad-e-lslami, Islamic Alliance, apparently in retaliation for earlier attacks by Shi'a on Pashtuns and Tajiks. Men were extrajudicially executed in front of their families, women and children were detained. The following day, several women were raped and dozens of homes were set on fire.
Civilians were reportedly also targeted in attacks in the provinces; dozens of women and children were said to have been deliberately killed by forces of the Jamiat-e-lslami and the Hesb-e-Islami in Argandab near Kandahar in August.
Several of those reported by their families to have been detained by various armed Mujahideen groups were missing and unaccounted for at the end of the year, raising fears for their safety, but few details were available.
Both in Kabul and in certain provinces Islamic law courts were said to have sentenced people to death after unfair trials. In one case in May, a man convicted of murder was reported to have been publicly executed in Kunar by the father of the victim. The same month two men were publicly executed by firing-squad in Maidanshah, Wardak province, after a local court found them guilty of killing a commander of a rival faction.
Amnesty International urged both the central government and those in effective control of other parts of the country to take all possible steps to bring an end to the cycle of gross human rights abuse, and to ensure that their forces were clearly instructed to observe human rights and basic humanitarian standards. Amnesty International also urged the international community to use its influence with the various parties to the conflict to ensure respect for human rights in Afghanistan.
In September Amnesty International issued a report, Afghanistan: Politica! crisis and the refugees, which expressed concern
about the hundreds of Afghan asylum-seekers in Europe, North America and in other countries who were in danger of being deported to Afghanistan where they could face serious human rights violations.
