CHINA
Hundreds of political activists and members of religious or ethnic groups were arrested. Scores of them, including prisoners of conscience, were held without charge or sentenced to terms of imprisonment after unfair trials. Over a dozen prisoners of conscience were released from prison, but not unconditionally. Thousands of political prisoners, including hundreds of prisoners of conscience arrested in previous years, remained imprisoned. Torture and ill-treatment of prisoners were widely reported. The death penalty continued to be used extensively.
Political opposition continued to be repressed by the authorities and the police continued to exercise extensive powers of arbitrary arrest and detention. In October a government official publicly sought to justify the prosecution of individuals for "counter-revolutionary" acts and stated that the number of convicted "counterrevolutionaries" imprisoned was over 3,300 - a figure far below the total number of political prisoners.
In September the authorities called for a "resolute" crackdown on "separatists" in Tibet. Similar statements were made about Muslim nationalists in other regions of western China. During September a large number of troops were moved into Kash-gar, Xinjiang Autonomous Region, apparently in response to bomb attacks allegedly carried out by Muslim nationalists. Large-scale arrests were reportedly carried out. In October the authorities crushed protests by tens of thousands of Muslims in Xining, Qinghai province, by storming a mosque occupied by the protesters and arresting
over a dozen Islamic leaders. Arrests related to ethnic unrest were also believed to have been carried out in other areas, but few details were available.
Widespread arrests of suspected government opponents continued throughout the year. Some people were released without charge, but others remained held. Between April and June over a dozen dissidents were detained in Shanghai, including veteran pro-democracy campaigners Fu Shenqi and Zhang Xianliang. They were sentenced in July to three years of "reeducation through labour", a form of administrative detention imposed without charge or trial. Both had previously spent several years in prison for writing articles advocating democracy.
Hundreds of people were detained because of their religious views or for taking part in unauthorized religious activities, including Protestants, Roman Catholics, Buddhists and Muslims. Some were released but others remained in detention without charge or trial. Among those particularly targeted were Christians in Shanxi, Henan, Shandong, Shaanxi and Anhui provinces. Many were arrested following police raids on religious meetings held in private homes. Often, they were beaten during raids or in police custody. Most were held without charge for a few days or up to several months and were freed only after paying heavy fines. Some were still held without trial at the end of the year.
Information emerged during the year about Christians imprisoned in previous years, including 37 members of a Protestant group called the Jesus Family in Shandong province, who were sentenced in 1992 to terms of imprisonment or "reeducation through labour" for their peaceful religious activities.
At least 160 Tibetans were reported to have been detained in Tibet for activities in support of Tibetan independence or for monitoring human rights. Of these, 123 were known to be still detained at the end of the year, mostly held without charge or trial.
Gendim Rinchen, a tourist guide, and Lobsang Yonten, a former monk, were arrested in May shortly before the arrival in Lhasa, the capital of the Tibet Autonomous Region (tar), of a delegation of European Community (ec) diplomats on a human rights fact-finding tour. The two men
CHINA
had been monitoring human rights and planned to contact the delegation. They were accused of "stealing state secrets" and engaging in "separatist activities". Both prisoners of conscience, they were believed to be held in Seitru Detention Centre in Lhasa at the end of the year.
Following the ec delegation's visit, large protests took place in Lhasa on 24 and 25 May, during which demonstrators stoned government buildings, resulting in casualties on both sides. Many Tibetans were arrested. Further arrests were reportedly carried out later when small groups of Tibetans attempted to stage peaceful protests. Among those detained were 12 nuns from Garu, near Lhasa, including Gyaltsen Pelsang, a 15-year-oId novice. In May and lune around 50 Tibetans were arrested in villages where a series of pro-indepen-dence protests took place. In early July hundreds of Chinese soldiers reportedly surrounded a group of villages in southern Tibet and arrested around 35 lay people and monks following pro-independence demonstrations. Later in July around 60 Tibetans were arrested in the provinces of Qinghai, Sichuan and Gansu which border the tar, on suspicion of preparing pro-independence leaflets for distribution.
Over a dozen prisoners of conscience were freed during the year in an apparent concession to international pressure. In February a number of students jailed for their role in the 1989 protests in Beijing, such as student leaders Wang Dan and Guo Haifeng, were released on parole. Several Roman Catholic clergy and lay members were released, including Zhang Weiming and Bishop Yang Libo (see Amnesty International Report 1993], as well as Bishop Wang Milu (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
Other prisoners of conscience released on parole included three prominent dissidents who had been imprisoned for over 12 years: Wang Xizhe, who was freed in February; Xu Wenli, who was released in May; and Wei lingsheng, who was released in September, six months before his 15-year sentence was due to expire.
Many former prisoners of conscience, however, remained under police surveillance and were liable to further punishment if they engaged in unauthorized activities. Ma Shaofang, a former student leader who had been released in mid-1992, was reportedly arrested in Beijing in April
and banished to his home province of liangsu because he had contacts with foreign journalists.
While a few political prisoners were released, thousands of others, including hundreds of prisoners of conscience arrested after the 1989 pro-democracy protests, remained in jail. The fate of thousands of others remained unknown (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 \o 1993).
One among the thousands who remained in jail was Jigme Sangpo, a 65-year-old Tibetan former primary school teacher, who had spent more than 23 years in jail since 1964 for supporting Tibetan independence. Wang Wanxing, who was arrested in Beijing in 1992 for unfurling a banner commemorating the lune 1989 massacre (see Amnesty International Report 1993), remained confined in a psychiatric hospital run by the police.
Over 30 pro-democracy activists secretly detained since mid-1992 for their suspected involvement in underground dissident activities were due to go on trial at the end of the year. At least 15 of those held in Beijing were reportedly served with indictments in or around September. However, no trial was known to have taken place by the end of the year. Those held in Beijing included Kang Yuchun, a doctor detained since early June 1992. Nearly 18 months later, his parents had still not been formally notified of their son's arrest and continued to be denied permission to see or write to him.
Trials continued to fall far short of international fair trial standards. Extreme limitations were placed on the right to defence and confessions — often extracted under duress or torture - were used as evidence. Defendants had no right to call witnesses and had inadequate time and facilities to prepare a defence. In political cases, verdicts and sentences were routinely decided by the authorities before trial.
Dozens of political dissidents were believed to have been tried, although only some cases were known. Liao lia'an, a postgraduate student at Beijing's People's University, was sentenced in August to three years' imprisonment on "counter-rev-olutionary" charges. Detained since June 1992, he was accused of circulating leaflets and hanging up a banner at the university campus to commemorate the 1989 massacre in Beijing. His family reportedly had difficulty finding a defence lawyer as the
CHINA
Beijing judicial authorities had allegedly warned law firms in the city not to defend him. Zhang Minpeng, a democracy activist from Wuhan in Hubei province who had previously been jailed for three years for publishing an unauthorized magazine, was sentenced in August to five years' imprisonment for organizing a "counter-revolu-tionary" political group, the Republican Party. Twelve other members of the group were due to be tried separately, but no information was available about their trials.
Several people were also tried in secret on charges of leaking or selling "state secrets" to foreigners, although this usually referred to information that would not be considered a state secret in other countries. They included Bao Weiji, a former Foreign Ministry employee, who was sentenced in May to 10 years' imprisonment for giving "national secrets" to a foreign journalist. He was tried in secret together with several other defendants. Others were arrested on similar charges, but had not been tried by the end of the year.
Torture and ill-treatment of prisoners were frequently reported throughout the country. The most common methods cited were severe beatings, the use of electric batons and shackles, deprivation of sleep and food, and exposure to extremes of cold or heat.
In April Chinese Government representatives stated before the un Committee against Torture that all cases of torture were "rigorously" investigated. However, few reports of investigations were made public, and in many cases no investigations were known to have taken place.
In March, during a police raid on a religious meeting in Xungyang county, Shaanxi province, a group of about 30 Christians were reportedly severely beaten. Five of them, including two women, were said to have been partly stripped, suspended by the arms and beaten until they lost consciousness, One of the men, Lai Manping, died a few days later, apparently as a result of the injuries he sustained. Despite photographic evidence of the injuries sustained, the authorities denied that the beatings had occurred.
Information came to light during the year about at least 10 people who had died as a result of torture in police custody since 1992. One of them was a villager from Beigang township. Jiangxi province, who had died under torture in March 1992.
The man was said to have been shackled with his hands tied behind his back, suspended by the arms, whipped, and repeatedly beaten and kicked until he died. No investigation into his death was known to have been initiated.
Many other cases of torture were reported, including those of several political prisoners at Hanyang prison, Hubei province, who had been brutally beaten on several occasions since their imprisonment in 1989 and who in 1993 were still being held in cruel and inhuman conditions. Their complaints were either ignored by the prison authorities or resulted in further ill-treatment.
Prison conditions were often harsh and many prisoners were reportedly seriously ill as a result. Both political and criminal prisoners were subjected to prolonged periods in solitary confinement, often resulting in physical or psychological disorders. Medical care was usually inadequate. Liu Gang, a student leader imprisoned in northeast China, was reported in April to be seriously ill owing to repeated torture and harsh prison conditions. In August the authorities denied that he had been tortured but gave no indication that the allegations of torture had been formally investigated.
A former prisoner of conscience, Han Dongfang (see Amnesty International Report 1993], was forcibly exiled. He was refused entry to China in August when he returned from the usa where he had received medical treatment. His passport was revoked, leaving him stateless.
The dramatic increase in the use of the death penalty which began in 1990 (see Amnesty International Reports 1991 to 1993) continued. The number of -people sentenced to death for non-violent economic crimes appeared to be increasing. Many executions for alleged corruption were recorded after the authorities launched a campaign against corruption in August. At least 2,564 death sentences and 1,419 executions were recorded by Amnesty International, but the actual figures were believed to be far higher. Many prisoners were executed after summary trials-Some were publicly displayed shortly before execution at mass sentencing rallies or in parades through the streets. These "execution parades" are illegal and officials denied they took place, but photographs of such events were publicly displayed.
CHINA/COLOMBIA
Throughout the year Amnesty International urged the authorities to release prisoners of conscience, ensure fair and prompt trials for other political prisoners, investigate torture allegations and safeguard prisoners from ill-treatment, and commute all death sentences. The government did not respond. In October Amnesty International wrote to the government proposing that an Amnesty International delegation should visit China to discuss human rights with govenunent officials and others. However, the government had not responded by the end of the year.
In oral statements to the un Commission on Human Rights in February and to its Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns in China.
Amnesty International published several reports on China including: in April. China: Torture and iU-treatment, in June, Persecution of Christians in China; in July, China: Victims in their thousands - the death penahy in 1992\ and in August, China: Appeal for Gendun Rinchen.
