UGANDA
Journalists held briefly on sedition charges were prisoners of conscience. Treason charges against more than 30 prisoners, including possible prisoners of conscience, were dropped. Dozens of uncharged political prisoners were freed. Criminal charges were brought against others, but there were long delays in bringing them to trial. At least 30 suspected opponents of the government were briefly detained during military operations. There were reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners; in at least four cases the victims died. Prison conditions in some prisons amounted to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. The courts continued to impose sentences of caning. Members of the security forces were reportedly responsible for extrajudicial executions. At least 14 death sentences were passed and the Supreme Court confirmed seven death sentences. At least nine prisoners were hanged.
The scale of armed opposition to the government of President Yoweri Museveni in the north and the east continued to decline. This led to a reduction in military counter-insurgency operations and a consequent decline in human rights violations by the National Resistance Army (nra). Rebel groups were responsible for human rights abuses.
The government continued to show reluctance to investigate human rights violations by nra troops in rural areas. A commission of inquiry established in early 1989 into violations in Gulu District again appeared to have fallen into abeyance (see Amnesty International Report 1992]. In September villagers and former victims of human rights violations that took place
around Odudui and Dakabela in eastern Uganda in 1989 renewed demands that the soldiers responsible be brought to justice. The authorities were not known to have taken any action in response.
In one important case, however, two nra soldiers were tried on charges arising from the deaths of 69 detainees at Mukura in Kumi District in July 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990). The soldiers, who had been arrested in May 1992 after a long period of official inaction, were detained without charge until April when 47 counts of murder were brought against them in the General Court-Martial, In November they were acquitted of murder, but one, Captain George Oduch, was sentenced to five years' imprisonment for "failure to execute his duties". The trial, which revealed significant inadequacies in the army's systems for carrying out investigations. implicated at least one other officer in the murder of the detainees. He had been detained in military custody until 1990 when he reportedly escaped.
In March the government announced the establishment of a judicial commission of inquiry into the administration of justice. The inquiry, which heard evidence relating to the mismanagement of investigations. prosecutions and trials in criminal cases, had not concluded by the end of the year.
In October the authorities brought sedition charges against three journalists who were held briefly as prisoners of conscience before being granted bail. Teddy Sseze Cheeye, editor of the Uganda Confidential newsletter, was detained for five days before being granted bail on charges of publishing and printing seditious material in an article alleging that senior government officials were guilty of nepotism in public appointments. In December he faced further sedition charges relating to an article published in August alleging that Janet Museveni, the President's wife, was implicated in a murder.
In October Hussein Musa Njuki, editor-in-chief of The Shariat newspaper, and Haruna Kanabi, a sub-editor on the paper, were held respectively for 11 days and nearly three weeks before being bailed on sedition charges after The Shariat carried an article criticizing the government and accusing government ministers of double standards. None of the three journalists had been tried by the end of the year.
UGANDA
There was, however, a reduction in the number of prisoners known to be facing the capital charge of treason. Treason charges preclude the granting of bail for 480 days and had been misused since 1988 to hold suspected government opponents for long periods without bringing them to trial (see Amnesty International Report 1993). Over 30 prisoners, among them possible prisoners of conscience who had been held for over three years, were released during the year after treason charges against them were dropped. In August, for example, the Minister of State for Defence announced that Martin Okello and eight other soldiers had been freed from military custody and would not face trial because "their human rights had been grossly abused by their long detention without trial". Detained in January 1990, the nine had been held without charge until March 1991 when they were charged with treason.
The authorities also reduced the number of political prisoners detained without charge by freeing dozens and bringing criminal charges against others. However, in at least one case in June treason charges were brought against a prisoner, Sergeant Kabanda, who had already been held for three years in military custody without charge or trial. He had not been tried by the end of the year. In February long delays in bringing soldiers to trial, many of them charged with capital offences, led to a riot in Luzira prison in which four prisoners were killed.
There were new arrests during military operations in eastern Uganda. In June, following attacks by the armed opposition Uganda People's Army (upa) around Kachumbala in Kumi District, nra soldiers briefly detained over 30 civilians, including children and elderly people. There were reports that some of those held were beaten but all were released after a few days.
In August over a dozen villagers from around Kanyum in Kumi District were briefly detained by nra soldiers searching for the killers of a local official. The soldiers, who reportedly caned each of the men before releasing them, returned to the village the next day and bound Sam Esele in the manner known as kandooya or "three-piece" tying, a practice officially outlawed within the nra, before caning him and setting him free. The authorities
were not known to have taken any action against the soldiers.
There were several other reports of torture and ill-treatment by soldiers, members of paramilitary Local Defence Units (ldus), police and prison officers. In some cases those reportedly responsible were arrested and charged but in others no action appeared to be taken. For example, in March a military intelligence officer in West Nile confined three men in a pit in a barracks near Koboko for five hours before beating them and setting them free. The incident was reported to local officials but they apparently took no action. There were several reports of nra soldiers beating criminal suspects. In August a man was flogged to death by soldiers in Kalaki barracks in Pal-lisa for alleged gun-running. The local police arrested both nra and ldu personnel who were then forcibly freed by soldiers from Kalaki barracks. In this case the authorities ordered the arrest of both the soldiers involved in the original incident and those who had freed them. In November the authorities arrested three nra soldiers in Kabale after they deliberately burned a man in their custody.
There were widespread reports of police officers beating criminal suspects in what appeared to be a country-wide pattern. For example, in March 13 civilians suspected of murder were beaten by police at Aloi in Lira District. The commander of the police post, who threatened to detain journalists who learned about the incident, was subsequently arrested. It was not known if any other action was taken.
Torture and harsh prison conditions amounting to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, including grossly inadequate food supplies, reportedly led to the deaths of convicted criminal prisoners. For example, four prisoners reportedly died in Masafu prison in eastern Uganda — two in July and the others in August and September - where prison guards were also reported to have regularly beaten and tortured prisoners. Prison deaths in Kabarole in western Uganda, initially reported in July, led district officials to visit prisons in December. They reported that prisoners, who were being kept virtually naked in "appalling conditions", were malnourished and were receiving inadequate medical care. It was not clear if official investigations were conducted into individual deaths.
UGANDAAJKRAINE
Courts at all levels - the High Court, magistrates courts and Resistance Committee (rc) courts - continued to impose sentences of caning for a wide variety of criminal offences including theft, attempted rape and giving false information to the police. Caning, which is provided for in the Penal Code, constitutes a cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment. The sentences passed down by rc courts, composed of locally elected councillors with no legal training, were particularly heavy. An 80-year-old widow from Namuganga received 10 strokes of the cane for stealing a hen in September.
With the decline in military activity in rural areas there was a reduction in the number of extrajudicial executions compared with previous years. However, in September, four suspected car thieves who were shot dead by nra soldiers at Namanve near Kampala, appeared to be victims of extrajudicial execution. The accounts of witnesses raised fears that the killings were part of a "shoot-to-kill" warning to deter other car thieves. Although a police investigation opened immediately, there had been no arrests by the end of the year.
In March, nine men convicted of murder in previous years were hanged in Luzira prison. The Supreme Court dismissed the appeals of seven other prisoners who had been sentenced to death for treason, murder and aggravated robbery, while the High Court condemned at least 10 to death for a variety of offences, including treason. A man condemned to death in March had spent nearly nine years in prison on remand. The General Court-Martial sentenced four nra soldiers to death for robbery with violence.
Armed opponents of the government abducted civilians and government officials and committed rape and deliberate and arbitrary killings. The District Administrator of Nebbi District was abducted in March by insurgents belonging to the Lord's Resistance Army who held him for two weeks in Gulu District and then set him free. Adolescent girls were particularly at risk of abduction by insurgents who often then raped them.
In April, five girls were abducted and raped by upa insurgents in Kumi District; two were freed by nra troops. Nine rc officials and villagers were deliberately killed by ufa insurgents in Kumi District in January. March and July. In the incident in July
insurgents surrounded a funeral in Kanyum and picked out six men who they then shot dead. Amnesty International condemned the abuses of human rights by armed opposition groups and urged them to abide by basic humanitarian standards.
During the year Amnesty International urged the government to review the cases of those charged with treason and to mount impartial and prompt investigations into reported extrajudicial executions. In May Amnesty International published a report. Uganda: The death penalty - a barrier to improving human rights, which expressed grave concern about the execution of nine men convicted of criminal offences and urged the abolition of the death penalty. In September the Minister of State for Defence announced that a review had been ordered of the cases of individuals, believed to number over 100, sentenced to death by army tribunals in previous years, because such courts were "illegal and incompetent" to try death penalty cases.
