SOUTH AFRICA
Over 4,300 people were killed in political violence. Further evidence emerged of covert security force collusion in political killings. Prisoners of conscience were among hundreds of prisoners detained without trial under security legislation. Detainees were tortured by members of the police and army; at least 39 died in police custody in suspicious circumstances. Few of those responsible for human rights violations were brought to justice. Over 400 prisoners were under sentence of death but there were no executions.
Negotiations between President F.W. de Klerk's government, the African National Congress (anc) and other political parties led to an agreement on a post-elections "Interim Constitution", which included a
SOUTH AFRICA
chapter on "Fundamental Rights", and was passed by the tricameral parliament on 22 December. In December the newly established Transitional Executive Council (tec) began to monitor the conduct of key government departments prior to elections set for April 1994. A coalition of right-wing parties, including the Inkatha Freedom Party (ifp) and the Conservative Party, boycotted the negotiations from July and at the end of the year still refused to accept the new Constitution and to participate in the multi-party tec.
In January South Africa signed the un Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, but had not ratified it by the end of the year.
The level of political violence remained high, with over 4,300 people killed during the year. Attacks on train and taxi commuters continued, and apparently random shootings by unidentified attackers in passing vehicles constituted a new form of terror for township residents in the Vaal Triangle. East Rand and Natal. The pattern of these shootings, which often coincided with key events in the negotiations process, suggested that they were being perpetrated by a "third force" of professional killers, possibly consisting of elements within the security forces and other armed groups opposed to the peace process. In the East Rand there was evidence of police collusion with ifp supporters involved in conflict with anc supporters.
Towards the end of the year right-wing parties, including the iff, were stockpiling weapons and running paramilitary training camps in opposition to the new Constitution and the tec.
The Azanian People's Liberation Army (apla), the armed wing of the Pan African-ist Congress of Azania (pac), maintained a policy of attacking police officers and were under suspicion in connection with attacks resulting in the deaths of more than 50 white civilians. More than 200 police officers died in politically motivated attacks, the majority in the context of political violence in the East Rand. In November apla officials and the Minister of Law and Order held talks in Zimbabwe which aimed at a "cessation of hostilities".
International observers, who had been sent to South Africa under the August 1992 UN Security Council Resolution 772, helped to limit the level of violence,
particularly during mass demonstrations which followed the assassination in April of South African Communist Party leader Chris Hani by right-wing conspirators.
The judicial commission chaired by Appeal Court Judge Richard Goldstone continued to investigate and report on incidents and issues relating to the political violence. In December the commission made public its evidence of a "hit squad" operating within the KwaZulu police. Lawyers were appointed as Police Reporting Officers under the 1991 National Peace Accord to investigate complaints against the police, but were hampered by insufficient resources, limited access to police files and financial dependence on the police.
Members of the security forces continued to commit extrajudicial executions and other human rights violations, despite some attempts by the authorities to make the police more accountable to local communities. For example, police fired indiscriminately into a crowd of peaceful demonstrators outside Protea police station, Soweto, in the aftermath of Chris Hani's assassination. Nine people were killed and around 240 injured. Elsewhere, the Bophuthatswana police brutally attacked peaceful demonstrators. In one incident in August they shot dead 14-year-oId David Letsile without provocation.
The police were also implicated in targeted assassinations of political activists and members of the anc's armed wing, Umkhonto weSizwe (mk), and in deaths in custody which appeared to be deliberate killings. In one case in April, six plainclothes police officers shot dead former mk member Khaya Simani in Nyanga township, Cape Town.
Members of the Internal Stability Unit, the former riot police, were repeatedly implicated in assaults, torture and extrajudicial executions of township residents in areas including Cape Town, Durban and the East Rand. Soldiers, too, were responsible for extrajudicial executions. In October the South African Defence Force (sadf) shot dead five youths aged between 12 and 17 during a night raid on a house in the Transkei "homeland" which they claimed was an apla base. Post-mortem evidence showed that at least 70 shots had been fired into the bodies of the youths who were lying in their beds at the time. There had been no progress in the investigation
SOUTH AFRICA
by the end of the year because the South African authorities refused to cooperate.
As in previous years, members of the security forces were granted impunity for human rights violations. In May the Ciskei "homeland" government decreed that 69 members of the Ciskei security forces who had faced charges arising from the September 1992 shooting in Bisho of unarmed demonstrators should be unconditionally indemnified against prosecution (see Amnesty Internationa} Report 1993).
The Goldstone Commission did not issue a final report on the lune 1992 Boipa-tong massacre (see Amnesty International Report 1993). However, 31 residents of KwaMadala hostel were still on trial for the murders at the end of the year. During the trial evidence emerged indicating that the police had deliberately destroyed ballistic evidence.
There were no results from the official investigation into a high-level cover-up of police involvement in the 1988 murder of 11 people in Trust Feed, Natal (see Amnesty International Report 1993). The official committee responsible for the inquiry was dissolved and the investigation was referred to the Goldstone Commission, which said that it was not authorized to investigate incidents which occurred before 1990.
Clear evidence implicating senior military officers in covert "hit squad" assassinations emerged during the inquest into the 1985 assassinations of Matthew Goniwe and three other Eastern Cape political activists (see Amnesty International Report 1986). The inquest had not concluded by the end of the year.
In November General Oupa Gqozo, head of the Ciskei "homeland" government, and one other person were brought to trial before the Ciskei Supreme Court for the 1991 murders of two alleged coup plotters, Charles Sebe and Onward Guzana, after an inquest court ruled that they were responsible for the deaths. Both were acquitted in December.
An ifp member was sentenced to death in September for murders committed in the Port Shepstone area. Natal. The court ordered an investigation into allegations that members of the KwaZulu police had supplied the accused with weapons.
The security forces used special powers under the terms of the Public Safety Act in districts declared "unrest areas" to detain
without charge himdreds of anc supporters, particularly young men suspected of being members of so-called self-defence units. Lawyers, human rights monitors and relatives of detainees ft'equently reported that during the initial 24 or 48 hours of arrest and interrogation, the security forces denied them access to detainees. Compelling medical evidence of torture was submitted to the Supreme Court, which issued an injunction restraining the police from further assaulting the detainees.
The police also detained scores of people under permanent security legislation allowing 10 days' incorrununicado detention. Those detained included leading pac members and suspected members of apla and of right-wing organizations.
Provisions of Bophuthatswana's Internal Security Act were repeatedly used within the nominally independent "homeland" to prevent political meetings, demonstrations, funeral processions and voter education workshops and to detain organizers and sympathizers. In August Thabo Sejana-mane, coordinator for the human rights monitoring organization, Mafikeng Anti-Repression Forum, was detained in an apparent effort to hamper his work. At the same time five members of the Mafikeng anc branch executive were detained when they attempted to organize a march through Mafikeng. The six, all prisoners of conscience, were released uncharged after almost a week in custody,
Officials of the Police and Prisons Civil Rights Union (popcru) from Pietermaritz-burg were detained in March during a strike by prison warders, denied a bail hearing, and brought to trial two months later when they were acquitted of all charges and released.
There was widespread evidence of torture and ill-treatment of political detainees and criminal suspects by the police and, less frequently, members of the armed forces. In general, the government failed to react when torture was reported.
Some interrogation and torture sessions reportedly occurred outside police stations - in the open countryside or inside police vehicles. The police may have been attempting to evade the scrutiny of various organizations, including the International Committee of the Red Cross which had been granted access to all police stations in 1992. Dozens of residents of Bruntville and other townships in Natal who were
SOUTH AFRICA
detained in January and February complained of being subjected to electric shocks, beatings and other forms of torture while being interrogated by police in abandoned farm buildings in isolated areas.
At least 39 prisoners died in police custody in suspicious circumstances. Wellington Mbili died as a consequence of gunshot and hand-grenade injuries when the police took him to a remote area near Port Shep-stone. Natal, allegedly to point out an arms cache. The police said they shot him when he attempted to throw a hand-grenade at them. He was handcuffed and guarded by three armed police officers at the time.
In several cases inquest courts found police officers responsible for torture or deaths of prisoners. In March an inquest court found a police officer criminally liable for the death of Bethuel Maphumulo in Protea police station in December 1990. A forensic pathologist representing Amnesty International observed the inquest. In November the officer was acquitted of Bethuel Maphumulo's murder.
Officers of a police weapons investigation unit known as the "Yankee Squad", based in the Vaal Triangle, were suspended following an investigation by a Police Reporting Officer into allegations of systematic torture. In November the same Police Reporting Officer's unit discovered electric shock and other torture equipment in police armoured vehicles in the East Rand.
Over 400 prisoners were under sentence of death, more than 300 in Pretoria and the remainder in the nominally independent "homelands". Fifty-four new death sentences were imposed. Two executions scheduled in Venda in May were halted after lawyers intervened. In June parliament debated a government proposal to end the moratorium on executions, which had effectively been in force since February 1990. Parliament voted to resume hangings but the government later said it would abide by the moratorium until constitutional negotiations had been completed.
Members of opposition organizations were convicted of killings and other acts of violence. It was not always clear if they had been acting on explicit orders from their organizations. In September, for instance, three anc members were convicted of six murders in an April 1992 attack on a passenger bus in Umgababa, Natal. In October a former Conservative Party
parliamentarian and a member of an extreme white right-wing organization were sentenced to death for the murder of Chris Hani. Apart from targeted killings by members of opposition organizations, many people died simply because of where they lived. In Sundumbile, Natal, and Radebe Section in Katlehong township, deaths occurred when ifp supporters attempted to drive out non-ifp families. At the same time, Zulu-speaking township residents were targeted as suspected ifp supporters by anc supporters.
Amnesty International representatives visited South Africa on five occasions to investigate human rights violations. Amnesty International called on the government to institute independent inquiries into cases of extrajudicial executions, torture, death threats and other forms of harassment. It also urged the government to suspend ft'om duty security force members implicated in such violations and to bring perpetrators to justice. Government and police officials responded, for the most part, with denials of the alleged violations or by placing the onus of investigation on the Goldstone Commission.
In December Amnesty International appealed to the government and the tec to implement specific urgent measures prior to the elections, including the establishment of locally supported police complaints investigation units, prompt and impartial action against perpetrators of human rights violations, and removal of all restrictions on freedom of assembly and association.
Amnesty International appealed to anc officials to take disciplinary steps against executive members of the anc branch in Khutsong, Carletonville, who had been implicated in acts of torture, assaults and killings against local members of the anc Youth and Women's Leagues. In May an Amnesty International representative attended part of the proceedings of the anc-appointed Motsuenyane Commission, which was investigating reports of human rights abuses by anc officials in exile during the 1980s. The Commission's report, made public in August, found that torture and killings had been carried out by anc personnel and identified alleged perpetrators. The anc leadership accepted these findings and assumed collective responsibility for the abuses, but declined to discipline the perpetrators or remove them from
SOUTH AFRICVSPAIN
positions of authority. Instead, they called on the government to set up a "Commission of Truth" to inquire into all violations of human rights committed by all parties.
In oral statements to the un Commission on Human Rights in February and to its Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns in South Africa.
