SAUDI ARABIA
Scores of people were arrested for their political, human rights or religious activities. Some were prisoners of conscience. Over 400 Iraqi refugees were arrested following clashes in a refugee camp during which at least nine refugees were shot dead by camp guards; at least 30 of those arrested were still held at the end of the year. At least 28 people, among them prisoners of conscience, who had been arrested in previous years and held without charge or trial or sentenced after unfair trials, were released. Reports of torture continued to be received and at least two detainees died allegedly as a result of
torture or ill-treatment. The judicial punishments of flogging and amputation continued to be imposed. At least 80 people were executed.
In August King Fahd bin 'Abdul 'Aziz appointed a 60-member Majlis al-Shura, Consultative Council, The establishment of the council was part of a series of reforms announced in 1992 (see Amnesty International Report 1993). In May the Committee for the Defence of Legitimate Rights (cdlr) was founded in Riyadh by six prominent Sunni Muslim religious scholars and professionals. Its stated aims were the "alleviation of injustice .., and the defence of human rights decided by the Shari'a [Islamic law]". In response, the council of senior 'Ulama - the highest religious authority in the kingdom - stated that the country had no need for human rights organizations since it was ruled in accordance with the Shari'a. Negotiations aimed at securing improved rights for the country's Shi'a Muslim minority were held during the year between the authorities and Shi'a Muslim leaders. Under part of the agreement reached, all known Shi'a Muslim prisoners of conscience and political prisoners were released (see below).
Between May and September, over 20 members and supporters of the cdlr were arrested and detained. They were prisoners of conscience. At least 16 were academics or staff members at King Sa'ud University in Riyadh. Among them was Professor Muhammad al-Mas'ari, the cdlr's spokesperson, who was arrested in May at his living quarters on the university campus by officers of al-Mabahith al-'Amma. General Intelligence. He was held incommunicado without charge or trial and allegedly tortured by being deprived of sleep for prolonged periods. He was released in November. Dr 'Abdullah al-Hamid, a founding member of the cdlr, was arrested at his house in June. A writer and lecturer, he had been summoned on more than one occasion by the authorities, apparently in attempts to persuade him and other cdlr foimding members to disband the committee. He was held incommunicado without charge or trial until his release in September. The remaining cdlr supporters or members were released in October. Among them was Dr Ahmad al-Tuwaijri, a well-known poet and former dean of the College of Education at King Sa'ud University. He was arrested in September reportedly after
SAUDI AFy^lA
signing a petition calling for the release of Muhammad al-Mas'ari.
The arrest of Christian worshippers for the peaceful expression of their religious beliefs continued (see Amnesty International Reports 1992 and 1993). In June and October, at least nine nationals of the Philippines were arrested in Riyadh and Abba following their participation in prayer meetings. Among them was Robinson Azucena Articulo, an office manager, who was arrested in June and held in Malaz prison in Riyadh. It was not known whether the detainees were still held at the end of the year.
Between April and September, scores of suspected government opponents were arrested by a!-Mabahith al-'Amma, mainly in the province of al-Qasseem. They had allegedly distributed audio cassettes and literature criticizing government policies and corruption within the ruling family. All were said to be followers of Salafiyya, a fundamentalist Sunni Muslim doctrine. It was not known whether they remained in detention at the end of the year.
Over 400 Iraqi refugees were arrested following a protest in Rafha refugee camp in March. The majority were released shortly after, but at least 30 of them continued to be held at the end of the year. Among them was Farazdaq Wahab 'Abdul-Majeed, a bus driver from the Iraqi city of Kut, who was arrested after being wounded during the protest.
The protest began after news reached the camp that the Saudi Arabian authorities had refused to admit an Iraqi family seeking asylum on the border between Iraq and Saudi Arabia. It reportedly started peacefully, but became violent after one of the protesters, Jabbar Muhammad Karim al-Etaym, a taxi driver, was shot and killed by camp guards. Some of the refugees then occupied the camp's educational facility, which was set on fire, reportedly resulting in the deaths of four of its employees. The disturbances were subsequently quelled by army personnel, who reportedly fired into the protesters, killing at least eight more refugees. The government announced an investigation into the incident, but no details of its composition or findings were disclosed. However, the official news agency said in May that nine refugees had been killed during the March protest when guards opened fire to clear a path to the burning building.
At least 28 Shi'a Muslim prisoners of conscience and political prisoners were released (see above). Among them were five students from King Sa'ud University who had been held since 1989, and four alleged supporters of HizbuUati fil Hijaz, Party of God in Hijaz, who were serving prison terms imposed after unfair trials in late 1989 or early 1990 (see Amnesty International Reports 1989 to 1993).
New reports of torture and ill-treatment were received. Hussein al-Shuwaykhat, a 17-year-old student, died in January in al-Mabahith al-Amma prison in al-'Awamiyya, Eastern Province. His body was returned to his family allegedly bearing marks of torture. He had reportedly been held without charge or trial since March 1991 on suspicion of theft. It was not known if an inquest or inquiry into his death was held.
Many Iraqi refugees were reportedly tortured or ill-treated following the protest in Rafha refugee camp (see above). One of them, Hussein al-Jizani, a former prisoner of war, was allegedly beaten to death by members of the armed forces two days after the protest. Fifteen Iraqi refugees who had apparently witnessed the incident were arrested and reportedly forced to sign a statement to the effect that Hussein al-Jizani had died of a heart attack.
The judicial punishments of flogging and amputation continued to be imposed. Mikhail Cornelius Mikhail, an Egyptian member of the Coptic Orthodox Church, received 500 lashes prior to his release and deportation to Egypt in January: he had been sentenced in October 1992 to seven years' imprisonment and 1,000 lashes on charges of blasphemy, At least five judicial amputations of the hand were carried out during the year. All the victims had been convicted of repeated theft.
At least 80 people were executed, all by being publicly beheaded. The victims included Egyptian, Pakistani and Saudi Arabian nationals who had been convicted of drug-trafficking, murder or rape. Three of them, two Saudi Arabians and an Egyptian, who had been convicted of murder and rape, were beheaded and then crucified in April in the city of Ha'il in Tabuk Province,
Amnesty International welcomed the release of prisoners of conscience and other political prisoners during the year but expressed concern about the arrests of others
SAUDI ARABIA/SENEGAL
for the peaceful expression of their political or religious beliefs. It called for the immediate and unconditional release of all prisoners of conscience. The organization urged the authorities to investigate thoroughly all deaths in custody, including those which had occurred in 1992 (see Amnesty International Report 1993], and all allegations of torture. It asked the government for details of the official investigation into the incident at Rafha refugee camp, but there was no response fi-om the government to any of Amnesty International's appeals.
In July Anmesty International published a report, Saudi Arabia: An upsurge in public executions, and expressed grave concern that 105 people had been executed during a one-year period up to May, many of them apparently after unfair trials. It urged the government to take immediate steps to stop executions, reduce the number of capital offences and allow defendants access to defence lawyers during trials. The Saudi Arabian Ambassador to the United Kingdom, responding through the news media, stated that Amnesty International's opposition to the death penalty was tantamount to "contempt for the beliefs of all Muslims".
In September Amnesty International published a further report, Saudi Arabia: Religious Intolerance; The arrest, detention and torture of Christian worshippers and Shi'a Muslims. It reported the emergence of a clear pattern of discrimination against religious minorities, particularly since the Gulf crisis in 1990 and 1991. It also highlighted the detention without trial of hundreds of men, women and children solely for the peaceful expression of their religious beliefs, as well as the frequent reports of torture. Amnesty International urged the government to release all prisoners of conscience immediately and to enact legislation to combat religious intolerance.
