CONGO
Several dozen government opponents, some of whom may have been prisoners of conscience, were detained without charge or trial for a few weeks. Some were reportedly tortured. Government opponents were reported to have been executed extrajudicially by members of the security forces. At least four people remained under sentence of death but there were no reports of executions. Armed opposition supporters captured, tortured and killed government supporters.
There was continued political instability which resulted in fighting both in the middle of the year and in November and December between government and opposition supporters. At least 160 people were killed and scores injured.
New elections for the National Assembly, which had been dissolved by President Pascal Lissouba in October 1992, took place in May and June and resulted in parties allied to the President remaining in power. However, an opposition party coalition led by Bernard Kolelas disputed the results and demanded fresh elections. When the government rejected this, opposition supporters set up barricades and road-blocks across the capital, Brazzaville, and began a campaign of civil disobedience and violent opposition to the government. Following clashes between members of different political and ethnic groups, the government declared a state of emergency in mid-July, giving wide powers of arrest to local security officials. However, in an attempt to defuse the crisis, President Lissouba asked the Supreme Court to decide whether electoral irregularities had occurred: the court ruled that the elections
had been flawed. The state of emergency was lifted in August after international mediation temporarily ended violence between the government and the opposition. A second round of voting took place in October in which the government won three of the 11 seats contested.
In November, however, there was further violence after several government supporters were abducted by armed supporters of the opposition. In response, members of the security forces used automatic weapons and rockets against the opposition strongholds of Bacongo and Makel^ k6l6. suburbs of Brazzaville. Violent clashes between government and opposition supporters persisted to the end of the year.
A general amnesty bill announced in 1992 by President Lissouba to protect the country's past leaders from prosecution for offences including human rights violations had not been submitted to the National Assembly by the end of 1993 (see Amnesty International Report 1993). The only reported inquiry into past human rights violations was an investigation into the killing of several demonstrators by the security forces in December 1992. The results of the inquiry were not published but, according to unofficial sources, the inquiry concluded that the security forces had been ordered by the government to open fire on the demonstrators. No action was taken against those implicated.
Several dozen opposition supporters were detained for up to a few weeks by government forces during the political disturbances in June and July. Twenty-three government opponents were freed in July, apparently uncharged, in exchange for 17 government supporters held by the opposition. Some detainees said that they had been tortured, including with electric shocks, and some that they had been made to throw the dead bodies of other detainees into the River Congo. However, no official investigation into these allegations was initiated.
Among those reportedly tortured was Jacques Koyo, a musician. He was arrested by members of the Presidential Guard and accused of acquiring arms for the opposition. He subsequently alleged that he had been taken to the Presidential Palace and tortured. He said he had been stabbed with bayonets, the tendons in his legs had been cut and that burning objects had been placed on his back. The authorities failed
CONGO/CÔTE DWOIRE
to take any steps in response to these allegations.
In February, two students were killed when the security forces used firearms to disperse a student demonstration in the southwestern town of Pointe-Noire. Thev appeared to be victims of extrajudicial executions. The students were protesting at the death in a traffic accident of a fellow student. The authorities took no action to establish whether the killings were lawful or not.
Dozens of people were reported to have been killed, some of them executed extrajudicially, by the security forces during the political violence between government and opposition supporters, yet the authorities took no measures to prevent or denounce unlawful killings, to ensure that killings by the security forces were thoroughly investigated or to establish clearly the circumstances in which the security forces could legitimately use lethal force. Among those killed was the Libyan Ambassador, who was shot dead by soldiers in June at a military road-block.
Foin? people convicted of criminal offences in 1989 remained under sentence of death. No new death sentences or executions were reported.
Opposition supporters who took up arms and resorted to violence were themselves responsible for abuses. In June Dr Roger Moukoumba, a World Health Organization official, and another man who was an aide to the Minister of Interior and Security, were shot dead, reportedly by members of the armed opposition. Fortified houses of opposition leaders were used as prisons to hold abducted government supporters who were allegedly subjected to torture. Some government supporters freed by the opposition at the end of July claimed that they had been held at the house of an opposition leader where they were subjected to beatings and torture, including cigarette bums. As many as 14 others held by the opposition were reportedly severely tortured and "disappeared".
Amnesty International appealed to the government to investigate reports of extrajudicial executions and other human rights violations, to bring to justice those found responsible for such violations, and to issue clear guidelines to all members of the security forces regarding the use of lethal force, in conformity with relevant UN standards. The government failed to
respond. Amnesty International also appealed to the opposition to abide by international humanitarian standards.
