IRAQ
Thousands of suspected government opponents were detained and tens of thousands of others who had been arrested in previous years continued to be held. Many of them were prisoners of conscience. Torture remained widespread. Hundreds of detainees "disappeared" and the cases of more than 100,000 people who "disappeared" in previous years remained unresolved. Hundreds of judicial and extrajudicial executions were reportedly carried out. Human rights abuses were
committed in areas of Iraqi Kurdistan under Kurdish control, including torture, executions and deliberate and arbitrary killings.
Economic sanctions against Iraq imposed by a un Security Council cease-fire resolution in April 1991 remained in force. Two "air exclusion zones" over northern and southern Iraq continued to be imposed (see Amnesty International Report 1993). A un-sponsored Memorandum of Understanding, which expired in March, was not formally renewed but the distribution of humanitarian relief under its terms continued on a reduced scale.
The scope of the death penalty was extended to cover three additional offences, including trading in banned goods.
Kurdish opposition groups retained control of parts of the northern provinces of Duhok, Arbil, Sulaimaniya and Kirkuk. These areas continued to be administered by the Council of Ministers for Iraqi Kurdistan. The economic blockade imposed on the region by the Iraqi Government in October 1991 remained in force. In January a Law on Judicial Authority came into effect in Iraqi Kurdistan, which stressed the independence of the judiciary, established the principle of public trials and defined the areas of jurisdiction for nine types of civil courts. In October the Kurdistan National Assembly passed a Law on Political Parties, requiring groups wishing to function as political parties to apply for authorization to the Kurdish Ministry of the Interior. Existing political parties were expected to comply with the law within three months of its coming into effect.
Widespread arrests of suspected opponents of the government of President Saddam Hussain were carried out throughout the year as part of the government's continuing crackdown on the Shi'a Muslim population. Most arrests took place in southern towns and villages, including in the southern marshes region, particularly between August and December. People suspected of assisting anti-government "saboteurs" or of having participated in the March 1991 uprising (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1992) were especially targeted. Many of those detained were tortured while held for short periods in al-Radwaniyya and al-Ramadi garrisons, Abu Ghraib Prison near Baghdad or other places. Some were released only after making large cash payments to the authorities. Others were
IRAQ/IRELAND
transferred to unknown destinations and there were fears that many of them were later extrajudicially executed (see below).
At least seven foreign nationals arrested between April and August and convicted of illegal entry into Iraq were held in Abu Ghraib Prison. Five of them were released between October and December. Five foreign nationals who had been detained in 1992 on similar charges remained held, but six others also arrested in 1992, a Filipino, two British and three Swedish nationals, were released in October and December (see Amnesty International Report 1993).
In August scores of prominent Sunni Arabs were arrested in Baghdad and other places by security and intelligence personnel. The fate and whereabouts of many of them remained unknown: it was feared that some may have been extrajudicially executed. They included retired army officers, economists, lawyers and former government officials. Among them were 'Abd al-Karim Hani, a former Minister of Labour and Social Affairs, and Rajeh al-Tikriti. a military doctor. Both were executed in November.
Thousands of government opponents and their relatives arrested in previous years remained held throughout 1993, among them prisoners of conscience. They included Arabs, Kurds, Assyrians and Turcomans arrested during the late 1970s and throughout the 1980s as well as thousands of others arrested since the March 1991 uprising. Several hundred Kuwaitis and other nationals arrested by Iraqi forces during the 1990 to 1991 occupation of Kuwait were believed to be still held in Iraq, although the Iraqi Government continued to deny holding such detainees. The Kuwaiti Government estimated that some 650 Kuwaitis had not been repatriated from Iraq after the cease-fire agreement. Among those believed to be still held in fraq were two Kuwaitis - Faisal al-Sane'. an entrepreneur and former parliamentarian, and Samira Ma'rafi. a university student.
Numerous new reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees were received. The majority of victims were Shi'a Muslims from southern cities and the marshes region. They were held in al-Radwaniyya Garrison, the headquarters of the 4th Army Corps in al-'Amara city and other detention centres where torture was routine and systematic. Detainees were reportedly subjected to prolonged beatings, electric
shocks, breaking of limbs, burning of the skin and mock executions. Scores of detainees reportedly died in custody during the year as a result of torture.
A Shi'a Muslim peasant was beaten with cables and given electric shocks while in detention in al-'Amara in April. He was then transferred to al-Radwaniyya where, he alleged, several detainees suffered critical bums after being pushed into a fire during interrogation. In another case, a Shi'a Muslim said he had been tortured for several days in al-Radwaniyya. He testified that he had been suspended by an arm and a leg from the ceiling, given electric shocks to his genitals, beaten with cables and burned with cigarettes. He was released after paying 30,000 Iraqi dinars. He also said that while he was in al-Radwaniyya, two fellow detainees had died under torture.
More than 100,000 "disappearance" cases from previous years remained unresolved. New details were received about scores of such victims, including information about Kurdish families who "disappeared" during the 1988 "Anfal operations" in Iraqi Kurdistan and Shi'a Muslim Arabs who "disappeared" between 1979 and 1985 (see previous Amnesty International Reports).
Several hundred people were reported to have been executed for alleged criminal or political offences. In most cases it was not possible to determine whether these were judicial or extrajudicial executions. The victims included four suspected members of the Syrian Ba'th Party whose bodies were returned to their families in October; among them was Walid al-'Ubaidi, a former employee of Iraq's Ministry of Oil. Two of the others were said to have had their eyes gouged out.
Mass executions of suspected government opponents held in prisons were reported, in particular in al-Radwaniyya Garrison where several thousand Shi'a Muslims arrested since the March 1991 uprising were held. Many former detainees reported that executions were carried out regularly throughout the year, with scores of people executed in September and October alone. Some were said to have been executed by firing-squad and buried in mass graves inside the garrison; others were allegedly burned to death. The mutilated bodies of others were returned to their families, who were forbidden from mourning
IRAQ/IRELAND
in public. Scores of detainees were reportedly executed in Abu Ghraib Prison; their relatives were instructed to collect the bodies, some of which were allegedly mutilated. Scores of military personnel were reportedly executed in September and October after two alleged coup attempts: no further information about these cases could be obtained by the end of the year.
Scores of non-combatant men. women and children were extrajudicially executed during attacks by government forces on civilian targets in the southern marshes. The attacks were part of the government's efforts to secure control of the vast marshlands area located between Basra. al-'Amara and al-Nasiriyya which has traditionally served as a hiding place for government opponents and army deserters. Up to 8,000 people had fled the southern marshes by the end of the year as a result of military attacks on villages, the draining of large stretches of marshland and the destruction of the local economy. Scores of refugees confirmed that the government was continuing its policy of deliberately targeting non-combatant civilians, particularly in villages in the southern al-Hammar marshes. Several hundred people, many of them civilians, were reportedly killed or injured on 26 September during military attacks in the 'Ulaiwi and Abu Zargi marshes. The villages targeted included Abu al-Sanadij, al-Ghatra and al-Ghag. A un team which visited the area in November announced subsequently that it could not confirm allegations that chemical weapons were used in these attacks.
Kurdish opposition groups and the Kurdish authorities in control of parts of Iraqi Kurdistan committed human rights abuses, including torture and deliberate and arbitrary killings. Most of the 13 political detainees who had been arrested in 1992 during a demonstration in Arbil (see Amnesty International Report 1993] alleged they had been beaten during interrogation by the Asayish (security) forces. Some said they had been given electric shocks. All were released in January. Scores of other detainees were allegedly beaten or otherwise ill-treated during interrogation. They were among hundreds of detainees held in prisons under the jurisdiction of the police and Asayish forces in Arbil, Sulaimaniya and Duhok, the vast majority for alleged criminal or security offences. In September, two Kurds accused
of murder needed intensive care treatment in al-Jumhuri Teaching Hospital in Arbil after being tortured at Azadi police station. One of them, Muhsin Hamad Ibrahim, died a week later from renal failure. Two policemen were subsequently arrested and arrest warrants were issued for four others.
Scores of deliberate killings were carried out in Duhok, Arbil and Sulaimaniya regions between April and August, some of which were politically motivated. Three political parties appeared to be implicated in the killings — the Kurdistan Democratic Party (kdp), the Patriotic Union of Kmd-istan (puk) and the Islamic Movement in Iraqi Kurdistan (imik). Among the victims were Qais Muhammad Ahmad, a member of the Central Committee of Zahmatke-shan. Kurdistan Toilers' Party, and Ra'uf Kamel 'Aqrawi, one of the 13 political detainees released in January (see above). In December, four unarmed demonstrators were killed in Sulaimaniya following clashes between the kdp and forces of the Kurdistan Socialist Party-Iraq (ksp-i). Also in December, hundreds of imik members and supporters and scores of puk members were arrested following armed clashes between the two groups in a number of Kurdish towns and cities. Deliberate and arbitrary killings were carried out by both sides, as well as the torture and execution of detainees. Official investigations into many of these incidents were set up by the Kurdish authorities but had not been concluded by the end of the year.
At least seven people were sentenced to death by the Sulaimaniya and Arbil criminal courts, all after being convicted of premeditated murder. Three people who had been convicted of similar offences in 1992 were executed in Arbil after their death sentences were upheld by the Court of Cassation and. in the absence of a head of state, ratified by the Speaker of the Kurdistan National Assembly.
Amnesty International appealed to the Iraqi Government to halt human rights violations, including the detention of prisoners of conscience, unfair trials, "disappearances" and executions. In April Amnesty International published a report, Iraq: "Disappearance" of Shi'a clerics and students. It urged the government to clarify the 106 cases highlighted in the report. No substantive response was received. In September the organization published a further report, Iraq: Secret detention
IRAQ/IRELAND
of Kuwaitis and third-country nationals, which called on the government to account for several hundred detainees still missing after the end of the Gulf conflict. In November the government denied holding these detainees but stated its willingness to investigate 625 cases referred to it by the Kuwaiti Government through the International Committee of the Red Cross. Also in November. Amnesty International publicly expressed its concern about gross human rights violations in the southern marshes region, and called on the un General Assembly to request the un Secretary-General to provide the necessary resources for establishing a human rights monitoring operation for Iraq.
In October Amnesty International raised its concerns about human rights abuses committed in Iraqi Kurdistan with Kurdish political leaders and officials during a visit to the area. In December Amnesty International expressed its concern to the Council of Ministers and to leaders of the kdp, puk and imik about reports of deliberate and arbitrary killings that month (see above). The organization urged that impartial and thorough investigations be conducted into all politically motivated killings, and called for measures to protect detainees from torture. A response was received from the kdp leader, Mas'ud Barzani, stating, among other things, that kdp forces had not been responsible for the killing of four unarmed demonstrators in Sulaimaniya.
In a written statement to the un Commission on Human Rights in February, Amnesty International drew attention to its grave concerns about human rights violations in Iraq, and in an oral statement urged the Commission to take up the recommendation of the un Special Rapporteur on Iraq that a human rights monitoring operation be established in the country. The Commission adopted a resolution extending the Special Rapporteur's mandate for a further year and requesting the un Secretary-General to take the necessary measures to implement the Special Rapporteur's recommendation. In an oral statement to the un Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August, Amnesty International urged the implementation of the Commission's resolution in view of the continuing human rights violations in Iraq. The human rights monitoring operation had not been set up by the end of the year,
In December the un General Assembly adopted a resolution requesting the un Secretary-General to cooperate with the Special Rapporteur on Iraq in setting up a human rights monitoring operation for Iraq.
