EGYPT
Thousands of people, most of them members or sympathizers of banned Islamist militant groups, were detained under state of emergency legislation. Many were held without charge or trial but hundreds of
others, almost all civilians, received unfair trials before military courts. Torture of political detainees was routine. At least 61 people were sentenced to death and 43. including 15 sentenced in previous years, were executed. Dozens of people were killed by the security forces in circumstances suggesting that some had been extrajudicially executed. Armed opposition groups also were responsible for grave human rights abuses, including deliberate killings of dozens of civilians.
The state of emergency, in force since 1981 (see previous Amnesty International Reports), continued. Administrative detention without charge or trial of political suspects, permitted under emergency legislation, remained widespread.
In October President Hosni Mubarak was re-elected, unopposed, for his third term of office. Throughout the year the President continued to refer civilians charged with terrorist offences for trial by military courts. In January the Constitutional Court rejected a challenge to this practice and ruled that the President was empowered to issue special decrees for this purpose.
There were further violent clashes between members of banned Islamist militant groups and the security forces, resulting in deaths on both sides. A number of civilians were killed in circumstances suggesting they had been extrajudicially executed, as they posed no serious threat at the time they were shot. These included eight people killed when police stormed a mosque in Aswan in early March.
Numerous bomb and other attacks were carried out by aimed opponents of the government, including al-Gama'a al-Islamiya, Islamic Group, and Gihad (Holy War). Dozens of civilians were deliberately killed in such bomb attacks: others, including foreign tourists and Copts, were victims of targeted killings. Those deliberately killed by al-Gama'a al-Islamiya and other armed opposition groups included Mohsen Maurice Yassa, a Christian shopkeeper, and Nash'at Fawzi, a doctor, who were both shot dead in Dayrut, Upper Egypt, in July and October respectively. Three government ministers and numerous police officers were assassinated or targeted by armed Islamist militants.
Thousands of members or sympathizers of banned Islamist militant groups were detained under state of emergency
EGYPT
regulations. Some were arrested after violent clashes with the security forces, particularly in Upper Egypt, Alexandria and parts of Cairo, the capital, but many were arrested as suspected sympathizers, including some possible prisoners of conscience.
Hundreds .of people' were arrested in the first three months -of the year; with some 290 suspected supporters of banned Islamist groups arrested throughout the country on 11 February alone. They included 'Abd al-Mun'im Gamal al-Din 'Abd al-Mun'im, a journalist, and Magdi Mohammad Mohammad Salim,'a university graduate, both of whom were detained in Cairo by. the Giza branch of. the State Security Intelligence (ssi) and .reportedly tortured. Both had been arrested several times previously but never convicted of a criminal offence. They were among more than 240 detainees referred to a military court some months later (see below].
Also in February, four foreign nationals and an Egyptian were arrested and charged with "exploiting religion to foment sectarian sedition". They were detained in Istiqbal Tora prison for over two months before their release in early May. The foreigners were deported to their respective countries: the Egyptian was placed in a mental hospital where he remained, apparently against his will, until the end of the year. His legal situation remained unclear.
Four supporters of the opposition Labour Party were briefly detained in October. Dr Mohammad Hilmi Mourad, a 74-year-old writer and the party's deputy leader, 'Adel Hussain, its secretary general, and two journalists at al-Sha'ab, the party newspaper, were held for up to three days, then released on bail, apparently in connection with the publication of articles critical of President Mubarak. They had not been tried by the end of the year.
The authorities revealed few details of arrests and detentions but at most points in the year at least 2,000 people were believed to be held under emergency legislation. They included hundreds arrested in 1992 or before, among them many of the 700 or more people arrested in Imbaba, Cairo, in December 1992 (see Amnesty International Report 1993).
The authorities continued to move many political detainees to remote-police stations or detention centres, apparently in order to prolong their detention. They also continued to serve new detention orders.
often repeatedly, on detainees who. had obtained court orders for their release. Consequently, some detainees had been held for up to. three years without charge or trial. For example, Hassan al-Gharbawi Shehata, a lawyer, reportedly remained in administrative detention, despite many court orders for his release and despite being acquitted at his trial. Another 18 lawyers remained in detention at the end of the year.
In October General Sa'd al-Din al-Shaz-li, a former ambassador and commander of the armed forces who had been arrested on his return to Egypt in 1992 (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1993), was released under a presidential amnesty.
Hundreds of civilians ' charged with membership of militant Islamist' groups and violent political offences • had their cases referred to military courts by order of President Mubarak, and appeared in mass trials. The procedures of the military courts fell far short of international- fair trial standards: the judges, military officers, were not independent, and defendants were denied adequate time to prepare their defence and had no right of appeal to a higher court. Before coming to trial defendants were routinely held in prolonged secret incommunicado detention and tortured to extract confessions. Between April and the end of October, military courts sentenced 30 people' to death, including four in absentia. 12 of whom were hanged in July, five more in November and nine in December: 175 people received sentences ranging ft-om life imprisonment to one-year prison terms and 122 defendants were acquitted.
Two trials began in August before the Supreme Military Court in Cairo, involving respectively 55 and 66 civilians charged with membership of Talai' al-Fatab, The Vanguards of the Conquest, a banned Islamist militant group, and calling for the overthrow of the government and the Constitution. Some defendants also faced murder, attempted murder or other charges.
Defendants at both trials testified that they had been tortured while secretly detained by state security police in Cairo. They said they had been blindfolded, suspended . in painful positions and given electric shocks to make them confess. Medical reports indicated that many of the defendants had scars which were consistent with their torture allegations.
EGYPT
Judgment in both trials, the proceedings of which had been attended by Amnesty International observers, was given in October. Eight people were sentenced to death, including two in absentia, and six were executed in December. Seventy-six defendants received prison sentences ranging from one year to life imprisonment, and 37 were acquitted. Those acquitted were not released but were served with new detention orders and were still held at the end of the year.
Torture of political detainees was frequently reported, particularly in police stations, at the headquarters of the ssi in Cairo, and at the premises of the Firaq al-Amn (security brigades) and ssi branches throughout the country. The most common methods alleged were beatings, suspension by the wrists or ankles, burning with cigarettes, electric shocks and psychological torture. Several detainees died apparently as a result of torture. Ahmad Farouq Ahmad, who was accused of participating in the attempted assassination of the Minister of the Interior, General Hassan al-Alfy, in late August, died within 24 hours of his arrest early in September, reportedly following torture. It was reported that Mohammad Hamidou and Yasser Abd al-Rahim had died as a result of torture in late December 1992; they had been among hundreds of people arrested earlier that month in Imbaba, Cairo.
Lawyers and human rights organizations lodged hundreds of formal complaints of torture with the Procurator General's Office, but the latter apparently took no action to investigate them.
Twenty-four defendants accused of involvement in the assassination of the Speaker of the People's Assembly, Dr Rifa'at al-Mahgoub, in October 1990 (see Amnesty Internationa! Reports 1991 to 1993), were acquitted in August after the civilian Supreme State Security Court ruled that some defendants had been tortured to make them confess. Some, however, received prison terms for other offences while others, such as Safwat 'Abd al-Chani, were also on trial for involvement in the murder of the writer Farag Foda in June 1992 (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1993), even though they were in prison at the time of the murder, ludg-ment in this trial was given in late December: one person was sentenced to death, three to prison sentences ranging from
three to 10 years (two of them in absentia) and eight were acquitted, including Safwat 'Abd al-Ghani.
There was a dramatic increase in the use of the death penalty. At least 61 people were sentenced to death: 32 of them, including four in absentia (see above), for politically motivated offences, and at least 29 after being convicted of murder. Forty-three people were executed: of these, 28 had been sentenced to death by military courts in 1993 and had had no right of appeal (see above). Fourteen others had been convicted of murder in previous years and Mohammad 'Abd al-Salam 'Ali al-Shahid, who was hanged in June, had been sentenced to death by a military court in Cairo in May 1992 after being convicted of espionage.
Amnesty International strongly condemned the deliberate and arbitrary killings of civilians by armed opposition groups and called on them to abide by international humanitarian standards.
Amnesty International repeatedly appealed to President Mubarak to commute death sentences and called for an end to trials of civilians before military courts and for all political prisoners to receive trials which conformed fully to international fair trial standards. Amnesty International also criticized the long-term detention without charge or trial of political detainees, called for all prisoners to be safeguarded against torture or ill-treatment, and for urgent, thorough and impartial investigations into all allegations of torture and extrajudicial executions.
In June an Amnesty International delegation, led by the Secretary General, visited Egypt and met senior government officials, including the newly appointed Minister of Interior. The Minister undertook to prevent the use of torture, but no specific steps were reported to have been taken by the end of the year.
Amnesty International published two reports: in May, Egypt: Grave human rights abuses amid politico! violence-, and in October, Egypt: Mihtary trials of civiHans, a catalogue of human rights violations. In response to the first report, the authorities acknowledged that isolated abuses had taken place, but said these were the exception rather than the norm and were not the result of any policy to abuse human rights. The response referred to the high level of violence against the state - more than 80
EGYPT/EL SALVADOR
attacks on police officers in 12 months -and the legal provisions which exist to safeguard human rights. However, it failed to give adequate information on the cases and concerns raised by Amnesty International. In their response to the second report, the authorities maintained that civilians received a fair trial before military courts and that the use of the death penalty was justified. They failed to respond to Amnesty International's specific criticisms. In August Amnesty International issued a statement expressing concern about deliberate and arbitrary killings by armed opposition groups.
In March and again in October Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns regarding torture in Egypt to the un Committee against Torture, pursuant to Article 20 of the un Convention against Torture.
