KOREA
(REPUBLIC OF)
Dozens of government opponents were detained on political charges, including prisoners of conscience. Many were tortured or ill-treated during interrogation. Some 250 other political prisoners arrested in previous years, including prisoners of conscience, continued to be held. The majority had been tried and convicted under the National Security Law (nsl), which restricts the rights to freedom of expression and association, and some had been convicted añer trials which were believed to have been unfair. Some 50 prisoners were under sentence of death. There were no executions.
In his inaugural speech in February President Kim Young-sam promised greater freedom and democracy. The new government initially expressed a willingness to amend the nsl but reversed this position soon after taking office. In December the National Assembly adopted legislation limiting the powers of the Agency for National Security Planning (ansp) to anest
KOREA (REPUBLIC OF)/KUWAIT
and interrogate political suspects and providing for the punishment of ansp agents found guilty of abuse of authority.
Under the amended law, the ansp will no longer be permitted to investigate the activities of those suspected of "praising" North Korea or failing to inform the authorities about alleged North Korean spies, although such suspects may still be prosecuted without ansp involvement. The amendment also provided for the National Assembly to exercise a degree of scrutiny over the ansp's budget.
In March the International Labour Organisation said that the ban on third party intervention in labour disputes, under which several prisoners of conscience have been held, was a "serious restriction" on the free functioning of trade unions. In May the government said it would amend Article 13(2) of the Labour Dispute Mediation Act to remove the ban. but in August it reversed this decision following a series of strikes.
In June the government announced its intention to ratify the un Convention against Torture. It had not done so by the end of the year.
In March, 144 political prisoners were released in an amnesty to mark the inauguration of the new President. They included dissidents, students, workers and also six elderly prisoners serving life terms. However, dozens of people were arrested during the year on political charges, many of whom were prisoners of conscience. Most were held under the nsl, which prohibits "anti-state" activities and contacts with "anti-state" organizations and North Korea.
Over 30 people were arrested and charged under the nsl with belonging to or supporting Sanomaeng, the Socialist Workers' League, which the authorities considered an "anti-state" organization. Some of those held, who included prisoners of conscience, had no connection with Sanomaeng and others said that they had sought to establish a socialist political party through legal and non-violent means. The prisoners of conscience included Professor Cho Kuk, an open critic of the nsl, and nine others arrested in June on suspicion of belonging to the Socialist Academy, alleged to have links with Sanomaeng. Some 60 real or alleged members of Sanomaeng arrested since 1990 remained in prison at the end of the year. Most of them were prisoners of conscience (see Amnesty
International Reports 1992 and 1993).
Hwang Suk-yong, a writer detained by the ansp in April as he returned to South Korea after a period of self-imposed exile, was also a prisoner of conscience. In October he was sentenced to eight years' imprisonment for making an unauthorized visit to North Korea in 1989 and accepting "operational" funds from the North Korean Government which, he said, were the copyright fee for permission to make a film of his book langkiisan.
Human rights activist Nob Tae-hun was arrested in July: the police tried to make him confess to meeting North Korean spies in Japan, but he denied this. He was charged under the nsl for possessing and distributing books and pamphlets which the authorities said benefited North Korea, but which were publicly available in South Korea. Noh Tae-hun's human rights work appeared to be the real reason for his arrest. He had helped former long-term political prisoners and had also coordinated the participation of South Korean non-govern-mental organizations in the un World Conference on Human Rights, held in Vienna in June. He was released in October after receiving a suspended prison sentence.
In July eight former army conscripts were arrested. They had deserted from the military and made "declarations of conscience", in some cases as long ago as 1989, advocating reform of the military and expressing concern at the political and human rights situation in South Korea. Most had been assigned to the riot police and required to perform duties they opposed on grounds of conscience. As the right to conscientious objection is not recognized, no alternative civilian service was available to them. Four of the eight were sentenced to prison terms ranging from one-and-a-half to three years: they were prisoners of conscience. The others were given suspended prison sentences but faced the possibility of being sent back to the army or riot police to complete their military service.
Trade union leaders continued to face arrest for violating the prohibition on third party intervention in labour disputes. In July leaders of the Korean Trade Union Congress (ktuc), including its President Dan Byung-ho, went into hiding when arrest warrants were issued on the grounds that they had given advice to trade unions about wage negotiations and about strike
KOREA (REPUBLIC OF)
188
procedures. Dan Byung-ho was still in hiding at the end of the year.
Some 30 of the 60 prisoners arrested and charged in August and September 1992 for alleged involvement in a "spy" ring operated by the North Korean Government were sentenced to prison terms ranging from one year to life imprisonment (see Amnesty International Report 1993). Twenty-five others were given suspended sentences and released. Those jailed included writer and political activist Kim Nak-jung, who was sentenced to life imprisonment in February. A prisoner of conscience, he had advocated peaceful reunification through his writings, lectures and meetings and there was no evidence of espionage. Other prisoners of conscience included Choi Chin-sop, a journalist, and Lee Kun-hee, a secretary to a member of the National Assembly. They were convicted of belonging to an "anti-state" group and of passing state secrets to alleged spies, but there was no convincing evidence for this. The authorities failed to investigate reports that many of the prisoners arrested in this case had been held incommunicado and tortured during interrogation.
Dozens of political prisoners convicted under national security legislation in previous years remained in prison. Many of those arrested in the 1970s and 1980s had received long prison sentences for alleged contacts with North Korea and for espionage. There were consistent reports that many of these prisoners had been tortured during interrogation and convicted largely on the basis of their own coerced confessions. They included prisoners of conscience Kim Song-man and Hwang Tae-kwon, arrested in 1985 and serving sentences of life and 20 years' imprisonment respectively, and Chang Ui-gyun, who had been arrested in 1987 and sentenced to eight years' imprisonment. In April the un Working Group on Arbitrary Detention determined that the detention of these three prisoners contravened both the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
The authorities refused to release two prisoners held since the Korean War (1950 to 1953) because they had consistently refused to sign a statement of "conversion" to anti-communism, renouncing alleged communist views. Kim Sun-myung and Ahn Hak-sop were North Korean soldiers at the
time of their capture in 1951 and 1953 respectively. They were sentenced to life imprisonment on espionage charges, but appear to have been simply prisoners of war who were convicted after unfair trials. They appeared to be prisoners of conscience.
In October the Judicial and Legal Affairs Committee of the National Assembly reviewed the case of Kang Ki-hun after new evidence emerged to suggest that he had been wrongly convicted in December 1991 of aiding and abetting the protest suicide of a political activist (see Amnesty International Report 1993). The new evidence, however, did not satisfy legal criteria for a retrial and Kang Ki-hun continued to be held. His arrest and conviction were apparently politically motivated: he was a prisoner of conscience.
Virtually all those known to have been detained for political reasons during the year were allegedly subjected to lengthy periods of interrogation, sleep deprivation and threats by both the Security Division of the National Police Administration and the ansp. Some prisoners said that they had been beaten and forced to do repeated physical exercises during interrogation.
The pacifist and human rights advocate, Kim Sam-sok, was stripped naked, sexually assaulted and beaten by officials of the ansp after his arrest in September. He and his sister, Kim Un-ju, were arrested without warrant and held incommunicado for two days. Kim Sam-sok told his lawyer that he had been forced to make a false confession and that he had tried to commit suicide. Kim Un-ju said she had been deprived of sleep and slapped and shaken by interrogators who also made sexual threats. The two were detained under the nsl on suspicion of contacting and passing state secrets to "anti-state" groups in Japan with the aim of benefiting North Korea. Their trial had not concluded by the end of the year.
In November former political prisoner Mun Guk-jin brought a civil law suit against the government, claiming damages for torture inflicted when he was arrested in 1980 and 1986. Doctors have attested that Mun Guk-jin's current mental illness is a direct result of torture.
There were some 50 prisoners under sentence of death, most of whom were kept permanently handcuffed. There were no executions.
KOREA (REPUBLIC OF)/KUWAIT
Amnesty International called for the release of prisoners of conscience, for an end to torture and ill-treatment and for impartial investigations into all torture allegations. In May it urged the government to ratify the un Convention against Torture. Amnesty International also urged the government to amend the nsl and other laws used to detain political prisoners and it called on the authorities to review the cases of long-term political prisoners, many of whom had been tortured and convicted after unfair trials. In December Amnesty International urged the authorities not to carry out any executions and to commute all death sentences.
