NEPAL
Hundreds of people, including possible prisoners of conscience, were detained during a series of opposition strikes and demonstrations and held without charge or trial for up to several weeks. Torture and ill-treatment of imprisoned demonstrators and other prisoners was reported. There was one reported "disappearance". At least 24 people were reportedly killed by police in circumstances suggesting that they may have been victims of extrajudicial executions.
Legislation to provide compensation for torture victims was drafted, but had not been passed by the end of the year. The draft bill set an upper limit for compensation but it did not define torture as a crime or require that perpetrators be brought to justice.
A committee was established in August under the Home Minister to review the cases of prisoners convicted of criminal offences under the previous government who may have been falsely charged for political reasons. It had not finished its work by the end of the year.
Over 1,000 people were arrested in June and July during a series of nationwide strikes and demonstrations called by the main opposition party, the Communist Party of Nepal (United Marxist-Leninist) (cpn-uml). in alliance with other opposition parties. Some of the demonstrations were violent, with stone-throwing, arson and destruction of public and private property. According to the police, about 1.280 people were arrested between 24 June and 4 July 1993, of whom 150 were charged with breaking the curfew or public order
NEPAL
offences. Most of the others, including hundreds of possible prisoners of conscience, were held in administrative detention without charge or trial under the Public Offences Act, which permits up to 35 days' detention, and then released.
Under the terms of a nine-point agreement reached between the cpn-uml and the government of Prime Minister Girija Prasad Koirala in August, the detained demonstrators and strikers were released and any charges against them withdrawn.
The parliamentary Foreign Affairs and Human Rights Committee established five teams to inspect jails, police stations and the offices of government attorneys in the five development regions. Their findings were not known at the end of the year.
There were several reports of ill-treatment and torture in police custody, including beatings of detainees held during the demonstrations and rape and attempted rape of women prisoners in both 1992 and 1993. Amnesty International does not know of a single case in which a police officer has been prosecuted for torture.
Manikala Rai was allegedly raped and subjected to other torture by five police officers at a Kathmandu police station in December 1992. The authorities, however, took action only against one sub-inspector, who was dismissed ft'om the police force in January. The police department said he had not been prosecuted because there had not been conclusive medical evidence of rape.
Teelu Ghale was reported to have been tortured at the Hanuman Dhoka police station in Kathmandu and at the Bhaktapur police station in September. Police apparently attempted to extort money ft'om her, beat her. subjected her to electric shocks on her wrists and attempted to rape her. When required by the Supreme Court to respond to a habeas corpus petition, the police denied she was in custody and transferred her to Bhaktapur police station, where she was further abused and denied food for two days. In early October police took Teelu Ghale to the District Court and charged her with selling one gram of heroin; they told the Supreme Court that she had been arrested only on the day that she was charged. However, the Supreme Court ordered an investigation and found that she had indeed been arrested in September. Contempt of court proceedings were initiated against the police officers
concerned but had not concluded by the end of the year. No action was known to have been taken regarding her torture.
There were numerous complaints of prisoners being beaten by police, including reports from Kathmandu, Lalitpur. Bhaktapur, Rolpa, Ham, Rukum, Lamjung and Morang. Victims included people detained in connection with the strikes and demonstrations, and street children. The police denied that detained demonstrators had been beaten. Other forms of torture reported included beatings on the soles of the feet, having pins pushed under the finger nails and electric shocks.
One person reportedly "disappeared" in police custody during the June demonstrations. Pravakar Subedi went missing ft'om his student hostel in Kathmandu on 25 June. His brother later saw a photograph in a magazine which he believed showed Pravakar Subedi. injured, being carried into custody by four police officers. The police had not traced him by the end of the year.
At least 24 people were reported to have died in circumstances suggesting that they may have been victims of extrajudicial executions. They included at least 21 people who were reportedly killed when police opened fire on opposition strikers and demonstrators in June and July in circumstances that did not appear to justify the use of lethal force. The government acknowledged 16 deaths. Under the terms of the agreement between the government and the cpn-uml, relatives of the deceased were paid compensation by the government. However, no independent inquiry was held into these shootings to establish whether the police officers responsible had acted within the law. Two other people were killed in August when police opened fire on a crowd gathered outside Bara-hathawa police station. Sarlahi District, protesting against the arrest and torture of three youths. The crowd had reportedly thrown stones at the police station before the firing started. The Home Ministry said it had investigated the incident, but it had not made its findings known by the end of the year.
In June police in Katari reportedly opened fire on a group of some 60 Tibetans who had crossed the border into Nepal on their way to India. Jemyang Kelsand died after being shot in the head. A government spokesman said that the Tibetans had
NEPAL/NETHERLANDS
attacked the pohce first, but other reports suggested that the pohce had opened fire after two children threw stones at them. The Home Ministry said it had investigated the incident, but the findings were not made public. No independent inquiry was held.
Amnesty International urged the government to ensxire that all reports of torture and killings by the police are promptly, thoroughly and independently investigated. It called also for the introduction of adequate safeguards against torture and ill-treatment of prisoners.
In November an Amnesty International delegation visited Nepal and met the Prime Minister and other government ministers and officials. Amnesty International expressed concern about the climate of impunity and called on the authorities to bring to justice those responsible for human rights violations. The government said it was committed to upholding human rights and that police had been required to open fire on demonstrators in order to maintain law and order, The police responded to six individual cases of alleged torture, death in custody and "disappearance" reported in 1992 and 1993 which Amnesty International had raised, and denied that the human rights violations described had taken place. The Prime Minister said the government would examine Amnesty International's recommendations for human rights safeguards.
