The Philippines
The country continued to be governed under martial law which was imposed in September 1972. In December 1974, President Ferdinand Marcos announced for the first time statistics about political imprisonment under martial law. He said he had ordered the release of 622 of the 1,165 people so detained at the time. Some observers have pointed out that the 622 people released included a proportion who were actually prisoners awaiting trial on criminal chaises. Moreover, the number of people detained under martial law is estimated to be far larger. An American missionary. Reverend Paul Wilson, expelled from the Philipines after being arrested and detained in June 1967, estimated the total number of detainees at 1,600. Another American, Professor John Swomely, estimated the overall figure to be 15,000 people detained in prisons throughout the Phihppines.
One reason for the wide variation in estimates was because of difficulties in classifying the many prisoners held in detention centers. Some are held for suspected criminal offences for long periods awaiting trial, many are detained because of their political or religious beliefs, and others are imprisoned because of alleged involvement in activity against the government. The total number of prisoners of conscience detained after the presidential amnesty of December 1974 is probably about 1,000.
In a report by the Roman Catholic Major Religious Superiors in the Philippines, based on a nation-wide survey on the role of the Church under martial law, grave concern was expressed for violations of basic human rights. The report said that "there are frequent reports of physical torture from all regions of the country". Apparently the methods of torture employed were not restricted to physical brutality. Addictive drugs were used to alter the mentality of prisoners, who were also subjected to "rehabilitation" by psychologists and psychiatrists. Another church report quoted the military commandant of Camp Crame, a much-criticized detention center, as saying: "call it what you may, call it brain-washing or whatnot, but simply we have to change the attitude of these persons, and that is not a simple job to do". In August 1974, Amnesty International Secretary General Martin Ennals, in a letter to President Marcos, called for an investigation into incidents involving torture allegations.
Detailed allegations of torture were made by a political detainee at Camp Olivas near Manila, Father Edicio de la Torre, who described how he was beaten after arrest in December 1974, as well as brutal treatment administered to fellow
100
prisoners. Severe torture included the application of electric shock to the genitals of prisoners, Father Edicio said. Father Edicio and another Roman Catholic priest. Father Manuel Lohoz, went on hunger strike in protest against the torture and the indefinite detention of political prisoners at Camp Olivas.
On 2 January, the Secretary of National Defence, Juan Ponce Enrile, armounced an official inquiry into these and other allegations of ill-treatment and torture, after an appeal to the government by the Archbishop of Manila. In a letter to President Marcos, AI urged that the inquiry be truly independent, allowing for all parties to be heard fairly and guaranteeing full protection from reprisals to those who testified. The President was urged to make the full report public.
Defence Secretary Enrile was later reported to have admitted privately to the Archbishop of Manila that incidents of torture against martial law detainees had indeed occurred. According to a press report of 17 January, Mr Enrile also said that some colonels and other high officials had been court martialled. It was further reported that the Military Commission of Inquiry had found evidence that torture was used against some martial law detainees and had recommended that stern measures be taken against the personnel responsible.
Throughout the year, the Roman Catholic Church of the Philippines had taken a consistently firm stand against the injustices of martial law. In a statement issued in November 1974, Archbishop Jaime Sim of Manila expressed deep concern over the indefinite detention "for security reasons" of prisoners. He described such detention as unjust. "We cannot jail a man indefinitely and still call ourselves Christian," he said. He asked the President to issue a clear definition of subversion, because "right now it is a catch-all term that includes almost anything". He spoke of the "creeping climate of fear and uncertainty that is threatening the country".
Among the prisoners released in the last year was José Diokno, a former senator, who was a leading political critic of President Marcos and had been detained for two years without trial. He was released in September 1974 with four other prisoners in an "act of executive clemency" on the occasion of the President's 57th birthday. Mr Diokno and one of the other prisoners had been adopted by AI.
On 14 May, Al-adoptee Benigno Aquino ended a 40-day hunger strike in protest against politick imprisonment under martial law. Mr Aquino was formely the most prominent opposition senator and was widely considered as a strong candidate for the Presidency.
