Brunei
In July 1974, Amnesty International completed a review of the cases of all 49 known detainees in Brunei. These cases had been under investigation by AI groups for almost a year. Since most of them had been detained without a trial of any description for over 11 years—the equivalent of a severe prison sentence—AI felt that the emphasis in these cases should properly lie on the lack of any trial procedures and on the apparent political motivation for the continued detention
85
of the men. On this basis, it was decided to change the status of each of the 49 cases from investigation to full adoption.
Since the United Kingdom retains responsibihty for the conduct of Brunei's external affairs and since Britain still has considerable influence in the sultanate, group activity was directed largely towards the British government. Following an extensive lobbying campaign, a number of British members of parhament wrote on behalf of groups to the Foreign and Commonwealth Office seeking official comment on the position of the 49 detainees. AI Secretary General Martin Ennals had written on 18 June 1974 to British Foreign Secretary James Callaghan requesting that he raise the question of the detainees with the authorities in Brunei. Appeals had also been addressed directly to Hassanal Bolkiah Muizaddin Waddaulah, Sultan of Brunei, and to members of his government.
On 1 November 1974, three of the 49 men were released from detention after taking an oath of loyalty to the Sultan and the Brunei government. This move followed an announcement by the Sultan in September to the effect that his government did not intend to hold the detainees indefinitely and that an advisory committee had been set up to review their cases. The committee, he announced, was to "study and review the situation of those who have realized their past wrong-doing and who are willing to mend and choose their way according to the teaching of Islam".
Further releases were made in January and March 1975, and to date a total of 11 detainees have been freed. They have all either taken an oath of loyalty or made statements condemning the leaders of the 1962 revolt. Groups continue to write to the Sultan welcoming the releases as they occur and urging the release of the remaining prisoners.
