Uruguay
The combined mission to Uruguay of the International Commission of Jurists and Amnesty International in May 1974 concluded that poHtical detainees lacked legal protection and were systematically tortured during the first period following their arrest. The delegation discussed these questions with the Uruguayan authorities and made specific recommendations as to how to improve legal safeguards and avoid the occurrence of maltreatment.
During the past year, AI has not been able to note any improvements in this respect. On the contrary, maltreatment has been extended to those categories of detainees who earlier enjoyed reasonably correct conditions of detention in the roofed sports stadium El Cilindro in Montevideo. Persons detained there represent the peaceful opposition, not suspected of subversion, and held for comparatively short periods of untried detention. Trade unionists, journalists, and politicians were amongst them. Gradually, there were more and more incidents of such prisoners being taken to military barracks, where torture has become routine practice.
AI appealed to the authorities on many occasions during the past year to respect humanitarian and legal norms of conduct towards detainees. One appeal concerned the case of the trade unionist Alcides Lanza, who was severely tortured before being returned to El Cilindro \ another appeal related to four dockworkers. Several other urgent steps have been taken in an attempt to protect detainees from maltreatment as early as possible after arrest. One trade unionist, detained earlier, was reported to have died some time after his release as a result of torture.
The political conflicts have further sharpened during the past year and the government's attempts to extend severe political control over all aspects of
80
society has increased the imprisonment of peaceful dissenters and, consequently, created a large number of prisoners of conscience. The curb on trade union freedom, the "oath of democratic faith" imposed on teachers and civil servants, whereby they swear never to have belonged to any of the now banned parties or organizations, the "administrative investigations" into teachers' political past, the curb on press freedom and the closure of journals are examples of government interventions in the national and political life that create prisoners of conscience - a group which, in Uruguay »represents a broad spectrum of the left. All dissent is interpreted as being part of an international Marxist conspiracy. President Juan Maria Bordaberry has even accused the United Nations of being a Marxist-dominated body.
The pattern of comparatively short detention, to which AI's traditional adoption method is unsuited, has largely remained. National sections, therefore, have been provided with information on "situations" of arrests among, for example, trade unionists, university teachers and students, and have been asked to take action on their behalf. The Research Department regularly provides national and international professional bodies with such information.
Detention procedures have remained highly unsatisfactory throughout the year, and AI has issued several news releases on waves of arrest during which maltreatment has occurred. The latest was in April 1975, when the secondary school teachers' union was closed and several teachers and active members of this union were arrested. The same statement reported on the detention incommunicado of a group of students, between 14 and 17 years of age, and on the inability of the families even to locate the place of detention of another group of prisoners.
AI groups are currently working for over 60 cases, among them a group of 25 belonging to a political group, Grupos de Acción Unificadora (GAU), which was legal until all political parties and groups left of center were banned at the end of 1973. The ostensible reason for their arrest was a bomb incident in which a student belonging to that group was killed. Although it has not even been satisfactorily established that the student himself knew of the bomb, the whole group is being tried under the concept of guilt by association.
Previously, the Communist Party, although banned, had not been a specific target, except for its top leadership. Its secretary general, Rodney Arismendi (who featured in the November 1974 Prisoners of the Month Campaign), was released in January 1975 in exchange for exile. His successor is in detention, as is the secretary general of the Communist Party youth branch. In the beginning of 1975, many members of the Communist Party were arrested, to be released later. Eduardo Viera, an elderly ex-deputy, was indicted for an alleged "attack on the morale of the armed forces" in April 1975.
The sensitivity to criticism of the military de facto rulers of the country is illustrated by the increasingly common charge of "attack on the morale of the armed forces", usually meaning criticism by the political opposition of the role of the armed forces and their policies. Several such cases are currently under adoption or investigation by AI groups.
Liber Seregni, the presidential candidate of the leftwing coalition Frente Amplio, was released, as was his colleague. Colonel Carlos Zufriategui, whereas
81
General Victor Licandro remains in detention. Also imprisoned is Winston Nelson Marra, author of the short story that last year caused the suspension and subsequent closure of the prestigious weekly Marc/ia and the detention for several months of the literary jury and the editors of the magazine.
Much international attention has been aroused by the fact that prisoners under judicial process are removed — in violation of the prison regulations — from their prison to military barracks throughout the country. There are individual instances, but the two best known groups consist of leading members of the urban guerrilla movement, the National Libeiation Movement (MLN) — Tupamaros. Secretary General Martin Ennals replied to President Bordaberry's public statement that all prisoners were detained in proper penal establishments by suggesting that faciUties be provided for jurists to visit the prisoners in question, thereby putting an end to adverse international publicity.
In 1974, there was an attempt by prominent jurists and other personalities to form an independent commission for the defence of human rights. The attempt failed on the grounds that there already existed such a commission within the Council of State, the 25-member body that has replaced Parliament. Although AI frequently uses this channel for lodging complaints about infringements of human rights, it is clear that this body, appointed by the Executive Power, cannot have the independence to protect citizens against abuse of authority, in the same way as the military official {juez íuwamwíe) appointed by his superior officers to investigate the case of a political suspect cannot have the independence of a civilian judge exercising his function within a system of separation of powers.
