Yemen Arab Republic
This is still a country about which Amnesty International has very little information as far as political prisoners are concerned. The few reports AI has received may not be indicative of the actual situation.
In May 1974 AI received reports about a teenage boy, Abdul Wahid Ali Qassem Saif, who had been arrested after the execution of h^ father in April 1973. The father had been found guilty of sabotage. It was reported that an earlier death sentence passed on the boy was later commuted to 3 years' imprisonment. Inquiries were made for further details of this case, and a letter was sent meanwhile to President Qadi AI Iryani requesting that the prisoner be allowed family visits which up until then, it is claimed, had not been permitted. Later it was learned from a reliable source that his mother was now being allowed to visit him. No other information about this case has been received.
In June 1974 there was a change of government when a military junta took over in a bloodless coup. The new President, Colonel Ibrahim AI Hamdi, announced that the cases of all political prisoners would be reviewed. In a letter to the then Prime Minister, Muhsin AI Aini, AI welcomed the move, and in August it was reported that all political prisoners, except for those convicted for sabotage, had been released.
In May 1975 an AI mission visited the Yemen Arab Republic and the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen. The delegates were British lawyer John Platts-Mills, and Katrina Mortimer from the Research Department. The mission's main purpose was to introduce Al's aims and methods to the leading members of the government and of the religious community. The delegates also held discussions with the appropriate ministers on political prisoners, on the legal system in relation to political offences and, following a visit to a number of prisons in the capital, on prison conditions.
Covers of Greek, Dutch, French, Japanese, Portuguese and Italian editions of Amnesty International Report on Torture.
137
