Brazil
President Ernesto Geisel of Brazil came to power in March 1974 promising a policy of gradual distensao and apertura (relaxation and opening), but a wave of arrests immediately following his inauguration, apparently by unofficial security groups, indicated that some groups were not prepared to allow a gradual liberalization of the Brazilian political scene. In a cable, Amnesty Intemational drew the President's attention to these arrests and reports of torture. An AI news release on 21 June reported the finding of new bodies in various regions of Brazil, apparent death squad victim, and the arrest of Maria de Conceiçâo
65
Sarmiento Coelho da Paz, who was evidently detained by police seeking her son. She was released shortly afterwards.
AI groups protested against the continuing arrests, which experts interpreted as symptoms of the confrontation between President Geisel and army sectors. Some arrests were carried out by govemment bodies opposed to his liberalization pohcy. Other arrests were made by unofficial groups opposed to political relaxation, probably to illustrate the extent of "subversion". This absence of a single detaining authority has made it particularly difficuh for friends and families to locate missing persons.
In reaction to the continuing arrests and disappearances, the Roman Catholic Church, particularly Archbishop Ams of Sao Paulo and the Sao Paulo Justice and Peace Commission, members of the only legal opposition party, the Movimento Democratico Brasilerio (MDB), the Brazilian Order of Lawyers (OAB) and friends and relatives of prisoners, became more vocal in their efforts to draw public attention to these transgressions of human rights.
In November, the MDB won a surprising victory in elections to the Senate and the House of Representatives, after a campaign which focused to a large extent on human rights issues. Although the opposition still has not a majority in either house, it succeeded in instituting a pariiamentary inquiry. Hopes were high that the MDB would open an investigation into the cases of some 22 persons (including several Al cases) whose "disappearance" and feared deaths in custody over an 18-month period has become a cause célèbre in Brazil.
Press censorship was lifted slightly by President Geisel following the elections, and advertisements seeking the missing persons and reports of new arrests and alleged torture appeared in the BraziHan press for the first time since the imposition of Institutional Act Number 5 in 1968.
To avert an inquiry, Minister of Justice Armando Fal9ào gave information to the press concerning a number of persons, some of them amongst the list of the "disappeared". However, in many cases his information related to their previous arrests. In other instances Mr Falgao claimed that the persons named were not in custody, or that no records concerning them were available. Al has addressed a memorandum to the Brazilian Government which points out the discrepancies between the information released by the Ministry of Justice and our own information.
However, reports that hardliners had'forced President Geisel to back down from his intention to allow some latitude to the MDB and rumours that MDB deputies would be declared cassado (lose their political and civil rights) if they pressed for an inquiry led the MDB to seek a compromise course. Instead of iniating a parliamentary inquiry, the MDB moved to ask Mr Pal^ao to appear before Congress to answer questions about the disappeared. The govemment party Arena defeated this motion, and has tried strongly to link the MDB to the Brazilian Communist Party in an effort to silence the debate on those who have disappeared. Al, however, has continued to press for an investigation and has been particularly active on behalf of Ana Rosa Kucinski Silva and her husband, Wilson Silva, both amongst the disappeared. Ana Rosa Silva's case has been widely pubUcized in connection with International Women's Year 1975.
AI has also taken up the cases of Communist Party (Mosco w-Hne) members
66
arrested after their printing presses were discovered and raided early in 1975. These new c^es bring the total of Brazil adopted cases to 142 and investigations to 40.
Groups are also attempting to estabUsh the exact whereabouts of political prisoners and are supporting moves within Brazil to improve prison conditions. Hunger strikes in November 1974 at various prisons were publicized in an effort to integrate the prisoners at Linhares prison in Juiz de Fora with other political prisoners. In May 1975, political prisoners at Ilha Grande were successful in their bid to be moved from their remote island prison to the city of Rio de Janeiro.
Action has been taken on behalf of Cesar Quiroz de Benjamin and Ivan Axelrud Seixas. Both boys were minors at the time of their arrest, and in both cases psychiatric and medical examination procedures were manipulated in order that they could be held in irregular situations. Cesar has now been transferred to a civilian rehabilitation center where his treatment improved.
In December 1974, a new submission was made to the United Nations and the Organization of American States presenting allegations of torture and unexplained disappearances. This up-dated an earlier submission in April 1974 giving the names of 210 "disappeared" people. AI's Report on Allegations of Torture in Brazil, originally published in September 1972, was re-issued in July 1974 with a new preface and some minor changes necessary to bring the documents up to date.
National sections have continued activities on behalf of Brazilian refugees driven from Chile following the September 1973 coup.
In March 1975, the case of Luis Basilio Rossi, on which AI has become active, finally came to trial. Although Professor Rossi now lives outside Brazil, a new writ calling for his preventive detention was issued. Several other adopted persons were sentenced on charges of attempting to re-organize the banned Communist Party. However, in most cases defendants had already served the terms imposed on them and were thus released.
Francisco Pinto, the MDB deputy indicted after criticizing President Augusto Pinochet Ugarte of Chile, served six months in prison, having refused the civil pardon which was offered him. Although Marcio Moreira Alves, a deputy who was indicted after addressing Parliament on human r^hts issues and who fled Brazil in' 1968, has now been cleared, President Geisel's useof Institutional Act Number 5 to intervene in a political dispute in the State of Acrem suggests that the brief experiment in distensao and apertura is now closed.
