Egypt
Over the past year there has been growing criticism of the Egyptian government, particularly among workers, caused by inflation at home, and re-alignments in foreign policy. The resentment culminated in New Year's Day worker demonstrations in Cairo. These were the most serious disturbances since the student demonstrations in 1972-73. The latter were sparked off by frustration at the "no peace, no war" situation, at the curb on freedom of expression and by economic factors. After the October 1973 war with Israel the government had promised that the new "open door" economic policy would raise living standards, but this has not resulted quickly in the expected improvements. There have been relaxations since then in censorship, but demonstrations are still illegal, and all political parties, except for the Arab Socialist Union, are banned.
As the government has felt its authority weaken in the face of growing opposition, there have been wide-spread arrests among all sections of the community. Persons detained include those who have expressed their opposition by demonstrating, by distributing anti-government pamphlets, by forming or belonging to secret organizations, or even by singing songs critical of the government. In August 1974,14 people were detained for a brief period for singing songs, or possessing tape recordings of songs, criticizing the government. The detainees included Sheikh Imam, the composer, and Ahmad Fouad Negm, the lyric writer of these songs.
Amnesty International adopted a group of six Egyptians, consisting of a surgeon, a lawyer, a student, a teacher and two employees from the public sector, who were arrested in October-November 1974 and charged -under
127
article 98 of the Penal Code—with forming a communist organization and printing or possessing anti-government pamphlets. Their initial appeals for release on bail were refused, but in March 1975, AI learned that another appeal had been granted. The date of their trial is not yet known at the time of writing (June 1975).
AI has taken up the cases of over 150 people who were arrested as a result of the New Year's Day demonstrations. They include workers, trade unionists, students, journahsts, lawyers, writers and artists. After the 1975 budget was announced, more than 1,000 workers demonstrated in the streets of Cairo over the worsening economic situation. Students and leftwing sympathizers joined in, and rioting broke out when workers were prevented from presenting their case to the National Assembly.
Some of the demonstrators were arrested, and during the following weeks other arrests were made, including students (students had demonstrated on three separate occasions for the release of detained workers) and well-known leftwing intellectuals and former members of the Communist Party (the Communist Party is banned in Egypt and many of those arrested had been imprisoned for long periods during President Gamal Abdul Nasser's era). The government blamed the leftwingers for provoking the disturbances. Exact numbers of those arrested are not known, but are believed to run into the hundreds. A few were later acquitted and some were successful in appealing for their release on bail.
AI is also looking into the cases of those arrested during violent demonstrations which broke out in March at the Mehalla AI Kobra cotton mill complex, again over prices and inflation.
AI sent a Turkish lawyer, Dr Yuksel Ersoy, as its observer at a trial on 23 March of 14 Alexandrians, mostly textile factory workers, who were arrested in June 1973 and charged under article 48 of the Criminal Law with forming and belonging to a communist organization with the aim of overthrowing the existing social order. (Nineteen persons were in fact charged: three had escaped arrest and two had been released on bail.) AI's main concern in these cases was the very long period of detention without trial and the allegations that one of the defendants had been seriously maltreated during interrogation. On 23 March the Supreme State Security Court ordered their release on bail and adjourned the trial until 22 June.
Secretary General Martin Ennals sent cables on 26 November and 30 January to President Anwar Sadat pressing for the commutation of death sentences passed on Egyptians accused of spying. In 1974-75 three people were executed and seven others were sentenced to death, although at the time of writing, AI had not heard whether the sentences have been carried out or not.
AI has received some allegations of torture in Egypt, but nonetheless there have been encouraging signs that steps are being taken in Egypt to safeguard fundamental human rights. In April 1975, an Egyptian imprisoned during the 1960s and who had been subjected to severe maltreatment, was awarded substantial damages by a court. In a letter to President Sadat, Mr Ennals welcomed this step and expressed the hope that the Egyptian government would continue its exemplary efforts for the cause of human rights.
128
The allegations of torture concern one of the detainees from Alexandria (mentioned above) who claims to have been tortured by electric shocks during interrogation. In addition, members of the Islamic Liberation Party, arrested after the attack on the military academy in April 1974 in which 11 people died, alleged in court in November 1974 that they had been tortured. The court ordered an immediate inquiry. In a letter to the President in January 1974, Mr Ennals expressed concern at these allegations. He stressed the importance of detainees having immediate access to legal counsel of their choice and to their relatives, since it is during periods of incommunicado detention that torture and ill-treatment are most likely to occur.
