Republic of South Vietnam
On 30 April 1975 the Vietnam war ended and the Provisional Revolutionary Government (PRG) assumed control in South Vietnam. All the tens of thousands of political prisoners held by the defeated regime reportedly gained their freedom. On behalf of Amnesty International, Dirk Börner, Chairman of the International Executive Committee, cabled PRG President Huynh Tan Phat welcoming the return of peace to Vietnam and requesting confirmation of the reported releases. The International Secretariat subsequently advised AI groups with South Vietnamese prisoners to regard these cases as closed.
Early reports from journalists and other observers staying in Saigon after its "liberation" painted a favourable picture. Although the new administration quickly began a moral and material "clean-up" campaign, promising "severe punishment" for a wide variety of "illegal acts", ranging from "spreading rumours" and "collecting information" to "opposing the revolution", it was intent on emphasizing "national reconciliation and concord" (a concept drawn from the January 1973 Paris Agreements on Vietnam).
Close monitoring of reports from South Vietnam by the International Secretariat, where an expert temporary researcher was appointed to deal with the emergency situation, revealed few substantiated accounts of reprisals or executions in the weeks immediately following the change of government. A PRG representative in Paris assured Amnesty International Secretary General Martin Ennals that the PRG was opposed to capital punishment as a matter of policy. In late May, however, reports began to be received of street executions of criminal offenders as the PRG began to tackle the widespread problems of petty crime. As for prisoners, it seemed clear that in the Saigon area at least, the number of new detainees remained comparatively small.
By mid-May, those whose position was least clear seemed to be higher-ranking military, para-military and civilian personnel of the old regime. Thus in early May a PRG spokesman was quoted as saying that while over 100,000 private soldiers and non-commissioned officers of the old regime detained in Danang since March were being allowed to return home, some 6,000 officers-were being held for "reeducation". A television team from the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation visited one of the officers' camps near Danang, and their report suggested that conditions, while spartan, were not oppressive. In Saigon in mid-May, General Tran Van Tra confirmed that some military and a few civilian personnel were being held in detention; but further details were not forthcoming.
In April and May 1975, discussions took place in Algiers, Paris and London between high-ranking officials of the PRG and members of the International Executive Committee and International Secretariat. The talks centered on finding
105
out more about released political prisoners, and on a proposal for an AI mission to visit South Vietnam (and perhaps Hanoi) later in the year. A letter formally proposing such a mission was sent to PRG President Huynh Tan Phat in mid-May. Apart from maintaining and developing AI's relations with the PRG, the proposed mission would look into the PRG's policies towards law and order in general, and political imprisonment in particular, as well as into the question of aid for the rehabilitation of released prisoners.
In the 12 months preceding the collapse of the old administration in Saigon, the condition of South Vietnamese political prisoners seems to have remained largely as it was in July 1973 when AI published its report Political Prisoners in South Vietnam, at least as regards the four large national prisons at Chi Hoa, Thu Due, Tan Hiep and Con Son. Fresh evidence obtained by the AI German Section Coordination Group on Vietnam in autumn 1974 confirmed the continued existence of many of the abuses outlined in the report, including the widespread use of torture during interrogation, the reclassification of political prisoners as common criminals, the continued detention of political prisoners after their sentences had been served, and the dispatch of many of those eventually released to serve in the front-line units of the army.
AI marked the second anniversary of the January 1973 Paris Agreements on Vietnam by calling on the signatories (the United States, North Vietnam, Saigon and the PRG) and the participants in the February 1973 Paris Peace Conference (including the members of the now-defunct International Commission for Control and Supervision) to discharge their legal and moral responsibility to ensure the release and humane treatment of civilians detained throughout South Vietnam, or publicly to renounce any continuing responsibility as guarantors of the agreements. AI national sections were asked to take supplementary actions, with approaches to their local Vietnamese embassies.
Efforts by AI groups to keep track of individual prisoners were often frustrated by the large-scale and allegedly forced transfer of prisoners from one prison to another. Thus according to reliable reports from Saigon, in May 1974 some 500 Buddhist monks were forcibly dispersed from Chi Hoa to various provincial prisons, while in August and November, several hundred prisoners were taken from Tan Hiep and Chi Hoa to Con Son, after police had used tear-gas and beatings.
Fresh arrests continued throughout the 12 months in question though the total number of political prisoners - while certainly still exceeding several tens of thousands — remained the subject of disagreement and the object of conflicting propaganda claims. Among those arrested in the Saigon area from June 1974 to January 1975 were more than 45 members of the "Saigon People's Anti-Hunger Front", a pressure group involved in opposing the soaring costs of food. In February 1975,18 journalists were arrested and charged with being members of a subversive communist group after a number of newspaper presses were confiscated (February 1975). The journalists and most of the Front members were adopted by AI as prisoners of conscience.
When the war ended and the prisoners were released in April-May 1975, AI groups were working on 236 adoption and investigation cases in Saigon-administered areas. In addition, work had continued on the cases of 13 people
106
alleged by the former administration of President Nguyen Van Thieu in Saigon to have been "abducted and held by the communists". These included 11 Montagnard nuns, allegedly abducted from Dakto in the Central Highlands in 1972. In April 1975, following presistent group inquiries, a report was received from Vietnam that the nuns had been released after being detained by the communists for more than two years. At that point, AI's investigations were overtaken by events.
In June 1974,118 South Vietnamese men, women and children of Chinese origin were caught by the Hong Kong authorities as they tried to enter the British Crown Colony by boat unobserved. A few days later they were sent back to Sa^on on the basis of being "illegal immigrants", where they were detained for having broken South Vietnamese emigration laws. Relatives in Hong Kong made strong allegations that the 118 were tortured after their arrival in Saigon, and there were reports that a number of them had been killed.
Amnesty International gave publicity to these allegations in an effort to avert possible ill-treatment. In August 1974, A.J.J. Sanguinetti, member of Justice (the Hong Kong-British section of the International Commission of Jurists), went on a mission to Saigon to investigate the condition and status of the 118. In October 1974, the 118 were reportedly tried by a civil court: 10 were acquitted and the rest received light sentences.
In November, 33 men of military age among them were tried for desertion: 10 were acquitted and the others given sentences of up to 10 years. In the October trial, it was revealed that one of the prisoners had died. Subsequently, a second death among the 118 prisoners was reported by a reliable source in Saigon.
Before the 118 were sent back to Saigon, AI had appealed to the British and Hong Kong governments to delay any decision about their return pending a review in depth of each individual case on humanitarian grounds, to determine whether they would be permitted to reside in Hong Kong or elsewhere. Some of them with relatives in the colony appeared to have "a possible claim to entry to Hong Kong had they chosen to apply through normal, official channels", as the then Director of Immigration in Hong Kong, W.E. Collard, put it later. A number of them were men of draft age who apparently objected to serving in the Army of the Republic of South Vietnam (Saigon).
In spite of the assurance given to AI on 12 June 1974 by the British Foreign and Commonwealth Office that a "reasonable opportunity" should be given to explore the possibility of the 118 residing in third countries, they were expelled from Hong Kong on 17 June.
