Federal Republic of Germany
The prolonged pre-trial detention of members of the Red Army Faction, better known as the "Baader-Meinhof group", and the bitter public debate in Germany about their treatment and conditions, led many individuals, both inside and outside Amnesty International, to seek an initiative by the International Secretariat. AI decided not to adopt the members of the group, but, in response to the multiple allegations that the prisoners were being ill-treated and their con-
112
tinued detention without trial, Secretary General Martin Ennals wrote letters on 15 November 1974 to individual Ministers of Justice in each of the Länder where Baader-Mainhof prisoners have been detained, urging them to examine the allegations of ill-treatment and to consider adjusting legislation in view of their prolonged detention without trial. The replies he received stated that the conditions in West German prisons had been improved and compared favourably with the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners.
In an attempt to break the deadlock which had developed between the prisoners, then on hunger strike, and the authorities, a private mission of mediation was undertaken by Reverend Paul Oestreicher, Chairman of AI's British Section. In a public statement, confirmed by the International Executive Committee, Reverend Oestreicher said on 16 December 1974: "In the opinion of Amnesty International ..Jit the present time the allegation of so-called torture by isolation is not justified...As such, the organization cannot intervene. That Amnesty International is ready and willing to help find a solution in the present crisis is demonstrated by my presence [in Germany]."
To assist AI groups working on German conscientious objectors, of whom three were adopted tlm year and many more are under investigation, a comprehensive background paper was prepared by the Research Department. Two of the adopted conscientious objectors were soon reported released from detention as a result of publicity in the German press. They are determined pacifists who refuse to wear uniform and use arms.
An Eritrean student, who regards himself as a political refugee but whom the authorities accused of alleged drug smu^ling, was also adopted. Adoption of four foreign workers from Turkey is also being considered on the grounds that they have been detained for one year without proper indictment.
These two examples are disquieting signs that West Germany is showing increasing reluctance to grant political asylum to apphcants from third world countries.
