South Africa
Despite the leading role of the South African government in bringing about renewed negotiations for the settlement of the Rhodesian issue and some diminution of inter-racial tension in southern Africa as a whole, 1974-75 has seen little improvement in the treatment of opponents of apartheid within the Republic of South Africa itself.
Thirteen young supporters of the "black consciousness" movement in South Africa were, as of this writing (May 1975), awaiting trial under the notorious Terrorism Act, which carries a minimum mandatory sentence of 5 years' imprisonment upon conviction and a maximum sentence of death. More than 20 other members of the South African Students' Organization (SASO) and the Black Peoples' Convention (BPC), the organizations which have fostered the concepts of black consciousness and self-reliance in South Africa, remain in detention in Pretoria with no knowledge of whether they are to be charged also or eventually released.
All of these people were arrested after the banning of a pro-FRELIMO (the liberation movement in Mozambique) rally which had been organized by SASO and BPC and which was scheduled to take place in Durban on 25 September 1974, the 10th anniversary of the start of the FRELIMO-led war for the liberation of Mozambique. A crowd which gathered at the place of the proposed rally in defiance of the government's ban was forcibly dispersed by the police and a number of persons were charged with riotous assembly.
Thereafter, a series of raids was launched throughout the Republic on the homes of known supporters of the "black consciousness" movement, during the course of which most of the leaders were detained or driven into exile in Botswana. Several of those still uncharged have now been detained for more than seven months and many allegations of torture and ill-treatment have been made. Legal action on behalf of five detainees to restrain the security police from further assaulting or unlawfully interrogating them failed when it came before the Supreme Court in November 1974. Amnesty International has taken up the cases of all those who have been detained and is planning to send an observer to the trial.
In October 1974, the International Secretariat cabled South African Prime Minister John Vorster urging him to exercise clemency in the case of Winnie Mandela, wife of African nationalist leader Nelson Mandela, who is currently serving a life sentence on Robben Island. Mrs Mandela, together with Peter Magubane,
55
had been sentenced to 6 months' imprisonment for contravening the terms of a "banning order" issued under the Suppression of Communism Act. Mrs Mandela served the sentence and was released in March 1975.
The International Secretariat, like the United Nations and many other international organizations, wrote to Mr Vorster in January 1975 to ask for the release of Bram Fischer, former leader of the South African Communist Party who was jailed for life in 1966 and who was reported at the end of 1974 to be suffering from terminal cancer. He was conditionally released for a period of one month in early March 1975 and died shortly after this period had been extended for a further two months. A further request was made to the South African government for the release of all political prisoners suffering from chronic ill health.
AI is working on more than 150 adoption and investigation cases in South Africa at the present time. These include convicted prisoners, prisoners awaiting trial, detainees, banned persons and people who have been "banished" to the so-called "resettlement areas". In addition, AI operates a considerable relief program using funds made available to the International Secretariat by the Swedish Section and by means of individual contributions.
