Togo
During early 1974 Amnesty International groups worked on the cases of two persons who had been held without trial in Lomé, the Togolese capital, since August 1973. In June 1974 one of these prisoners was freed.
Sixteen political prisoners were released in October 1974, but a number still remain in prison. The Research Department is trying to obtain further information about them so that their adoption may be considered.
Tunisia
In May 1975 Amnesty International groups were working actively on more than 40 adoption and investigation cases in Tunisia. A number of these cases date from a wave of arrests which began in November 1973, while others concern individuals who were detained in September and October 1974.
Political prisoners are held in the Prison Centrale in Tunis, at the prison of Boij el Roumi near Bizerte,and, in the case of women, at La Manouba prison. Conditions in all three prisons are reported to be poor, with insufficient diet and medical care.
During February 1975 political detainees in the three prisons staged a hunger strike in order to obtain the status of "politicals", the abolition of soUtary confinement and other concessions. Simultaneously AI launched a postcard campaign on behalf of a long-term prisoner, Ahmed Ben Othman, who has been severely tortured. Reports in March 1975 said that the prisoners had succeeded in gaining some concessions and that Mr Ben Othman's sohtary confinement had been lifted.
A major political trial took place in Tunis during August 1974, involving 202 persons charged with plotting against the internal security of the state, reconstituting a banned organization and diffusing false information likely to disturb the public order. Monique Desforges, a French lawyer, attended the trial as AI's observer, but was expelled as were all other judicial observers. A further trial, involving some individuals who were given suspended sentences or sentenced in absentia at the August trial, occurred in late March 1975. The AI Research Department is at present assembling data on the prisoners sentenced in these two trials with a view towards adopting them.
58
