Rhodesia
The changing situation in southern Africa, stimulated particularly by the progress of Angola and Mozambique towards African rule, has brought about the growing isolation of the white regime in Rhodesia during the past year. The South African government's policy of improving relations with the African states north of the Zambesi, has placed Prime Minister Ian Smith's government under increasing pressure to reach a constitutional settlement with the African National Council (ANC), led by Bishop Abel Muzorewa.
However, while engaging in protracted negotiations with the ANC, and even going as far as to release a number of detained African nationalist leaders, the ruling Rhodesia Front government has continued to introduce increasingly repressive legislation and to deal ruthlessly with any persons suspected of involvement with the,guerrilla campaign being waged in the northeastern parts of the country. One former detainee, who was released during December 1974 and who is adopted by Amnesty International, was, at this writing (May 1975) to be tried in camera on charges of recruiting guerrillas. If convicted, he faces a mandatory death penalty under a recently introduced amendment to the Law and Order (Maintenance) Act.
In June 1974, AI received news of the closure of Gonakudzingwa (Sengwe) detention camp and the transfer of detainees to Salisbury Remand Prison. During the same month, Dr Edson Sithole, the publicity secretary of the ANC and a former Al-adopted prisoner, was re-detained by the Rhodesian authorities after a temporary breakdown in negotiations between the government and the ANC.
However, Edson Sithole and 12 other nationalist leaders were released from detention in early December 1974 in order to participate in settlement talks in Lusaka, Zambia, in which heads of state and other representatives of the governments of Botswana, Tanzania, Zambia and South Africa played an active part. At the talks, it was agreed that, as a preliminary to more detailed negotiations, the Smith government would release political detainees and that a ceasefire should be observed between govemment forces and nationalist guerrillas operating in the northeast. It was also decided that Rhodesia's two liberation movements, the Zimbabwe African Peoples' Union (ZAPU) and the Zimbabwe African National Union (ZANU), would unite under the umbrella of an enlarged ANC and the leadership of Bishop Muzorewa.
Before the announcement of the agreement, the International Secretariat had cabled Mr Smith urging him to release all political detainees as a mark of his desire for a just and equitable settlement. After Mr Smith had broadcast his decision to "release the African leaders from detention and restriction, and their followers as well", a further cable was sent asking for clarification as to whether the amnesty would extend to all of the 350 political detainees known to be imprisoned in Rhodesia. Messages of support were also sent to the African heads of state and
52
nationalist leaders who had been involved in the negotiations'and, when it was known that he was one of those freed, to Daniel Madzimbamuto, an AI adoptee who had been detained without trial since 1959.
Regrettably, the Smith government's amnesty did not include all political detainees, and of the 80 believed to have been released, many had their freedom of movement restricted. Nor did the Lusaka agreement bring an effective end to the warfare in northeastern Rhodesia. Apparently for this reason, the Rhodesian authorities stated in early January 1975 that no more detainees would be freed until guerilla activities ceased. Since that time, the ANC has argued that no meaningful talks can be held until the remainii^ detainees are freed and the authorities stop executing captured guerrillas and other people sentenced to death for political offences. The only response of the Smith government has been to announce that details of future hangings will no longer be made available to the public.
In March 1975, the Reverend Ndabaningi Sithole, President of ZANU and a member of the executive of the enlarged ANC since his release from detention in December, was re-arrested and accused of plotting the assassination of a number of his political associates in the ANC. New regulations were hurriedly introduced establishing a special court—in reahty, little more than a detention review tribunal. Reverend Sithole was further accused of ultimate responsibility for atrocities alleged to have been committed by ZANU guerrillas.
When Reverend Sithole appeared before the tribunal, no evidence was introduced to support the original assassination charge. An AI observer who was present, American lawyer E. Clinton Bamberger, described the proceedings as a "sham" and a blatant attempt on the part of the Smith government to create friction between ZANU and the rest of the ANC. Mr Bamberger went on to characterize the partcipation of Rhodesia's acting Chief Justice in the proceedings as "a prostitution of the judiciary".
AI has more than 250 adopted prisoners in Rhodesia. During the year, several of these prisoners have obtained, with the assistance of their adoption groups, offers of educational places in Western Europe. It is hoped that some may soon be freed to take up these places.
AI operates a considerable relief and prisoner rehabilitation program in Rhodesia using funds made available to the International Secretariat by the Swedish Section and by means of individual group contributions.
