Morocco
During 1974-75 Amnesty International was principally concerned with three groups of prisoners in Morocco. The first consisted of members or supporters of the opposition party Union Nationale des Forces Populaires (UNFP) who had been tried on charges of subversion at two major political trials: at Marrakesh in 1971 and at Kenitra in 1973.
The second included leftwing students and teachers who had been sentenced to long prison terms following a trial in Casablanca in 1973. The third consisted of leftwing activists who had been arrested early in 1973 and never charged or brought before a court.
By mid-1974 AI groups were handling more than 180 adoption or investigation cases in these three categories, and a new wave of arrests beginning in November
1974	saw the imprisonment of more than 100 individuals. Some of the latter had been sentenced to hfe imprisonment in absentia at the 1973 Casablanca trial and had been in hiding since that time. Reports of the torture of political detainees continued to reach the Research Department, and in December 1974 AI received confirmed reports that Professor Bekhali, a professor of philosophy at Casablanca, had died during the previous month after torture.
Against thtô background, AI has intensified its work on Morocco, taking up further adoption and investigation cases. In August 1974 the Research Department produced a new background paper on Morocco. Coordination group work proved most valuable, and made it possible to plan a concerted campaign during 1975 aimed at encouraging a general amnesty on the birthday of King Hassan II on 9 July 1975.
There are some hopeful signs, however, that the human rights situation in Morocco may be improving. In spite of continuing arrests and reports of torture, the Moroccan government has moved during the past year towards a rapprochement with the leading opposition parties, mainly in an attempt to build
49
national unity over the issue of Morocco's claim to the territory in the Sahara presently administerad by Spain.
During the summer and autumn of 1974 many members and supporters of the UNFP, including a number of AI adoptees, were released from prison. May 1975 saw further releases and light or suspended sentences passed on detainees held at Casablanca. Most of the leading opposition parties, some of which were allowed to hold public annual conventions for the first time in years, have called on the Moroccan government to show its good faith by granting a general amnesty to political prisoners.
AI has been encouraged by these moves, and by the appreciation which Moroccan parties and individual prisoners have expressed of AI's work in their country. In January 1975, for example, the Union Socialiste des Forces Populaires (USFF-formerly the Rabat branch of the UNFP) sent a cable to the Intemational Secretariat expressing the party's "sincerest thanks" for the "courageous action" which AI had taken in the past on behalf of imprisoned Moroccans.
