Spain
In spite of continuous and wide-ranging work on this country for many years, Spain remains one of Amnesty International's deep concerns.
The new government of Carlos Arias Navarro, who in January 1974 succeeded the assassinated Admiral Luis Carrero Blanco as Prime Minister, at first raised hopes of "liberalization". Trials, however, continued and the civil Public Order Courts and the military courts martial were all fully active, dealing with conscientious objectors, members of clandestine political parties, students, intellectuals, members of the various workers' movements, etc.
During 1974 an estimated 9,000 cases came before the political courts, and between April and May 1975, the introduction of a state of emergency in the Basque country, with suspension of habeas corpus, brought about more than 2,000 arrests, of which more than 900 remain in prison. AI adoptions in Spain have increased to a total of approximately 450 cases in spite of the fairly regular release of prisoners as they finish their sentences.
The major concerns of AI not only remain unresolved, but have drastically increased. The number of death penalties asked for both political and non-poli-tical prisoners has risen, so has the number of lawyers, doctors and priests arrested and fined for carrying out their professional duties. Allegations of ill-treatment have increased and AI remains concerned at the denials of access to defence and at the fact that conscientious objection is still considered a crime.
In October 1974, Secretary General Martin Ennals wrote to the Prime Minister, the Minister of Justice and the Minister of Foreign Affairs asking them to receive an AI delegation. The purpose of the mission was to establish official contact with the new government; confirm that letters and visits from AI groups to their adopted prisoners could continue, and discuss the specific issues of human rights concern to AI. The Spanish authorities made no response, and the mission did not take place.
In December 1974, a wave of hunger strikes started in Spanish prisons as part of a campaign for a general amnesty for political prisoners on the occasion of Holy Year in 1975. The strikes spread to all prisons where political prisoners are detained. Participants were sent to solitary confinement cells as a result. All AI groups working for Spanish prisoners were asked to send telegrams to the Ministry of Justice expressing concern and showing support for such an amnesty.
In specific cases the Secretary General intervened directly, and missions were sent to observe two important trials. On 8 October 1974, Mr Ennals sent a telegram to Minister of Justice Francisco Ruiz-Jarabo. He expressed deep concern about the disturbing news of the ill-treatment of several Spanish intellectuals, among them Genoveva Forest, who were allegedly connected with the Madrid bombing in September 1974 and the assassination of Prime Minister Carrero Blanco in December 1973. Mr Ennals asked for the restoration of the right to access to defence and respect for human lives. The detainees were said to have
117
been subjected to torture and extremely long periods of solitary confinement.
At the end of October 1974, a French lawyer, Dr Mario Stasi, went to Madrid in an attempt to secure for the detainees the right to a proper defence and access to lawyers. His report made it clear that the conditions under which the detainees were held seriously contravened fundamental rights. AI groups with Spanish prisoners and national sections appealed to the Spanish authorities for a pubhc and fair trial with full rights to defence and expressed concem at the strong allegations of ill-treatment. All of the 14 detainees involved were taken up as investigation cases. They are to be tried by a military court under legislation which carries the death penalty. An AI observer will attend the trial.
In February 1975, a Swiss lawyer. Christian Grobet, attended the appeal hearing of 10 leaders of the outlawed trade union organizations, the Comisiones Obreras, all of them adopted by AI. The Spanish court sharply reduced the long sentences imposed in late December 1973 on this group who had become known as the "Carabanchel 10", Four were released immediately and the other six had their imprisonment cut to 6 years from original sentences that varied from 17 to 20 years. Although this means that they are still serving extremely long sentences, the outcome is one good result of international pressure on Spanish authorities.
Another important trial is that of five people accused of being leaders of the clandestine political organization FRAP (Revolutionary Anti-Fascist Patriotic Front). A Portugese lawyer. Manual Correla Neves, went to Madrid on 7 March to represent AI in conjunction with the International Commission of Jurists, but the trial was postponed until June. The prosecution is demanding 15 to 18 year sentences on charges of illicit association.
In April 1975, Martin Ennals cabled the Head of State, General Francisco Franco, appealing for the commutation of the death sentence confirmed by the Supreme Court on José San Juhan Jimenez a common law prisoner.
Adoption of individual prisoners remains one of the most important aspects of AI's work in Spain. Between May 1974 and May 1975 more than 150 new adoption cases were taken up and 121 prisoners for whom AI groups had been working were released.
