United States of America
At the request of AI's International Council, Amnesty International Secretary General Martin Ennals wrote to President Gerald Ford on 1 November 1974 appealing to him to mark American Thanksgiving Day by declaring a general, imconditional amnesty for all United States war resisters. The contents of this letter were made public in a news release issued to coincide with the annual US holiday on 28 November 1974.
Although the number of imprisoned war resisters is now fewer than in previous years, there are still thousands of young American men living in exile or underground in the United States because, for reasons of conscience, they do not feel able to accept the terms of the clemency program initiated by President Ford.
Much attention has been given throughout the year to the case of Martin Sostre, sentenced to a possible 40 years' imprisonment in 1968 for the alleged sale of narcotics. The only witness of the alleged sale has since recanted his testimony, and AI believes that Mr Sostre was falsely implicated because of his poUtical activities. He was one of the prisoners featured during Prisoner of Conscience Week in October 1974.
On 13 August 1974, an AI observer attended Mr Sostre's appeal against being returned to New York State custody after testifying on behalf of a fellow prisoner in an action against the New York State prison authorities. The federal appellate court ruled against him and he was returned to Clinton prison in New York where he was once again subjected to harrassment and abuse.
On 11 November 1974 Secretary General Martin Ennals cabled the New York State Commissioner of Corrections to express concern about reports that Mr
79
Sostre had again been assauhed by prison guards for refusing to submit to rectal searches. An AI observer was also present in February 1975 at Mr Sostre's trial-arising from his refusal to submit to rectal searches—on charges of assaulting prison guards. He was found guilty, but at the time of writing has not been sentenced.
The Chairman of AI's International Executive Committee, Dirk Börner, discussed the Sostre case with the legal counsellor of the Governor of New York State and in a letter address to Governor Hugh Carey on 14 April 1975 Mr Börner argued that "... any reasonable person placed in possession of the facts of this case is bound to feel that a serious miscarriage of justice has occurred".
On 10-11 December 1974, an AI observer attended the hearing in North Carolina of the petitions of three Al-adopted prisoners, James Earl Grant Jr, Charles Parker and T.J. Reddy (known as "The Charlotte Three") in which they sought an order setting aside their convictions on a charge of arson (see AI Annual Report 1973-74), but there has been an extraordinary delay in the handing down of a decision by the judge in this case and at the time of writing no judgment has yet been delivered.
During the past year many appeals have been made to state authorities regarding the passing of death sentences, including one passed in the State of Florida on a 15-year-old boy.
AI groups are working on behalf of seven prisoners in the United States.
