Chad
Amnesty International group work on 38 adoption cases, mostly persons arrested between July 1972 and March 1973 and held without charge or trial, continued during 1974-75. In August 1974,106 prisoners were released in an amnesty announced by President N'garta Tombalbaye. Among those freed were three AI adoption cases, one of whom had been the subject of a postcard campaign in November 1973.
In spite of this amnesty, the human rights situation in Chad continued to deteriorate throughout the last months of 1974. In September reports began reaching the outside world that Chadians of all walks of hfe were being forced by the government to undergo the Yondo initiation rites of President Tombalbaye's ethnic group, the Sara. Although Chad embassy officials in France denied it, reports stated that as many as 50 Chadian Christians may have died during the rites.
43
In January 1975 Chad was the subject of a world-wide postcard campaign organized by AI, which appealed to President Tombalbaye to release the hundreds of untried detainees reportedly held in poor conditions in prisons in the capital, N'Djamena, and the urban centers of Moundou and Doba.
February 1975 saw the trial in N'Djamena of 32 persons accused of having plotted the overthrow of President Tombalbaye. Although the principal accused, Madame Kaltouma Guembang, received a 7-year prison sentence at the conclusion of the trial, there were indications that the government was displeased by what it considered to be the leniency of the sentence, and a new trial was in preparation when Tombalbaye's government was overthrown in a coMp d'état on 13 April 1975.
The new regime, which took power after President Tombalbaye's death during the fighting, turned to the question of the political prisoners as a matter of priority. By the end of April 1975, according to government sources, 172 prisoners had been released, and there were no further political prisoners in Chad. Among those freed were a number of AI adoptees, but the releases coincided with the tragic news that over 70 political detainees had died in prison or been executed summarily between January 1974 and April 1975. AI is attempting to obtain a complete list of those prisoners freed and those who did not survive. Meanwhile, groups continue to handle 27 adoption cases: prisoners whose exact fate remains uncertain.
