Haiti
The adoption program initiated in 1973 has continued, and 70 prisoners are currently allocated to Amnesty International groups. Apart from a constant flow of letters to the Haitian authorities, group work has included approaches to the embassies and also publicity.
Prisoners are not allowed lawyers, nor contact with their families after arrest, nor-with few exceptions-are they ever charged or brought to trial. Such conditions of isolation and the general fear of arbitrary arrest make it difficult to obtain personal data on the prisoners and to establish their status as prisoners of conscience.
Hence, the main reason for taking up the cases is prolonged detention without due legal process, and the purpose of group work is to press for trial or release. The prisoners, who are peasant farmers, workers, teachers, students and other intellectuals, have been detained for between 2 and 12 years. It is possible that some of these prisoners are no longer alive, but, as the prison authorities do not inform even families of a prisoner's death, such facts cannot be estabhshed.
Shortly after adverse publicity on conditions of detention in Haiti in the Canadian news media early in 1975 based on material supplied by the International Secretariat, the Haitian government declared an amnesty for 26 prisoners. The most prominent of this group was an AI adoptee, Jean Bernardel, ex-director of the Royal Bank of Canada in Haiti, and one of the few prisoners to have been tried. Together with four other people, not included in the amnesty, he had been sentenced to life imprisonment. The list of amnestied prisoners included one other
74
adoptee and a further five whose names were known to the International Secretariat. However, with the exception of Mr Bemardel, it has not been possible to establish whether, in fact, the others were released and whether some of the names correspond to prisoners at all.
The International Secretariat has on several occasions supplied information to lawyers and institutions attempting to help Haitian refugees in Canada and the United States, who are threatened with return to Haiti where they would run a high risk of arbitrary arrest.
