Iraq
The Kurdish war has dominated events in Iraq this past year and brought a considerable increase in repressive measures against Kurdish civilians, supporters and others believed to oppose the government. On 22 November 1974 Amnesty International Secretary General Martin Ennals wrote to President Hassan AI Bakr and other members of the Iraqi government, expressing concern at the large numbers of arrests for political or religious reasons, summary executions and the torture of prisoners which in some cases had resulted in death. Mr Ennals noted the apparent lack of legal guarantees— reflected in summary trials by military courts-the absence of the right of defence and the right of appeal. He appealed for the release of all political prisoners and called for a review of the government's policy with regard to the death penalty.
Among those arrested for political reasons were a group of 200-250 people associated with freemasonry prior to the 1958 revolution (after which freemasonry was banned). Almost all were elderly, professional people (doctors, lawyers, senior civil servants, etc.) whose names appeared on a list of invitees to a Masonic dinner in 1949. This list had recently been found in a deed box belonging to an Englishman who had left the country in 1958.
Some were arrested in February 1974 and of these one elderly man, Darwish al Haydari, died in prison, allegedly as a result of ill-treatment. Others were arrested in October 1974. They were charged with "cooperating with reactionary forces", an offence for which a law passed in October imposes the death sentence. They were tried by a revolutionary court in October or November, after which many were released. An unknown number were, however, sentenced to terms of imprisonment and it was reported that five were executed, but this has not been confirmed.
There has been an alarming number of executions over the past year. AI has received the names of 91 people, including two women, who have been executed since April 1974. They include Kurds and Kurdish sympathizers, religious leaders, right and left wing opponents and critics of the government, members of illegal organizations and of the Iraqi armed forces. Five Sh'ite religious leaders were sentenced to death in November, accused of membership of an illegal organization called The Islamic Mission. AI appealed, unsuccessfully, to the Iraqi government to commute the sentences.
The number of offences punishable by death was increased in 1975 to include espionage (specifically, cooperating with reactionary forces, making an appeal to a foreigner or a foreign organization) and those who endanger the national economy (specifically, breaking the economic blockade of the
130
Kurdish areas in the north—a law was passed to this effect in October 1974).
A reply from the Iraqi government assured Al that these allegations were untrue. It said: "We are not in the least surprised at the chaises made against the Government of Iraq by inimical and spiteful circles. The fact that we have solemnly pledged ourselves to an unremitting fight against imperialism and reaction arouses the ire of many people and leads them to embark upon conspiratorial activities against the country and to hurl charges at Iraq and at its leadership."
On 7 April Amnesty International again wrote to the President expressing concern at reports that, during the peirod of hostilities, "Kurdish and non-Kurdish civilians had not been accorded the protection guaranteed by international humanitarian law". AI requested, now that the Iran-Iraq agreement had brought hostilities to an end, that all Kurdish detainees be released "and that they and all other Kurdish civilians be accorded the protection guaranteed by the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights ratified by your country".
AI also urged that investigations be initiated into allegations of ill-treatment and torture and into the alarming number of executions. Al had received the names of 551 Kurdish civilians, including women and children, who had been detained, and 43 Kurds who had allegedly been tortured to death. Of the 43, most of them had previously been detained in Kirkuk or Mosul security prisons or Abu Ghreb prison in Baghdad, and their bodies, when returned to their families, showed signs of torture.
One such case was a Kurdish religious leader, Mulla Ali Shamdani from Zakho, who, because he was thought to be a supporter of the Kurdish rebellion, was in June 1974 tortured to death, including having his eyes gouged out.
Some AI national sections were asked to appeal to their governments to intervene with the Iraqi authorities for the release of Kurdish detainees.
Letters have been sent to the Iraqi government from the International Secretariat and from adoption groups on behalf of two Jewish prisoners, Akram Baher and Shua Sofer, but no news has been received which would confirm that they are still alive.
