Sri Lanka
Of the 18,000 young prisoners detained after the insurgency, staged by the Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna (JVP) in April 1971, some 2,000 remain in detention today. Prisoners were arrested under the Emergency Regulations, but as of 31 December 1974, 192 have been sentenced to terms of imprisonment ranging from 2 to 20 years by the Criminal Justice Commission, a judicial committee set up especially to try those accused of complicity in the 1971 events, before which the normal rules of criminal procedure do not apply. At the end of January 1975, 391 prisoners were still to appear before the commission.
In January 1975, Amnesty International sent a mission to Sri Lanka to investigate the prospects of trial and release of prisoners held under the Emei^ency Regulations. Louis Blom-Cooper, an English lawyer, accompanied by the researcher for South Asia, Yvonne Teriingen, had extensive discussions with the Minister of Law and other senior officials in the Law and Prison Departments who cooperated in every way with the AI delegates. They visited WeHkada and New Magazine Prison in Colombo, as well as Pallekelle Camp near Kandy and attended proceedings before the Criminal Justice Commission. A report was prepared following the mission and presented to the Prime Minister, Mrs Sirimavo Bandaranaike, on 8 May 1975.
The report argued that standards of criminal justice should never, as had happened with the Criminal Justice Commission, be compromised. It said that the abandonment of longstanding legal procedures - such as the exclusion of hearsay, the inadmissability of confessions and the partial shifting of the onus of proof, to mention a few — jeopardized public regard for independence of the judiciary and subjected political offenders to a kind of second class system of justice. The report recommended that prisoners be tried before fully independent courts and that the Criminal Justice Commission Act be repealed. It also called for the repeal of any measures that discriminated against political prisoners.
Under the Emergency Regulations, prisoners can still be held for a period of 15 days in police custody without any kind of judicial control or access to legal assistance. This provision has given rise to a number of allegations that acts of police brutaUty were being committed during the 15-day period. While the AI mission was not in a position to verify the allegations, AI submitted in its report that there was no longer a need for detention in police custody without judicial control. It recommended its abolition and that prisoners be produced before a magistrate within 24 hours of their arrest.
Some prisoners are still being detained on suspicion of having committed offences punishable under the Emergency Regulations. A very small number of these prisoners appeared to have been detained without trial or charge since 1971. The report recommended that an inquiry be instituted into all penal establishments in Sri Lanka to investigate the cases of these prisoners, with a view to their immediate trial or release without further delay if no specific
103
charges exist. A few prisoners, generally members of Marxist splinter groups who did not participate in the 1971 insurrection, are held for security reasons on orders of the Executive. They can be detained indefinitely under the Emergency Regulations. AI urged that the government review and possibly abolish provisions that keep such prisoners in detention without an independent machinery for review.
The Sri Lanka government has put considerable emphasis on the rehabilitation of prisoners during their detention and after their release. A number of restrictions, however, on freedom of movement, association and speech are presently in force on some released prisoners, the majority of whom have not been tried. AI recommended that such restrictions should now be reviewed. The report also made a number of detailed recommendations regarding prison conditions of political prisoners. The report concluded that there had been a large increase in the number of executions in Sri Lanka since 1972 (two prisoners, having taken part in the 1971 insurgency, were sentenced to death before the criminal courts), and recommended abolition of the death penalty.
Specific mention should also be made of the efforts of many AI groups who worked for 35 prisoners of the Tamil minority, arrested in 1972 and 1973 and detained under the Emergency Regulations. The Minister of Justice informed the AI mission that all but three of the prisoners would be released. At the time of writing, however, 20 such prisoners remain imprisoned.
The continuation of the state of emergency now affects many areas outside the scope of the original reasons for its declaration. By way of Emergency Regulation 143/1, the government made it an offence to criticize Sri Lanka's constitution outside the National Assembly or the courts of law, thus depriving the Tamil minority of an important means of expressing its opinion democratically.
