Guatemala
The dominant human rights concem of Amnesty Intemational was that people who opposed or were imagined to oppose the government were systematically seized and frequently tortured and murdered by both uniformed and plain clothed members of the security forces. Arrests without warrant were rarely acknowledged by the authorities, and those detained frequently "disappeared" or were found dead showing clear signs of torture. Often bodies were found far from the place of detention with their features disfigured. To Amnesty International's knowledge the authorities have never conducted a satisfactory investigation into the circumstances under which many thousands of Guatemalans have been killed or "disappeared" in recent years. The authorities have also been unresponsive to repeated requests from Amnesty Intemational and other intemational humanitarian organizations for such investigations and have consistently failed to address the substance of the complaints submitted to them.
The government attributed such killings to independent groups of the left and right outside its control, or stated that victims died in armed confrontations with the authorities. On 18 February 1981 Amnesty Intemational published a report which concluded that no pro-govemment groups existed independent of government control, and that government agencies were directly responsible for the killings and kidnappings which the authorities ascribed to extremist "death squads". The report was based on evidence collected since the early 1970s, and included a number of very recent testimonies. One was that of Ehas Barahona y Barahona, a former Ministry of the Interior press representative who resigned and fled into exile on 3 September 1980. He stated that the so-called death squads were part of a "program of pacification" carried out by units of the army and police, which used lists of people to be eliminated prepared in a department of the army in the National Palace and approved at meetings held in the palace attended by the Ministers of Defence and the Interior and the C hief of the General S taff of the Army. He said his job at the Ministry of the Interior was to ensure that the press described this govemment-directed violence as "fighting between clandestine groups of the extreme right and left".
Amnesty International's report included the testimony of a man kidnapped and tortured by the army, who described being beaten and kicked, pulled up by his testicles and smothered with the inner tube of a tmck tyre impregnated with quicklime. Before his escape from a
149
military base in Huehuetenango he had witnessed three prisoners being garrotted. A former conscript soldier of Kekchi Indian origin described his training, during which he and other new recruits were told that it was their constitutional duty as soldiers to kill subversives. He related how squads which had killed while in plain clothes were sometimes then ordered to investigate these same murders, this time in uniform.
The report included examples of recent kidnappings and killings, and noted that some 3,000 people had been found murdered after being seized in the first 10 months of 1980 alone. The report was released with a hst of 615 people who had "disappeared" after being detained by security forces since President Romeo Lucas Garcia took office in July 1978.
Even before they received the report the Guatemalan Government rejected the conclusion? of the report, and accused Amnesty International of interfering in its sovereign aff'airs and impugning the honour of the President. However when questioned by the press about Amnesty International's findings, the former Vice-President of Guatemala, Dr Villagrán Kramer, stated that he had learned about the system while in government and did not doubt that most killings were decided upon in the presidential palace. Dr Villagrán had threatened to resign if the violence was not controlled, and went into exile in the United States of America on 1 September 1980.
Leaders and potential leaders of popular movements, as well as thousands of peasants and workers, believed to have had no political involvement have been ehminated in government-controlled killings. In many cases the authorities who direct ix)lice and army units to kill individuals or cause them to "disappear", are believed to be working from lists of subversives first drawn up after a coup in 1954. These lists are now believed to be held in the central files of the army intelligence division. For instance, some observers attributed the submachine-gun attack in September 1980 on Professor Lucila Rodas de Villagrán, 60, head of a girls' school, to her active membership in her youth of the Partido Acción Revolucionaria, Revolutionary Action Party, which ceased to exist more than 25 years ago.
On 28 May 1980 former Christian Democratic Congressman, Julio Hamilton Noriega, was murdered in El Quiché. The Ejército Secreto Anticomunista (ESA), the Secret Anti-Communist Army, one of the so-called "death squads", claimed responsibility for this killing. The ESA's name frequently appears on the periodic "death lists", which Amnesty International believes were prepared by the authorities. The killing was apparently a reprisal for the Christian Democrats' statement denouncing violence and the killing of two of its members, and the kidnapping of another on 22 May 1980. After Julio
150
Hamilton Noriega's death, the Christian Democrats announced that they would close their offices throughout Guatemala, but the killings continued.
Three Christian Democratic mayors were shot in June 1980 and one abducted in November. In February 1981 one person was killed and three wounded in frpnt of the Christian Democratic offices in Guatemala City during an apparent attempt on the life of the party's leader, Vinicio Cerezo Arevalo. Two Christian Democrats arrested after the attempt on Cerezo's life were located in custody and turned over to the jurisdiction of the courts after foreign diplomats had intervened on their behalf. The Christian Democrats appeared to have lost yet another member of their national committee when Joaquin Aguirre Villatoro was kidnapped on 7 April 1981.
Members of the opposition party Frente Unido de la Revolución (FUR), the United Front of the Revolution, whose leader Manuel Colom Argueta was killed in 1979 in one of Guatemala's many thousands of unsolved political murders, have also been attacked. Rogelio Barillos, a FUR leader, was killed on 8 May 1980; and Marco Tulio Collado Pardo, a mayor in the department of E scuintia, and Vice-President of the FUR executive committee, was attacked on 8 July with a machine-gun and his bodyguard was killed.
Trade unionistshave also been attacked. A listofmissing workers, peasants and trade unionists compiled by Amnesty International indicated that between 1 May 1980 and March 1981,77 workers and trade unionists taken into custody were missing and 47 had been killed.
On 27 May 1980 Marlon Mendizábal García, a trade union leader at the Embotelladora Guatemalteca S.A. (EGSA), Guatemalan Bottlers, became the fourth worker to be killed by "death squads" and the third Secretary General of the trade union to die in 17 months. On 20 June 1980 Edgar René Aldana, executive committee member at EGSA, was abducted and his bullet-ridden body was found later that day. When trade unionists met on 21 June 1980 at the headquarters of the Central Nacional de Trabajadores (CNT), the Guatemalan Workers' Congress, to discuss René's funeral, police sealed off" the road and 25 plain clothes policemen broke into the offices and arrested 27 people. The police originally denied that the trade unionists had been detained, but then Vice-President Villagrán Kramer disclosed that he had asked the President of the Guatemalan Supreme Court to initiate habeas corpus proceedings on their behalf In response to renewed appeals in August 1980, Labour Minister Carlos Alarcón Monsanto wrote that the detained trade unionists had been released. However there has been no further word of the missing people and it is feared they may have been buried in secret graveyards.
151
In January and February 1981 alone, five such secret burial grounds were found and 45 corpses recovered. In November 1980 Amnesty International received a detailed account of one such secret graveyard near San Juan Comalapa. In March 1980,38 corpses had been discovered in a deep gorge near that village. Among them was the body of Liliana Negreros, detained during a funeral procession held in memory of 21 Indian peasants who burned to death when police attacked demonstrators in the Spanish Embassy in January 1980. Amnesty International's informant has visited the site and confirmed that at least 30 more bodies had been found in the gorge since the March exhumation. He stated that many corpses still lay in the common grave, and believed the leaders of the local earthquake construction committee, seized and murdered from March to October 1980 by local army units, to be amongst them. They had apparently been killed in line with a general government policy to eliminate any organization which could become a focus for opposition activity.
The policy of intimidating and eliminating leaders or potential leaders of community development projects which might support anti-government activity or provide alternative finance for peasants and thus pose a threat to land owners' labour supplies, has also been directed against foreigners working with legally recognized aid agencies. On 10 October 1980 VeitNicolaus Stoscheck, a citizen of the USA working as an agricultural assistant in Chimaltenango, was abducted by five gunmen believed to be plain clothes members of the security forces. His body was later found in Antigua, with multiple head injuries and marks of torture.
Lay workers, priests and foreign missionaries have also been defamed in government and anonymous propaganda. The attacks were apparently in retaliation for shielding local Indians from ill-treatment and helping them organize to protect their rights. The Justice and Peace Committee, a human rights monitoring organization founded in 1978, has been vilified and threatened with violence in anonymous press advertisements and leaflets attributed to a nonexistent Guatemalan Section of Amnesty International. The Jesuits have been similarly threatened and many foreign priests have been forced to leave the country after receiving death threats. The government withdrew the visas of some religious workers while they were abroad.
Others have been murdered. Father Walter Voordeckers, a Belgian missionary, was killed on 12 May 1980 shortly after he had publicly prayed for the release of his close friend and colleague, Father Conrado de la Cruz, a Filipino member of a Belgian order who had "disappeared" with his assistant Herlindo Cifuentes on 1 May 1980, after being detained with 44 others participating in May Day
152
demonstrations in the capital. The bodies of some of those arrested at the same time as Father de la Cruz andHerlindoCifuentes have since been found, but the priest and his assistant are still missing.
On 4 June 1980 Father José María Gran Cirera of the Spanish Order of the Sacred Heart was killed with his sacristan Domingo Bats, between Juil and Chajul. The Ministry of Defence alleged that they died in an armed confrontation, but this was denied by the Justice and Peace Committee. Two other priests from the same order were killed in subsequent months. One had been tortured.
Guatemalan priests and lay workers have also suffered repression, often in connection with efforts to help campesinos (peasants) claim compensation after their lands had been confiscated by local landowners. Some have been abducted and have since "disappeared", including 11 who "disappeared" from Santiago Atitlán between October 1980 and January 1981.
Increases in killings and "disappearances" in rural areas could often be linked to government suspicions of guerrilla activity in the area, or to the discovery of minerals or other natural resources making Indian lands more desirable. The authorities frequently claimed that the victims have "disappeared" or have been murdered as the result of guerilla actions, or, as was alleged in the case of Father Gran Cirera, that they have died in armed confrontation with official security units.
A number of guerrilla groups have been operating since the mid-1960s, and Amnesty International was aware of reports of escalating conflict, particularly in the countryside, between government and guerrilla forces, with lives lost on both sides. However Amnesty International did not accept government assertions that all or most killings in the rural provinces were the result of armed conflict or the work of agents operating independently of government control. Nonviolent community leaders and pohtically inactive peasants have often been killed by the army in areas where guerrillas were believed to be operating.
On 13 June 1980 approximately 100 men and boys were taken from three villages in the department of Escuintla in a military operation involving the army and the Guardia de Hacienda (Treasury Police). Their families initially suspected that they had been forcibly recruited for military service, a frequent occurrence in rural areas witii large Indian populations. However there has been no further word of the missing men, and a delegation of relatives which travelled to the capital to ask the President of the Congress to intervene were reftised an audience. In July 100 campesinos who had taken part in strikes for an increase in the minimum wage "disappeared" from around the Tiquisate area.
The Guatemalan Church in Exile (the bishop, priests and nuns who
153
had been working in EI Quiché but were forced to leave in July 1980 after death threats and the killing of some of their colleagues) denounced in early February 1981 the killing by the army of an estimated 168 people in the villages of Papa Chala, Patzaj and Panincac in the municipality of Comalapa, department of Chimaltenango, an area where guerrillas were beheved to be operating. A new-bom baby was reportedly kicked to death by soldiers.
Some peasants appear to have been killed in reprisals for losses suffered by the army in clashes with the guerrillas. In January 1981 troops who had been ambushed near Santiago, Sololá, retaliated by arresting 14 peasants who were picking cotton nearby. The detainees were flown out of the area in army helicopters. Three days later their bodies were found along the shores of Lake Atitlán, bearing signs of severe torture. All had been garrotted.
In a similar case on 9 April, 24 peasants including a five-year-old child were reportedly hacked to death with machetes by 60 members of the security forces who occupied the village of Chuabajito, in Chimaltenango. There were fears for the lives of two peasants who were left for dead, but survived, and have been removed to the departmental capital for treatment Amnesty International knows of six witnesses to abuses by the security forces who were removed from hospital and killed in September 1980 alone.
Student Victor Manuel Valverth Morales survived an attempt to remove him from a medical centre where he was being treated after being assaulted by police. He was seized at gunpoint on 19 June 1980 inside the School of Engineering of the National University of San Carlos (USAC) in Guatemala City by two men in plain clothes, who did not identify themselves as law enforcement officers or produce a warrant but shot him several times when he tried to escape. When his attackers tried to remove him from the university medical centre they were overpowered by other students who came to his assistance. Uniformed army troops then attacked the students, who killed one of the two original assailants in reprisal. The students found a card on him which identified him as a military intelligence agent from the "General Aguilar Santa Maria" army base in Jutiapa province. The second man carried an identity card issued by the Servicio Especial (Special Service) of the Guardia de Hacienda. The wounded student was eventually able to take advantage of political asylum offered by the Costa Rican Ambassador, but many others have been less fortunate.
The National University of San Carlos has allegedly been the target of a program of government repression intended to destroy it Officials have often denounced the USAC as a "centre of subversion", and during the year many students have been killed in demonstrations
154
or as a result of indiscriminate police fire. A further 71 have reportedly been killed in detention over the same period. One such incident followed an attack on the Vice-Minister of the Interior, Juan de Dios Reyes Leal, on 19 August 1980. The following day the bodies of nine youths were found on the spot where the official had been wounded, with a note describing them as members of a left-wing guerrilla group. All had apparently been tortured and strangled to death; their bodies were mutilated with machetes. Two were identified as agronomy students detained the previous week. All of the dead had reportedly been in custody and had been executed by the security forces in reprisal.
During the year at least 53 teachers were shot dead while from March to September 1980 at least 27 staff of the University of San Carlos were killed. Amongst those who died at San Carlos were 12 members of the law faculty, while the Guatemalan newspaper El Gráfico estimated in January 1981 that 35 other lawyers had been murdered by "death squads" in the previous year. In February El Gráfico reported yet another killing at the university: Oscar Arturo Falencia, Director of Publications. An estimated 50 USAC staff members have gone into exile, following Rector Saul Osorio, who left the country in April 1980.
Many journalists, threatened because of their reporting of the violence," have also fled into exile. The external commission of the Sindicato de Trabajadores en los Medios de Comunicación Social (SIMCOS), the Guatemalan journalists' and radio and television commentators' trade union, has listed 12 forced into exile for political reasons from May to December 1980. Many left after their newspaper offices or broadcasting stations had been bombed or shot at by machine-guns. Over the same period the SIMCOS document records the deaths of 13 journalists and the "disappearance" of four others, including Gaspar Culán Yataz, director of t|je radio station Xa Voz de Atitlán (The Voice of Atitlán), who was twice wounded in the head on 25 October 1980 as he was being apprehended by soldiers in civilian dress. He has not been seen since.
Alaide Foppa, 65-year-old journalist, art critic and professor at Mexico City's National Autonomous University (UNAM) went to Guatemala to visit her family. A resident of Mexico for some years and a member of the Mexican Section of Amnesty International, she was kidnapped and "disappeared" on 19 December along with her chauffeur. Despite inquiries from the Mexican Government and widespread international appeals, her whereabouts are still unknown.
Amnesty International has launched 44 action appeals on behalf of approximately 252 people who have "disappeared" or been kidnapped or arrested over the year. Forty-one "disappearance" cases have
155
been assigned for investigation by Amnesty Intemational groups. Three campaigns by members of Amnesty Intemational medical groups have been initiated on behalf of medical personnel detained or "disappeared" in Guatemala, and on behalf of people who survived attacks and were taken into medical care, but whose hves were still believed to be in danger.
In addition. Amnesty International launched a special campaign on trade unions and companies in Guatemala in March 1981. This campaign was motivated by its concern that employers in Guatemala and intemational businesses with interests there had avoided responsibility for preventing the kidnapping or killing of their employees. Certain evidence also indicated that some employees of intemational companies appeared to condone these killings and abductions. The campaign was aimed at making intemational trade union confederations and intemational companies aware of human rights abuses in Guatemala, and at securing statements from them expressing concern. It was also hoped to encourage the companies to take steps to protect their employees from human rights violations and to investigate cases where their workers were killed or have "disappeared".
One such agreement was reached on 20 December 1980 between trade union representatives and the new managers of the EGSA, the Coca Cola bottling plant in Guatemala City, after the factory was transferred to a group of Central American investors on 5 September 1980, after an intemational outcry at the human rights abuses which had been suffered by its employees.
On 12 January 1981 Amnesty International submitted to the United Nations Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances a list of 615 people who had "disappeared" in Guatemala after being arrested by the security forces between July 1978 and 31 October 1980. Other smaller groups of cases or individual cases were submitted to this body for consideration with requests for urgent intervention. Amnesty Intemational also made available its report on Guatemala to members of the UN Commission on Human Rights during Febmary 1981. In an oral intervention to the commission Amnesty Intemational drew attention to the problem of politically-motivated government murders there. The commission decided to ask the UN Secretary-General to collect information on the human rights situation in the country and pursue contacts with the authorities.
On 23 September 1980 Amnesty Intemational provided the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States with 10 cases which it considered representative and suggested that the commission might visit several govemment installations which Amnesty International believed to be instrumental
156
in the government's policy of secret detentions, "disappearances" and assassinations. These included the telecommunications centre in the presidential annex, believed to be coordinating secret and extrajudicial security operations. Several alleged interrogation centres, a notorious secret cemetery, and a number of public hospitals where victims of killings were customarily taken for obligatory autopsies were also suggested. Amnesty Intemational urged the commission to pursue its investigation of cases previously raised by Amnesty International which have still not been adequately investigated by the Guatemalan authorities.
