Iran
The main concerns of Amnesty International were executions, the ill-treatment of prisoners, the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, and the lack of fair trials for political prisoners.
More than 700 executions have taken place in Iran during the past year. This figure, which is based on reports which have appeared in the press outside Iran, must be regarded as the minimum because not all executions have been reported. Offences for which people have been executed included alleged plots against the government, drug-smuggling and selling, espionage, collaboration with Iraqi forces, sexual offences, support of the Kurdish Democratic Party, murder and robbery. Baha'is and Jews have been among those executed, usually on charges of espionage apparently based on the connections members of
356 	
these religions have with Israel (Baha'i world headquarters are in Israel).
Throughout the year Amnesty Intemational appealed to the authorities to halt executions and on 19 August 1980 wrote to Prime Minister Mohammed Ali Rajai.. we appealed time and time again to the late Shah for a stop to executions ... Since the Revolution we have been sad to observe the continuation of human rights violations and especially the large number of executions which have taken place".
In December 1980 Ayatollah Khomeini ordered an inquiry into reports of torture in Iranian prisons. President Abolhassan Bani-Sadr and subsequently a group of 133 Iranian intellectuals had stated publicly that torture was once again taking place in Iran, but had not mentioned specific instances. The report of the investigating commission had not been made public by the end of April 1981, but two members of the commission, Ali Mohammad Besharati Jahromi and Hojatoleslam Mohammad Montazeri, stated on 12 April and 19 April that allegations of torture were totally unfounded. Amnesty International did not receive any specific allegations of torture during the year, but on several occasions was told that torture was taking place. It has been unable to verify these reports.
In May 1980 Amnesty Intemational published a report Xavv and Human Rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran which found that defendants before Islamic Revolutionary Tribunals were consistently denied fair trials (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1980). Many people were executed almost immediately after the imposition of the death sentence, leaving little or no time for the defendant to appeal or petition for clemency. On 20 July 1980 five officers convicted of participation in a conspiracy to overthrow the govemment were executed approximately 16 hours after their trial was reported to have begun.
Amnesty Intemational expressed its concem about the imprisonment and execution of members of religious minorities to President Abolhassan Bani-Sadr on 24 March 1981 following the execution of two Baha'is.
"These executions and the imprisonment and execution of other members of the Baha'i religion appear to Amnesty Intemational to indicate a deliberate govemment policy of religious persecution, in violation of Article 18 of the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to which Iran is a State Party. This article states: 'Everyone shall have the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion. This right shall include freedom to have or to adopt a religion or belief of his choice, and
357 	
freedom, either individually or in community with others and in
public or private, to manifest his religion or belief in worship,
observance, practice and teaching.' " Amnesty International asked the President about the whereabouts of nine members of the National Spiritual Assembly of the Baha'is of Iran and two other Baha'is, who were arrested in Teheran on 21 August 1980 and whose relatives had received no information about them since.
The number of prisoners of conscience in Iran was not known to Amnesty International. It has often been difficult to establish whether a person was a prisoner of conscience because the charges faced were not known or were couched in vague and general terms, without mention of a specific offence. Even when people were charged with offences which would suggest that they were not prisoners of conscience, the lack of fair trials usually made it impossible to know to what extent the charges were justified.
Many people have been held for long periods without charge or trial. Abolfazle Ghassemi, one of the leaders of the Iranian National Front and Secretary General of the Iran Party, who was elected to the Iranian parliament in the first elections after the February 1979 revolution, was arrested on 14 July 1980, after his parliamentary mandate had been contested by the Minister of the Interior. In January 1981 Amnesty International appealed to President Bani-Sadr and Ayatollah Beheshti, Head of the Supreme Court, for his release, expressing particular concern because he was 60 years old and suffered from heart disease. In April 1981 he was still being held without charge or trial.
Other prisoners of conscience included members of ethnic and religious minorities; members of political parties and groups opposed to the existing authorities; and people connected in some way with the previous government, who appeared to be regarded as guilty by association.
Mohammad Reza Sa'adati, former leader of the Mojaheddin-e-Khalq, a left-wing organization active in the opposition to the Shah, was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment on 15 November 1980 on charges of spying for the Soviet Union (see Amnesty International Report 1980). He denied the charges and conducted his own defence after his lawyer was barred from the court. On 26 January 1981 Teheran State Radio announced that he was to be retried, but by the end of April 1981 no further information had reached Amnesty International.
On 8 April 1981 Amnesty International wrote to the Iranian Embassy in London, asking to be informed of the charges against Ali-Asghar Amirani, proprietor and editor-in-chief of the former weekly
358 	
journal Khandaniha, who had been imprisoned. No further information about Ali-Asghar Amirani had reached Amnesty International by the end of April 1981.
In January 1981 the hostages heldinthe United States Embassy in Teheran since November 1979, for whose release Amnesty International had appealed, were released.
