Liberia
The concerns of Amnesty International were political imprisonment, detention without charge or trial, unfair trials, poor prison conditions, the ilKtreatment of detainees, and the death penalty.
Immediately after the armed coup which brought Master-Sergeant Samuel Doe to power on 12 April 1980, many former officials, senior officers and managing directors of publicly-owned corporations were arrested. The newly-formed People's Redemption Council (PRC), the supreme legislative and executive body composed of soldiers from the lower ranks, issued a decree defining the crime of high treason, effective retroactively and punishable by the death penalty or imprisonment of 10 years to life. Habeas corpus was suspended and all political activity was banned. The PRC established a Special Military Tribunal consisting entirely of soldiers, which, within a week of the coup, began hearings against 14 former senior officials charged with "high treason, rampant corruption, misuse of public office and the abuse of civil and human rights". The defendants were allowed neither defence counsel nor to present evidence. After hurried proceedings the military tribunal submitted its verdict on 13 of the accused to the PRC, which ordered their execution. On 22 April 1980 they were publicly executed by firing squad.
These executions provoked protests from many foreign heads of state, international organizations and religious bodies. Shortly afterwards the new government stated that no more former officials would be executed and that only 101 individuals on a public list would be tried for activities before the coup. However by then about 500 people had reportedly been arrested and detained in prisons and detention centres in the capital, Monrovia, aUhough about 200 were freed within a month. Many were associates or relatives of former prominent officials and had been arbitrarily detained on the orders of a member of the PRC or of the government. Many others were harassed by soldiers from the lower ranks. Head of State Doe made several attempts to control the soldiers and curb the violence against civilians, and to end the administrative confusion: at least nine soldiers were imprisoned during 1980 for assault or harassment of civilians.
54
A PRC decree made public in mid-May 1980 restricted the power of arrest to the Ministry of Justice and county authorities but it was not consistently followed. The Commanding General of the armed forces ordered the arrest of armed forces chaplain Major Edwin Lloyd, who had reportedly criticized the execution of former government officials in a sermon. Officials claimed he was arrested for helping a photographer to take unauthorized pictures. He was taken to Bella Yallah prison. A.B. Tolbert, son of the late President, William Tolbert, and former member of the House of Representatives, was arrested in niid-June 1980 when troops forcibly entered the French Embassy where he had sought refuge. An unknown number of civilians were held for allegedly assisting him while he was hiding. In October 1980 Stephen Neal was arrested in Harper for having allegedly criticized the execution of his brother in April. In February 1981 three dock-workers' leaders were arrested following strikes, which had been banned by the PRC in June 1980.
These arrests appear to have been carried out solely on executive orders, without reference to legislation existing before the coup or independent judicial authority. Despite official claims most detainees have not been charged or given reasons for their arrest. Powers of extrajudicial arrest were increased by Head of State Doe in September 1980 when he pubhcly authorized members of the security forces to arrest anyone found to be "sabotaging the interests of the PRC". His call for all "anti-revolutionary elements ... to immediately be executed" was later retracted. In February 1981 Head of State Doe was repK)rted to have warned that anyone attempting to "disorganize the nation" would be arrested and shot by firing-squad if found guilty. The legal status of these crimes remains unclear, and it is not known whether any detainees have been accused of committing them.
In late April 1980 the Special Military Tribunal resumed its hearings against civilians accused retroactively of "high treason, rampant corruption and misuse of public office". Throughout May, 22 former ministers and senior officials were given hurried trials, without the right to defence counsel or to appeal. The military tribunal is believed to have submitted its verdicts for ratification to the PRC, but these were never made public and the accused remained in detention without knowing their sentences. In July 1980 the trial of nine soldiers arrested in May and accused of plotting a counter-coup, including Brigadier General Rudolph Kolako and Colonels Bedell, Solo and Benson, opened before the Special Military Tribunal. The defendants were allowed defence counsel and the ri^it to present evidence and call witnesses. They denied the charges. On 11 December 1980, the day before the verdict was due, the Chairman of the Special Military Tribunal, General Frank Senkpeni, was arrested. He was accused of
55
withholding information provided by the prisoners and of delaying the court's judgment. Shortiy afterwards two other members of the tribunal, Colonels Taylor and Coleman, were also arrested, apparently on similar grounds. Although all three were replaced, the tribunal has not sat again and the verdicts against the nine soldiers have not been made public.
Appeals for the prompt trial of all political prisoners before civilian courts or their release have been regularly addressed to the PRC. The diplomatic representatives of France and the United States publicly appealed for a general amnesty on several occasions and the European Economic Community reinforced its call for releases by suspending aid to Liberia for several months. Similar appeals were made by several African heads of state. In June and September 1980 Amnesty Intemational appealed to Head of State Doe to release between 200 and 400 detainees held without charge or trial; to ensure that trials of political prisoners took place before independent courts with adequate defence counsel; to improve prison conditions in Monrovia; to end the ill-treatment of detainees; and to retum prisoners transported to the remote prison of Bella Yallah to Monrovia. From October 1980 onwards Amnesty Intemational repeatedly submitted this appeal to the Head of State and to members of the PRC and of the govemment After a request from Foreign Minister Gabriel B. Matthews in December 1980 Amnesty International made a number of recommendations to improve respect for human rights including the publication of a list of all political detainees and the release of those against whom proceedings were not intended. The authorities have yet to respond to these proposals or to agree to an Amnesty Intemational mission to their country.
Many public appeals have been made within Liberia: civilian members of the government, including the Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Economic Affairs and Planning, and Justice, called on the PRC to release or try all political prisoners before civilian courts; as did representatives of the Roman Catholic Church and other prominent personalities.
In July 1980,19 detainees were freed, and the late President's wife, Victoria Tolbert, and her three daughters were released from house arrest Three further groups of political prisoners were released in November and December 1980 and April 1981, when 23,22 and 19 detainees were freed. In all some 120 prisoners were reported to have been released by the end of April 1981, the majority detainees, but also at least 15 former senior officials tried in May 1980. Although it is difficult to establish the number of prisoners left, records suggest that between 80 and 200 people were still imprisoned at the end of April 1981.
56
In the first three months aftsr the coup Amnesty International received several reports that detainees in Monrovia were fi'equently being beaten with whips and automobile fan belts. Although recent reports indicated that this had been stopped Amnesty International remained concerned by reports of very poor prison conditions in the Post Stockade at the Barclay Training Centre and in the South Beach prison, both in Monrovia. Conditions were believed to be most insanitary and the food insufficient and of poor quality. Medical care was inadequate and at least two prisoners are believed to have died as a result Visits by friends and relatives of prisoners have been banned for long periods. In September 1980 the commanding officer of the Post Stockade, Captain Reeves T. Buoah, banned all visits to prisoners and is reported to have warned that attempts to circumvent this ruling would be severely punished.
Amnesty International was also concerned by penalties to counter the smuggling and use of illegal drugs which involved cruel and degrading treatment, and were reportedly to be imposed extrajudicially. Minister of Defence Major Samuel B. Pearson announced in September 1980 that individuals found in possession of illegal drugs would be forced to consume immediately whatever quantities were found upon them. In March 1981 the Liberian press announced a government decision that before prosecution 25 lashes would be inflicted on anyone importing drugs into Liberia through Robertsfield airport.
Statements by government officials suggested that the death penalty would apply to those convicted of "illegally attempting to influence the conduct of armed and police forces and security personnel for personal benefit and against the interest of the State" or of "disorganizing the nation". Seven people were executed by hanging in early March 1981. Government sources claimed that all had been convicted of murder and sentenced to death before the coup.
57
