Comoros
Amnesty International's concerns were detention without trial, unfair trials, ill-treatment of prisoners, and harsh prison conditions.
In response to an invitation from the government. Amnesty Intemational was preparing for a mission in May 1981. Amnesty Intemational had repeatedly called on the government to try or release about 30 civilian officials and soldiers arrested when the present government of President Ahmed Abdallah came to power in May 1978, and still detained without charge or trial in April 1981. They included members of the former government of President Ali Soilih such as Salim Himidi, former Minister of the Interior, Ali Toihir "Keke", former Secretary General for Defence, and Abdulwahab Mohamed, teacher and former member of parliament. Toyib Dada and Nassor Khalifa, both former presidential aides detained since 1978, had been freed in May 1980.
Thirteen others who had been detained in 1978 were brought to trial in December 1980 and early 1981, before a special court established to deal with people detained in 1978. Eleven of them, all former members of the security forces, were convicted of killing 11 people in a mosque in Iconi, Grande Comore, on 18 March 1978. They were sentenced to prison terms ranging from six months to life imprisonment. The defendants were not legally represented and had no right of appeal.
A number of students were arrested in February and August 1980 for striking or criticizing the government's educational policies, and some were reportedly ill-treated by the security forces. Most were released within a short time, but some were sentenced to six months'
]
37
imprisonment. Amnesty International was also investigating the detention of Fatouma Said Abdallah who was charged with murder, since it believed that she may have been arrested for her political views.
In February 1981 over 50 people including prominent officials were arrested for alleged pKDSsession of subversive documents and video cassettes. Eleven were still held without charge, in Voidjou military camp at the end of April 1981.
Amnesty International was concerned about harsh prison conditions at Moroni central prison, where the 1978 detainees were held According to Amnesty International's information prisoners were denied visits from relatives, lawyers or religious representatives, correspondence, writing materials, and books except for the Quran. They were denied beds and sleeping mats, and slept on the earthen floor. Until January 1981 the cells were overcrowded, with windows blocked up. Prisoners were allowed out into the open air very rarely, and were forbidden to change their clothes or wash for long periods. Medical treatment was often refused. When the prison jurisdiction was transferred in January 1981 from the security force to the army, overcrowding was reduced, the windows were unblocked, and some outdoor exercise was permitted. Some prisoners were admitted to hospital, although contact with relatives was still denied.
In Voidjou military camp, 40 kilometres from Moroni, prisoners were held incommunicado in darkened cells, without beds or sleeping mats, and denied medical attention. Prisoners there were reportedly frequently beaten. Some of the 1978 detainees have also from time to time been taken there from Moroni central prison and beaten.
	"a ^
^JÎ	^ -i? / -k.
