Tunisia
During the year all Amnesty International adopted prisoners of conscience were released from prison. Amnesty International welcomed this but was still concemed that some former prisoner were subjected to restrictions, including house arrest. It was also concemed about continuing allegations of torture, and the death penalty.
Although the Parti socialiste destourien (PSD), Socialist Destour Party, was the only legal party, President Habib Bourguiba indicated at the opening of the PSD conference on 10 April 1981 that other political movements would be authorized during the year, provided that they were representative and complied with the constitution. The year was marked by a government policy of "liberalization" which included elections at the end of April 1981 for the leadership of the Union générale des travailleurs tunisiens (UGTT), General Union of Tunisian Workers, in which former prisoner of conscience Taieb Baccouche was elected Secretary General. More newspapers were authorized. However there were also periods of renewed unrest as strikes and student troubles continued in early 1981, resulting in some arrests.
On 18 November 1980 charges were dropped for lack of evidence against 12 trade unionists from Sousse by the State Security Court in Tunis. They were the last of a group of 101 defendants who appeared before the Sousse Criminal Court in July 1978, on various charges relating to the general strike of 26 January 1978. Chargés against 89 ofthe defendants were dropped in November 1978.
President Bourguiba granted several amnesties benefiting Amnesty International adopted prisoners of conscience and a considerable number of other political and non-political prisoners. While some of the amnesties were unconditional and without restrictions, others were conditional or partial, granting release from prison but not the restoration of all constitutionally guaranteed rights.
On 1 May 1980 four former members of the leadership of the
380
UGTT serving prison sentences of up to eight years were released. On 1 June eight members of the group	The Tunisian
Worker, and some associated with Ech-Chaab, The People, an underground version of the UGTT newspaper circulated in 1978, were freed. In July and August 1980 the remaining six members oiEl AmelEl Tounsi were released to mark the President's birthday. They were serving up to nine years' imprisonment. The only two members of the UGTT leadership remaining in prison were granted amnesty: Abderrazak Ghorbal, who had been sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment; and Salah B'rour, personal secretary to Habib Achour (former Secretary General of the UGTT), who was sentenced to six years' imprisonment at the same trial before the State Security Court in October 1978.
In February 1981 President Bourguiba granted an amnesty for members of the Mouvement d'unitepopulaire(M\JF), Movementfor Popular Unity, although none was inprison at the time. This amnesty reportedly extended to members of MUP tried in their absence and living abroad, with the sole exception of the leader of MUP, former cabinet minister Ahmed Ben Salah.
Many former prisoners of conscience have initially faced considerable restrictions after their release. These included restricted residence and being required to register every day at a local police station. In the majority of cases these restrictions have been gradually lifted.
In August 1980 former Minister of Foreign Affairs Mohamed Masmoudi, who had been the principal exponent of the union between Tunisia and Libya in 1974, was released from house arrest after more than two years. The release followed his hunger-strike in protest against the restrictions placed upon him and in support of his demand to be allowed to travel abroad.
Although no prisoners of conscience were known to be in prison at the end of the year, Habib Achour, former Secretary General of the UGTT, remained under strict house arrest and one of his sons was reportedly also placed under house arrest in March 1981. In a letter to President Bourguiba in November 1980 Amnesty International welcomed the release of prisoners of conscience and urged an unconditional amnesty for them to enable them to exercise fully their human rights, as guaranteed by the constitution and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, ratified by Tunisia in 1969. It urged that all conditions and restrictions be lifted at the earliest opportunity.
There have been occasional reports of torture and ill-treatment despite indications that the authorities intended to investigate the use of torture. In November 1980 Amnesty Intemational welcomed the
381
news that at least one former adopted prisoner of conscience who had been tortured during pre-trial detention had been sent abroad for medical treatment at the expense of the govemment. Amnesty Intemational urged the authorities to ensure medical treatment free of charge either within the country or abroad for all former prisoners of conscience whose health was impaired as a result of ill-treatment or prolonged imprisonment.
At the end of January 1981 two Tunisian newspapers reported the death of 24-year-old Jamel Zkir, allegedly as a result of torture and poor prison conditions. In appeals to President Bourguiba and to the Prime Minister, Mohamed M'zali, Amnesty International expressed concem at these reports, and urged an inquiry into the circumstances.
Tunisia retains the death penalty for a considerable number of political and non-political offences. During the year Amnesty International leamed of seven executions in June and November 1980 at Tunis Civil Prison. All those executed had been found guilty of murder. In Febmary 1981 Amnesty Intemational leamed that a 23-year-old Tunisian had been sentenced to death by the Tunis Criminal Court for murder. It appealed to President Bourguiba to commute this and any other death sentences on humanitarian grounds. He was executed on 22 April 1981.

