Honduras
During the year Amnesty International received an increasing number of reports of human rights violations, involving both Salva-dorian refugees and Honduran citizens, including arbitrary arrests, torture, kidnappings and killings, allegedly committed by both Salva-dorian and Honduran security forces and paramilitary groups.
The armed forces have been in power since a 1972" coup, and President General Pohcarpo Paz Garcia has ruled the country directly since a bloodless coup in 1978. Domestic and regional tensions threatened a planned return to civilian rule, and it was within this unsettled context that Amnesty International followed reports of human rights violations: including the forcible repatriation of Sal-vadorian refugees back into El Salvador with the aid of Honduran security units; joint Honduran-Salvadorian mihtary operations along the border to stop refugees entering Honduras; and the arrest, torture and extrajudicial execution of both Salvadorian refugees and Hon-durans, including political activists, trade unionists, campesinos (peasant farmers), religious workers, and Hondurans working with Salvadorian solidarity groups and refugee assistance committees. Reports have also been received that paramilitary squads have emerged and issued death lists.
Amnesty International was gravely concerned about reports that people trying to escape fighting in El Salvador and seek refuge in Honduras had been massacred During 1980 there were moves towards settlement of the long-standing border dispute between El Salvador and Honduras, and these moves coincided with reports that the security forces of the two countries had cooperated in preventing
162
refugees entering Honduras and in forcibly returning refugees. In May 1980 hundreds of refugees were reported killed at the Sumpul River during a joint operation by Honduran and Salvadorian troops (see El Salvador). Amnesty International directed appeals to both governments expressing alarm at the reports of the indiscriminate killings by security forces and members of the Salvadorian rural paramilitary group ORDEN and called for a full investigation into the incident.
In October appeals to the Honduran Constituent Assembly were renewed: Salvadorian church sources had reported that Honduras had closed its border to refugees fleeing counter-insurgency operations in Morazán, El Salvador, where napalm and white phosphorus were allegedly being used, and that refugees were being returned.
Similar reports continued to reach Amnesty International although foreign priests, doctors and representatives of international refugee organizations apparently managed to limit the death toll by helping refugees to safety and insisting that people taken into custody be produced alive at recognized detention centres. Eye-witness accounts of incidents in March and April 1981 indicated that although members of ORDEN could cross the border at will, peasants fleeing certain areas, particularly the Salvadorian province of Chalatenango, were killed on the spot
An unknown number of peasants died at the Rio Negro on 15 March in an unsuccessful bid to cross into Honduras; on 18 March two refugees were killed at the Rio Lempa by Salvadorian helicopters; and in mid-March 11 children were drowned, 15 reported missing and 22 others reportedly killed by the Honduran army on Honduran territory during another entry attempt by Salvadorian peasants. Twenty others were reported detained without charge, and the Honduran army was said to be limiting access to the area, interrogating and searching all those who attempted to enter, including representatives of refugee organizations. Some weeks earlier the Committee for Aid to Salvadorian Refugees in Honduras had alleged that women and children were being expelled from Honduras and pushed into the Rio Lempa on flimsy improvised rafts. The committee had also claimed that a joint military operation was being prepared in the region.
In early April 1981 Honduran troops were reported to have opened fire on a number of Salvadorians trying to enter Honduras near Ocotepeque. Those who were wounded but not killed were reportedly turned over to the Salvadorian National Guard. On 2 January 1981 Honduran troops near Mercedes, Ocotepeque, allegedly handed over a young refugee named Ernesto Hernández to members of a Salvadorian "death squad" who murdered him on Salvadorian territory. On 30 March 1981,17 Salvadorians were allegedly handed
163
over by Honduran troops to the SalvadorianNational Guard; all were presumed dead. In another incident, Honduran police allegedly forcibly entered the hospital at Santa Rosa de Copán, removed six gravely wounded Salvadorians from theirbeds, and turned them over to the Salvadorian army.
On 14 April 1981 Amnesty International expressed its grave concern to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (lACHR) and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) at reports of human rights violations of refugees from El Salvador seeking asylum in Honduras. It urged the lACHR to "take all measures to ensure full investigation into such incidents".
Earlier, on 19 August 1980, Amnesty International had written to the UNHCR to express its concern about the many thousands of Salvadorian citizens forced to flee their country and to ask the UNHCR to intervene with the governments of the region to urge them to protect these refugees. In particular it pointed out that more than 30,000 were estimated to have fled to Honduras, where they were not welcome.
On 26 February 1981 Amnesty International's testimony to the Committee on Migration, Refugees and Demography of the Council of Europe about Salvadorian refugees included reports of the alleged cooperation between Salvadorian and Honduran troops.
Those who have tried to help refugees have themselves suffered. Since local priests and the Honduran Bishops Council denounced the Sumpul River killings, residency permits for religious workers in the departments of Copán, Santa Bárbara and Ocotepeque have been inordinately delayed. A public communiqué accused all priests working in the Copán area of "international subversive connections", and the government announced that it was studying the possibility of expelling priests and nuns who had denounced the massacre.
In December two priests from Santa Bárbara and a seminarian, Antonio Bú, were accused of having murdered Dr René Perdomo Paredes. Antonio Bú and another seminarian were detained, interrogated and reportedly tortured. After the family of the dead man had spoken in their defence, they were released and the charges dropped. Fausto Milla, a priest working in Copan, was arrested on 13 February as he returned from a conference on Salvadorian refugees held in Mexico. He was charged with transferring money and arms to El Salvador, although most observers agreed that he was detained because he had denounced the massacre at the Sumpul River. Amnesty International joined many organizations in appealing on his behalf, and he was freed on 18 February. At the mass celebrating his release several participants were detained and questioned about priests working in Copán.
164
Amnesty Intemational appealed on behalf of Facundo Guardado Guardado, ÍQdátroíXiit Frente Democràtico Revolucionario (FDR), the Democratic Revolutionary Front, arrested on 18 January 1981 after visiting Salvadorian refugee camps on the border. Former Secretary General of the Bloque Popular Revolucionario (BPR), the Popular Revolutionary Bloc, Guardado had earlier been arrested in El Salvador in May 1979 at which time Amnesty Intemational had similarly appealed on his behalf. The Salvadorian authorities had initially denied his arrest, but they eventually released him after an intemational campaign. After his arrest in January 1981 in Honduras, Guardado was reportedly seen in detention, and had allegedly been tortured, but the authorities repeatedly denied that he had been detained. A little-known guerrilla group hijacked a Honduran airliner on 17 March 1981 and demanded the release of 15 political prisoners, including Guardado, in exchange for the passengers' lives. Ten prisoners were freed by the Honduran government, including Guardado, wiio reportedly took refuge inPanama. His brother Sixto Francisco and his sister Teresa de Jesús and her child, who were living in exile in Honduras, were arrested. Earlier, another brother, José Antonio, had also been arrested. Their detention has been denied by the Honduran authorities and despite Amnesty Intemational's appeals there has been no further information about them.
As the pace of agrarian reform has slowed in recent months, there have been confrontations between the authorities and Honduran campesino organizations. Trouble flared once again at the Isletas banana cooperative, where controversy has been raging since 1974. There have been reports of: death lists threatening the cooperative leaders; their harassment by the secret police; their periodic detention; and isolated incidents of torture. In January 1981 reports indicated that the army had once again imposed its own leadership upon the cooperative and militarized the zone.
On 21 January 1981 Amnesty Intemational appealed on behalf of Felipe Viera, leader of a cooperative in Lean in the department of Atlantida, arrested on 10 January by the National Investigation Department, and taken to the army barracks in Tela. Friends who inquired there were told that he had been transferred to an army military base at Tamara, 45 kilometres north of the capital, Tegucigalpa. In response to Amnesty Intemational inquiries, the Commander General of the Armed Forces, Colonel Gustavo Adolfo Albávez Martínez, denied Viera's detention and stated that he had been seen alive at the beginning of Febmary 1981.
Two policemen were killed who had been involved in the 1975 Olancho incident, when seven leaders of the National Union of Campesinos and two priests were murdered. In February 1978, after
165
an extended trial, two army officers were convicted of the murders. Eight others, including one of Olancho's largest land-owners on whose property the incident occurred, were acquitted. The two convicted men were later released before they had served their sentences. In February 1981 one was "killed while trying to escape", together with another former officer connected with the case. Reports suggest that they had been silenced to prevent them revealing information about other soldiers involved in the Olancho killings.
In March 1979 Amnesty International had appealed on behalf of 150 striking trade unionists including Tomas Nativi, who had reportedly been detained after a fire at the Bemis Handal textile factory in San Pedro. In and out of detention on several occasions since then, Tomas Nativi alleged that while in custody in December 1980 he had been tortured in a variety of ways including beatings, poisoning and simulated executions; he was left with swelling in his chest, stomach and arms, nerve damage to his hands, broken ribs, multiple bruising and internal injuries to his spleen and liver.
