Israel and the
	
	
	
	
Occupied Territories
Amnesty International's concerns in Israel and the Occupied Territories were the arrest and conviction of prisoners of conscience, including conscientious objectors to military service; the use of administrative measures to physically restrict individuals and to detain them without trial; the secrecy of certain military trials; the lack of effective safeguards to protect those in custody from ill-treatment; and the use of excessive force by security forces to quell pubhc disturbances. Israel retains the death penalty; however it is not mandatory and no death sentences were passed during the year.
In September 1980 Amnesty Intemational "pnhììshQà Report and Recommendations of an Amnesty Intemational Mission to the Government of the State of Israel This concentrated on the lack of administrative and legal safeguards for security suspects — individuals detained on suspicion of threatening the security of the state. This publication included the government's response to the mission report and Amnesty International's comments.
During the year Amnesty Intemational worked on behalf of 25 prisoners who had been tried and convicted of security offences: seven of these were adopted as prisoners of conscience and 18 cases were being investigated.
Security offences are specified in the Defence (Emergency) Regulations (DER) promulgated by the British in 1945 for the whole of Palestine and still valid for both Israel and the Occupied Territories, except where superseded by more recent legislation, and in the more than 800 orders issued by the Regional Commander of the West Bank since 1967. They include a wide range of acts, some of which may involve the use or advocacy of violence. However Amnesty International believes that the regulations and orders, as interpreted and applied by military courts, have led to some individuals being sentenced to prison terms for acts which were expressions of p>olitical belief and did not involve the use or advocacy of violence. In one such case Amnesty International adopted as a prisoner of conscience Ahmed Abu Ayish, a 19-year-old resident of Halhoul (West Bank), who was arrested with two other teenagers on 18 December 1979 after a mock funeral procession to commemorate the death of an official of the Palestine Liberation Organization who had been a native of the town. Ahmed Abu Ayish was charged before the
363 	
Military Court at Hebron with activity against public order and participating in a procession without a licence, but was not specifically charged with advocating or using violence. He was sentenced to two years' imprisonment and an additional two years' suspended sentence, and was held in Hebron prison.
Amnesty Intemational noted with concern the amendment of the Prevention of Terrorism Ordinance in July 1980 making public expression of sympathy for illegal organizations by means of placards, slogans, flags or anthems an offence punishable by up to three years' imprisonment. Amnesty Intemational believes that applying such a law might create prisoners of conscience and noted that opponents of the bill asserted during debate that "it was designed to stifle legitimate expression of opinion" {Jerusalem Post, 29 July 1980).
Amnesty Intemational adopted as a prisoner of conscience Gadi Elgazi, a member of a group of 27 Israeli high school students who had sent an open letter to the Minister of Defence in July 1979 stating that they would refuse military service in the Occupied Territories.
Gadi Elgazi was arrested in June 1980 after refusing to serve at an army base in the West Bank. He applied to the Israeli High Court of Justice to force the army to allow him, for reasons of conscience, to serve only within Israel's pre-1967 borders. In September 1980 this was rejected and on 6 January 1981 GadiElgazi was sentenced bythe Southern District Military Court to one year's imprisonment. Two months later, in March 1981, after having spent more than six months in prison, Gadi Elgazi was released following the commutation of his sentence. He was later discharged without penalty from the Israeli Defence Forces.
Amnesty Intemational continued to work on behalf of individuals who were imprisoned or physically restricted in their movements under administrative orders. In January 1980 the law goveming administrative detention in the Occupied Territories was amended by Military Order No. 815. This provides for some judicial review, allows the detainee the right of appeal to the President of the Military Courts and limits the duration of each order to six months, after which a new order must be issued. However, the principle of detention without charge or trial is maintained and at no stage need the detainee or lawyer be informed of the reason for detention nor of the evidence against the detainee. During the year Amnesty Intemational worked on behalf of 10 administrative detainees, of whom the longest held was Ali Awad Jamal, detained since May 1975.
Amnesty Intemational began work on a number of cases of people whose movement was restricted by administrative order, although they were not imprisoned. Such orders do not give the restricted person details of the charges nor the right to refute evidence. They are
364 	
issued by the military authorities under Article 110 of the DER in Israel and under Article 86 of Security Provisions Order 378 for the Occupied Territories. The restrictions include house arrest, "banning", hmits to travel, restricted residence and the requirement to fulfil official formalities such as periodic registering.
Amnesty International learned of more than 30 Arabs from both Israel and the Occupied Territories who were subjected to restriction orders. Three were editors of important East Jerusalem publications: Bashir Barghouti of Al-Tali'a, Ma'mun Al-Sayyid of Al-Fajr and Akram Haniyyeh oïAl-Sha'ab. They were placed under town arrest on 7 August 1980 and were still under this restriction at the end of April 1981. The restriction orders made it impossible for them to carry out their journalistic work. Two others, Ibrahim Nassar and Walid Fahoum, were lawyers who often represented Palestinian prisoners in the Occupied Territories. They were issued with administrative orders prohibiting them from entering the West Bank and making it difficult, if not impossible, to represent many of their West Bank clients. Ibrahim Nassar was also placed under house arrest by administrative order on 5 July 1980, and was still under house arrest at the end of the year.
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about the secrecy imposed on certain military trials in both the West Bank and, under the DER, in Israel proper. In particular it noted with concern the arrest of approximately 60 Israeli Arabs in early 1981, and the strict military censorship surrounding the case: the Jerusalem newspaper Al-Quds was suspended for five days after revealing certain details. At least four people were sentenced in a secret trial before a military tribunal to up to 20 months in prison. Amnesty International sought further information on these and related cases. Amnesty International also noted the release, in December 1980, of two Germans whose cases it had been investigating. Thomas Reuter and Brigitte Schultz had both been formally charged and tried before a secret military tribunal, beginning in December 1976, and few details have been made public by the Israeli authorities. Three Arabs who were arrested with them in January 1976 and were sentenced to 18-year prison terms remained in prison.
Amnesty International was concerned by reports that Israeli security forces were using unnecessarily harsh methods to quell public disturbances and were ill-treating people in custody. Reports reached Amnesty International that in November 1980 at least nine students were shot and injured by the Israeli Defence Forces in the West Bank towns of Bethlehem and Ramallah, as the army attempted to disperse demonstrators supporting Palestine Week and protesting against the closure of Bir Zeit university. There were also numerous
365
allegations of police and army brutality and, in one instance at least, an offending official was punished: on 9 September 1980 the High Court of Justice upheld a two-year prison sentence on an Israeli poHce sergeant convicted of brutally beating a man from Hebron (West Bank) to extract a confession.
Amnesty International was concerned at the death in July 1980 of two hunger-strikers in Nafha prison after reports that they had been forcibly fed. In a message to Prime Minister Begin it urged that "all necessary steps to be taken to prevent such occurences and that a full public explanation be given of the methods utilized and the circumstances leading to the deaths". A special committee appointed by the Minister of the Interior to investigate the deaths of Ali Jafri and Muhamed Halwa reached the following conclusions:
"As to the circumstances of the death of the two prisoners, the committee stated [for Ali Jafri: ]... the findings indicate that the cause of death was 'aspiration pneumonia' but since it was proven that the prisoner was not force-fed, the committee stated that the pneumonia was caused by aspiration of stomach liquids into the lungs.
As to Muhamed Halwa, the committee stated that the prisoner was force-fed through a tube and his death was caused by 'aspiration pneumonia', due to aspiration of gastric acid and food from the stomach to the lungs. There exists a reasonable possibility that as a result of his general condition a certain amount of food entered his lungs due to a misinsertion of the tube.... The committee stated that all actions taken were carried out according to the prevailing orders and procedures."
However this failed to satisfy nine inmates of Nafha prison or Fatma Jafri, sister of one of the dead hunger-strikers. In March 1981 they appUed to the Israeli Supreme Court for the suspension and trial of several prison and medical staff they accused of responsibility for the deaths of the hunger-strikers. In March 1981 the Israeli police were reported to be opening files on these individuals to investigate their role in the deaths
In September 1980 Amnesty International published Report and Recommendations of an Amnesty International Mission to the Government of the State of Israel which included a reply from Israel's Attorney General and Amnesty International's comments. The report concentrated on administrative and legal safeguards, applying to security suspects in custody in the Occupied Territories, and found these safeguards to be inadequate, "[enhancing] the possibility that the basic rights of prisoners may be routinely violated". {Stt Amnesty International Report 1980. )

366
Amnesty Intemational therefore recommend that: "a public and impartial committee of inquiry should be established to investigate the allegations of ill-treatment in their totality and the administrative and legal procedures and practices relevant to the arrest, confinement, interrogation and trial of security suspects. The committee's findings, conclusions and recommendations should be made public."
The publication included a reply from the Attomey General on behalf of the authorities which rejected the conclusions and recommendations.
As the report was being published Amnesty Intemational received a document from Acting Attomey General Gabay which reiterated many of the points in the earlier reply. Amnesty International wishes to draw attention to an error in its report that was addressed by the Acting Attomey General. It is not tme that: "one important limitation to the free choice of defence counsel [in the Occupied Territories is that]: in situations where the court has determined that the security interests of the state require the military trial to be held in secret, the defendant must select legal counsel from among those on a specially approved list" (page 31). This limitation does not obtain in the Occupied Territories and is only relevant to military trials held in Israel proper.
In this document the Acting Attomey General emphasized that: "Israel makes every effort, under the most difficult circumstances to safeguard the human rights of the security detainees in the areas under her administration ... the Israeli authorities responsible for the administration of justice, conduct an ongoing review of the treatment of security detainees and will continue to ensure that their civil rights are duly respected... we are of the opinion that nothing is to be gained by having the sort of committee of inquiry proposed."
In January 1981 the Knesset (parliament) State Control Committee announced that it would begin an examination of police detention and interrogation procedures, and that the Knesset Interior Committee and the Law Committee had decided to form a joint panel to examine these matters. These developments followed a report by the State Comptroller that police officers had been lax in their required supervision of detentions and interrogations.
On 1 April the Knesset passed a govemment-sponsored amendment to the Criminal Procedure Law, relating to the rights of suspects in police custody. A suspect "has the right to remain silent during interrogations, but police do not have to tell him of that right after he is brought to the sizûon" {Jerusalem Post, 3April 1981). The amendment, which applies to Israel but not to the Occupied Territories, also enables the detainee to notify a lawyer and relatives of the place of detention, immediately after arrest. This may be delayed by up to
367
48 houre on the authority of a senior officer, and by up to 21 days in cases of terrorism and espionage. Under the amendment an arrested person may apply for financial compensation and defence costs in cases of unjustified arrest.
