Pakistan
r^ ^^ ^ J)
i^fi^i	The concerns of Amnesty Inter-
^^ ,, 1 '	national continued to be the wide
powers of arrest and detention without legal safeguards which were used to detain many hundreds of prisoners of conscience and the trial of political prisoners by military tribunals applying summary procedures without the right of defence by a lawyer or the right of appeal. Amnesty International was concerned about incommunicado detention, police brutality during interrogation, and the deaths of several prisoners, including two political prisoners, in police custody allegedly as a result of torture. The practice of flogging people for non-violerit political activity was resumed. Amnesty International remained deeply concerned by the large number of executions, many following sentences by military courts applying summary procedures without the right ^f appeal.
Under martial law, political parties were dissolved and all p>oliticai and trade union activity banned. Strict censorship was enforced and since October 1979 elections have been indefinitely postponed.
On 27 May 1980 President Zia-ul-Haq issued Presidential Order No. 21 of 1980 amending Article 199 of the constitution. The Presidential Order prohibited the High Courts and the Supreme Court
245	
from reviewing the legality of martial law orders and regulations adopted by the government, and from reviewing the legality of martial law itself. The High Courts were no longer allowed to hear any petitions from political prisoners challenging the legality of their detention, or their trial or conviction by a military court. The government simultaneously issued two martial law orders. Martial Law Order No. 77 extended the jurisdiction of the military courts at the expense of the civilian courts by empowering military courts to try cases oftreason, subversion, sedition, sabotage, prejudicial activity and seducing members of the armed forces". Martial Law Order No. 78 incorporated the provisions of Martial Law Order No. 12, permitting prisoners to be detained without trial for a maximum of 12 months, but removed the existing right to be informed of the grounds of detention.
Amnesty International cabled President Zia-ul-Haq on 30 May 1980 to express its concern about these constitutional and legal changes saying it believed they were a "further serious departure from the rule of law in Pakistan". It urged the government to repeal the legislation, to restore the supervisory jurisdiction of the civilian courts and to release all prisoners of conscience. Despite the constitutional amendments the High Courts continued to hear some petitions from political prisoners, set aside several sentences of floggings imposed by military courts and stayed the executions of several civilian prisoners sentenced to death by military tribunals.
On 24 March 1981 the President promulgated the Provisional Constitutional Order 1981. It effectively annulled the 1973 constitution, seriously impaired the independence of the judiciary, and gave the President power to change the constitution at will. The order reaffirmed the May 1 ^80 constitutional amendments and required all High and Supreme Court judges to take an oath to uphold the new constitutional order. The Chief Justice of Pakistan, two Supreme Court judges and at least nine High Court judges refused to take the oath. The government did not allow several High Courtjudges to take the oath, effectively removing them. The March 1981 order removed the remaining legal safeguards protecting the basic human rights of political prisoners.
On 19 June 1980, 80 lawyers were arrested in Lahore for taking part in a demonstration calling upon the government to hold elections and to withdraw the May 1980 constitutional and martial law amendments. Ten lawyers were among 12 people arrested in Karachi on 22 August 1980, under martial law provisions banning all political activity, for organizing a procession " urging the government to restore the constitution and the rights guaranteed by it". Although the lawyers were released shortiy after their arrest, many other prisoners
246	
of conscience faced detention without trial or trial by military courts under martial law provisions prohibiting all political activity (in particular Martial Law Regulations 13 and 33). Many leaders of political parties, including Begum Bhutto and Benazir Bhutto of the Pakistan People's Party (PPP) and Air Marshal Asghar Khan of the centrist party Tehrik-i-Istiqlal, were rearrested during the year. In early August 1980 the government arrested more leaders of the PPP and the Tehrik-i-Istiqlal under the provisions of Martial Law Order No. 78. During the summer students and trade union officials were arrested under the same order. Charges included the writing and distributing of political pamphlets, prohibited under martial law.
Amnesty International wrote to President Zia-ul-Haq on 26 September 1980 urging the government to release all prisoners of conscience, to abolish the practice of detaining political prisoners without trial and of trying political prisoners before military courts applying summary procedures.
Political arrests continued and their number increased sharply during the first months of 1981. In the first week of January some 40 people, many of them students, were arrested in Karachi in connection with plans to observe the birthday of former Prime Minister Bhutto. On 3 January 1981 Irshad Rao, the editor of the pro-PPP paper Fatah, was arrested together with five other journalists. The police said they had discovered a "clandestine publication group" which was "printing and publishing anti-state subversive literature".
Also arrested during the first weeks of January were a number of rank and file members of the PPP, allegedly on suspicion of "passing secrets to a foreign country". The government later said that the arrests had been made under the Army Act. Several of those arrested were reportedly taken to Attock Fort, where they were held incommunicado for up to six weeks without being told the grounds for their arrest.
Between 16 and 26 February 1981 more than 200 people were arrested in Multan and Lahore after the formation on 6 February 1981 of the Movement for the Restoration of Democracy, a nine-party alliance of all the major opposition parties, including the PPP, the Tehrik-i-Istiqlal, the Pakistan Democratic Party, the pro-Islamic Jamiat Ulema Islam and the Muslim League. The government arrested nearly all its leaders and officers, as well as members and sympathizers. They included students supporting the movement's demands for the immediate lifting of martial law and the resignation of the government until the establishment of a civilian government to supervise elections.
Amnesty International cabled President Zia-ul-Haq on 26 February 1981 to express its concern at the arrests of approximately 100
247	
leading members of opposition parties, and urged the government to release them and others arrested on 16 February.
On 2 March 1981 a Pakistan International Airlines plane was hijacked. The hijackers demanded the release of political prisoners in Pakistan, and 54 political prisoners were released on 15 March 1981. According to press reports, the hijacking was carried out by the Al Zulfikar organization, which the government claimed later to be the armed wing of the PPP, but without providing any evidence. In the weeks after the hijacking hundreds of PPP members and sympathizers were arrested throughout the country. Amnesty International has estimated that by mid-March 1981 at least 1,000 political prisoners were added to the several hundred already held at the beginning of 1981, and numerous arrests continued to be reported of members of all major opposition parties.
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about the procedures under which political prisoners were tried by military courts. Summary military courts do not allow defence lawyers at the trial, and there is no appeal. Hundreds of political prisoners have been tried by such courts during the year under the provisions of Martial Law Regulations 4, 15, 18, and in particular 13 and 33, for participating in demonstrations, for possessing political literature, and for organizing or attending political meetings. They were sentenced to terms of imprisonment of up to one year. About 60 have been adopted as prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty International was concerned at several reports that political prisoners had been tried in camera. On 5 March 1981 Amnesty Intemational cabled the Minister of Home Affairs, Mahmoud A. Haroon, and the Home Secretary for the Sindh province to express concern about reports that Jam Saqi, Badar Abroo, Shabir Shah, Jamal Naqvi, Kamal Warsi and Amar Lai were being tried by a special mihtary court in Karachi Central Jail. After their arrest the government had announced on 29 August 1980 that it had discovered "a secret cell working underground... producing and disseminating clandestine subversive literature calculated to erode the ideological foundations of Pakistan . . .", but did not publish specific charges. Amnesty Intemational urged the government to allow all the accused a lawyer of their choice, to transfer the trial to an open court, and to give full rights of appeal as guaranteed in the constitution. Amnesty International has taken up these cases for investigation.
In its letter of 26 September 1980 Amnesty Intemational expressed its deep concern about reports that at least five prisoners had been tortured and died in police custody in the 12 months from November 1979. Nazir Abbasi, President of the Sind National Students Federation, reportedly died in custody in Karachi on 9
248	
August 1980, 11 days after arrest Family members alleged that Nazir Abbasi had died as a result of torture, and said they had seen wounds on his body when they received it for burial. On 13 August 1980 Amnesty Intemational urged President Zia-ul-Haq to order an independent inquiry, and to publish its findings in full. The government has instituted formal inquiries into only three of these five deaths, one of them being a judicial inquiry. On 26 September 1980 Amnesty International urged the govemment to establish judicial inquiries into all five cases, to publish the findings in full and to investigate fully the record and conduct of police officials against whom there was evidence of involvement in such practices. Amnesty International also urged the government to review police training methods and said that the inclusion of the United Nations Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials in police training would be an important step towards preventing torture.
In its letter of 26 September 1980 to President Zia-ul-Haq Amnesty Intemational urged the immediate abolition of floggings and amputations saying it considered them "cmel and inhuman" punishments and as such prohibited under international law. During the first seven months of 1980 summary military courts ordered the flogging of at least 76 people convicted on criminal charges. The sentences ranged from three to 15 lashes each. Amnesty International was glad to note that although several people were sentenced to have their hands amputated the punishment had not been carried out as far as Amnesty Intemational was aware. During the year Amnesty International launched urgent appeals on behalf of Mohammed Dutta, Lateef Ullah, Ghulam Ullah, Hussain Mahesar and Ali Asghar, who were sentenced to amputation, and expressed concem that flogging was still often being imposed by summary military courts and Shari'a (Islamic law) courts for offences including political offences. There has been a sharp increase in the incidence of flogging for political offences since the beginning of 1981.
Amnesty Intemational's letter of 26 September 1980 was released to the press on 3 November 1980, and during the following months Amnesty Intemational members throughout the world wrote to the govemment urging it to take immediate steps to halt torture, floggings and executions in Pakistan, and to release all prisoners of conscience. Amnesty Intemational did not receive a direct reply to its letter. However in a public response to the publication of the letter on 3 November 1980, the government was quoted on 6 November as saying that "there were only two political detainees in Pakistan". It denied reports that five prisoners had died during the year in police custody as a result of torture. It said all five men had died "by natural causes" {Dawn, 7 November 1980). It specified that Nazir Abbasi
249	
(who was 25 years old at the time of his death and had no known medical history of heart disease) had died of a "heart attack". The govemment said this was the conclusion of a report drawn up by a medical board, but it did not release the text On 10 October 1980 Amnesty Intemational cabled the President to deplore a report that another political prisoner, trade union leader Inayat Masih, had died in hospital on 6 September while in custody. It urged the government to establish an independent inquiry.
On 13 April 1981 Amnesty Intemational cabled the Minister of the Interior to express concem about reports that two members of the PPP, lawyer Qamar Abbas and former Attomey General Yahya Bakhtiar, who had been sentenced to five years' imprisonment by a special court on charges of election-rigging in Quetta constituency, had been assaulted in police custody in Peshawar and Quetta jail respectively. Amnesty International urged the government to provide fìlli medical treatment immediately, to conduct a public inquiry into both incidents and to take appropriate measures to establish responsibility.
The number of executions continued to be of profound concem. Among those sentenced to death were civilians convicted by special military courts against whose verdict there was no appeal, although executions had to be confirmed by the Chief Martini Law Administrator, President Zia-ul-Haq. Statistics given by the govemment to the United Nations on the period to 1978 confirmed a rise in the number of executions in Pakistan since martial law. A man was sentenced by a special miUtary court in Faisalabad on 13 July 1980 to be executed in public; and on 9 April 1981 two men were executed in Kot Lakhpat jail, Lahore, after being convicted of murder by a special military court One of the accused, Wajid, was 18 years old at the time of his hanging. Throughout the year Amnesty International appealed for clemency for 18 civilians sentenced to death by military courts, nearly all without being allowed to appeal. In its September 1980 letter Amnesty Intemational had appealed to the President to commute all death sentences as a step towards abolishing the death penalty. Amnesty Intemational does not know of a single case in which the President granted clemency out of the hundreds of prisoners who have been sentenced to death since the military govemment took power in June 1977.
250_
