Madagascar
Amnesty International's main concerns were the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, prolonged pre-trial detention, torture and harsh prison conditions.
The cases of three long-term detainees were being investigated by Amnesty International: Richard Andriamaholison and Marson Rakotonirina, both senior police officers; and Jean-Astier Rakoto-Abel, an army officer. They were arrested in October 1977 and eventually charged with endangering or plotting against state security. They were still being held in pre-trial detention at the end of April 1981, although the 20-month maximum period of such detention permitted by Malagasy law had been exceeded. The authorities have failed either to acknowledge or respond to Amnesty International's repeated requests for the reasons for their continued detention without trial. There was particular concern about Richard Andriamaholison, who was reportedly seriously ill in Manjakandriana prison in April 1981. Amnesty Intemational medical groups" appealed to the authorities to allow him füll access to qualified medical treatment, if necessary in hospital.
On 30 November 1980 Monja Jaona, the 70-year-old President of the Mouvement national pour l'indépendance de Madagascar (MONIMA), the National Independence Movement of Madagascar, was placed under house arrest {assignation à résidence ßxe) in a remote army camp near Ihosy, 600 kilometres from the capital, Antananarivo. This followed demonstrations in Toliary by MONIMA supporters. Amnesty International appealed for his release if he was not to be charged, and for access to his relatives, doctor and lawyer, but no response was received. Amnesty International later issued an urgent appeal calling for his unconditional release as a prisoner of conscience. He was released in March 1981, after agreeing to reintegrate MONIMA into the ruling National Front for the Defence of the Malagasy Socialist Revolution.
More people were arrested after demonstrations in Antananarivo on 3 February 1981 by students protesting about academic issues and demanding the release of Monja Jaona. At least six people were killed in the ensuing rioting. Four members of the Union of Teachers and Researchers in Higher Education, who had been involved in a strike committee coordinating university protests since the previous November, were detained. They included Professor Randriamampandry, Dean of the Faculty of Medicine and President of the Malagasy
58
Human Rights Committee (which had been active on behalf of political prisoners in 1971 and 1972); Dovo Rabetsitonta, a lecturer and senior MONIMA party official; Régis Rakotonirina, a research technician and MONIMA official; and Herimanana Razafimahefa, a student leader. The strike committee was accused of instigating the rioting, and charges of endangering state security and criminal association were brought against the four detainees and other strike committee members sought by the police. Professor Randriamampandry was arrested without legal formalities and detained incommunicado beyond the 12-day maximum permitted period of detention without charge. Régis Rakotonirina "disappeared" after abduction by unidentified government agents. About a month later however he was taken to hospital and then prison, having been severely ill-treated. Amnesty International issued an urgent appeal on behalf of the four detained strike committee members on 25 February 1981, and later adopted them as prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty International made further inquiries about the delays in bringing certain prisoners charged with serious security offences to trial. Valev Dimitrov, a refugee from Bulgaria, and Milan Knezic, a refugee from Yugoslavia, had been detained since 1978. In another case, Walter Markl, an Austrian architect, and Roland Lachman and Constantin Centziedes, citizens of the Federal Repubhc of Germany, had been arrested in September 1979. Their trials took place in December 1980, and the security charges were all dismissed. The two refugees were sentenced to one and three years' imprisonment for illegal entry, while the other three were acquitted.
Valev Dimitrov alleged after his release that he had been tortured in the security police headquarters. Direction générale d'invest^ation et de documentation (DGID), during the first five months of his detention, by means of systematic beatings on the body and feet, electric shocks, simulated execution, and frequent denials of food. He alleged that Milan Knezic had also been tortured in this way, and that both had attempted to commit suicide. Towards the end of his detention he was held in several different prisons where there was severe overcrowding, poor hygiene and diet, inadequate medical attention, and frequent ill-treatment of prisoners. Dave Marais, a South African, was allegedly also ill-treated in the security police headquarters and was still being held there incommunicado in poor health in early 1981. He and another South African, John Wight, were arrested in 1978 and sentenced later that year by a military tribunal to five years' imprisonment for illegal entry.
59
