Spain
Amnesty Intemational's main concern was the ill-treatment and torture of people detained under the anti-terrorist laws. Legal and political changes took place during ^e year which affected himian rights in Spain. The armed confrontations between extremist forces of left and right, of autonomists and the police and the Guardia Civil (paramilitary police force) intensified in the past year, especially in the Basque country. On 24 March 1981 the armed forces were given an operational anti-terrorist role for the first time.
Prime Minister Adolfo Suarez, who had been in office since July 1976, resigned in February 1981. Major legislation, including a new constitution in 1978, was passed during his term of office. This new legislation was largely responsible for the improved human rights situation following the deaA of General Franco in November 1975. Leopoldo Calvo Sotelo became Prime Minister on 25 February 1981. Elements of the army and Guardia Civil attempted a coup on 23 February 1981 during the parliamentary debate about his
318 	
nomination. During the coup attempt rebel Civil Guards under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel Antonio Tejero Molina held members of the Cortes (parliament) prisoner at gunpoint At the end of April 1981, an inquiry was taking place with a view to legal action against those responsible and Lieutenant-Colonel Tejero and other senior officers were in detention.
The chief legislative tools in combating the political violence were the powers of arrest and detention under the anti-terrorist laws (Law 56/1978 of 4 December 1978 and Royal Decree-Law 3/1979 of 26 January 1979). Under these laws the police can detain not only members of armed groups, but also people who publicly defend their activities or even associate with their members.
The detainee may be held incommunicado for interrogation in a police station, initially for three days, and for another seven days after extension by a magistrate of the Audiencia Nacional (National Court). Lawyers were generally denied access to detainees during the 10 days of incommunicado detention, in contravention of the right to legal assistance guaranteed in Article 17(3) of the constitution. Effective judicial supervision is lacking. Amnesty Intemational considers these conditions conducive to ill-treatment and torture. Evidence collected during an Amnesty Intemational mission in October 1979 supported this view, and allegations of ill-treatment and torture of people held under the an ti-terrorist laws were still being received regularly at the end of April 1981.
In September 1980 Amnesty International presented its Report of an Amnesty Intemational Mission to Spain, 3-28 October 1979 to the govemment and invited its comments. The report was published in December 1980. No reply has been received. The mission delegates, who included two doctors, had interviewed 14 people who had been held under the anti-terrorist laws in Madrid, Barcelona and Bilbao. All had been held incommunicado for up to 10 days and subjected to exhausting interrogations and beatings, mock executions, electric shocks and other forms of ill-treatment and torture. The report contains details of the legislation then in force, of the cases examined, and the recommendations of the mission.
The recommendations, which were consistent with the human rights guarantees of the 1978 constitution, called for the abolition of 10-day incommunicado detention; access to lawyers for suspects detained for interrogation; and the introduction of habeas corpus legislation provided under the constitution. It recommended that judicial control over the interrogations should be strengthened, and that public prosecutors should intervene to protect the rights of detainees as well as take legal action against offenders. It recommended a system of recorded medical examinations for detainees
319 	
after arrest and immediately before transfer from police custody, with a provision for intermediate examinations, and a legal right for detainees to see independent doctors.
The report condemned political murder by armed groups and said that Amnesty International opposed arbitrary arrest and detention as a violation of fundamental human rights, regardless of whether such acts were committed by governments or opposition groups. Amnesty International appealed publicly for the release on humanitarian grounds of José Maria Ryan, an engineer at the Lemoniz nuclear power station in the Basque country, who had been kidnapped by Euskadi Ta Askatasuna-Militar (ETA-m), Basque Homeland and Liberty, an autonomist group. José Maria Ryan was murdered and his dead body found on 6 February 1981. On the night of 19 February 1981 the three Honorary Consuls of Austria, El Salvador and Uruguay were kidnapped by ETA Politico-militar, another Basque autonomist group. On 25 February 1981 Amnesty International appealed for their release on humanitarian grounds. They were released unharmed on 28 February 1981.
The anti-terrorist laws on arrest and detention were introduced as an interim measure until a new penal code and code of penal procedure were adopted. Law 56/1978 laid dowi^the type of suspects who could be held and the procedures which should be adopted. Royal Decree-Law 3/1979 widened the range of offences for which suspects could be held. On 1 December 1980 Law 56/1978 was replaced by a new Organic Law 11/1980, which retained the powers under Law 56/1978 and also suspended three important constitutional rights. Article 55.2 of the constitution allows certain guaranteed rights to be suspended for the purpose of investigating armed groups and terrorists. Royal Decree-Law 3/1979 remains in force and complements Organic Law 11/1980. It did not however suspend the constitutional right to legal assistance which is continually denied by police to people held incommunicado for interrogation under the anti-terrorist laws. None of the criticisms of Law 56/1978 made by Amnesty International in its report have been answered by its replacement with Organic Law 11/1980.
The possible consequences of allowing unsupervised incommunicado detention for up to 10 days were illustrated by the death in custody on 13 February 1981 of José Arregui Izaguirre. He and a companion, Isidro Echave Urrestrilla, allegedly members of ETA-m, were captured in Madrid after a gun battle with members of the police and Civil Guard. They were held incommunicado for nine days before they were transferred to hospital where Arregui died. A post-mortem examination revealed injuries to his lungs, bums on his feet, bruises to his body, eye injuries and severe intemal bleeding. The immediate
320 	
cause of death was certified as pneumonia. Isidro Echave, who was shot and had a bullet in his shoulder, was only operated on several days after his removal from the police station and he had been badly tortured. A screw-driver had reportedly been manipulated in the gun-wound.
More and more people have been detained under the new anti-terrorist law. Since its introduction in December 1980, 815 people have been arrested and held under the two an ti-terrorist laws 11/1980 and 3/1979. According to official statistics from the Minister of the Interior, 319 people were held in the same period last year. Amnesty International was concerned by the scale of these arrests, especially as most of the detainees were later released without charge.
On 10 October 1980 the trial began in the Audiencia Nacional in Madrid of José Orive Velez, on charges of abduction, attempted damage and illegal possession of arms and explosives. José Orive was interviewed by the Amnesty International mission, and details of his ill-treatment and torture were published in the report. He had been provisionally at liberty since the court released him in June 1979. Amnesty Intemational sent an observer to his trial. The trial observer drew attention to, among other things, the fact that José Orive's complaint of torture while held incommunicado of 25 May 1979 had not been judicially investigated; and to the delay of nearly 20 months in bringing the case to trial. He also reported the negligence of the prosecution in failing to take account of the fact that José Orive was a minor until nearly the end of the trial and the inclusion in the summary ofthe two charges of attempted damage and possession of arms and explosives which were not based on substantial evidence. José Orive was found guilty of abduction and sentenced to four years and five days' imprisonment. He was acquitted on the other two charges. The trial observer believed that, in spite of the criticisms mentioned above, the trial had not been conducted unfairly and that, in the face of the evidence, the court could reasonably find as it did.
The trial of civilians before military courts, used to restrict freedom of expression, has long been a concern of Amnesty Intemational. On 22 November 1980 a reform of the Code of Military Justice removed the powers of military courts to try civilians for offences such as damaging or insulting the army and a number of well-known cases were then quashed by civilian courts.
On 11 November 1980 the government announced its intention of ratifying Article 25 of the European Convention on Human Rights for an initial period of two years, beginning on I July 1981. This will permit individual applications to the European Commission on Human Rights.
321 	
