Iraq
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about widespread arrests and imprisormient on political grounds, and the lack of legal safeguards in trials of political prisoners by revolutionary and special courts. It was also concerned about the use of torture to extract confessions during interrogation, and about the many executions during the year. On 12 June 1980 Amnesty International launched an intemational campaign to persuade the Iraqi authorities to halt their frequent use of the death penalty, and to reduce the large number of offences, many political and some non-violent, which carry the death penalty. On 29 April 1981 Amnesty International published Iraq: Evidence of Torture.
During the year Amnesty International worked on behalf of 37 prisoners whose cases were being investigated. These included 31 former govemment officials of the mlingBa'ath Party, arrested in July 1979, and serving sentences of up to 15 years' imprisonment in Abu Ghraib prison in Baghdad. They were convicted of being party to, or withholding information about, a conspiracy against the govemment allegedly uncovered in mid-July 1979. Reports reached Amnesty Intemational that one prisoner from this group, Murthadha Abdul Baqi al Hadithi, sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment, died in prison in mid-June 1980. Unofficial sources claimed that he died from "unnatural causes" but Amnesty Intemational has been unable to verify this.
Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about two members of the Iraqi Communist Party (ICP), Dr Safa al-Hafidh and Dr Sabbah al-Durrah. Both were arrested on 8 Febmary 1980 because of their alleged activities within the ICP and have since been held in incommunicado detention without being charged or tried.
Amnesty Intemational was investigating the cases of three scientists —
359 	
Dr Hussain al-Shaiiristani, Dr Hassan al-Rajai and Dr Ja'afar Dhia Ja'afar — arrested at the end of 1979. The first two were arrested because of alleged connections with al-Da'awa al-Islamiya, a predominantly Shi'i party which has existed illegally since the mid-1950s, and were sentenced to 10 and seven years' imprisonment respectively. As far as Amnesty Intemational knows Dr Ja'afar has not been charged or tried. On 30 January 1980 Amnesty Intemational sent an urgent appeal to the authorities on behalf of Dr al-Shahristani after reports that he had been severely tortured but has received no reply. According to the New Scientist, 2 April 1981, "Dr Shahristani has been killed while in custody; he was tortured and spent his last days in the al-Rashid Military Hospital in Baghdad".
During the year Amnesty Intemational learned of the arrest of seven religious men, assistants to Ayatollah A1 Kho'i, a prominent leader of the Shi'i community in Iraq. The seven men were reportedly arrested around the start of the war with Iran in September 1980. in December 1980 Amnesty Intemational received the names of 49 people said to be teachers, students, engineers and other workers, who had reportedly been arrested on suspicion of opposition to the govemment. In January 1981 Amnesty International wrote to the authorities seeking confirmation of these arrests, details of the prisoners' whereabouts and of the charges against them, but received no reply.
Amnesty Intemational viewed with concem reports in Febmary 1981 of the arrest of several members and supporters of the ICP, after a house-to-house search by security forces in the Sulaymaniah area. The whereabouts of those arrested and the charges against them were still unknown at the end of April 1981.
On 29 April 1981 Amnesty Intemational published a report,/ra^; Evidence of Torture. This contains detailed medical findings and other evidence that political prisoners were tortured in Iraq. In October 1979 and March 1980 a panel of Amnesty International doctors interviewed and examined 15 Iraqi exiles who alleged that they had been tortured while in the custody of Iraqi security forces between September 1976 and August 1979. All 15 said that they were questioned under torture about their views and those of other people, and in some cases were pressed to join the ruling Ba'ath Party. Torture techniques allegedly ranged from cmde physical assaults with fists, boots, tmncheons and whips to sustained beatings of the soles of the fQQi(falaqa), rape and threats of rape, systematic electric shock torture and mock executions. In all cases the doctors found that the results of the physical examination were consistent with the tortures described. In addition the accounts were markedly consistent — even though the former detainees were arrested independently and
360 	
at different times and places.
None of the prisoners had been allowed access to a lawyer during detention. Their families were often unable to obtain confirmation of their arrest or whereabouts. In all cases interrogation by members of the security forces started on the first or second day of detention. Only two of the 15 were brought to trial and neither was found guilty of any offence.
On 29 April 1981 Amnesty Intemational issued a news release stating that all the information available, including details in the new report, provided convincing evidence that torture was continuing and widespread in Iraq. In the report Amnesty Intemational recommended concrete measures to protect prisoners, including: an end to incommunicado detention; allowing lawyers, family and doctors prompt access to prisoners; and bringing people to court without delay after arrest. It called on the Iraqi Government to honour its commitments under the Intemational Covenant on Civil and PoUtical Rights, which Iraq ratified in 1971 and which prohibits torture.
On 27 April 1981 the government described the report as "without foundation". The 1,500-word govemment response, passed to Amnesty Intemational by the Iraqi Embassy in London, emphasized that torture was banned by the nation's constitution and laws. However it did not reply in detail to the specific allegations of torture in the report and did not allay Amnesty International's concern.
During the year Amnesty Intemational continued to receive allegations of torture and deaths under torture; bodies of political detainees are said to have been returned to their families bearing marks of torture and in some cases badly mutilated. Amnesty Intemational has the names of 13 people reported to have died under torture since June 1979.
Since May 1980 Amnesty Intemational has received disturbing information about the alleged poisoning of political suspects. A number of people arrested on suspicion of political opposition were said to have been given drinks shortly before being released, and then to have become ill some time after their release from custody. Detailed evidence on three people alleged to have been given slow-acting poison while in custody in Iraq has reached Amnesty International. Two were examined by doctors in the United Kingdom after they left Iraq and both were found to be suffering from thallium poisoning (thallium is a heavy metal used commercially in rat poison). One person died and the other recovered. The third case was of a women reported to have died in Iraq. On 2 September 1980 Amnesty Intemational wrote to President Saddam Hussain urging him to open an inquiry into the reported poisonings and to make public its findings. No reply has been received.
361 	
After receiving an average of 100 names each year since 1974 of political prisoners reported to have been executed in Iraq, and reports of up to 100 executions in a six-week period from the beginning of March 1980, Amnesty Intemational launched an intemational campaign in June 1980 to call attention to these facts and to persuade the authorities to cease the executions.
On 11 July 1980 Amnesty Intemational appealed on behalf of 20 Kurds from the Autonomous Region of Kurdistan after they had been sentenced to death by the Special Court of Kirkuk. It leamed later that six ofthe 20 were executed on 25 November 1980 in Mosul prison.
The majority of death sentences were passed either by the Revolutionary Court in Baghdad, or by special courts such as the Special Court of Kirkuk. Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the procedures of these courts, which did not conform to the legal safeguards guaranteed by Iraqi law and stipulated by the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights: all trials were summary and held in camera-, tribunals consisted of representatives of the executive and not of the judiciary; defendants were held incommunicado during pre-trial detention; there were very severe restrictions on the rights of the defence in the Revolutionary Court and no right of defence at all in special courts; convictions in both courts were often based on confessions extracted under torture; there was no right of appeal to a higher court, although the death sentence had to be ratified by the President and the prisoner could petition the President for clemency.
In January 1981 Kurdish sources claimed that 19 Kurds, allegedly members and supporters of the Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) of Iraq were executed in November 1980. A further 61 were under sentence of death. On 16 March 1981 the Syrian daily newspaper^/ Ba 'ath reported that 176 members of the Iraqi armed forces had been executed and many others had been arrested, including members of the armed forces, a former govemment minister, and a writer. Amnesty Intemational sought confirmation of these reports.
362 _
