Turkey
The main concerns of Amnesty Intemational were torture, executions and death sentences, and the holding of prisoners of conscience.
Political violence, which has resulted in thousands of deaths since 1975, continued. Martial law, imposed in December 1978 in 13 of Turkey's 67 provinces, had been renewed at two-monthly intervals and extended to cover 20 provinces, but assassinations by both right and left-wing groups had mounted to over 5,000 by 12 September 1980 when Turkey's military leaders abolished parliament after a coup and imposed martial law on the whole country. General Kenan Evren, the Armed Forces Chief of Staff, announced that legislative and executive powers would be held by the National Security Council headed by himself. Later in the month a govemment was appointed under a retired admiral, Bulent Ulusu.
Thousands of people were detained, including members of parliament, members of political parties and trade unionists. The duration of detention without charge under martial law was increased from 15 to 30 days and then in November 1980 to 90 days. All political and trade union activity was banned and three newspapers, Aydinlik and Democrat on the left and Hergun on the right, were closed down.
Subsequent changes in the martial law regulations extended the powers of martial law commanders, giving them control over mail, communications, press censorship and all labour and trade union activities. Under the new law people could be sentenced to six months' to two years' imprisonment for propagating "erroneous, unfounded or exaggerated information in a manner to create alarm or excitement among the public". The penalty would be doubled if the offence was committed through the news media and if a foreigner was involved the sentence was to be not less than a year. Another change made sentences of up to three years passed by military courts not
323 	
subject to appeal.
In May 1980 (that is, before the coup) an Amnesty International mission visited Turkey to investigate the increasing allegations that political prisoners were being tortured. The mission interviewed people who had been tortured and talked to lawyers, doctors, members of political parties, trade unionists and journalists. On the basis of information from these meetings and from documents, including medical reports, Amnesty International published a news release on 9 June 1980 which reported that torture had become widespread and systematic and that most people detained by police and martial law authorities were subjected to torture, which in some cases was alleged to have ended in death.
Methods of torture included electric shocks, falaka (beating the soles of the feet), and violent assaults on all parts of the body, including the sexual organs. Some detainees — both men and women — were also subjected to a form of rape, with police truncheons or other objects inserted into the anus or vagina. Detailed information was given on three people who were alleged to have died after being tortured: Yasar Gundogdu, Osman Mehmet Onsoy and Oruc Kork-maz. Torture was reported by both right and left-wing political groups.
Allegations of torture continued and increased and by July 1980 Amnesty International had detailed information about 10 deaths alleged to have been caused by torture in the preceding six months. On 4 July 1980 Amnesty International wrote to the Prime Minister Suleyman Demirel saying: .. we now have received a large amount of information, including medical reports, which make it quite clear that torture is extensive and that the cases referred to above are not isolated or unusual incidents." On 23 July the Turkish Ambassador in London, Vahap Asiroglu, informed Amnesty International that:
"The martial law authorities have already looked into a total of 39 complaints concerning allegations of torture. The investigations of 14 complaints have been completed and since there was no evidence to substantiate them, the martial law authorities have decided to take no further action. The investigations in connection with the remaining 25 allegations are still continuing and I understand that a number of people are assisting the martial law authorities in their enquiries."
Amnesty International requested further information about these investigations and a list of all 39 complaints, but did not receive this.
On 25 July an appeal was sent to Prime Minister Demirel for an urgent investigation into allegations that Fikri Sonmez, the Mayor of Fatsa, and others detained with him were being tortured. It is not
324 	
known whether these allegations were investigated.
On 17 September 1980, five days after the coup. Amnesty International wrote to the new head of state, General Evren, saying that while the organization was " sympathetic to the difficulties which any government is faced with in dealing with the political violence which has resulted in so many killings . . . there is never any justification for torture". Enclosed with this letter were the findings of the Amnesty Intemational research mission and documentation detailing torture allegations.
Following the military takeover and the large number of people taken into custody (122,609 between 12 September 1980 and 10 April 1981, according to the Turkish newspaper MilUyet, 4 May 1981), even more allegations of torture reached Amnesty Intemational. On 9 October Amnesty International appealed to General Evren for an inquiry into the death on 2 October of Ahmet Feyzioglu, a trade union lawyer, in Bursa Central Police Station. In November 1980 the organization published the names of eight people alleged to have died as a result of torture since 12 September, including Ilhan Erdost, a left-wing publisher who was beaten to death by soldiers at Mamak military prison in Ankara on 7 November. The Turkish authorities later announced that these deaths had been investigated and that some people would be prosecuted. On 1 December 1980 Amnesty International wrote again to General Evren expressing concem at reports of deaths in custody after torture. By the beginning of April 1981 Amnesty Intemational had received the names of 20 people reported to have died in custody since 12 September, and believed that torture continued to be widespread and used as an administrative practice.
On 17 April an Amnesty Intemational mission went to Turkey to discuss its concerns with the authorities. The delegates met General Necdet Oztorun, the Deputy Chief of Staff; General Recep Ergun, the Martial Law Commander for Ankara; General Nezet Bologirey, Commander responsible for coordination of martial law; Foreign Minister liter Turkmen; Minister of State Ilhan Oztrak; and Fahri Gorgulu, Director of the Turkish Police. All the concerns of Amnesty International were raised in these meetings, but particular emphasis was placed on the many allegations of torture. Amnesty Intemational appreciated steps taken by the authorities to check torture, but urged further safeguards to protect prisoners from ill-treatment. Specific recommendations were that the government should issue public instructions to military and police personnel that torture is prohibited and constitutes a criminal offence; that the 90-day detention period should be drastically reduced and that access to lawyers and family should be accorded in all cases throughout the period of custody.
325 	
The mission also had talks with former Prime Ministers Bulent Ecevit and Suleyman Demirel, with the Presidents of the Turkish and Istanbul Bar Associations, with lawyers, journalists, relatives of detainees and released detainees.
On 28 April 1981 Amnesty International was invited to address the Political Affairs Committee of the Council of Europe's Parliamentary Assembly in Paris. The committee was told that the substantial information about torture in Anjnesty International's possession made an " irrefutable case that torture is being practised on such a large scale in Turkey that it is impossible that it is carried out without official sanction." The committee was also told of Amnesty International's conviction that the actions taken by the authorities had not resulted in any lessening of torture, or made it any easier for people to make complaints about torture.
The imprisonment of people under Articles 141, 142 and 163 of the Turkish penal code continued during the year (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1980). Article 141 prohibits forming organizations "aimed at estabhshing the domination of a social class over other social classes"; Article 142 prohibits "making propaganda for the domination of a social class over other social classes"; Article 163 is used to imprison anyone who "opposes secularism, forms or organizes, plans, manages or administers a society aiming, even partially, to impose religious principles on the basic social, economic, political or legal order of the state".
Journalists, writers and translators were sentenced to terms of imprisonment under Article 142, although some were permitted to pay a fine instead of going to prison. Of the thousands of people in prison in April 1981 accused of politically motivated offences, many were charged with crimes of violence, but many others were held for their non-violent political activities and beliefs. These included officials of DISK (the Confederation of Revolutionary Trade Unions), members of the Turkish Labour Party, members of the National Salvation Party (including former members of parliament), and members of the Turkish Workers' and Peasants' Party. Trials of all these people were scheduled to take place, but until these and other trials have been completed it is impossible for Amnesty International to make any estimate of the number of prisoners of conscience.
Many Kurds were also in prison, both before and after the coup of 12 September 1980. Trials of some Kurdish groups accused of terrorist activities had started by April 1981, but Amnesty International had also received information about Kurds who were reported to have been detained, tortured and released without charge. On 25 March Serafettin Elci, a former cabinet minister, was sentenced to 2 years and 3 months' imprisonment for "making
326 	
Kurdish and secessionist propaganda". He was convicted on the basis of published statements in which he was quoted as having said: "I am a Kurd. There are Kurds in Turkey." Amnesty International regards him as a prisoner of conscience.
Between 12 September and 13 December 1980 four men convicted of political killings were executed, the first executions since 1972. The last of the four to be executed was 19-year-old Erdal Eren who was sentenced to death in,March 1980 after being convicted of killing a soldier during a demonstration. The death sentence was subsequently annuHed on legal grounds by the Military Court of Appeal, but was reimposed by the Council of the Offices of the Military Court of Appeal in November 1980 and approved by the National Security Council on 12 December.
Frequent appeals have been made to the authorities for a stop to executions and the abolition of the death penalty. In its letter to General Evren on 17 September Amnesty International urged him "to consider that the best way for a government to demonstrate its belief in the inviolability of human life is to abolish entirely the use of the death penalty." The death penalty was one of the concerns raised with the authorities by the Amnesty International mission in April 1981.
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
Amnesty International remained concemed about the harassment, imprisonment and forcible confinement in psychiatric hospitals of people holding views — whether political, religious or nationalist — disapproved of by the authorities; frequent violations of internationally accepted standards for fair trial; the harsh conditions of detention of prisoners of conscience; and the use of the death penalty.
During the year Amnesty International learned of approximately 200 people arrested for the non-violent exercise of their human rights. Over 30 were forcibly confined in psychiatric hospitals without genuine medical grounds. It also learned of the harassment, intimidation, short-term detention and, in some cases, physical ill-treatment of many other dissenters. In the course of the year it worked
327 	
on behalf of about 500 prisoners who had been adopted as prisoners of conscience, or who were being investigated as possible prisoners of conscience.
Even though the USSR has ratified a number of intemational human rights instmments, including the International Covenants on Civil and Political Rights and on Social, Economic and Cultural Rights, the authorities continued to convict prisoners of conscience under criminal law which prescribes imprisonment for the non-violent exercise of human rights: "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda"; "circulation of fabrications known to be false which defame the Soviet state and social system", often referred to as "anti-Soviet slander", and "violation of the laws on separation of church and state and of church and school", which forbids teaching religion to children "in an organized way". The authorities also used the criminal law to convict prisoners of conscience on charges with no ostensible relationship to the dissenting activities of those convicted, and which Amnesty Intemational believed to be without foundation and politically motivated.
On 27 June 1980 the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR proclaimed an amnesty in connection with the Olympic Games in Moscow, but its provisions were not pybUshed. Amnesty Intemational has leamed that the amnesty benefited prisoners serving sentences of up to two years for "minor offences", and some war veterans, mothers, and decorated workers serving terms of up to five years' imprisonment. The amnesty excluded those convicted of political offences such as "anti-Soviet slander". A number of prisoners of conscience were released from corrective labour colonies and given a milder punishment known as "building up the national economy": they were sent to complete their sentences on construction sites often far from their homes.
On 22 June the authorities forcibly expelled Vladimir Borisov from the USSR. The long-standing dissenter, victim of political abuses of psychiatry and former prisoner of conscience had been rearrested on 30 May.
During the year the authorities continued the major drive against all categories of dissenters launched towards the end of 1979. In July 1980 Amnesty Intemational issued a list of 144 people imprisoned during the preceding nine months. Arrests and trials of dissenters continued, and on 21 January 1981 it expressed concem in an international news release. The first four months of 1981 saw no apparent improvement Heavy sentences were frequent: during the year at least 19 prisoners of conscience were sentenced to 10 or more years' imprisonment and internal exile for "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda".
328 	
Forms of repression within Amnesty Intemational's mandate have hit three types of dissenter especially hard: "Helsinki monitors", unofficial groups trying to monitor Soviet compliance with the human rights provisions of the Final Act of the 1975 Helsinki Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe; critics of the Soviet nationalities policy in the non-Russian Soviet Repubhcs and advocates of political independence for their nations, particularly Ukrainians, Lithuanians and Estonians; and religious believers, particularly Baptists, Seventh-Day Adventists, Pentecostalists and Russian Orthodox believers.
The authorities have continued to imprison Helsinki monitors. In the spring of 1980 Tatyana Osipova, a member of the Moscow Helsinki monitoring group, and Vasyl Stus and Ivan Sokulsky, both former prisoners of conscience and members of the Ukrainian Helsinki monitoring group, were arrested. The Armenian Helsinki monitor, Eduard Arutyunyan, was sentenced to two and a half years' imprisonment and the Ukrainian monitors, Petro Rozumny and Yaroslav Lesiv, to three and two years' imprisonment respectively. In June two Helsinki monitors and former prisoners of conscience were convicted of "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda": Moscow group member Viktor Nekipelov and Ukrainian group member Vitaly Kalynychenko were given 12 and 15 years' imprisonment and internal exile respectively. Another Ukrainian monitor, Vyacheslav Chomovil, rearrested while in internal exile, was falsely convicted of attempted rape and sentenced to five years' imprisonment. In the same month, Oksana Meshko, a 75-year-old Ukrainian monitor and mother of the prisoner of conscience Oleksander Serhiyenko, was forcibly confined in a psychiatric hospital. In August the Lithuanian monitor, Dr Algirdas Statkevicius, was ruled mentally ill and unaccountable for his actions, and ordered by a court to be confined indefinitely in a special psychiatric hospital for the "especially dangerous". Olha Heyko Matusevych, a Helsinki monitor whose husband is serving a 12-year sentence for participation in the Ukrainian group, was sentenced to three years' imprisonment.
In the following months Vasyl Stus and Ivan Sokulsky were both given 15-year sentences of imprisonment and internal exile. In December the Lithuanian Helsinki monitor, Vytautas Skuodis, received 12 years' imprisonment and internal exile, and Dr Leonard Temovsky three years' imprisonment. In the following month, Oksana Meshko was sentenced to six months' imprisonment and five years' internal exile. In March 1981 two Lithuanian monitors, Mecislovas Juravicius and Vytautas Vaiciunas and a Ukrainian monitor, Ivan Kandyba, were arrested. At the beginning of April Tatyana Osipova was sentenced to five years' imprisonment and three years' internal exile.
329 	
A number of those imprisoned during the year for peacefully exercising human rights were members of non-Russian nationalities. Most had protested against what they consider to be an official policy of "Russification" discriminating against national minorities, or had advocated the secession of their Union Republic from the USSR They were imprisoned despite basing their activities on Article 36 of the USSR Constitution (1977) which proscribes discrimination on the grounds of race or nationality, and Article 72, which proclaims that "each Union Republic has the right freely to secede from the USSR". Many were charged with "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda" and given sentences of up to 15 years' imprisonment and internal exile.
Those imprisoned for "nationalist" activities in Ukraine included Mykola Kraynyk, sentenced in August 1980 to 10 years' imprisonment and internal exile for organizing a clandestine group peacefully seeking to achieve Ukrainian political independence. Stepan Khmara, Vitaly Shevchenko and Oleh Shevchenko were given sentences of 12, 11 and eight years' respectively in December for circulating an unauthorized Urkainian journal. Vasyl Kurylo was reported to have been sentenced to a total of 15 years' imprisonment and internal exile for a similar offence. In Lithuania, Antanas Terieckas and Julius Sasnauskas were tried in September, convicted of" anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda" and sentenced to eight and six and a half years' imprisonment and internal exile respectively. Among a number of Lithuanian activists tried at the end of 1979 for circulating unauthorized journals were Gintautas lesmantas and Povilas Peceliunas, who were sentenced to 11 and eight years' respectively. In Estonia, Mart Niklus, a leading activist, was sentenced in January to a total of 15 years' imprisonment and internal exile. Other imprisoned Estonian dissenters included Yuri Kukk (two years), who died in March in a corrective labour colony after a prolonged hunger-strike, Veljo Kalep (four years) and Viktor Niitsoo (four years). Several campaigners for national rights were also imprisoned in Armenia — A. Manucharyan, A. Navasardyan, A. Arshakyan — and in Georgia — N. Samkharadze, V. Shgenti, Z. Gogiya, V. Chitanava.
More than half of the prisoners of conscience arrested during the year were religious believers. Most were members of "dissenting" Baptist, Seventh-Day Adventist and Pente costal ist congregations which reject the restrictions imposed by the state on religious activity. The authorities regard these "unregistered" religious communities as illegal. Among those imprisoned were leaders of all three of these "dissenting" denominations.
Amnesty Intemational learned of the imprisonment of almost 80
330 	
Baptists. Most members of their unofficial governing body known as the Council of Evangelical Christians and Baptists in the USSR have been imprisoned. These included Pastor Mikhail Khorev, who was almost blind, sentenced in May to five years' imprisonment; Pastor Nikolai Baturin, a former prisoner of conscience, given the same sentence in August; and Pyotr Rumachik sentenced in early 1981, also to five years' imprisonment. Another leading Baptist, Pastor Dmitry Minyakov, was arrested in January. On 26 March Amnesty International issued an urgent appeal for him after receiving reports that he was gravely ill as a result of a protest hunger-strike in Tallinn prison. In August four Baptists — Galina Yudintseva, Lyubov Kosachevich, Sergei Bublik and Tamara Bystrova — were given three-year sentences in connection with the discovery of an unofficial Baptist printing press in Dnepropetrovsk in central Ukraine. In June another seven Baptists were arrested in Krasnodar Territory in southern Russia for unofficially printing religious literature, and later sentenced to between three and four years' imprisonment.
Most of the Seventh-Day Adventists imprisoned during the year were accused of distributing unauthorized religious literature. Twenty-two "dissenting" Adventists were arrested in connection with "Open Letter No. 12", an unofficially circulated report of violations of Adventists' right to freedom of conscience. In July Rostislav Galetsky, leader of the "dissenting" Seventh-Day Adventists, was arrested and charged with "anti-Soviet slander" and with violating regulations circumscribing believers' freedom of conscience. He was tried in Ryazan in March and sentenced to five years' imprisonment.
Since the 1960s a large movement for emigration from the USSR has developed among "dissenting" Soviet Pentecostalists because of official restrictions on their freedom of conscience. Two leaders of this movement were among the Pentecostalists imprisoned during the year. Pastor Nikolai Goretoi, who had been held in custody since his arrest in November 1979, was sentenced in August 1980 to 12 years' imprisonment and internal exile for "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda". In August Boris Perchatkin was arrested in the far east of the USSR and sentenced to two years' imprisonment.
Two Russian Orthodox activists were among religious believers given long sentences for their dissenting activities. In August 1980 Father Gleb Yakunin, a leading campaigner for religious rights, received 10 years' imprisonment and internal exile for "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda". Prisoner of conscience Alexander Ogo-rodnikov, a member of an unofficial seminar of Russian Orthodox Christians and already serving a one-year sentence, was faced with an additional charge of "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda" and sentenced in September to a further 11 years' imprisonment and
33J
internal exile. A number of Lithuanian Roman Catholics were also imprisoned, including Genovaite Naviskaite and Ona Vitkauskaite, sentenced in November to two years' and eighteen months' imprisonment respectively for circulating the unofficial joumaM Chronicle of the Lithuanian Catholic Church. Another Lithuanian woman, Gemma-Jadvyga Stanelyte, was arrested in June after organizing the annual religious procession to a shrine. She was charged with "organization of, or active participation in, group actions which violate public order", and in December imprisoned for three years.
Amnesty International continued to receive reports of conscientious objectors imprisoned for refusing military service. They included Baptists, Jews, ethnic Germans, Ukrainians and Russians.
People trying to emigrate were arrested, including several activists in the Jewish emigration movement — Viktor Brailovsky, Vladimir Kislik and Kim Fridman — Pentecostalists, ethnic Germans, Russians and others. In February two members of an unofficial "Committee for the Right to Emigrate" were arrested; Vasily Barats was briefly confined in a psychiatric hospital, and Georgy Shepelev sentenced to six months' imprisonment.
During the year more well-known human rights campaigners were imprisoned. These included Tatyana Velikanova, sentenced in August 1980 to a total of nine years' imprisonment ànd internal exile; Alexander Lavut, given three years' in December; and Genrikh Altunyan, given a 12-year sentence in March. In March the Soviet authorities arrested the former prisoner of conscience, Anatoly Marchenko. Amnesty International also worked on the case of Vazif Meylanov, a mathematician from Dagestan, who demonstrated peacefully against the internal exile of Dr Andrei Sakharov, and was sentenced in December to a total of nine years' imprisonment. Others adopted during the year as prisoners of conscience included campaigners for workers' rights (Vsevolod Kuvakin), feminists {Natalya Maltseva, Natalya Lazareva) and distributors of unofficial writings (losif Dyadkin, Sergei Gorbachev).
Some prisoners of conscience were convicted on false criminal charges. Would-be emigrants Alexander Maximov and Father Myron Sas-Zhurakovsky were sentenced for "violation of passport regulations". Another would-be emigrant, Valéry Pilnikov, was given a five-year sentence after being falsely charged with "malicious hooliganism" and a Baptist, Vladimir KishJcun, a one-year sentence for "hooliganism". Some dissenters, like the Estonian Methodist Herbert Murd, lost their jobs as a resuit of official harassment and were charged with "parasitism": this may consist of not having paid employment for four months in any year.
The Soviet authorities continued to confine dissenters in psychiatric
332 	
hospitals for political rather than medical reasons. Several prisoners of conscience were arrested and confined indefinitely to special psychiatric hospitals, the most severe form of psychiatric detention, intended for people who "represent a special danger to society". They included Algirdas Statkevicius, a Lithuanian Helsinki monitor, Viktor Davydov, a legal consultant, Anatoly Cherkasov, who attempted to leave the Soviet Union illegally, Aleksander Kuzkin, who circulated unofficial writings and leaflets, and Alexei Nikitin, a campaigner for workers' rights. However confinement to ordinary psychiatric hospitals has been more common. For example this was the fate of Hanna Mykhaylenko, a Ukrainian teacher, arrested for circulating unofficial reports of human rights violations; Lutheras Lukavicius, a Lithuanian former prisoner of conscience; Vladimir Khailo, a Baptist would-be emigrant; and two "dissenting" Adventists, Anatoly and Pavel Lysenko.
Many dissenters were confined in psychiatric hospitals for brief periods, particularly during the summer of 1980 when the Olympic Games took place in Moscow. Many prisoners of conscience in custody awaiting trial were sent to psychiatric hospitals to undergo psychiatric examination.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports of prisoners of conscience being ill-treated in psychiatric hospitals, particularly with powerful drugs. At the beginning of 1981 Alexei Nikitin was confined in the Dnepropetrovsk Special Psychiatric Hospital after discussing his workers' rights activities with foreign joumalists, in spite of the fact that shortly before his arrest he had been independently examined by a Soviet psychiatrist, Dr Anatoly Koryagin, and found to be mentally sound. From mid-January to mid-March he was reported to have been held in isolation and given multiple injections of drugs "bringing him severe pain and disorientation". Other prisoners of conscience reported to have been ill-treated in this way included: Anna Chertkova, Vladimir Klebanov, losif Terelya, and Alexander Shatravka, who was again confined in a psychiatric hospital not long after being released. Amnesty International was concemed that prisoners of conscience were kept with criminally insane and violent inmates. For example Algirdas Statkevicius was reported to be held in Cherayakhovsk Special Psychiatric Hospital in a ward containing four psychotic murderers; in Alma-Ata Special Psychiatric Hospital Nikolai Baranov was reported to have twice been severely beaten.
During the year the authorities imprisoned the remaining active members of the unofficial Working Commission to Investigate the Use of Psychiatry for Political Purposes. Since its inception in early 1977 this group has played a major role in exposing political abuses of psychiatry and in September 1980 issued its 24th Information
333 	
Bulletin. Those imprisoned were: Vyacheslav Bakhmin, sentenced in September 1980 to three years' imprisonment; Dr Leonard Temovsky, a physician and Helsinki monitor, sentenced in December to three years' imprisonment; Irina Grivnina, in custody; Felix Serebrov, in custody; and Dr Anatoly Koryagin, a psychiatrist, in custody. Alexander Podrabinek, the sixth member of the group, was rearrested while serving a sentence of internal exile and in January 1981 sentenced to three years' imprisonment His brother, Kirill Podrabinek, was rearrested at the end of a previous sentence and in January was also sentenced to three years for "anti-Soviet slander".
Further charges were brought against several prisoners of conscience before the end of their sentences leading to their continued detention: Vasyl Lisovy and Razmik Markosyan were arrested and convicted on false charges while serving sentences of internal exile; Mark Morozov was charged with "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda" in his place of internal exile and in December 1980 given a further 13 years' imprisonment and internal exile; Vasyl Barladyanu was given an additional three years for allegedly carrying out "anti-Soviet slander" among prisoners in his place of imprisonment; Alexander Bolonkin was charged with conducting "anti-Soviet propaganda" within a corrective labour colony and for the second time faces an extension of his prison sentence.
Conditions in Soviet corrective labour colonies and prisons continued to be characterized by chronic hunger, overwork in difficult conditions, inadequate medical treatment and arbitrary deprivation of the limited rights to correspondence and family visits. Amnesty International received detailed information on the harsh conditions in the new "special regime" zone (the most severe category) in Perm corrective labour colony No. 36. Prisoners of conscience imprisoned there protested in September 1980 that conditions were calculated to bring about their "gradual psychological and physical destruction". In September Amnesty Intemational issued a paper: Conditions of Imprisonment in Chistopol Prison.
Amnesty Intemational learned of numerous prisoners of conscience being punished while serving their sentences. Among those known to have been confined for long periods in prison conditions within corrective labour colonies were Yury Orlov, Mykola Matusevych (subsequently transferred to even harsher conditions in Chistopol prison), Sergei Kovalyov (also transferred to Chistopol prison), Anatoly Shcharansky and Myroslav Marynovych. At the beginning of 1980 the Baptist pastor, Mikhail Khorev, was reported to have been placed in a punishment cell in a corrective labour colony in Omsk after officials had found a Bible in his possession.
During the year Amnesty Intemational interceded on behalf of a
334 	
number of prisoners of conscience whose poor state of health was giving cause for concern. Among those for whom it issued special appeals were: Vyacheslav Chornovil, on hunger-strike, Alexander Bolonkin, Oksana Meshko, Dmitry Minyakov, on hunger-strike, Mart Niklus, on hunger-strike, Yuri Kukk, died on hunger-strike, Mykola Rudenko, on hunger-strike and Zinovy Antonyuk.
Amnesty International received persistent reports about hardships facing prisoners of conscience sentenced to internal exile in remote areas. It continued to campaign for the release of Dr Andrei Sakharov, who remained in enforced exile in the city of Gorky.
During the year Amnesty International learned of about 30 death sentences, most for murder or war crimes. However, several people are known to have been sentenced to death for non-violent crimes. For example Yuri Khorobidze, a Georgian official, was reported in the Soviet press to have been executed after being convicted of taking bribes. Four other Georgians were sentenced to be shot for economic crimes. Two of them were convicted of "illegally producing and selling adulterated fruit juice"; the other two were sentenced for their part in a swindle involving illegally-made knitted goods. Amnesty International, being unconditionally opposed to the use of the death penalty, appealed against the death sentence in all these cases.
During the year the Soviet news media made several attacks on Amnesty International. On 25 and 26 August 1980 the Soviet newspaper Izvestia accused Amnesty International of committing " anti-Soviet sabotage" and of being "maintained by imperialist secret services". Amnesty Intemational issued an international news release on 12 November rejecting these charges. It pointed out that:
"governments at the other end of the political spectrum have accused us of being run by the KGB ... They have attacked us after we published detailed information about human rights violations in their countries. Instead of replying to the information or ending the abuses, they have tried to discredit us." A further attack on Amnesty Intemational at the end of November in the newspaper Sovietskaya Rossiya accused it of waging psychological warfare against the Soviet Union. In February V. Skosyrev, an Izvestia correspondent, interviewed Amnesty International's Secretary General. On 16 and 19 March/zveji/a repeated its accusation.
335 	
