Lesotho
During the year there were several detentions under the Internal Security (General) Amendment Act of 1974. This empowers the police to detain people incommunicado and without charge or trial for a period of 60 days, after which successive detention orders may be issued. In June 1980 at least four academic staff members of the National University were detained under this provision for several weeks. They were later released uncharged after protests by students and other university staff. One of them, Thabeng Ramarumol, a law lecturer, was later reported to have left the country and to have sought asylum in Botswana. There were further detentions in early August, when Godfrey Kolisang, a well-known lawyer and General Secretary of one faction of the Basutoland Congress Party (BCP) and other BCP supporters were arrested. Godfrey Kolisang had previously been adopted as a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty International when he was detained under the same act in November 1975.
Amnesty International called upon the government to grant these detainees access to their families and to legal representation, and asked the authorities to publish the names of all detainees together with details of their places of imprisonment. Concerted appeals were made on behalf of one of the detainees, 66-year-oId Tsolo Kalake, a former political prisoner in South Africa who was reported to be seriously ill. Amnesty International also urged the government to ensure that the detainees were charged or released without delay. In response the government said that Godfrey Kolisang and the other detainees had been arrested for alleged subversive activities and would be prosecuted, unless the Director of Public Prosecutions decided otherwise. All the detainees, including Godfrey Kohsang, were later released uncharged, although the Prime Minister's private secretary claimed that some had confessed under interrogation to subversive activities in support of the armed guerrillas of the Lesotho Liberation Army (LLA). On 20 October 1980 in response to further inquiries from Amnesty International, the government reported that no detainees were then being held under the Internal Security (General) Amendment Act.
The first major political trial since 1975 began in early March 1981 when 11 alleged supporters of the LLA appeared in court at Maseru charged with high treason. The accused were all said to have been arrested in May 1980 after an attack on a police station in
53
Mafeteng district, which resulted in two deaths. The trial was still in progress at the end of April 1981.
