Togo
Amnesty International's main concerns were detention without trial and prison conditions. The imprisonment of five alleged opponents of the govemment after a trial which fell short of intemational-ly recognized standards continued to give cause for concern.
Detention without trial or "administrative detention" was used against individuals suspected of political opposition who were often held for periods of several years. In October 1980 Amnesty Intemational appealed to head of state General Gnassingbe Eyadema to provide information about the judicial status of the detention of five people arrested between late 1973 and August 1980 and held without trial. Among these were Agbeshie Pascal Sassou, an official of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, who was arrested in 1979. Although official sources reported his release on 1 May 1980 Amnesty International received several reports that he was confined to Tokoin hospital against his will throughout 1980. In late March 1981 the Togolese authorities provided Amnesty Intemational with information on all five detainees. Three detainees including Agbeshie Pascal Sassou were said to have been freed between November 1980 and
89
February 1981, one was being held on corruption charges and one was unknown to the authorities. In early February 1981 Amnesty International appealed to the government to give the reasons for the arrest of Guy Midiouhouan, who had been deported from Gabon to Togo in January 1981. The authorities replied that they had deported him to Benin in late February, claiming that he was not a Togolese national.
Amnesty International was still investigating the cases of Kodjovi Emmanuel de Souza, Kouao Stéphan Sanvee, Kwassi Jean Savi de Tove, Kouassivi Alphonse de Souza and Abalo de Souza, who were convicted by Togo's State Security Court of conspiracy to overthrow the government in August 1979. Death sentences against the first two were commuted to life imprisonment, and the others received prison sentences of between five and 10 years. The trial failed to establish adequately the guilt of the accused and the sentences passed appeared unwarranted and severe. There had been procedural irregularities, particularly with regard to the right to defence counsel at all stages of the judicial process (see Amnesty International Report 1980).
Conditions of detention at the gendarmerie headquarters in the capital, Lome, were reported to be harsh. Detainees were said to be held in dark overcrowded cells, with little ventilation, poor sanitation and no exercise. Visits were believed to be very restricted.
In late April 1980 an Amnesty International mission visited Togo at the request of the authorities. The delegates were received by President Eyadema, Director of the Presidential Office O. F. Natchaba, the Minister of Justice, and the President of the Supreme Court, and were told that they had free access to any other officials or individuals they might wish to meet. Among the subjects raised by the delegates was the frequency of "administrative detention" and the apparent absence of judicial redress. The authorities were asked to ensure an early hearing before an independent and impartial tribunal for all detainees with defence counsel of their own choosing. Although acknowledging that detainees were held without trial on presidential or ministerial order, often for several years, government officials stressed that the use of such measures was exceptional and designed to counter threats to national security. Interviews with officials confirmed reports that detainees held on executive order could obtain no redress through the courts. The Amnesty International delegates were allowed to visit the "Petite Porte" detention centre at the gendarmerie headquarters in Lome. After an appeal to President Eyadema five prisoners held without trial for suspecte^ political opposition were reportedly freed by presidential order on 1 May 1980. Two of these are believed to have been held for possessing literature critical of the government.
90
In February 1981 a Swiss citizen, Rudolf Eigenmann, was sentenced to death after being convicted of murder. His sentence was later commuted to life imprisonment by the President
