Czechoslovakia
Amnesty Intemational continued to be ccmcemed about the imprisonment of people expressing views disapproved of by the authorities; trial procedures that fall short of internationally recognized standards; poor conditions of detention for political prisoners; harassment and ill-treat-ment of dissenters; and the retention of the death penalty. At the end of April 1981 Amnesty International was working on behalf of 29 adopted prisoners of conscience and investigating six further cases, but it believed that there were many more prisoners of conscience about whom it did not have definite information.
On 8 May 1980 the CSSR proclaimed an amnesty to mark the 35th anniversary of the liberation of Czechoslovakia from German occupation by the Soviet army but only one prisoner adopted by Amnesty Intemational benefited from it.
The Czechoslovak weekly Tribuna on 25 June 1980 accused Amnesty Intemational of focusing its activities against the Soviet Union and other socialist countries and of interfering in the internal affairs of socialist states. In a letter to Tribuna dated 21 October 1980 Amnesty Intemational drew attention to its public record which showed that it worked impartially on human rights issues within its mandate throughout the world. The letter was not published.
The Czechoslovak Penal Code (1973) includes a number of articles which explicitly restrict the exercise of human rights by people whose views and beliefs are disapproved of by the authorities. These articles contravene the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and are used to imprison people who have criticized the policies of the govemment and the Communist Party.
Vaclav Umlauf, a miner aged 20 preparing for theological studies, was arrested on 19 March 1980, and on 23 May 1980 sentenced by the district court in Brno to three years' imprisonment on charges of "incitement" and "damaging the interests of the Republic abroad". He had complained at work that the equipment in the mines was inadequate and had openly condemned the Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan. The court also found him guilty of having distributed an unspecified " anti-state" text and of having sent a letter to a priest in the United Kingdom in which he criticized the trial in October 1979 of six members of the Committee for the Defence of the Unjustly Persecuted (VONS). Pavel Santora, a 25-year-old worker, was remanded in custody on 12 March 1980 after the state security police
286	
had searched his home and confiscated various unofficial texts. On 22 July 1980 the district court in Usti nad Labem found him guilty of "distributing among his co-workers and friends written materials of anti-state and anti-socialist content... of tendentiously informing about the criminal proceedings against VONS members . . . and of acting out of hostility to the socialist, social and state order of the CSSR" and sentenced him to one year's imprisonment. He appealed against the verdict, but the appeal court in Usti nad Labem increased his sentence to 18 months on the grounds that his activities were highly dangerous to society.
Jiri Cernega, a 25-year-old worker and Charter 77 signatory who had been repeatedly harassed, was remanded in custody on 3 November 1980 for "detracting from the dignity of the President of the CSSR". He was accused of having taken a portrait of the President off a wall, of making insulting remarks, and of allowing a photograph to be taken of himself and his friends holding the portrait. On 27 January 1981 he was sentenced by the district court in Klatovy to six months' imprisonment, and at an appeal hearing on 12 March the regional court in Plzen increased his sentence to one year.
Amnesty International has received information about continued arrests, prosecutions and imprisonment of religious believers. Oskar Formanek, a 66-year-oId Jesuit priest who had been barred from exercising his office and had retired, was sentenced on 25 June 1980 by the district court in Presov to 18 months' imprisonment suspended for four years for "obstructing state supervision of the church" and for "incitement". He was accused of holding prayer meetings in private homes and of declaring before a witness that the church in the CSSR was under state control. The court also accused him of disseminating religious literature. His co-defendant Maria Kozarova was sentenced on similar charges to 12 months' imprisonment suspended for three years. Another Roman Catholic priest from Slovakia, Jozef Labuda, was sentenced on 30 October 1980 by the district court in Rimavska Sobota to six months' imprisonment for saying mass and for holding prayer meetings with a group of young people in a mountain hut without state permission. At the same trial Emilie Kesegova, a librarian, was given a four-month prison sentence for organizing the meeting. Josef Barta, a 59-year-old Franciscan priest barred from exercising office was arrested on 18 November 1980 during a police raid on members of the Franciscan order in Liberec, North Bohemia, and charged with "obstructing state supervision of the church". His home was searched on 28 January 1981, and a number of people were interrogated in Liberec and Prague. Father Josef Barta was released from pre-trial detention on 20 February 1981, but judicial proceedings against him were continuing.
287	
Amnesty International was concerned that many dissenters trying to exercise their human rights in non-violent ways have been arrested, tried and imprisoned on criminal rather than political charges. In all these cases the criminal charges were preceded by a long history of harassment and detention.
Two musicians, Karel Soukup and Jindrich Tomes, both Charter 77 signatories, were arrested in mid-1980 and on 5 November 1980 sentenced by the district court in Usti nad Labem to 10 months' and 12 months' imprisonment respectively for singing songs with "anti-socialist content and using vulgar expressions" at a private wedding party. The court ruled that they had committed a breach of the peace. Karel Soukup had been detained in March 1976 on a similar charge and although released from pre-trial detention later that year, he has not been officially informed that criminal proceedings against him have stopped. Engineer Rudolf Battek, a sociologist. Charter 77 spokesperson and VONS member, with a history of harassment and imprisonment for political activities going back to 1969, was arrested on 14 June 1980. In the year leading up to his last arrest the police took action against him nine times, with repeated house searches, short-term detentions, interrogations and surveillance. After two sessions of interrogation he was driven a long way from Prague and abandoned. On 14 June 1980 he was called to the'local poUce station about the theft of his car. When no one attended to him he left the police station and a police officer ran after him and dragged him back. He was detained and charged with "assaulting a policeman". This charge was later changed to one of "causing bodily harm". On 12 January 1981 the Procurator informed his wife that in addition to the charge of causing bodily harm he had been charged with subversion. In April 1981 Rudolf Battek, who suffers from a serious asthmatic condition, was still awaiting trial. In the lO'/i months of pre-trial detention he was denied almost all contact with his wife and his lawyer.
Amnesty International drew attention to two prisoners of conscience who faced new charges before they had completed their sentences. Jiri Wolf, whose three-year sentence was to expire in February 1981, was charged on 18 June 1979 with "false accusations" and on 20 June 1980 brought to trial before the district court for Prague 2. The new charge refers to a statement he made during his first trial in October 1978 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1979). At the trial on 20 June 1980 Jiri Wolf again stated that during the investigation after his arrest in February 1978 he had been forced to change his evidence and that he admitted his guilt under physical and psychological pressure. He claimed that when he refused to cooperate the police had threatened and insulted him, punched his stomach and face, and
288	
threatened that his pregnant wife would be imprisoned. The court held that this allegation constituted "grossly insulting a public agent" and extended his sentence by a further six months. Petr Cibulka was brought to trial in January 1980 for "obstructing the purpose of custody" while serving a two-year sentence for "incitement". In 1979 he went on hunger-strike to protest against unacceptable working conditions and repeated physical attacks on him by ordinary prisoners. For this he was sentenced to a further six months and at an appeal hearing in March 1980 his sentence was increased to one year. On 27 January 1981, shortly before the expiry of his second sentence, he was brought to a third trial before the district court in Plzen and given a 10-month prison sentence for "insulting two prison guards". He stated in court that the guards forced him to remove official newspapers and journals he was allowed to have in his cell. He appealed against the verdict and the regional court in Plzen on 12 March 1981 set aside the sentence on the grounds that the two prison guards had exceeded their authority and that the accused had already been punished for making insulting remarks. On 16 March 1981 Amnesty Intemational wrote to the President of the CSSR welcoming the outcome.
Trials of dissenters continued to violate intemationally accepted standards for a fair trial; in particular defendants were sometimes denied access to a lawyer at the pre-trial stage.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed at reports that conditions of detention of prisoners of conscience in Mirov prison fell short of internationally recognized standards. Petr Uhl, serving a five-year sentence in the second (stricter) prison category in Mirov prison, has been repeatedly harassed and punished. He was punished three times in November 1980 after making complaints to the prison director about the lack of hygiene and frequent discrimination against political prisoners.
Amnesty Intemational issued urgent appeals on behalf of the prisoners of conscience Jaromir Savrda, Otta Bednarova and Rudolf Battek whose poor state of health was giving cause for particular concem.
Throughout the year Amnesty International received information about the harassment, intimidation and short-term detention of active dissenters for the non-violent exercise of their human rights. The police broke up numerous meetings of Charter 77 signatories and VONS members, searched their homes, detained them for questioning and released them within 48 hours. Petr Pospichal, a Charter 77 signatory and a former prisoner of conscience, alleged that he had twice been taken into custody and beaten in September and October 1980. Vaclav Maly, a Charter 77 spokesperson and VONS member,
289	
was taken on 10 December 1980 from a VONS meeting to the poUce headquarters in Prague where he was handcuffed, beaten, threatened and interrogated about the meeting. He was released after 50 hours in detention.
According to figures provided by the CSSR to the United Nations, in the period 1974 to 1978,22 people were sentenced to death and 16 were executed; two were sentenced for offences against the state and the rest sentenced and executed for offences against the person. Amnesty Intemational did not leam of any death sentences or executions during the year.
