Central African Republic
Amnesty International's main concerns were detention without trial and the death penalty.
In November and December 1980 the government released Ange Patasse, leader of the Mouvement de libération du peuple centrafricain (MLPC), Central African People's Liberation Movement, and several other political detainees. This was apparently part of an attempt to form a national coalition between the ruling Union démocratique centrafricaine (UDC), Central African Democratic Union, and opposition political parties. Charges of endangering state security which had been brought against Ange Patasse and nine others were dropped after an examining magistrate ruled that they were without foundation. Most of the detainees released at this time, including Ange Patasse and the journalist Joseph Tchendo, had been detained since November 1979.
In early December, the government convened a national seminar in Bangui to discuss the country's future and invited all political groups. The seminar recommended that political parties in addition to the ruling UDC should be legalized, and allowed to compete for power within a democratic framework. This was accepted by the government and led to the legalization of existing opposition parties and to the formation of several new ones in late December and early January. On 1 February 1981a national referendum approved a new constitution by a large majority.
In August 1980 President David Dacko, who had assumed office after the overthrow of Emperor Bokassa almost one year earlier, dismissed two senior government officials. Vice-President Henri Maidou and Prime Minister Bernard Christian Ayandho were both placed under house arrest for several weeks. Their removal led to the formation of a new government under Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Lebouder, which included members of the MLPC.
The new constitution introduced after the February referendum guarantees, freedom of activity for political parties. It provides for a single-chamber national assembly, and an elected president to hold" office for six years. The first presidential election under the new constitution took place on 15 March 1981, organized on the French model. President Dacko was confirmed in office at the first round of voting with an official return of50.23 per cent, and Ange Patasse, who stood as the MLPC's presidential candidate, received 38 per cent of
34
the votes. Even before the official results were announced on 19 March there were violent demonstrations in Bangui, where Ange Patasse had been the most successful candidate. At least four people are believed to have been killed. The results were challenged by the unsuccessful candidates who claimed that the poll had been rigged in the President's favour. On 20 March 1981, in response to the demonstrations in Bangui and other towns such as Bossangoa, President Dacko proclaimed a state of siege, but this was lifted after 10 days. After the election President Dacko formed a new government composed exclusively of UDC members, under the premiership of Simon Bozanga.
In August and September several MLPC supporters who had been held under house arrest or restricted to provincial towns were set free. They had been adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International, as were the members of the MPLC released in November and December 1980, who included Joseph Beninga and Gabriel Dote-Batakara. Several supporters of the Front patriotique oubangien (FPO), Oubangui Patriotic Front, were also freed, including Nditifei Boysembe Marc, who had been detained at Ngaragba prison since 16 August 1980 accused of plotting to overthrow the government, and Cyriaque Bomba and Emmanuel Majot, who had been banished (assignés à résidence) to Boda and Bossangoa respectively after their arrest on 9 March 1980. Also set free was Massemba Ngolio, a joumaUst arrested in August 1980 for having filed a report to an international news agency which was considered to be insulting to President Dacko.
There were several trials of former officials accused of crimes committed during the rule of Emperor Bokassa. In December 1980 Emperor Bokassa's elder sister, Catherine Gbagalama, was convicted of carrying out arbitrary arrests, causing bodily harm and abusing the authority which she had held as Mayor of Pissa, a town 80 kilometres from Bangui. She was sentenced to three years' imprisonment, two of them suspended. She was released immediately as she had already spent 15 months in pre-trial custody. In December 1980, Louis Lakouama, a former Minister of Defence, and Jean-Robert Zana, a former Minister of Interior, were put on trial. They were both acquitted of charges connected with the killing of young people at Ngaragba prison in April 1979. In early 1981 several officials accused of crimes during the Bokassa era were still in prison awaiting trial: they included the former Prime Minister, Elisabeth Domitienne.
Former Emperor Bokassa, in exile in Ivory Coast since his overthrow in September 1979, was tried in his absence in December 1980. He was accused of responsibility for numerous murders, particularly of political prisoners, and also of expropriating and misusing
35
public funds. He was convicted and sentenced to death.
Six people were convicted of having committed murders while Bokassa was in power and sentenced to death. They included former prison guards found guilty of killing children at Ngaragba prison in April 1979. They were initially condemned to death by Bangui's Central Criminal Court in February 1980, but these sentences were annulled by the Supreme Court in August 1980. The six were tried again in September 1980 and were once again sentenced to death. Amnesty International appealed for these sentences to be commuted. The six prisoners also appealed to the President to commute their sentences. However all six were executed by firing-squad at the end of January 1981 and their bodies publicly displayed.
	
/	
	. > V
	V £
	} ')»
	
	
