Korea
(the Republic of)
The concerns of Amnesty International were the arrest and detention of prisoners of conscience, frequent and serious irregularities in the judicial process, the ill-treatment and torture of political prisoners and the use of the death penalty for political and criminal offences.
On 2 March 1981 Amnesty International launched a worldwide campaign to pubhcize its concerns in the Republic of Korea and to persuade the authorities to stop using political imprisonment, torture, unfair trial and the death penalty. These concerns were described in Republic of Korea: Violations of Human Rights, an Amnesty International report published at the beginning of the campaign.
Martial law had been imposed on most of the country after the assassination of President Park Chung-hee on 26 October 1979. On 17 May 1980 it was extended to the whole country. The martial law command issued Regulation No. 10 (MLR 10) which banned all political activities, tightened press censorship, prohibited strikes and made it illegal to criticize present or former presidents or to "spread rumours". The arrest, detention and search of anyone violating MLR 10 were permitted without warrant The declaration of nationwide martial law was followed within hours by the detention of student leaders and others known to be critical of the government In the capital, Seoul, hundreds of people were detained by the military authorities for investigation, some of whom had formerly been adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience. In the
230	
Kwangju area more than 500 people were detained, the majority of them after the army had quelled disturbances in the city on 27 May. On 18 May a student demonstration ended in violence when paratroopers intervened. Continuing clashes during the following days culminated in the demonstrators taking control of the city. On 27 May the army regained control.
In July 1980 Amnesty Intemational sent a mission to South Korea to discuss its concerns with the govemment and to investigate reports of mass arrests and torture since 17 May and the legal situation and treatment of prisoners detained before that date. The authorities refused to allow the delegates to enter the country. The Embassy of the Republic of Korea in Tokyo told the Amnesty International representatives that the timing of the mission was inconvenient because the issue of human rights was "too sensitive in South Korea at this time".
On 15 August 1980 Amnesty International submitted a number of recommendations to the government. These included appeals for the release of prisoners of conscience detained since before 17 May 1980; the release or trial of all those detained since that date, and the publication of a full list of detainees; the end of incommunicado detention and the investigation by an independent body of prisoners' claims of ill-treatment and torture; fair and open trials and in particular the exclusion from evidence of incriminating statements made under duress and respect for the principle that a defendant is presumed innocent until proved guilty.
Amnesty Intemational remained concemed at the use of laws other than the martial law regulations which allowed people to be detained for the non-violent exercise of their right to freedom of expression and association. Detention and arrests continued under provisions of the Anti-Communist Law, 1961, rescinded in January 1981, concerning activities allegedly benefiting the People's Democratic Republic of Korea; the National Security Law, 1960, concerning "anti-state organizations"; Articles 87,90 and 98 of the Criminal Code, concerning subversion and espionage; the Public Security Law, 1975, on preventive custody; and the Law on Assemblies and Demonstrations, amended in November 1980.
A new constitution was promulgated on 27 October 1980, guaranteeing freedom from torture, freedom of speech, press, assembly and association and the exclusion of forced confessions from evidence in coiul However, these rights may be restricted constitutionally "when necessary for national security, the maintenance of law and order or for public welfare" in violation of the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Martial law was partially lifted in September 1980 and completely rescinded on 25 January 1981,
231	
although the martial law courts continued to process cases until 24 February 1981. A presidential amnesty was granted to 5,221 criminal and political prisoners on the inauguration of President Chun Doo-hwan on 3 March; another presidential amnesty was granted on 3 April to 83 prisoners convicted on charges related to the Kwangju disturbances. Thirteen prisoners adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience were released under these amnesties.
In a letter to President Chun Doo-hwan on 27 February 1981 welcoming the lifting of martial law, Amnesty International recommended that the government consider ratifying the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. It also urged it to review the cases of all political detainees including those imprisoned under the previous government, as many had reportedly been convicted on the basis of confessions obtained under djiress and sometimes torture.
On 2 May 1980, 73 people were sentenced by Seoul District Criminal Court under the National Security and Anti-Communist laws in connection with an allegedly pro-communist group, the South Korean National Liberation Front (SKNLF) (see Amnesty International Report 1980). The court sentenced four defendants to death; 44 to terms of imprisonment ranging from three years to life; and 25 others received suspended sentences. On 2 May 1980 Amnesty International urged President Choi Kyu-hah tp commute the death sentences and expressed its concern at reported irregularities in the trial. In September the appeal court commuted two of the death sentences to life imprisonment but confirmed those on Lee Jae-mun and Shin Hyang-shik; it also reduced some sentences. On 24 December the Supreme Court confirmed both death sentences. At all stages of these legal proceedings Amnesty International urged the commutation of the death sentences, expressed concern at irregularities in the trial and called for a retrial. It received reports that the prisoners were ill-treated and tortured and had made confessions under duress. Several defendants had had limbs broken and one his spine. Amnesty International continued its investigation as it believed some of the prisoners might be prisoners of conscience. Among them were two prisoners of conscience who had already been arrested on other charges when accused of being members of the SKNLF. Lee Jae-oh, a high school teacher and Secretary General of the Executive Committee of Amnesty International in the Republic of Korea, was arrested on 6 August 1979 and charged with violations of Emergency Regulation No. 9 for criticizing the government in a speech at a prayer meeting (see	International Report 1980). At the time of his
arrest in March 1979 Im Tong-kyu was working at the Labour Affairs Research Institute of Korea University. While in prison he was indicted in the SKNLF case and given a second life sentence.
232	
On 19 May 1980 Amnesty International cabled President Choi Kyu-hah and martial law commander General Lee Hui-song, appealing for the release of Kim Dae-jung, the opposition leader, and requesting assurances that the 43 other people arrested on 17 May would be granted full legal safeguards, and that the charges against them would be made public if they were not immediately released. Kim Dae-jung and the 23 people who stood trial with him were held incommunicado until a few days before their trial began. On31 July KimDae-jungwas charged with having made speeches considered by the govemment to be beneficial to the People's Democratic Republic of Korea and with financing and instigating student disturbances in Kwangju on 19 to 27 May 1980 in an attempt to overthrow the govemment and seize power. Twelve of his co-defendants were charged with participating in a meeting which was illegal under martial law regulations and with conspiracy to subvert, under the criminal code. The others were charged with violations of martial law regulations. The trial before a military tribunal started on 14 August, and all were found guilty on 17 September. Kim Dae-jung was sentenced to death, the others to terms of imprisonment of between two and 20 years. Amnesty Intemational considers that their trial failed to fulfil intemationally recognized legal standards. All the defendants but one denied the charges and claimed that they had been beaten, intimidated and deprived of sleep to make them confess. Severe limitations were placed on the defence. The defendants were not allowed counsel of their choice: a number of civil rights lawyers were taken into custody and others were intimidated into not taking up the cases. Restrictions were put on the defendants' testimonies in court; no witnesses were called in the case of those charged only with violations of martial law; some witnesses were reportedly intimidated and witnesses for the defence not allowed to give evidence; confessions were accepted as evidence without proper examination of their validity or of the defendants' claims that they had been improperly obtained.
Amnesty Intemational cabled President Chun Doo-hwan on 24 September 1980 urging him to commute the death sentence on Kim Dae-jung if upheld by the appeal courts. Amnesty International repeatedly appealed for the immediate and unconditional release of Kim Dae-jung and his co-defendants, or for their retrial in an open court with full legal safeguards. On 2 December 1980 it appealed to the heads of govemment of the 43 member countries of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in an effort to prevent the execution of Kim Dae-jung. The sentences on Kim Dae-jung and some of his co-defendants were confirmed by the Supreme Court on 23 January 1981. After worldwide expressions of concem Kim Dae-jung's death sentence was commuted to life imprisonment by the
233	
President and the sentences on 11 co-defendants were reduced to five to 15 years. On 23 January 1981 Amnesty International wrote to President Chun Doo-hwan to welcome his decision to cpmmute the death sentence on Kim Dae-jung, and urged him to exercise his presidential power of clemency to commute all death sentences submitted to him. Among those sentenced with Kim Dae-jung for whose release Amnesty International continued to appeal were: Reverend Moon Ik-hwan, a Presbyterian minister adopted twice before by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience; Reverend Lee Moon-young, formerly a professor at Korea University, dismissed for political activity, who had been adopted as a prisoner of conscience twice before in 1977 and 1979; Ye Chon-ho, a former member of the National Assembly; Koh Eun, a poet, previously adopted as a prisoner of conscience after his arrest in 1979; Cho^ong-oo, a student at Korea University; and SulHun, also a student adopted as a prisoner of conscience after his arrest in 1977 (see Amnesty International Report 1977 and 1980).
Amnesty International also adopted as prisoners of conscience several of Kim Dae-jung's associates after they were arrested on 17 May 1980. They were tried by the Capital Garrison Court Martial in September 1980 for holding a meeting in violation of martial law regulations. The Supreme Court reduced their sentences to terms of imprisonment ranging from one and a half to three years. They included Han Hwa-gap, press secretary to Kim Dae-jung (see Amnesty International Report 1980), Kim Ok-doo and Han Yun-shik, secretaries of Kim Dae-jung.
Amnesty International called for the release of a number of students arrested after demonstrations in May 1980 in Seoul and in provincial cities. Jhese demonstrations were largely peaceful and Amnesty International received no information to suggest that these students had used or advocated violence. Two of them, Kim Bong-wu, a student at Kyunghee University, and Cho Tae-won, a student at Pusan University, were sentenced to three years' imprisonment for violation of MLR 10. Both had previously been adopted as prisoners of conscience when arrested in 1978 and 1979 respectively.
Amnesty International was concerned about the reported ill-treatment and torture of the people detained in connection with violent disturbances in Kwangju in May 1980. Several prisoners were reported to have died while under interrogation. Prisoners were reportedly beaten, deprived of sleep and subjected to long periods of continuous interrogation to make them confess. Amnesty International was concerned also about irregularities in proceedings against 390 people sentenced on 25 October 1980 by a Kwangju martial law court on charges including liaison with Kim Dae-jung, and
234	
attempted insurrection. The defendants were not allowed lawyers of their choice.
On 27 October Amnesty Intemational cabled President Chun Doo-hwan and martial law commander General Lee Hui-song deploring the imposition of five death sentences and urging the defendants' retrial in an open court with full legal safeguards. Two prisoners had their death sentences commuted by a military appeal court on 31 December 1980. The Supreme Court rejected the appeals of the three others on 31 March but their sentences were commuted by President Chun Doo-hwan on 3 April 1980. Among the defendants sentenced to prison on 25 October a number had their sentences suspended by the appeal courts. A few others benefited from the presidential amnesty on 3 March 1981, and 57 of the 83 whose sentences were confirmed by the Supreme Court at the end of March were released by presidential amnesty on 3 April 198]. Amnesty International appealed for the release of some of these prisoners whom it had adopted as prisoners of conscience. Among them were Hong Nam-soon, a prominent civil rights lawyer, Professor Myong No-keun, from Chunnam University and Father Kim Sang-yong, who were prominent members of the Citizens' Committee to Seek Solutions to the Kwangju Disturbance. The committee wrote to the President asking for a government apKDiogy for its handling of the disturbances.
Amnesty Intemational leamed of 37 journalists detained during the year. It adopted as prisoners of conscience three members of the Joumalists' Association of Korea, including its President. On 17 May 1980 the association complained to the military authorities about censorship and threatened to stop work. Kim Tae-hong, the President of the association, was arrested on 27 August after several months in hiding. Details of his trial and his sentence are not known. Eight joumalists who protested against the tightening of press censorship under MLR 10 and were charged under the Anti-Communist Law and MLR 10 with "spreading false and malicious mmours" about the army's actions during the Kwangju disturbances were also adopted as prisoners of conscience. Four of them were reportedly released on 13 February 1981.
Amnesty Intemational has been investigating reports of arrests of joumalists, students and trade unionists during the last three months of 1980.
When student Kang Jong-kon's five-year sentence on political charges expired on 14 February 1981 he was reported to have been detained under the PubHc Security Law. Amnesty Intemational appealed for his release in the belief that he was detained because of his refusal to change his political views.
235	
Amnesty International investigated the arrests of students in March and April 1981 after demonstrations at several universities. They were charged under the Law on Assemblies and Demonstrations. According to information received they had neither used nor advocated violence, and Amnesty Intemational appealed for their release.
Amnesty Intemational continued to appeal for the release of prisoners of conscience detained for many years. Among them were 16 prisoners tried in the "People's Revolutionary Party" case in 1974 (see Amnesty International Report 1980). In August 1980 it launched a special appeal for the release of Soh Joon-shik and Soh Sung, who have been detained since 1971. Soh Sung was serving a sentence of life imprisonment; Soh Joon-shik was still held in detention under the Public Security Law, although his sentence had expired in May 1978.
On 11 December 1980 the poet Kim Chi-ha was released from prison. The life sentence he had received on account of his writings had already been commuted to 20 years' imprisonment (see International Report 1978, 1979, 1980). Also released on that date were Professor Yu In-ho, a co-defendant of Kim Dae-jung, and six defendants in the Young Women's Christian Association (YWCA) case of November 1979 (see Amnesty International Report 1980). Five more defendants in this case were reportedly released in the 3 March 1981 presidential amnesty. Amnesty International also welcomed the release under the 3 March 1981 presidential amnesty of Lee Bu-yong, a reporter, adopted by Amnesty International after his arrest in December 1979 {sqq Amnesty Intemational Report 1980).
During the year Amnesty International worked on behalf of 140 prisoners of conscience and other political prisoners, and appealed for a fair trial for many more.
Amnesty Intemational continued to appeal for the commutation of death sentences for political and criminal offences. During the year 10 death sentences were imposed for political offences, eight of which were later commuted by the President. There were, to Amnesty International's knowledge, seven political prisoners on death row. Two had their sentences confirmed by the Supreme Court in December 1980: Lee Jae-mun and Shin Hyang-shik, both sentenced in the SKNLF case. An application for retrial by the other five was rejected on 25 July 1980. In a letter to President Chun on 23 January 1981 in which it welcomed his decision to commute the death sentence on Kim Dae-jung, Amnesty Intemational urged the commutation of the death sentence on four prisoners, expressing its belief that they had been convicted after unfair trials. Five people convicted in December 1979 of the assassination of President Park and sentenced to death were executed on 24 May 1980.
236_
