Thailand
Amnesty Intemational's main concerns were political imprisonment, the prison conditions of political prisoners, and the death penalty.
The constitution of 1978 (chapter 3, section 27) guarantees the presumption of innocence, access to courts or administrative bodies to seek redress, and the right to legal counsel in all cases before a court. However, the right to legal counsel may be denied during the pre-trial period which diminishes legal protection.
Furthermore, provisions of the Anti-Communist Activities Act of February 1979 allow people accused of communist activities to be detained for up to 210 days with the approval of the police Director-General, and for up to 480 days with the permission of a military or criminal court The number of people held under this act was not available, but it appeared that arrests were few and concentrated in southern and northeastern Thailand.
More than 200 people were reportedly still held without trial since their arrests between 1976 and 1978 under previous govemments. They had been sentenced administratively without trial under Martial Law Decrees 21 and 22. Twenty-eight of the prisoners were believed to have received life sentences and a further 89 were sentenced to 10 years' or more imprisonment.
In a letter to the Prime Minister of Thailand, General Prem Tinsulanond, in April 1981 Amnesty Intemational pointed out that the continued detention of these individuals contravened the United Nations Declaration of Himian Ri^ts and the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Amnesty Intemational noted with regret
268	
that although the government had abolished the relevant decrees over 200 people were still detained under these provisions. Amnesty International urged that their cases be reviewed immediately, and that they be released or charged and brought to an early trial.
Following reports that refugees were being coerced into returning to Kampuchea to fight, Amnesty Intemational cabled Prem Tin-sulanond. Prime Minister of Thailand, on 23 May 1980 urging his govemment to continue to grant the right of first asylum to people trying to flee Kampuchea for fear of political reprisals and to ftirther guarantee that Kampuchean refugees who did not wish to retum for Pear of such reprisals from any of the contending forces in Kampuchea be given all facilities to apply for resettlement in a third country. In June 1980, and in spite of opposition from the authorities of the People's Republic of Kampuchea, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees supervised a volimtary repatriation scheme.
In December 1980 the govemment released a group of 186 prisoners, largely Chinese and Vietnamese, who had been in detention for up to 20 years awaiting deportation on charges of illegal immigration. Most were over 50 years old and one man was 83. They complained of inadequate medical conditions in prison and of frequent beatings by guards. Amnesty Intemational believes that some 56 prisoners, also accused of illegal immigration, remained in detention at Bangkhen Temporary Prison in Bangkok.
Prison conditions continued to concem domestic civil rights groups and Amnesty Intemational. In June 1980 the Lawyers Association of Thailand and the Coordinating Group for Religion in Society published a study criticizing overcrowding and ill-treatment of detainees in prisons. Amnesty Intemational also continued to receive reports of persistent human rights violations including killings in southem Thailand, which it has not been able to substantiate.
According to recent reports four executions took place in 1980.
269	

'-J	iV	-i
