Mauritania
The main concerns of Amnesty International were detention without charge or trial and house arrest, unfair trials, torture, judicial amputations and floggings, and the death penalty.
In early March 1980 demonstrations in the capital, Nouakchott, and several major towns called for greater equality for the Haràtine, a black Arabic-speaking minority composed of freed slaves of the politically dominant Maure (Arab-Berber) community. Demonstrators also called for the release of four Haratine who had earlier been arrested after protests against the sale in Atar of a young woman by her slave-master. As many as 50 susp>ected members of a clandestine Haratine movement known as El Hor were arrested after these demonstrations and some are believed to have been badly beaten in detention. Most were released shortly afterwards, but 17 were tried in early May 1980 before the newly-formed Special Military Court on state security charges. All received three-month suspended prison sentences and fines. A further 18 Haratine were arrested in March 1980 in Atar, apparently accused of trespass after trying to prevent the sale of the young slave. They were freed in late 1980 after being held without trial for several months. Also freed in late 1980 was Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, director of the nationalized SNIM mining company, whose case was investigated by Amnesty International after he was arrested in April 1980 and accused of involvement in the Haratine movement. In early July 1980 the ruling Comité militaire de salut national (CMSN), the Mihtary Committe for National Salvation, announced that it had abolished slavery, and that a national commission had been formed to evaluate the compensation due to former slave-owners.
Throughout the year the authorities detained without trial suspected opponents of their policies. In April 1980 school inspectors Bal Fadel and M'Bodj Samba Bedou, former teacher Sy Omar Satigui, entrepreneur Ba Youssouf and government official Kane Sai'dou were detained for alleged opposition to government policies. All are believed to have been tortured after their arrest, and to have been held incommunicado until their release in November 1980. Also arrested in April 1980 were former Ministère Sidi Cheikh Ould Abdellahi, Mohammed Ould Sidi Babah, Abdoulaye Baro and Abdallah Ould Ismael, apparently suspected of sympathy with opposition movements. All were placed under house arrest. Their cases were taken up by Amnesty International.
65
In mid-December 1980 around 120 pupils at the Lycée franco-arabe (secondary school) in Nouakchott were briefly held in detention after protests against some members of the teaching staff. Police are reported to have severely beaten demonstrators. Four former senior officials — Taleb Mohammed Ould M'Rabott, Dah Ould Abdel Jelil, Mourio Ould Hassen and Malokif Ould El Hassen — were arrested in the same month after demonstrations in Nouakchott calling for a return to civilian rule. Amnesty International was investigating their cases. In late December 1980 Ahmed Baba Miske, Mauritania's former Ambassador to the United Nations, and at least four others were arrested after the authorities claimed to have uncovered a "pro-Libyan" plot to overthrow the government. Ahmed Baba Miske and Mohammed El-Wafi were placed under house arrest in Akjoujt, while the others are believed to have been imprisoned. Charges against them were dismissed by a civil court in late February 1981 and all were released. Amnesty International was concerned .about the continued house arrest of four former officials arrested in June and October 1979 including former Ministers Abdallah Ould Bah, Ahmed Ould Daddah and Hamdi Ould Mouknass. The last was seriously ill, and was allowed out of the country temporarily in October 1980 for medical treatment after a number of interventions on his behalf.
On 16 March 1981 an armed attempt to overthrow the ruling CMSN was staged in Nouakchott led by former senior officers of the Mauritanian army who had joined the clandestine ^//mncepour une Mauritanie démocratique (AMD), an opposition movement associated with former President Moktar Ould Daddah, whose leading members were exiled in Morocco and France. About 10 soldiers and civilians were killed in the attack, which was repulsed by forces loyal to the CMSN. In the days after the attack Mauritania broke off diplomatic relations with Morocco; head of state Lieutenant-Colonel Mohammed Ould Haidalia claimed it had been directly involved in training and transporting the insurgents. At least nine rebels were arrested, and the authorities are reported to have detained about 50 sympathizers in Nouakchott. After a trial before the Special Military Tribunal Lieutenant-Colonel Ahmed Salem Ould Sidi, former Vice-President of the CMSN, Lieutenant-Colonel Mohammed Ba Ould Abdel Kader, former Minister of Education and member of the CMSN, and Lieutenants Moustapha Niang and Mohammed Doudou Seek, were convicted of "high treason, murder and conspiracy with the enemy", and sentenced to death. Five others received sentences of life imprisonment with hard labour. Despite appeals for clemency from Amnesty International and other organizations, the four men sentenced to death were executed in late March 1981. About 20 alleged
66
supporters of the AMD who had been arrested were reportedly freed in late March. Amnesty International continued its investigations into the identities of those in detention and the charges against them.
Amnesty International was concerned about reports of trials held in the absence of the accused, in camera, and without defence representation. In mid-November 1980 former President Moktar Ould Daddah was sentenced in his absence to imprisonment for life with hard labour by the Special Military Court on charges of "high treason, violation of the constitution and of the nation's economic interests." The court also sentenced Lieutenant-Colonel Mohammed Ba Ould Abdel Kader to death in his absence on charges of " desertion, treason, plotting against the internal and external security of the State". In February 1981 the Special Military Court sentenced Lieutenant Moustapha Niang to death in his absence on similar charges, and handed down long terms of imprisonment to six other absent defendants. Both Lieutenant-Colonel Kader and Lieutenant Niang were executed in late March 1981 after participating in the failed attack on Nouakchott. In mid-March 1981 the Special Military Court convened to deliver three death sentences in absentia to individuals allegedly involved in the March attack.
Amnesty International is also concerned about the cruel penalties which have been imposed by the SharVa or Islamic law court. This court was formally established in July 1980 to ensure what Minister Colonel Dia Amadou termed "good, swift and effective justice" to combat rising crime. It promptly imposed two death sentences and one sentence of amputation of the right hand. On 19 September 1980, near Nouakchott, in front of several thousand people, the first prisoner was executed by firing-squad. Three others were then led into a tent to have their right hand cut off by a medical auxiliary from Nouakchott hospital. After each amputation, performed without general anaesthetic, the medical auxihary left the tent and held up the amputated hand for the crowd to see. All three hands were finally held up to public view on a rope. In its appeals to the government and to the medical association in Mauritania Amnesty International called for an end to these penalties and to the participation of medical personnel in contravention of the Hippocratic Oath and the World Medical Association's Declaration of Tokyo. It was later learned that the Association des médecins, pharmaciens et odontologistes de Mauritanie, the Mauritanian Association of Doctors, Pharmacists and Dentists, had protested vigorously to the authorities about involving a member of the medical profession in the amputations.
In early October 1980 nine men were publicly given from 10 to 30 lashes of the whip after being convicted of theft by the Shari'a court After being convicted of murder by the same court Mouhamed Ould
67
Alioune was publicly executed in early December 1980. In a statement commemorating International Human Rights Day on 10 December 1980 the Minister of Foreign Affairs is reported to have stated that the application of Shari'a law in Mauritania was motivated by the government's "constant preoccupation ... to safeguard human rights".
