German Democratic Republic
Amnesty International's main concem continued to be the arrest of GDR citizens for the non-violent exercise of human rights, in particular the right to freedom of expression and the right to leave one's country. On 4 Febmary 1981 Amnesty Intemational published German Democratic Republic (GDR), a revised version of its briefing paper first published in October 1977.
During the year Amnesty Intemational worked on behalf of 190 prisoners of conscience or people thought likely to be prisoners of conscience. The majority of these were would-be emigrants, imprisoned either for attempting to leave the country without permission or for persisting in efforts to obtain permission. Others included a conscientious objector to military service, and a number of people arrested for expressing critical views.
The GDR has ratified a number of international human rights instruments, including the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, but the exercise of some of these rights is severely restricted by articles in the penal code, in particular Articles 99 ("treasonable passing on of information") and 106 ("incitement hostile to the state"). Article 99 proscribes "handing over, collecting or making available" information "not categorized as secret" (the handing over of secret information is proscribed elsewhere in the penal code) "to the disadvantage of the interests of the GDR" to a "foreign power, its institutions or representatives ... or to foreign organizations as well as their helpers". Amnesty Intemational considers that this article of the penal code restricts the right"to seek, receive and pass on information regardless of frontiers" (Article 19 of the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights) in a way that goes well beyond the restrictions allowed by the covenant. The offence carries a prison term of from two to 12 years and has been used against a number of would-be emigrants who have asked foreign organizations to help with their efforts to emigrate legally. Siegfried Domeier, a baker, and his wife Steffania, a waitress, were typical. After applying repeatedly but without success for permission to emigrate they contacted organizations in the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG) for help. As a result their story was publicized in the FRG. They were arrested in April 1980 and each sentenced in September to three years six months' imprisonment for " treasonable passing on of information". They were released on 2 April 1981.
298	
The exercise of the right to freedom of expression is further restricted by Article 106 of the penal code, "incitement hostile to the state", which proscribes discrediting "social conditions, representatives or other citizens of the GDR because of their state or social activity" and importing, producing, disseminating or displaying "writings, objects or symbols" for this purpose. Amnesty International sought the release of a number of prisoners convicted under this article, including Simone Langrock, a 23-year-old bank employee. She was arrested on 22 April 1980 after taking part in dissident activities including distributing leaflets appealing for the release of political prisoners in the GDR. She had also applied for permission to emigrate. On 15 May she was sentenced to five years' imprisonment for "incitement hostile to the state". Several members of her family have been imprisoned for political reasons, including her grandfather, Albert Mainz, as a communist under the Nazis, and her father, Rolf Mainz, recently imprisoned in the GDR on the same charge of "incitement hostile to the state".
In February 1981 Amnesty International sent a copy of the revised briefing paper to Erich Honecker, Chairman of the State Council, and appealed to him to initiate a review of the penal code to ensure that it conformed, both in substance and application, with the GDR's international commitments to respect human rights. Until the outcome of such a review Amnesty International urged that prosecutions under articles of the penal code which explicitly restrict the exercise of human rights, including Articles 99 and 106, be suspended.
Amnesty International has received no reply to this letter, but on 6 February Erich Honecker, commenting on the briefing paper, described Amnesty International as "one of the many organizations in the West, funded by shady sources, whose task it is to slander respectable states". He also said that since 1979 there had been no political prisoners in the GDR. The interview was carried in a number of publications including the Berliner Zeitung, a GDR newspaper, and the FRG weekly magazine Stern. Amnesty International wrote again to Erich Honecker informing him fully about its policies on the acceptance of funds and explaining that the organization seeks to end human rights violations falling within its mandate, irrespective of where they take place. The letter noted his statement that there were no political prisoners in the GDR and enclosed a list of people, including Simone Langrock, whom Amnesty International believed to be prisoners of conscience, urging that their cases be examined.
Following the publication of the briefing paper Amnesty International groups as part of a campaign wrote to the authorities urging the release of all prisoners of conscience and the repeal of laws resulting in their conviction.
299	
Prisoners of conscience continued to be released to the FRG, before completing their sentences, in exchange for money paid by the FRG Government. This is commonly known as the "buying out" scheme. Although many prisoners have gained their freedom in this way, Amnesty International does not endorse prisoner exchanges, and calls upon governments to release prisoners of conscience without conditions. The FRG authorities hold that the "buying out" scheme is the only effective help for prisoners of conscience in the GDR and that action by others on behalf of the prisoner, particularly publicity, could only hinder their efforts. They discouraged relatives and others with information about prisoners of conscience from seeking publicity or contacting other organizations. During the year they urged a number of organizations in the FRG to stop publicizing information about' prisoners of conscience in the GDR. Amnesty International has repeatedly urged the FRG authorities to provide examples where publicity has had an adverse effect on prisoners, as this has not been borne out by its own observations, but they have not done so. Amnesty International was concerned that the withholding of information about prisoners of conscience in the GDR from the public might impede efforts to combat human rights violations in this country. These concerns were raised in a meeting between Amnesty International and the FRG Ministry responsible for the "buying out" scheme in West Berlin in September 1980.
The death penalty is retained for a number of offences including political ones. In October 1980 Hans-Joachim Heusinger, the Minister of Justice, stated that no death sentences had been passed or carried out during the past few years, but that the death penalty would nonetheless be retained for the time being. As part of the campaign Amnesty International groups wrote to the-autliorities urging them to consider whether the time had not come to abolish this form of punishment, in view of the fact that it had not been used in recent years.
300_
