Philippines
On 17 January 1981 President Marcos lifted the state of martial law in force since September 1972. Amnesty International's concerns since the imposition of martial law have been: the arrest and detention of prisoners of conscience; the detention of political prisoners for long periods without trial; the trial of political prisoners before military tribunals under procedures which do not conform to internationally recognized standards; the extralegal practices of military personnel including arrest and detention without charge or trial, "disappearance", torture and killing of people considered opponents of the government; the imposition of the death penalty by civil and military courts and the extension of the range of offences for which the death penalty may be imposed. Amnesty International was concerned that the pattern of human rights violations established during the period of martial law did not end with its lifting. The grounds for such concern were the wide-ranging emergency powers retained by the President, particularly regarding arrest and detention, the prominent role still assigned to the armed forces and continuing reports of human rights violations.
Under the martial law p>owers the armed forces were authorized to arrest and detain for prosecution or preventive detention anyone suspected of conspiring "to seize political and state power". During the period of martial law approximately 70,000 people were detained under these provisions. Amnesty International believes that in recent
251	
years approximately 1,000 political detainees were held under martial law at any one time. Many of these were held for short periods so that the total number of arrests in one year was considerably higher than 1,000.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive regular reports of torture after arrest Prisoners have frequently been tortured during "tactical interrogation" immediately after arrest by a unit of the intelligence and security forces. They were often held incommunicado in secret holding centres known as "safe houses". Some who "disappeared" into "safe houses" were released later or reappeared in a military detention centre. Others never reappeared and their fate or whereabouts after abduction was never ascertained. Other victims were later found dead and mutilated in isolated areas. In the period 1975 to 1980 Amnesty International received reports of more than 230 cases of "disappearance". Five such cases on which Amnesty Intemational had been working were referred to the United Nations Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances in September 1980.
Large numbers of people believed to have engaged in non-violent protest against govemment policies were arrested during the year. On 20 and 21 May 1980, 22 people, mostly students associated with the Student Christian Movement were arrested in Cebu City after protests against a government slum clearance project They were later charged with subversion and Amnesty International investigated their cases. In Manila, between June and the end of September 1980, at least 60 students were arrested for what the govemment called "preventive reasons", after taking part in demonstrations focusing on educational issues and the continued imposition of martial law. On 2 and 3 September 1980 a number of trade unionists were arrested. They were associated with the PhiUppine Alliance of Labor Organizations, the National Federation of Labor and the Kilusang Mayo Uno (KMU), First of May Movement, which were jointly planning a labour rally for 25 September. Although most were released within days, three, including Ernesto Arellano, Executive Secretary of KMU, who was adopted as a prisoner of conscience, were not released until 9 April 1981. Demonstrations against martial law which took place in September, around the anniversary of the proclamation of martial law, prompted further arrests in Manila, Cebu City, Davao City and elsewhere.
Amnesty Intemational also received reports of individuals being arrested for exercising their right to freedom of expression. Father Pepito Bernardo, a priest from the diocese of Cabanatuan who has worked among tribal peoples in the Philippines and is a board member of the Episcopal Commission on Tribal Filipinos (ECTF), an
252	
organization founded under the auspices of the CathoHc Bishops' Conference of the PhiUppines, was arrested on 26 September 1980 in Hagan, Isabela, for allegedly being in possession of "subversive materials". He was later served with an Arrest, Search and Seizure Order (ASSO) and taken to Bicutan Rehabilitation Centre. He was adopted as a prisoner of conscience.
As a result of widespread arrests in the Manila area between June and October 1980, the number of people held in the chief military detention centre in the Metro Manila area, the Bicutan Rehabilitation Centre (Camp Bagong Diwa), more than trebled. Compounding the problem of overcrowding was an instruction issued in June 1980 which gave the President sole authority to approve the release of people arrested by ASSO, which slowed the release process. On 29 September 1980 the detainees in Bicutan went on a three-day hunger-strike in pursuit of a number of demands including: abandonment of the new release procedures; the immediate release of 54 detainees recommended for release by the Ministry of NationalDefense; and an increase in the food allowance. A second hunger-strike for the same demands, involving 132 detainees, was held between 3 and 21 November. On 6 November Amnesty Intemational launched an appeal urging the authorities to improve conditions in Bicutan and to review release procedures. It also urged the authorities to ensure that no reprisals would be taken against those participating in the hunger-strike, as had happened after previoiR hunger-strikes. On learning that five detainees, including Father Bernardo, were seriously ill as a result of the hunger-strike and that two others, José Luneta and Satumino Ocampo, had been punished by being removed from Bicutan to the Military Security Unit (MSU), Fort Bonifacio, Amnesty Intemational launched a further appeal on 18 November 1980. The appeal called for all necessary medical treatment for the ill, for the release of Father Bemardo, and for no reprisals to be taken against those on hunger-strike. On 21 November, after receiving assurances that a number of detainees would be released, the prisoners ended their hunger-strike. Between October and December
1980	Amnesty Intemational also leamed of hunger-strikes for improved conditions and release of detainees in Camp Alagar (Cagayan de Oro), Camp Bagong Ibalon (Legaspi City) and Camps Lahug and Sergio Osmena Sr (Cebu City).
In the period around the lifting of martial law the authorities announced the release and amnesty of large numbers of detainees and former detainees. Between 29 November 1980 and 18 January
1981	the amnesty and temporary or permanent release of 3,762 detainees and former detainees were announced. The majority were alleged members of the guerrilla New People's Army (NPA) and the
253	
Muslim secessionist Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF) who had already been released, and who were now granted amnesties. Others had been convicted by military tribunals of common crimes such as gambling, illegal firearms possession, robbery and murder. Amnesty International believes that no more than 129 of those released between 29 November and 17 January were political detainees. Amnesty International understands that 12 prisoners were released from Bicutan on 18 January 1981.
On 17 January 1981 it was announced that 341 prisoners, 159 of whom were said to be charged with public order and national security offences, would be released. Between 5 March and 20 April 1981 a further 13 detainees were released from Dorm 9-C, New Bilibid Prisons, Muntinlupa, where they had been transferred on the lifting of martial law. Amnesty International also learned of individual releases of detainees in the period after the lifting of martial law. On 5 December 1980, 24 December 1980, and 20 January 1981, Amnesty International wrote to President Marcos to welcome reports of the release and amnesty of 232,1,200, and 159 detainees respectively. On each occasion it asked for full lists of those released No such lists were provided, but it would appear that fewer than 200 detainees held for national security and public order offences were freed. Moreover, it appears that all were granted "temporary release": their cases were still pending before the courts, and they were still subject to restrictions on their freedom of movement and association and had to report regularly to the authorities.
Eleven prisoners whose cases had been taken up by Amnesty International were among those released. Most had been held in detention centres in the Manila area. Three women detainees, Marietta Socorro Briones, Luminada Malingin and Linda Angel Rentillosa, who had been held in Camp Lahug, Cebu City, and were among the 22 charged with subversion, were released in January 1981. Eduardo Quitoriano, an adopted prisoner of conscience held on charges of subversion since December 1978, was released from Camp Alagar, Cayagan de Oro City, Misamis Oriental, on 14 February 1981. On 24 December 1980 Father Pepito Bernardo and Father Jeremías Aquino were released (see Amnesty International Report 1980). On 13 December 1980 Leoncio Co, who had been detained without trial on subversion charges since March 1970, before the declaration of martial law, was released. Four other detainees facing charges of rebellion or subversion or both — Eduardo Lingat, Fernando Tayag, Delfin Delica and Hermengildo Garcia — were released between 29 November 1980 and 6 April 1981.
Despite the lifting of martial law, the powers retained by the
254	
President are extensive. They are set forth in: Amendment 6 to the 1973 Constitution ratified in the referendum of October 1976; the Public Order Act (Presidential Decree (PD) No. 1737); and the National Security Code (PD No. 1498). Amendment 6 allows the President to exercise emergency powers short of declaring a state of martial law. PD No. 1737 specifies the emergency powers to be exercised by the President under Amendment 6, among them the power to take whatever measures he may deem necessary to meet an emergency "including but not limited to preventive detention". The National Security Code is a compilation of orders and decrees issued under martial law relating to national security and pubhc order, including General Order (GO) No. 2 as amended which authorizes the Minister of National Defense to arrest, detain and release people believed to have committed specified security and pubhc order offences. In addition. Proclamation No. 2045 lifting the state of martial law provides that the suspension of the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus, which had been introduced with the imposition of martial law, would continue in areas in Mindanao where ¿le MNLF were active, and with respect to people detained for public order and security off"ences. The only martial law decree or order known to have been revoked on the lifting of martial law was GO No. 8 of 27 September 1972, which had created military tribunals with jurisdiction over specified offences which included security and public order offences.
Despite the revocation of GO No. 8 Proclamation No. 2045 provided for military tribunals to continue to hear cases pending before them. It appeared that the effect of revoking GO No. 8 was to reaffirm Letter of Instruction (LOI) No. 772 of November 1978 in which President Marcos had ordered all new cases over which military tribunals had previously held jurisdiction to be referred in future to the civil courts. The implementation of LOI No. 772 was uneven, with some new security and public order cases still being referred to military tribunals and others to civil courts. In 1980, for example, at least three major political cases were referred to military tribunals: tiiose of Olaguer et al, Kalaw et al and Pinguel et al. The Supreme Court is understood in January 1981 to have rejected habeas corpus petitions in three major martial law cases. One of these cases, that of Aquino et al, was reported to have been reopened before a military tribunal in April 1981.
During the period of martial law the military tribunals were challenged on a variety of grounds including their denial of defendants' rights to due process. Military tribunals were constituted not as part of the judiciary but as agencies of the executive; their members were career officers ultimately responsible to the President in his capacity
255	
as commander-in-chief. Moreover, very few trials started before military tribunals and even fewer were completed both because pretrial and trial proceedings were subject to inordinate delays and because cases were suspended for long periods awaiting decisions from the Supreme Court on defendants' petitions. Amnesty International knows of no cases of a political nature decided by military tribunals during the year.
A small number of detainees were transferred from military detention centres to civilian prisons on the lifting of martial law. Thirty-three were transferred from the Bicutan Rehabilitation Centre to Dorm-9C, the National Penitentiary, Muntinlupa. Amnesty International also learned of transfers from military detention centres in Benguet, Pangasinan and Davao City to city and provincial jails. However at the end of April 1981 a number of military camps were still being used as detention centres, including Camp Olivas in Pampanga, Camp Bagong Ibalon in Legaspi City and Camp Lahug Detention Centre in Cebu City. Detainees were also still being held in places administered by branches of the intelligence and security services such as 4th Regional Security Unit (RSÚ-4), Camp Crame, Quezon City and the MSU, Fort Bonifacio. Prisoners transferred to Muntinlupa faced worse prison conditions and the 33 detainess held there went on a three-day protest hunger-strike on 16 February 1981. In the following two months 12 prisoners were released from Muntinlupa and six transferred back to the Bicutan Rehabilitation Centre. The centre had been reopened earlier to accommodate three detainees transferred from the MSU. The three included Saturnino Ocampo and Sixto Carlos Jr, whose cases have been taken up by Amnesty Intemational.
Amnesty International was concemed by continuing evidence of torture and ill-treatment, "disappearances" and extrajudicial killings. Amnesty Intemational knows of cases where detainees, having suffered severe torture during interrogation, were subsequently held incommunicado in a detention centre for an indefinite period. Approximately 20 prisoners were still detained in restrictive conditions, including in some cases total isolation, in the MSU, Fort Bonifacio, at the end of April 1981. Among them were alleged leaders of the Communist Party of the Philippines and the NPA, including the alleged Communist Party Chairman José Maria Sison and his wife Juliet Delima Sison, who have been held in solitary confinement since their arrest in November 1977. Bemabe Buscayno, a former commander of the NPA, has been detained in isolation in RSU-4, Camp Crame, since shortly after his arrest in August 1976. Benigno Aquino, the former leader of the Liberal Party and regarded as President Marcos' chief political rival before martial law, was released from the
256	
MSU on 8 May to have heart surgery in the United States of America. He was charged in his absence, together with 86 others, of complicity in the urban bombing campaign undertaken by the so-called April 6 Movement between August and October 1980. Also alleged to be involved in the April 6 Movement were a number of prominent exiled politicians, and former Senator Jovito Salonga, still resident in the Philippines, who was arrested on 11 October 1980 and detained in the MSU until 30 November when he was placed under house arrest.
In April 1981 it was reported that Maria Milagros Lumabi-Echanis was also being held in the MSU. On 16 August 1980 she had been taken with her two-month-old son by men in plain clothes from her uncle's house in Manila. Her parents' attempts to discover her whereabouts from the authorities proved fruitless. On 11 March, after learning that she had been seen in the MSU, Amnesty Intemational appealed to the authorities to confirm that she was being held there and urged that she be released or, if charged, be transferred to a regular detention centre.
Two other cases of "disappearance" — those of Romeo Crismo and Petronilo Torno — were investigated by Amnesty Intemational. No information has been received on their whereabouts or fate. Romeo Crismo, a public accountant and former leader of the Methodist Youth Fellowship, "disappeared" in Cagayan province on 12 August 1980. Petronilo Tomo, a trade unionist, was taken from his home in Quezon province, reportedly by members of the Philippine Constabulary, in June 1980, shortly after being released from detention together with a number of fellow trade unionists.
Amnesty Intemational has received frequent reports in recent years of extrajudicial killings by military units, by irregular units believed to be acting as agents of the armed forces, or by other officials. This practice is known in the Philippines as "salvaging". Amnesty Intemational received reports of more than 300 cases of "salvaging" between 1975 and April 1980. The number of reported cases grew each year. Many were reported from Davao and Maguin-danao in Mindanao, Quezon province and the Bicol region in Luzon, and Samar and Negros Occidental in the Visayas. Two instances of "salvaging" — the killing of Macli-ing Dulag in Kalinga-Apayao, northern Luzon, and the killings of nine people in Negros Occidental — received wide publicity. In August 1980 the Minister of National Defense, Juan Ponce Enrile, announced that four army personnel had been charged in connection with the killing of Macli-ing Dulag, but Amnesty Intemational has received no further information about the trials. Nineteen people including the Mayor of Kabankalan, Negros Occidental, were charged with murder after the "disappearance" of 14 residents between 29 March and 7 May 1980. However none of
257	
the people charged were in detention at the end of April 1981 and no reports have been received indicating any progress in their trial. Amnesty International received further reports of "salvaging" from the Bicol region in southern Luzon; Quezon, Cagayan and Isabela provinces in eastern Luzon; and Nueva Ecija, central Luzon. It has also received reports of killings by private armies, allegedly operating with official sanction. One such case involved the death on 13 April 1981 of Father Godofredo Alingal, priest of the parish of Kibawe, Bukidnon, Mindanao.
Amnesty International believes that more than 800 people were under sentence of death, most in the National Penitentiary, Muntinlupa They included Sabiniano Contreras, sentenced to death in March 1972 when he was 15 years old. Amnesty International wrote to President Marcos on 30 October 1980 urging him to do everything in his power to intervene and remove him from death row. Almost all those under sentence of death were awaiting review of their sentences by the Supreme Court Eleven people have been under sentence of death since the 1950s. On 29 January 1981 it was learned that the Supreme Court had rejected the final appeal against the death sentence of Exequiel Angeles, a former policeman sentenced in 1969. Amnesty International appealed to President Marcos for clemency and in March 1981 learned that President Marcos had commuted the sentence to life imprisonment. Others under sentence of death were convicted for offences allegedly committed while they were members of the NPA or its predecessor the Hukbong Mapagpalaya ng Bay an. People's Liberation Army, (popularly known as the Huks). Executions have been carried out infrequently in recent years. Amnesty International understands that no executions took place during the year under review.
