Sri Lanka
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the wide powers of arrest and detention under the Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA) and about people arrested under its provisions and held incommunicado. The fate of three Tamils who "disappeared" in 1979 has still not been clarified.
A major development in 1980 was the government's decision to sign and ratify the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The govemment acceded to the covenant on 11 June 1980 and made a declaration under Article 41 of that covenant recognizing the competence of the Human Rights Committee to hear interstate complaints about violations of the covenant. On 3 June 1980 Amnesty Intemational cabled President J. R Jayewardene welcoming the govemment's decision. In a letter of 17 September 1980 Amnesty International expressed the hope that this important initiative would be followed by an early decision to ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, as Amnesty Intemational had recommended in its memorandum submitted to the govemment in May 1980. The govemment has not yet ratified the Optional Protocol.
Amnesty Intemational said it was encouraged to note that the Proscription of Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam and Other Similar Organizations Law had lapsed in May 1980, a law which Amnesty Intemational had criticized. It expressed concern however that the PTA remained in force, which similarly suspends legal safeguards. Several arrests were reported under the PTA, which allows for detention without trial for up to 18 months "in such place and subject to such conditions as may be determined by the Minister". Under the PTA detainees need not be produced before a magistrate within 24
261	
hours of arrest as is the normal rule, and there are no safeguards against incommunicado detention. Detainees have been denied any access to their lawyers and relatives for long periods.
On 5 June 1980 several opposition parties and trade unions organized a demonstration to protest against rising living costs exacerbating the earlier cut in the food subsidy program. Pro-government unions organized a counter-demonstration, and one man died in the ensuing violence. On 16 July the government imposed emergency rule and invoked the Public Security Act. It banned the general strike called by the Joint Committee for Trade Union Action for 18 July and then dismissed 40,000 public sector employees who went on strike nevertheless. Officials said opposition parties had planned the general strike to overthrow the government and obstruct its development program. Opposition sources claimed 150 people were arrested, but all were released shortly afterwards.
On 8 August 1980 opposition parties and trade unions demonstrated in Colombo Fort against the dismissals of workers who participated in the 18 July general strike. The demonstration ended in violence and the police arrested 32 trade union leaders and left-wing political leaders. On 17 September 1980 Amnesty International wrote to the President asking the government to confirm that the arrests made under the emergency imposed in July 1980 had been short-term and that those arrested were being released. It expressed concern about reports that some might face trial under the Emergency Regulations, despite the fact that the emergency had been allowed to lapse on 15 August.
Amnesty International later learned that all those arrested had been released within two months of their arrest except G. I. D. Dharmasekera, the General Secretary of the Lanka Democratic Front Amnesty International has not been able to establish under what legislation he was being held and what the specific charges were against him. It is investigating his case.
Thirty members of the Tamil minority were reported to have been arrested in April and early May in connection with an armed robbery at Neerveli in the northern region on 25 March 1981. Two poUcemen were killed in the incident. Amnesty International wrote and cabled to President Jayewardene on 30 April 1981 to verify reports of the arrests and to urge the government to meet the minimum standards laid down in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. While acknowledging that those responsible for violent incidents should be brought to justice. Amnesty International expressed concern that the arrested people were apparently held incommunicado, and that relatives were not informed about their whereabouts. It stressed that the removal of safeguards against incommunicado
262	
detention by the PTA facilitated human rights violations. Amnesty International named seven people reportedly arrested and asked the govemment to publish the names of all those arrested, to allow them immediate access to a lawyer of their choice, to inform the relatives of the place of detention and allow them immediate and regular visits to the prisoners. It urged the govemment to publish the charges against the 30, or to release them.
The effective provision of minimum legal safeguards to detainees was one of the main concems outlined by Amnesty Intemational in its memorandum presented to the govemment on 23 May 1980 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1980). The memorandum dealt with events in the northern Jaffna region after the declaration of an emergency on 11 July 1979. Many young Tamils were arrested under the Emergency Regulations, the PTA or other special legislation. It detailed allegations of torture and reports that six Tamils had died in the custody of the police. The memorandum was sent to the President, the Prime Minister, the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Minister of Justice, asking for the govemment's comments and observations, and was also sent to the Minister of Trade and Shipping who is the Chairman of the Parliamentary Select Committee inquiry into the six deaths, the Inspector General of Police, the Military Commander for the Jaffna district and the Deputy Minister of Defence, the officials met by the Amnesty Intemational delegate visiting Sri Lanka in August 1979.
In its letter of 17 September 1980 Amnesty Intemational expressed concern that it had still not received the govemment's comments on the memorandum submitted in May. On 25 November 1980 Amnesty Intemational discussed the memorandum with the Acting High Commissioner in London. Amnesty Intemational was told that it would receive a full reply from the govemment. It was informed that the Parliamentary Select Committee, set up to inquire into the allegations that six Tamils had died in the custody of the police after allegedly being arrested in July 1979, was expected to finalize its report in January 1981, and that the report would be published. The bodies of two of the men were found on the morning of their arrest and one died later in the prison hospital. The Jaffna magistrate returned a verdict of homicide in the case of lyathurai Indrarajah, one of the Tamils who died after his arrest, and found "evidence of police violence". The government denied that the other three, RamaUngam Balendran, Sellathurai Rajeswaran and Sellathurai Parameswaran, had been arrested. Their bodies have not been found although relatives have testified to their arrest and believe they subsequently died in pohce custody. Amnesty International was informed that the govemment believed the three men were in hiding afraid of interrogation in
263	
connection with criminal charges.
On 27 February 1981 Amnesty Intemational wrote again to the govemment asking for the report of the Parliamentary Select Committee. It drew the government's attention to United Nations General Assembly Resolution 33/173 of 20 December 1978 requesting govemments to undertake speedy and impartial investigations into all cases of "disappeared" people. Amnesty Intemational has not received a reply and knows of no published information about the progress made in the Parliamentary Select Committee's investigations or about its findings. The fate of the three "disappeared" Tamils has not yet been clarified.
Amnesty Intemational also asked the govemment for details of any proceedings against individual police officers implicated in torture. Amnesty International has not received a reply from the govemment nor any indication of proceedings being instituted against individual officials.
Although death sentences are known to have been passed since the United National Party (UNP) govemment assumed office in 1977, Amnesty Intemational understands that no executions have taken place since that date.
Taiwan
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the arrest and detention of prisoners of conscience. It continued to investigate a number of cases where it believed that political prisoners had been convicted of activities involving violence after unfair trials, and possibly for the non-violent expression of their political views. It remained concerned at the conviction of political prisoners on the basis of confessions made during incommunicado detention and at the number of death sentences for criminal offences.
The majority of political prisoners of concern to Amnesty International were convicted of sedition under the Statute for the Punishment of Sedition (1949). This statute is part of the provisions of the state of siege declared in Taiwan in 1949; it specifies a number of offences against the internal and external security of the state and gives jurisdiction to military courts. Amnesty International was also concerned about the use of the Public Officials Election and Recall
264	
Law of May 1980, which prescribes a term of imprisonment for spreading seditious ideas in the course of an electoral campaign.
Among the prisoners of conscience for whose release Amnesty International appealed were people arrested in the early 1950s for alleged pro-communist activities, who were arrested in a period of emergency; many were given summary trials. At least 20 were known to be still in detention.
Amnesty International learned that Tseng Cheng-chin, a watch-dealer from Taipei, detained since 1976 and an adopted prisoner of conscience, was released in May 1980 on grounds of ill-health (see Amnesty International Report 1978 and 797P). A special appeal was made in January 1981 for the release of Li Ching-sun, a former newspaper editor, who received a life sentence for sedition in 1971 which was commuted to 15 years in 1975. Amnesty International believed that he was detained for having written articles critical of the government.
Amnesty International continued to urge the immediate and unconditional release of Li Ching-jung, the editor of the magazine Fubao Chihsheng. He was arrested on 26 December 1979 and held incommunicado for almost four months. He was tried by a military court and sentenced on 15 May 1980 to five years' imprisonment for writing articles advocating the peaceful reunification of Taiwan with the People's Republic of China and spreading propaganda beneficial to the communists.
Amnesty International adopted as prisoners of conscience eight members of the staff of the magazine Formosa whose trial by military court on charges of sedition in March 1980 had been observed by an Amnesty International delegate (see Amnesty International Report 1980). Huang Hsin-chieh, Shih Ming-teh, Yao Chia-wen, Chang Chun-hung, Lin Yi-hsiung, Lin Hung-hsuan, Lu Hsiu-lien and Chen Chu, all executives or editors oiFormosa and involved in opposition to the government, were arrested in December 1979 and January 1980. They were convicted in April 1980 of attempting to overthrow the government by organizing a riot in Kaohsiung on 10 December 1979 (known as the "Kaohsiung incident"). The Taiwan Garrison Command announced on 30 May 1980 that their sentences, ranging from 12 years' to life imprisonment, had been confirmed by a military appeal court. Amnesty International believed that these prisoners were detained for their political beliefs and activities and tihat there was no evidence that they had used or advocated violence; it was concerned that confessions, which the defendants claimed in court had been obtained by illegal means including violence, threats, inducements and fraud, were admitted as evidence without a thorough investigation by the court. Amnesty International was concerned also
265	
that some sessions of the pre-trial hearings were held in camera: during these sessions the defendants reportedly stated that their confessions had been voluntary. The court later used this to dismiss the defendants' complaints about how their confessions had been obtained.
On 27 February 1981 Amnesty Intemational submitted a memorandum to the government. It contained recommendations arising from the missions to Taiwan in Febmary and March 1980, and from later developments in the cases of those arrested after the Kaohsiung incident. At the end of April 1981 the govemment informed Amnesty International that it would send its comments on the memorandum in the near future. These documents were to be published later in the year.
Thirty-three prisoners were tried on criminal charges in connection with the Kaohsiung incident. They had been arrested in late 1979 and early 1980 and interrogated by Ae Taiwan Garrison Command on suspicion of sedition. Their cases were transferred to a civilian court in late Febmary 1980. On 31 March 1980 they were charged with either "inciting a group of people to commit or threaten violence" or "being accomplices in acts of violence". The full court hearings took place from 21 to 26 May 1980 and the verdict was announced on 2 June 1980. Three defendants were acquitted and one was given a suspended sentence. The sentences, ranging from 10 months' to six years eight months' imprisonment, were in many cases reduced on appeal. Amnesty Intemational has adopted most of those still detained as prisoners of conscience because it believed they were detained either on account of their political activities and association with Formosa magazine or in violation of their right of peaceful assembly. Writers, local politicians and political activists received the longest prison sentences. Amnesty Intemational believed that the charges of violence against them had not been substantiated: in most cases the only evidence for conviction was confessions and incriminating testimonies which the defendants claimed in court had been made under duress. On 18 February 1981 Amnesty Intemational requested the Minister for Legal Affairs, Li Yuan-tzu, to order an inquiry into reports that this group of prisoners was held in solitary confinement, denied the right to work, not allowed outdoor exercise and that their reading material was extremely restricted. It also expressed its concem that their mental and physical health appeared to have been greatly impaired by their detention; it asked for a thorough inquiry into the complaints made by most of the prisoners about their treatment while detained for investigation.
Amnesty Intemational adopted as prisoners of conscience six people charged with having helped Shih Ming-teh, the general
266	
manager of Formosa magazine, to escape arrest or with not having reported him to the police. They were tried by a military court on 16 May 1980 and sentenced on 5 June 1980 to terms of imprisonment ranging from two to seven years. Four co-defendants were given suspended sentences. Amnesty International believed they were detained for non-violent actions performed out of humanitarian concern and for conscientious reasons.
Yeh Tao-lei, a 30-year-old sociology graduate and a teacher at a junior college, was arrested by the Taiwan Garrison Command on 9 September 1980 on charges of sedition. She was reportedly held incommunicado for a two-month interrogation during which she confessed to the charges against her. On 17 November 1980 she was accused of having been recruited to work for the People's Republic of China while a student in the United States of America, and of having carried microfilms of communist books back to Taiwan. Yeh Tao-lei was tried on 6 January 1981 by a military court, found guilty and sentenced to 14 years' imprisonment. Amnesty International was concemed that the main evidence on which the verdict was based was her confession which may have been obtained under duress.
Amnesty International also investigated the case of Kao Huo-yuan, sentenced to 13 years' imprisonment on 18 December 1980 after a military court had found him guilty of participating in a seditious group advocating the independence of Taiwan while he was in the United States of America. Kao Huo-yuan was accused of having received instructions and money from this organization to carry out seditious activities on his return to Taiwan. Amnesty International was concemed that he was reportedly convicted on the basis of his confession. According to official but unconfirmed reports, other people were arrested at the same time on suspicion of advocating the independence of Taiwan. No details of their names or of the charges have been made public.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of Chang Chun-nan, a former member of the National Assembly and an active member of the opposition, who was arrested on 17 January 1981 and charged on 30 January with advocating the independence of Taiwan and calling on the people to overthrow the government, during the electoral campai^ for the Legislative Yuan in December 1980. Amnesty International received information that he did not advocate the use of violence. Chang Chun-nan was sentenced by Taichung District Court on 3 March 1981 to three and a half years' imprisonment.
Amnesty International investigated the case of three other election candidates prosecuted for their speeches or for holding "unauthorized meetings" during the electoral campaign. Amnesty Intemational
267	
adoption groups worked on behalf of 134 political prisoners in Taiwan.
Amnesty Intemational remained concemed about the number of death sentences imposed by civilian and military courts and about the number of executions carried out every year. To Amnesty International's knowledge 25 death sentences were passed for murder, armed robbery, kidnapping and embezzlement between September 1980 and April 1981 and eight executions were carried out during the same period. It expressed its concern to the authorities and urged the commutation of all death sentences.
