Korea
(the Democratic People's Republic of)
Amnesty International continued to be concerned by the extreme reluctance of the authorities to make public any information about political imprisonment and other human rights violations.
Amnesty International has been particularly concerned over the years about the punishment of political offences and the imprecise definition of such offences. Article 20 of the "Law Governing the Organization of the Procuracy and Internal Affairs" may be applied to anyone considered untrustworthy by the authorities. This article provides for prosecution for such broadly defined crimes as subversive conduct and association with subversive intent. The legal procedure for "state crimes" comes under a special statute that is referred to in the Code of Criminal Procedure but is not known to have been made public. This procedure is reportedly the exclusive province of the Ministry of Public Security.
Although the law allows questioning by officials of the Public Security Office for up to two months after a person's arrest, this period may be extended twice by the provincial procurator's office or the Procurator-General. In practice it appeared that if the agreement of the Chief Prosecutor was obtained, the period of interrogation could be extended indefinitely. In the case of the Venezuelan communist and poet Aii Lameda, whose acount of imprisonment in North Korea Amnesty International published in 1979, this period of interrogation lasted for 12 months before he was charged.
Although Amnesty International received reports of several prisons holding political prisoners, only two specific prison camps were known to exist: Camp No. 8 in Chagang province and Camp No. 149 in Yanggang province. Camp No. 8 was reported to hold political offenders whom the authorities considered guilty of serious crimes. Detainees at Camp No. 149 were also held for "political offences"
229	
and were allowed to have their families live with them.
The existence of "re-education" camps was confirmed to a visiting delegation from the American Friends Service Committee (AFSC) in 1980 but they were not allowed to visit a camp.
Amnesty International has also received reports of the banishment of political offenders. In September 1980 it was reported that individuals allegedly opposed to the growing political power of Kim Chong-il, the son of President Kim Il-sung, had been banished. Residents of Pyongyang, Hamhung, Wonsan and Hwanghae province were reported to have been forcibly evacuated to areas bordering the Yalu and Tuman rivers near the frontier with the People's Republic of China.
