Zimbabwe
Amnesty IntemationaFs major concerns were the death penalty and the retention of emergency legislation providing for detention without trial.
By the first anniversary of Zimbabwe's independence on 18 April 1981, an estimated one million refugees and displaced persons had been resettled and life in the rural areas most affected by the war appeared to have largely returned to normal. Progress was also made in promoting political reconciliation, not only between the white minority community and the black majority population, but also between the ruling Zimbabwe African National Union (ZANU-PF) and other black political parties.
A crucial problem was the integration of the former ZANU-PF and Patriotic Front (PF) guerrilla forces with what remained of the former Rhodesian security forces, and the reduction of the numbers under arms. Here too, the government of Prime Minister Robert Mugabe achieved progress, though the process was hampered by fighting between former PF and ZANU-PF guerrillas, particularly at Entumbane township, Bulawayo, in November 1980 and February 1981. Partly as a result of the uncertain security situation, the nationwide state of emergency which had been in effect almost continuously since UDI and most recently renewed by Lord Soames in January 1980 was again renewed for a further six months by the new government in July 1980. However a number of provisions affecting fundamental human rights were withdrawn. These included regulations providing for the Special Courts and Special Courts Martial that had been used by previous governments for the trial and sentence of nationalist guerrillas and those suspected of supporting them, and powers to impose collective fines or to enforce compulsory labour.
The state of emergency was again renewed for a further six months in January 1981. Richard Hove, who had replaced Joshua Nkomo as Minister of Home Affairs, told the House of Assembly that this was necessary because of the continuing " unacceptable level of violence", and should not be seen as an intention on the government's part to "infringe human rights".
Although a number of the emergency powers provisions were withdrawn in mid-1980, regulations providing for detention without trial remained intact The police kept the power to detain any person without charge for 30 days. On 2 September 1980 Senator Simbi
103
Mubako, Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, told the House of Assembly that there were 117 people detained under such orders. The government retained the power of indefinite detention under the Emergency Powers Regulations, the provision which was used by former governments to detain Robert Mugabe, Joshua Nkomo and many other nationalist leaders and supporters for years. Senator Mubako stated in early September that a total of 69 such detainees were then held on administrative detention orders of indefinite duration. The majority are believed to have been ZANU-PF and PF guerrillas accused of indiscipline. This detention provision is believed also to have been used against at least two members of Joshua Nkomo's PF party who were arrested in late November 1980 at a time of serious tension between the coalition government's ZANU-PF majority and its minority partner, the PF. Several executive members of the PF were detained without charge but, with two exceptions, all were released by 17 December. The two in custody, who are beheved to have been the subject of indefinite detention orders, were former Amnesty International adopted prisoners of conscience, Sidney Malunga, an elected member of the House of Assembly, and Mark Nziramasanga, the PF publicity officer. Both were eventually freed unconditionally on 19 January 1981.
In November 1980 the government repealed the Indemnity and Compensation Act, which had been introduced in 1975 by Ian Smith's government. This Act effectively provided indemnity against prosecution to members of the Rhodesian security forces for all acts committed "in good faith" during the course of the guerrilla war. The decision to repeal the Act in November followed the appearance in court of Edgar Tekere, a cabinet minister and the Secretary-General of ZANU-PF, on a charge of murder. Together with seven other ZANU-PF members as bodyguards, he was alleged to have killed a white farmer on 4 August 1980 while carrying out a military-style attack on some soldiers whom he believed had fired upon him the night before. The eight accused admitted the killing, but claimed that they were members of government who had been acting "in good faith" to suppress terrorism, and so were covered by the terms of the Indemnity and Compensation Act. This trial was a major embarrassment to the government and led to Edgar Tekere's removal from the cabinet It ended on 8 December 1980. The eight defendants were acquitted by a majority verdict on the grounds that they were immune from prosecution due to the Indemnity and Compensation Act
In early September 1980 the government announced that President Canaan Banana had extended the amnesty granted at the time of independence in April 1980, which had resulted in the release of some ten thousand prisoners. The amnesty had originally covered the
104
period up to 1 March 1980; the amendment announced in September 1980 extended this by six weeks to 18 April 1980. As a result prisoners convicted of stock theft were released, as well as those convicted of or awaiting trial for political oifences allegedly committed between 1 March 1980 and 18 April 1980.
A further act of clemency was announced in April 1981, on the first anniversary of independence, when all death sentences imposed during the first year of independence were commuted by President Banana. Although no official figures were given, at least 17 prisoners are believed to have benefited. They included five believed to have been under sentence of death and awaiting execution at the time of independence in April 1980. Announcing the President's decision, the Minister of Justice stated that "This special exercise of the prerogative of^ercy does not represent a change in the law in regard to capital punishment or as establishing any precedent".
Amnesty Intemational welcomed this use of presidential clemency as it had been concemed about the government's retention of the death penalty, and about its failure to reject a policy introduced in 1976 by Prime Minister Ian Smith's govemment under which executions were carried out in secret.
