Zaïre
Amnesty International's main concerns were detention without trial, administrative banishment (relegation), torture and death in detention, and the death penalty. Amnesty International was also concerned about reports of harsh prison conditions and about unfair trials for alleged government opponents.
In May 1980 Amnesty International published a 22-page report documenting these concerns in detail. Amnesty International members throughout the world participated in a campaign to improve respect for human rights. They sought the release of all prisoners of conscience and a full review of the cases of all political detainees held without trial, an immediate end to torture and extrajudicial executions and the commutation of all death sentences.
Three months before the publication of the report Amnesty International had submitted a memorandum to the government of
94
President Mobutu Sese Seko. This summarized Amnesty International's concerns in Zaire and recommended a number of measures to prevent violations of human rights. In May 1980 three government departments replied formally: the Centre national de documentation (CND), National Documentation Centre, the security police responsible for arresting political prisoners; the Parquet général de la République, the Procurator General's Office; and the Auditorat général, the Office of Military Justice responsible for prosecutions both of soldiers and of civilians suspected of complicity with soldiers.
These responses expressed the view that Amnesty International had exaggerated the extent of violations such as torture and harsh prison conditions. As a result they did not feel it necessary to comment on Amnesty International's recommendations on these issues. On the question of detention without trial the Prosecutor General's Office agreed that greater safeguards were needed and recommended that a special commission should regularly review such cases. However there are no signs that this recommendation has been put into effect.
Replying in detail on several individual cases the departments said that a number of prisoners had been released and claimed that others cited by Amnesty International were not prisoners of conscience. In the case of Kasongo Lukika, a military officer convicted with more than 70 others in March 1978 and sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment, the Office for Military Justice said that he was an ordinary criminal because he had been convicted of disobeying orders. He was convicted for belonging to the Mahikari religious sect and was adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience. He was eventually released under a special presidential order in February 1981.
Following the publication of Amnesty International's report in May 1980 the Zaire Government tried to create the impression that the report was exaggerated and inaccurate. The State Commissioner for Foreign Affairs, Nguza Karl-i-Bond, suggested that Amnesty International had a political motive in publishing the report and had not acted purely out of concern for human rights. However a year later, after resigning from his government post in April 1981, Nguza Karl-i-Bond retracted his remarks and admitted that he had been tortured himself while in prison in late 1977. President Mobutu Sese Seko claimed both in September 1980 and again in December that there had been no political prisoners in Zaïre for at least two years.
After receiving new reports of torture during the first half of 1980 Amnesty International published in September 1980 a short document entitled The Ill-treatment and Torture of Political Prisoners at Detention Centres in Kinshasa. This contained detailed information
95
on torture at detention centres in Kinshasa: particularly at the headquarters of the security police, which changed its name in April 1980 to the Centre national de recherches et d'investigations (CNRI), National Research and Investigation Centre; at a prison known as the Deuxième Cité de VOUA, Second OUA City; and at another centre known as "B2". In response the authorities referred to the fact that the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), had been granted access to each of these places of imprisonment. They claimed that the ICRC had published a report describing conditions as satisfactory but no such report has in fact been published.'
In November 1980 a senior official visited London on the initiative of the government for discussions with Amnesty International about human rights in Zaire. After this visit a new memorandum outlining Amnesty International's concerns was submitted to President Mobutu's government, and Amnesty International was invited to send representatives to Kinshasa to discuss these issues.
Many students were arrested between February and April 1980 after demonstrations in Kinshasa and Lubumbashi. In May the government stated that only 24 had been arrested and that they had all been released during the visit to Zaire of Pope John Paul II at the beginning of May 1980. However Amnesty International believes that over 100 students had been arrested and that some were still in detention in June 1980; one of the five students who had been introduced to the Pope after his release at the beginning of May was reported to have been rearrested and assaulted.
In Lubumbashi 16 students were detained on 22 April 1980; immediately after their arrest eight were summarily tried by an army officer and by members of the youth wing of the ruling party, the Jeunesse du mouvement populaire de la révolution (JMPR), People's Movement for the Revolution Youth. The students were not allowed to defend themselves and were sentenced to be expelled from the university, imprisoned and eventually banished to their home villages for at least one year.
Amnesty International learned of the arrest of teachers in Kinshasa and the provinces after illegal strikes for higher wages in early 1980 and early 1981. Some teachers were also accused by the CNRI of counter-revolutionary activities and of opposition to the government. Another strike for higher wages by school teachers which began in November 1980 led to arrests in Kinshasa and in Kivu and Shaba regions. In March 1981 some 50 teachers were detained in Shaba region. Most were soon released but some were kept in custody for several weeks. In January 1981 the Secretary of the National Teachers' Federation, part of the National Trade Union, was taken
96
into custody for several days suspected of complicity in the teachers' strike.
After their arrest in Bas-Zaire region at the end of March 1980 a group of more than 20 people were transferred from Matadi to the CNRI headquarters in Kinshasa in May 1980. They were apparently suspected of links with an illegal poUtical party, the Mouvement national d'union et de réconciliation du Zaire (MNUR), Zaïre National Movement of Union and Reconciliation. Most of those arrested came from the Mayumbe area of Bas-Zaire region as did former President Kasa-Vubu, who was overthrown by President Mobutu in 1965. After six months in custody, during which some of the detainees are reported to have been seriously ill-treated, all but four were released without being charged. The four remaining in prison, Kambu Mavungu, Ngoyo Fuakatinu, Mpongo Malanda and Nlandu Pholo, were charged with conspiring to overthrow Zaire's constitution. Membership of any party other than the ruling Mowve-mentpopulaire de la révolution (MPR), People's Movement for the Revolution, is prohibited under Zaire's one-party constitution. Three of the four prisoners, all of whom were adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience, were convicted by the State Security Court in November 1980. Kambu Mavungu and Nlandu Pholo were sentenced to three years' imprisonment; Mpongo Malanda was sentenced to 10 months' imprisonment and was released in January 1981. Ngoyo Fuakatinu was reportedly acquitted.
Suspected members of the Mouvement national congolais/ Lumumba (MNC/L), Congolese National Movement/Lumumba, were also held in custody without charge or trial during the year. MNC/L members arrested in Kinshasa and Kisangani between September 1979 and May 1980 were reportedly released from prison in September and October 1980 and banished to their towns or villages of origin. In November 1980 Kapepa Inongu was arrested on suspicion of belonging to the MNC/L; and in January 1981 several Zairians who usually lived in Brazzaville were arrested by the CNRI in Kinshasa on suspicion of links with the MNC/L or with exiled opposition leaders such as the former State Commissioner for Higher Education, Mungul Diaka. Amnesty International sent repeated inquiries about them but received no replies.
Throughout 1980 large numbers of people were reported to have been arrested and held without charge or trial by the security forces in southeastern Kivu region. Thirty were reportedly still in detention in early 1981. Observers said the total number detained was much higher. The arrests continued in 1981 when Msembe Heri, a student, was detained in Uvira by the CNRI at the end of January. He was reportedly tortured. On 17 March 1981 six young men were arrested
97
in Uvira. The bodies of two of them, Sadild and Shindano, were later found at the edge of Lake Tanganyika shot through the head.
Amnesty International tried without success to obtain information from the authorities about the reasons for the detentions in Kivu region. The detainees included a number of people who were formerly refugees in Burundi: for example Jean Anzuruni left Zaïre in the late 1960s after playing a major role in the Kivu rebellion against the central government, and returned to Zaire in 1978 under an amnesty for refugees granted by President Mobutu in June 1978. The detainees also included many farmers, as well as teachers, agricultural extension officers and a 16-year-old fisherman, Zabulone Fujo, whose father has been an active opponent of President Mobutu's government.
In January 1981, 13 People's Commissioners were arrested and accused of signing an open letter to President Mobutu which contrasted many policy statements he had made since he took power in 1965 with what he had actually done.
The 13 were stripped of their parliamentary immunity and their cases were examined by the newly created Disciplinary Commission of the MPR Central Committee, which also examined the case of Kibassa MaUba, a member of the Political Bureau accused of complicity. The Disciplinary Commission found all 14 guilty of serious off^ences against the discipline of the party and ordered that they should be deprived of their civil and political rights for periods of from one year (in one case) to five years (in 11 cases). Although the legal charges against the People's Commissioners were later dropped the loss of civil and political rights resulted in all 14 people being banished. Some were later held under house arrest in the towns to which they had been banished.
Amnesty International learned of the release of a number of prisoners of conscience during the year. These were military prisoners convicted in March 1978 of complicity in a plot to overthrow President Mobutu and sentenced to three or five years' imprisonment. Some were released after serving their sentences while others, such as Kasongo Lukika, were released under special presidential orders. By April 1981 seven officers serving sentences of between five and 20 years were still imprisoned at Angenga Military Prison in Equateur region and at N'Dolo Military Prison in Kinshasa.
As well as the extrajudicial killings of two young men arrested in Uvira on 17 March 1981, Amnesty International received reports of others killed after their arrest in Kivu region between July and November 1980. In September 1980 for example, Faustin Kinuku and Vincent Waziwazi, both from Luvungi village between Bukavu and Uvira, were reported to have been arrested and killed.
98
On 26 March 1981a social sciences professor from the Kinshasa campus of Zaire's national university, Dikonda wa Lumanyisha, was arrested by the CNRI, beaten and tortured. He was apparently suspected of having been interviewed incognito on a Belgian television program. He was also scheduled to address a human rights seminar at the end of April. Following reports that Professor Dikonda was vomiting blood and had lost consciousness Amnesty Intemational appealed to President Mobutu to intervene and to ensure that Professor Dikonda was given medical attention.
Amnesty Intemational remained concemed by harsh conditions at many prisons and detention centres, despite the closure of the detention camp with the worst mortality rates — Ekafera Camp in Equateur region — in April 1980. Elsewhere in the country conditions were reported to be most severe at centres administered by the army and the security police. Some civilian prisons were also reported to maintain severe regimes, for example Goma in Kivu region, although it appeared that efforts were being made to improve conditions at some other prisons.
After the publication of its report in May 1980 Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to commute all death sentences. In October 1980 President Mobutu commuted the death sentences of all civilians awaiting execution in a special measure to mark his 50th birthday. This measure is believed to have benefited some 130 death-row prisoners. However, it did not apparently help prisoners who had been condemned to death but who were still appealing against their sentences. In March 1981,17 peopleoriginally convicted in January 1980 of armed robbery and murder were executed. Final appeals by some of them were rejected in Febmary 1981 and the executions took place after the 17 had allegedly tried to escape from the prison at Luzumu.
99
