Asia
Respect for human rights improved to a limited extent in several coimtries in Asia with the release of considerable numbers of political prisoners in some, notably Viet Nam, the Philippines, Burma and Laos. However in other respects, for example preventive detention and prolonged political detention, the human rights picture has deteriorated in the last year. Although martial law was aboUshed in the Philippines and in the Republic of Korea, in both countries the government retained extraordinary powers of arrest and detention and used them extensively against critics.
Prolonged political imprisonment, in some cases without trial, is a major concern of Amnesty International in several Asian countries; especially Taiwan, Indonesia, Malaysia, Brunei and Singapore. In Taiwan (Republic of China) Amnesty International knows of at least 20 prisoners of conscience detained since 1950 in the infamous prison on Green Island. Fourteen other prisoners are believed to have been detained for the last 30 years, and Amnesty International continues to investigate their cases. All the prisoners were summarily tried during the period of emergency after the evacuation of the Kuomintang (Nationalist) government from mainland China to the island of Taiwan. In Indonesia Amnesty International estimates that at least 300 political prisoners arrested in connection with the 1965 coup remain in prison. Although the prisoners have all been tried. Amnesty International considers that their trials took place in circumstances which did not permit adequate legal safeguards.
In several Asian states preventive detention without trial is extensively used. In Brunei, which is still nominally British protected. Amnesty International worked for the release of nine prisoners who
192	
have been held without trial for alleged involvement in the rebellion of December 1962. The nine men have been in detention for up to 18 years, held under a state of emergency declared in 1962 and still in force. In Malaysia and Singapore political prisoners are held without charge or trial under the Internal Security Act (ISA), and some have been held since the early 1960s. Despite the release of several prominent political prisoners, at least 800 people are still detained in Malaysia without charge or trial under the ISA. The system under which they are detained does not allow the detainees any judicial recourse, nor does it afford them a fair review of their cases. Regrettably the Indian Government reintroduced preventive detention under the provisions of the National Security Act, and by the end of April 1981 Amnesty International had received reports that in certain Indian states political prisoners were being detained under the act.
Detention for the purpose of "re-education" remains a problem in the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and in the People's Democratic Republic of Laos. In a memorandum submitted to the Vietnamese Government in May 1980 Amnesty International recommended the abolition of "re-education" camps. The detainees, held for the most part since 1975, have not been charged or tried and they are still imprisoned more than six years after the end of the war. Detainees have been freed over the last year but Amnesty Intemational is concerned that the government has announced no timetable for future releases. In both Viet Nam and Laos adequate legal provisions providing minimum safeguards against arbitrary arrest and detention appear to be lacking.
Throughout the year armed hostilities involving foreign troops continued in three territories — Afghanistan, Kampuchea and East Timor. In each, human rights violations of concem to Amnesty International have been reported, in some cases involving both sides in the fighting. However the nature of these conflicts has critically hampered investigation of human rights abuses.
In East Timor, as well as in the Philippines, Amnesty Intemational has been dismayed by the "disappearance" of people after their arrest and detention by security authorities. In October 1980 Amnesty International submitted a report on the "disappearance" of 22 people after their arrest by Indonesian military authorities in East Timor to the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights. In September 1980 Amnesty International submitted to the working group five "disappearance" cases in the Philippines on which it had been working for several years. In the five years between 1975 and 1980 Amnesty International received reports of more than 230 "disappearances" in the Philippines. In the same five-year period Amnesty
193	
International learned of more than 300 extrajudicial killings by military units or by irregular units believed to be acting under the instruction of government officials.
Political trials took place within the region which fell short of internationally agreed standards for a fair trial. For example in the People's Republic of China the trial opened in November 1980 of five former prominent political figures and five former senior military officers. Many of the charges were of a purely political nature and from the outset an assumption of the defendants' guilt was evident in official pronouncements. Amnesty International expressed its concern to the Chinese authorities and after the announcement on 25 January 1981 that two of the defendants, Jiang Qing and Zhang Chunqiao, had been sentenced to death with a two-year reprieve of execution Amnesty International appealed for the commutation of the sentences.
In the Republic of Korea a number of major political trials took place including that of former presidential candidate Kim Dae-jung and 23 other defendants, all of whom Amnesty Intemational considered prisoners of conscience. The defendants were tried before a military tribunal and severe restrictions were placed on the defence. In September Kim Dae-jung was sentenced to death, and other defendants to long terms of imprisonment. In January 1981 the death sentence was commuted to life imprisonment.
In Pakistan political prisoners including'prisoners of conscience were frequently tried before military tribunals without any provision for defence lawyers, or for appeal against sentence. In Bangladesh civilians have been tried before military courts on politicai charges and an Amnesty Intemational delegate was denied access to one major trial.
The death penalty continued to be a major concern of Amnesty International. In the past year Amnesty Intemational compiled dossiers on the death penalty in the People's Republic of China and in Japan. In Malaysia the government resumed executions after a 12-month interval, and executed nine men in seven days. Amnesty Intemational also appealed on behalf of a prisoner sentenced to death in Australia; the death sentence was later commuted. The death penalty was a major concern of Amnesty Intemational in Bangladesh and Pakistan where hundreds of people are executed each year. Others countries where executions took place were the Republic of Korea, Taiwan, Singapore and Thailand.
Amnesty Intemational published a report on human rights violations in the Republic of Korea in Febmary 1981. During the year submissions relating to human rights violations in Afghanistan, Indonesia, the Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Sri Lanka and East Timor were presented by Amnesty International to the
194	
United Nations and other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations.
	
ifh.	
\ .	
f c % 1	
