Poland
Amnesty Intemational followed human rights developments during the year against a background of major social and political change. The outbreak of strikes in July 1980 led to an agreement on 31 August between the inter-factory strike committee in Gdansk and the authorities which included accepting independent trade unions, the release of all political prisoners and a commitment to end the persecution of individuals for their opinions. The independent trade union Solidarity, with a membership of some 12 million workers, was officially registered on 10 November 1980. The First Secretary of the Central Committee of the Polish United Workers Party, Edward Gierek, was replaced by Stanislaw Kania on 5 September 1980.
Until the Gdansk agreement the pattem of repression of previous years cor\im\x&á{stQ Amnesty International Report 1980). Members of the growing organized unofficial human and civil rights movement which began in 1976 were subjected to detention in police custody for up to 48 hours and to politically motivated arrests, trials, convictions on false criminal charges. The movement included groups such as the Committee for Social Self-Defence (KSS KOR), the Movement for the Defence of Human and Civil Rights (ROPCiO) and "Self-Defence Committees" founded by students, farmers, religious believers and otiier groups, as well as unofficial trade unions. In May 1980 Amnesty Intemational appealed for the release of ROPCiO member Tadeusz Szczudlowski and Dariusz Kobzdej of the Young Poland Movement, another unofficial group. They were arrested on 3 May 1980 after speaking at an unofficial rally in Gdansk to mark the anniversary of the first Polish constitution of 3 May 1791. The rally
309 	
was attended by some 4,000 people and a number of participants were alleged to have been physically assaulted by police. Tadeusz Szczud-lowski and Dariusz Kobzdej were both allegedly beaten while being driven to police headquarters. On 5 May they were sentenced by a Tribunal for Petty Offences to three months' imprisonment on charges unknown to Amnesty International. This sentence was reportedly confirmed at an appeal hearing on 11 July.
On 12 June 1980 Miroslaw Chojecki, manager of NOW A, a publishing house printing works banned by the censor, and Bogdan Grzesiak, a NOWA printer, were convicted of appropriating state property after being given, by workers of a state publishing house, a duplicator which was to be scrapped. Amnesty International's observer was hindered from attending the trial. The defendants were sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment suspended for three years. Amnesty Intemational was concerned by irregularities during their pre-trial detention. It adopted them as prisoners of conscience.
KSS KOR associate Marek Kozlowski was also adopted as a prisoner of conscience. In July 1979 he gave information to KSS KOR about Tomasz Koscielik, a worker from Slupsk, who had been permanently injured as a result of police assaults. The policemen concerned were later tried and convicted. According to reports Marek Kozlowski himself was later repeatedly beaten, threatened and interrogated by the security police. On 1 July 1980 he was found guilty of "threatening behaviour" and sentenced to 19 months' imprisonment. Amnesty International believes that the charge was false and that Marek Kozlowski was imprisoned for his activities for KSS KOR.
Amnesty Intemational has been concemed at the detention of known activists for up to 48 hours in police custody. In most cases their houses were searched and possessions such as unofficial literature, typewriters and paper confiscated. This was the most frequent method of harassment during most of the year. Reports indicated that many members of human and civil rights groups were repeatedly arrested and held for 48 hours, but released without charge. Some alleged that they had been beaten and threatened during their detention, others were placed in a prison cell without explanation and released after 48 hours. Some were rearrested immediately after release.
The number of detentions appeared to increase about the time of unofficial meetings and demonstrations. For example over 70 people were detained for up to 48 hours at the time of the appeal hearing of adopted prisoner of conscience Jan Kozlowski on 26 May 1980. Jan Kozlowski, member of the Farmers' Self Defence Committee, had been sentenced to two years' imprisonment on 1 Febmary 1980 for
310 	
alleged assault. The verdict was upheld on appeal.
In June 1980 isolated detentions were reported to Amnesty International, including associates of the unofficial Roman Catholic journal Spotkania (Encounters) in Lublin on 25 June, collaborators •wiihRobotnik (The Worker) near Rzeszow on 22 June, and members of KSS KOR and the Student Solidarity Committee in Poznan on 22 June 1980.
Following the outbreak of strikes in July 1980 which gradually spread throughout Poland, members of KSS KOR and other human rights activists collected and issued information about the strikes in order to by-pass the virtual official news blackout. As the strikes spread and strike committees were formed, isolated reports reached Amnesty International of activists being detained for up to 48 hours. Some alleged that they were beaten. The first known instance of a striker being detained was on 11 August.
On 20 August the Polish news agency PAP issued a first report about the strikes; shortly afterwards over 20 activists issuing information about the strikes were arrested in Warsaw, Poznan, Wroclaw, Szczecin and Krakow. Some were released after 48 hours while others were reportedly moved every 48 hours to different police stations, being rearrested each time to circumvent the law prescribing time limits on detention. After the news of their arrest Amnesty International appealed to the PoUsh authorities for their release on 21 August. Further appeals to release them, and adopted prisoners of conscience Edmund Zadrozynski, Marek Kozlowski and Jan Koz-lowski, were sent on 27 August 1980 (see Amnesty International Report 1980).
On 31 August the government agreed to 21 demands made by an inter-factory strike committee at the Lenin Shipyards in Gdansk, committing itself to the release of all political prisoners; the release, pending review of their cases, of Edmund Zadrozynski, Jan Kozlowski and Marek Kozlowski; and an end to the persecution of individuals for their opinions. Within 24 hours all those detained on and after 20 August were released. Shortly afterwards Amnesty International learned of the release of the three adopted prisoners of conscience.
Protests continued after the Gdansk agreement, calling on the government to implement the agreement. Reprisals against activists continued. Amnesty International received numerous reports that dissidents involved in setting up the independent trade union Solidarity were detained and interrogated about their membership of Solidarity and in some cases of KSS KOR. By the end of 1980 these detentions appeared to have decreased.
Amidst growing attacks in the official news media on "anti-
311 	
socialist forces" accused of disrupting the internal affairs of Poland, Leszek Moczulski, leader of a small, unofficial nationalist political group known as the Confederation for an Independent Poland (KPN) was arrested on 24 September and charged with "slandering the dignity of the PoUsh People's Republic and its organs" and "having participated in an organization with criminal objectives". His arrest followed the publication, in the Federal Republic of Germany, of an interview in which he described the KPN as an opposition party whose aims were "an independent sovereign Poland, free from Soviet rule and from the totalitarian dictatorship of the Polish United Workers Party". Two other KPN members, Tadeusz Stanski and Zygmunt Golawski, were arrested on similar charges. Also charged was Wojciech Ziembinski, a member of ROPCiO.
On 20 November following police searches in SoUdarity's Warsaw offices Jan Narozniak, a volunteer worker in the office's print shop, was arrested and charged with betraying state secrets. A document had been found and was being reproduced in the Solidarity offices which came from the Procurator General's office and gave guidelines to local procurators for prosecuting dissenters. It appeared to confirm the pattern of repression of activists described by Amnesty International. On 25 November Piotr Sapelo, a worker in the duplicating centre of the Procurator General's office who had reportedly passed this document to Jan Narozniak, was arrested on similar charges. On 24 November, after the authorities had refused Solidarity's demand for the release of Jan Narozniak, workers occupied the Ursus factory near Warsaw. On 25 November they threatened a general strike in the Warsaw region unless Jan Narozniak, Piotr Sapelo, Leszek Moczulski, Wojciech Ziembinski, Tadeusz Stanski and Zygmunt Golawski were released. On 26 November Amnesty Intemational appealed for their release and said that it regarded them as prisoners of conscience. On 27 November Jan Narozniak and Piotr Sapelo were conditionally released and the threat of a general strike was lifted.
On 10 December, in response to the continued reprisals against its members and members of the human and civil rights movement, in contravention of the Gdansk agreement. Solidarity announced its decision to estabhsh a Committee for the Defence of Prisoners of Conscience.
In December three further members of KPN were arrested and charged: Tadeusz Jandziszak of Wroclaw, Krzystof Bzdyl of Krakow, and Jerzy Sychut of Szczecin.
On 9 January 19^1 Amnesty International wrote to Stanislaw Kania appealing for the release of the seven people then in detention and setting out its concems about the laws and practices by which
312 	
people were arrested, detained, tried and sentenced to imprisonment for the non-violent exercise of their human rights.
On 24 January another KPN member, Romuald Szeremietiew was arrested in Warsaw and on 6 March KPN members Leszek Moczulski, Romuald Szeremietiew, Tadeusz Stanski and Tadeusz Jandziszak were indicted on charges under Articles 123 and 128 of the penal code, which make it an offence:
"in agreement with other persons... [to] make preparations... with the purpose to deprive the Polish People's Republic of its independence, to detatch a portion of its territory, to overthrow by force its system or to weaken its defence capability".
Amnesty Intemational has adopted all eight detained as prisoners of conscience and has been concemed that although they have not yet been tried the official news media have stated that KPN members had plotted the violent overthrow of the state. Available information indicated that none had used or advocated violence, and that they were arrested for expressing views disapproved of by the authorities.
Amnesty Intemational welcomed the release of Wojciech Ziem-binski from investigative detention on 13 March after a heart attack, and that of Jerzy Sychut on 23 April, but was concerned that proceedings against them continued
Amnesty Intemational was investigating six cases of people convicted of espionage; the defendants were reportedly denied proper legal safeguards and the trials held in camera.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about deficiencies in the law dealing with investigative detention, in particular about the wide powers of detention granted to the state procurator and the police, and the suspect's limited right of access, before indictment, to lawyer and family. On 3 Febmary 1981 the Minister of Justice, Jerzy Bafia, announced that the Justice Ministry was reviewing the criminal law. Regulations governing preliminary hearings, temporary detention and the scope and application of the death penalty were especially noted as being considered for revision.
The death penalty was still in force although Amnesty International did not receive any reports of any death sentences or executions during the year.
313 	
