Malawi
Amnesty International's concerns were the use of detention without trial and the trial of two senior politicians accused of sedition.
The sedition trial began in November 1980 and ended in March 1981 with the conviction and imprisonment of the two defendants. It was the first major political trial to take place since 1977. One of the defendants, Gwanda Chakuamba, was a former cabinet minister and confidant of Life President Hastings Kamuzu Banda. For many years he had been one of the most senior and powerful political figures in the country. Until his dismissal from office in February 1980 he held two ministerial portfolios, with responsibility for both the southern region and for Youth and Culture. He was also Commander of the Young Pioneers, youth wing of the ruling Malawi Congress Party (MCP), and Chairman of the key MCP Disciplinary Committee.
Gwanda Chakuamba was detained without charge until late November 1980 when he was brought to trial before the southern region Traditional Court at Blantyre. He appeared together with a political associate, Sofiliano Faindi Phiri, a nominated member of parliament for Chikwawa South. Both defendants were charged with "uttering seditious words" with the intent of "raising discontent or dissatisfaction among the subjects" of President Banda. Three other charges were brought against Gwanda Chakuamba alone. He was alleged to have contravened public security regulations by having in his possession photographs of several exiled former government ministers and by the illegal possession of firearms, two pen pistols. One of these was said to have been loaded with one bullet He was also accused of possessing prohibited publications, notably copies of the London-based New African magazine, and To The Point, a South African publication.
The main charge, that of "uttering seditious words", related to a political meeting held on 18 November 1979 at Chikwawa, in the southern region. At the meeting Faindi Phiri was alleged to have committed sedition by claiming that all developments in the Lower Shire area had been brought about through the personal efforts of Gwanda Chakuamba, and to have said that the country as a whole would have been better developed if there were more people of Gwanda Chakuamba's calibre. The essence of the sedition charge against Gwanda Chakuamba was that he did not dissociate himself from Faindi Phiri's remarks and emphasize to those attending the
60
meeting that all developments in the area were in fact due to "the wise and dynamic leadership of President Banda".
The trial of Gwanda Chakuamba and Faindi Phiri was conducted before a panel of five chiefs, headed by Chief Nazombe. Legal representation is not permitted in the Traditional Court After several adjournments the trial ended on 20 March 1981. Gwanda Chakuamba was convicted on all four counts and sentenced to 22 years in prison. Faindi Phiri was also convicted and received a five-year prison term for sedition.
Amnesty International's request for permission to observe the trial was not accepted by the government.
One aspect of the trial proceedings which gave cause for particular concern was a reference by the prosecutor to the continuing imprisonment of an unspecified number of people arrested for possessing photographs of exiled former government ministers. Cross-examining Gwanda Chakuamba on 18 February 1981, the state prosecutor claimed that many people had been arrested for this reason in the past by the Young Pioneers and that some of them were still in custody. Neither the number nor the identities of those to whom he referred were known to Amnesty International.
No official information has been made available about the number of detainees and political prisoners and it was not possible for Amnesty International to estimate their number. The identities of only a few were known. They were believed to include several detainees held since the early 1970s and about 15 political associates of Gwanda Chakuamba arrested in late 1979 or early 1980. Aleke Banda, a former Secretary General of the MCP and cabinet minister, and more recently managing director of the government-controlled Press Holdings company and other quasi-governmental institutions was also believed to be detained. He was dismissed from all his posts and from the MCP in January 1980 for alleged "gross breaches of party discipline". However David Basa Kaunda, another former cabinet minister who had been similarly dismissed in February 1980, was formally reinstated in the MCP in January 1981. The rumours of his detention referred to in Amnesty International Report 1980, appear to have been without foundation.
The opposition group which appeared to cause the government greatest anxiety was the Socialist League of Malawi (LESOMA), headed by Dr Attati Mpakati. In early April 1981 President Banda was reported to have told a rally in Lilongwe that Dr Mpakati would be "shot on sight" if he should enter Malawi.
61
