Benin
The main concerns of Amnesty International were: the detention without trial of suspected political opponents; unfair trials of political prisoners; and the cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment of some prisoners.
Throughout the year Amnesty International sought the release of 22 students and teachers held without trial for alleged involvement in protests against government policies in education. With the exception of Paul Iko, held since September 1978, they were arrested between March and November 1979 when meetings and strikes were organized to call for improvements in university education, and to oppose government-controlled student associations. Several reports suggest that in early 1980 up to 50 students and teachers were detained but that by late 1980 some of these had been released after hurried court hearings that passed sentences of three and four months.
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the release of three former Presidents, Hubert Maga, Sourou Migan Apithy and Justin Ahomadegbe, held under house arrest without charge or trial since the military coup led by Colonel Mathieu Kerekou in October 1972. In late April 1981, they were reportedly released from house arrest.
Amnesty International also sought the release of Abbé Alphonse Quenum and former Agriculture Minister Adrien Glele who were among 13 people arrested in 1975 and convicted of participation in attempts to overthrow the government. There were serious shortcomings in their trial, including the absence of defence counsel and denial of the right of appeal. Inquiries were also made about Claude
29
Midahuen, a former official in the Ministry of Finance, who was arrested in 1975 and sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment. He was not permitted to be present at his trial.
In November and mid-December 1980 two waves of arrests took place throughout the country and as many as 100 people are reported to have been detained. Some of the arrests were of high-ranking government officials suspected of opposing the leadership of President Kerekou. Others included primary school teachers who allegedly opposed government attempts to impose a new trade union structure. Most are believed to have been released by the end of April 1981. In early January 1981 Amnesty International appealed publicly for the release of these and all other detainees held without charge or trial in Benin; the appeals also drew attention to prisoners convicted in unfair trials, and called for improvements in prison conditions. The authorities have not responded.
In March 1981 Amnesty Intemational appealed to the government for the release or trial of Guy Midiouhouan. In early February he had been deported from Gabon to Togo after being arrested for writing articles critical of President Oumar Bongo. Two weeks later he was deported from Togo to Benin where he was detained. In April 1981 Amnesty Intemational was informed of his release.
In September 1980 Amnesty International appealed to the government for the release of all prisoners of conscience in Benin, for an end to detention without trial, pointing out that rights enshrined in the Beninese constitution, Loi fondamentale, had been violated. This law guarantees the rights to freedom of conscience, expression and association, to freedom from arbitrary arrest and to defence counsel. No answer has been received.
Amnesty Intemational was concerned by reports of harsh prison conditions and ill-treatment of detainees at the Commissariat central (central police station) in Cotonou, the capital. Prisoners were held in overcrowded cells, which are poorly ventilated and unsanitary. One cell, known as la grille (the cage), was so overcrowded that many detainees were forced to remain standing. Medical facilities were reported to be inadequate and many detainees to suffer recurrent ill-health. In October 1980 students and teachers held in the Central Prison, Cotonou, were apparently beaten and harassed by prison officers, after asking to be held separately from prisoners convicted of criminal offences. The conditions of detention and medical facilities at the Central Prison in Cotonou and the civilian prison in Porto Novo were also known to be poor.
30
