Swaziland
All 14 long-term political detainees still held at the beginning of May 1980 were released unconditionally later that month by order of Prime Minister Prince Mabandla Fred Dlamini. On the day of their release, 28 May 1980, the detainees were taken to the Cabinet office where they were addressed by the Prime Minister and other government ministers, who reportedly admitted that their long imprisonment had been unjustified but encouraged them not to harbour grievances. Seven of the detainees had been adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International.
Those freed on 28 May included Ambrose Simelane» formerly a leading supporter of Dr Ambrose Zwane's Ngwane National Libera-tory Congress (NNLC), which was declared illegal in April 1973 when King Sobhuza II summarily suspended the independence constitution and dissolved parliament. Simelane had been detained continuously under a series of 60-day detention orders since February 1978. Other former office-holders in the NNLC, including Sam Myeni and Kislon Shongwe, had similarly been detained without trial for two years. They had been arrested in mid-May 1978. Musa Shongwe, a well-respected attorney detained inAugust 1978 shortly after defending three South African refugees charged with arms offences, was also freed unconditionally on 28 May 1980.
The first indication that the detainees might be released had been given about two weeks earlier by Prime Minister Dlamini when commenting upon a report which appeared in the London-based New African magazine. This had described the use of detention without trial in Swaziland and had suggested that an international campaign would be launched to obtain the detainees' release. While questioning the motives behind such a campaign, the Prime Minister indicated that he was reviewing the whole issue of political detainees in Swaziland.
Amnesty International welcomed the release of the detainees in early June and urged Prime Minister Dlamini to avoid further use of administrative detention orders.
The situation of refugees from Mozambique and South Africa also gave cause for concern. In eariy June 1980 it was reported that more than 60 Mozambican refugees had been handed back by the Swazi authorities. The identities of those returned were not known to Amnesty International and were not disclosed by the government, but
86
it was feared that some may have had valid grounds to expect imprisonment for reasons of conscience on their return. More Mozambicans seeking asylum in Swaziland are believed to have been repatriated later in the year, and in February 1981 it was reported that there were only 20 Mozambicans left in the country recognized as refugees by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
Shortly before the first large-scale repatriation of Mozambican refugees in June 1980 Prime Minister Dlamini had visited Maputo for talks with the Mozambique Government. As a result, suspicions were aroused that a reciprocal agreement might have been reached between the two governments under which refugees would be returned. These suspicions gained credence in late August 1980 when four Swazi refugees were summarily repatriated from Mozambique. Three of them were subsequently charged with leaving Swaziland illegally, and one received a jail sentence. However one other, who is not believed to have been charged, was permitted by the authorities to return to Mozambique.
The vulnerability of the 4,000 South African refugees who live in Swaziland was vividly illustrated twice during the year. In June 1980 at least two members of the banned African National Congress (ANC) were killed when houses occupied by the organization were destroyed in a bomb explosion allegedly caused by South African security agents.
In February 1981 Dhaya Pillay, an alleged member of the ANC who had been a refugee in Swaziland since November 1977, was forcibly abducted by several men apparently acting on behalf of the South African security police. Four of those held responsible were arrested in Swaziland and charged in connection with the kidnapping. Three of them were said to be members of a Mozambique opposition group and the other a black South African, but their identities were not revealed by the Swaziland authorities. They were brought to court in early March 1981 but the proceedings were held in camera. They were then released on bail, and may have been able to leave the country.
Dhaya Pillay, who had been employed as a schoolteacher at the time of his abduction, was returned to Swaziland by the South African authorities on 11 March 1981. He later told a press conference in Mbabane that he had been taken blindfolded to a place of detention in South Africa and interrogated. After four days the white official in charge of his interrogation told him: "We made a mistake". After a further two weeks in detention, he was blindfolded again and driven in a car back to Mbabane.
After reports of Dhaya Pillay's abduction Amnesty International appealed to South African Prime Minister P. W. Botha to clarify
87
whether or not he was detained in South Africa and to investigate fully his removal from Swaziland. There was no response to this appeal but an official statement issued by South Africa claimed that Dhaya Pillay had been "detained at the border for alleged contravention of South Africa's immigration laws and then allowed to go".
