Ivory Coast
Amnesty International's concerns were detention without trial, the forcible conscription of suspected trade union activists, and the gross ill-treatment of detainees, some of whom died.
In November and early December 1980 some of the personnel at the headquarters of the Offlce des postes et télécommunications, the post office; the Radio-Télévision ivoirienne {KYI), the national broadcasting agency; and XYiQ Agence ivoirienne de presse ( AIP), the national press agency, went on strike for salary increases and improvements in training programs. On 12 December a number of jouimaUsts and technicians at the RTI and AIP suspected of being trade union activists were arrested, and forcibly conscripted into the army. Sports journalist Eugène Kacou was among at least 18 transported to the military camp at Daloa. Conscription in the Ivory Coast is not universal and has in the past been selectively applied against critics of government policies.
Also arrested between 4 and 18 December were eight white-collar workers suspected of holding an unofficial union meeting and possessing Marxist literature. All were held in overcrowded conditions at the Commissariat central (the central police station) in the capital, Abidjan. In its appeals to the authorities in January and April 1981 Amnesty International called for the rapid release or trial of all these individuals. No answer has been received.
In March 1981,46 people died in custody. Most were Ghanaians, who were among several hundred arrested during an operation against urban crime. All 46 detainees apparently died of asphyxiation after being crowded into a small and badly ventilated cell at the Gendarmerie (police station) at Agban, a suburb of the capital. President Houphouet-Boigny is reported to have condemned these deaths and to have ordered an official inquiry. Amnesty International was concerned that many migrant workers from neighbouring West African states were apparently singled out for arbitrary arrest, and that without relatives to bring them food, their conditions of detention have been particularly harsh. Reports suggestèd that detainees held in Abidjan, and particularly at the maison d'arrêt (remand centre), received insufficient food and medical attention and that many were in poor health.
51
