Bolivia
115
Until 17 July 1980, when the interim civilian government of Lidia Gueiler was overthrown, positive measures to protect human rights were implemented. The military coup led by General Luis Garcia Meza, who was immediately installed as President, prevented the transfer of power to the Unión Democràtica Popular (UDP), Popular Democratic Union, the coalition party which had won the general election on 29 June 1980. Amnesty International's concerns after the coup were arbitrary arrest, detention without trial, torture, ''disappearances" and extrajudicial killings..
By September 1980 between 1,500 and 2,000 people had been detained, all without warrant or charge. Habeas corpus was to all intents and purposes suspended. There was evidence of widespread torture and ill-treatment of prisoners, and families were refused information. No political prisoners were brought to trial and many were summarily expelled under threat of death. Many Bolivians were killed by the army or paramilitary groups.
Amnesty Intemational issued urgent appeals after the first wave of arrests and killings. On the morning of 17 July 1980 an emergency meeting held in the building of the Central Obrera Boliviana (COB), the Bolivian Workers' Confederation, in La Paz was attacked. About 30 people were seized when the building was stormed by a paramilitary group. Marcelo Quiroga Santa Cmz, the leader of the Partido Socialista 1 (PS-1), Socialist Party 1, a parliamentarian and lawyer, was singled out and shot, reportedly because he had called for an investigation of human rights violations under former President Bánzer. Among those taken into custody were Juan Lechín Oquendo, the Secretary General of the COB; Simón Reyes, a leader of the Federación Sindical de Trabajadores Mineros de Bolivia (FSTMB), Trade Union Federation of Bolivian Mineworkers; Líber Forti, a member of the executive of the COB; and Iván Zegada of the Asamblea Permanente de los Derechos Humanos, Permanent Assembly for Human Rights. They were all taken to the Estado Mayor (the main military barracks) in Miraflores, La Paz, in ambulances commandeered by Colonel Luis Arce Gómez before the coup.
A similar raid on the Palacio Quemado (the presidential palace)
116
led to the arrest of ministers of the interim government, as well as about 25 journalists who were taken to the Estado A/c>'or where they were held in the stables, allegedly forced to lie down in dung and kicked, insulted and threatened.
On 5 August 1980 Amnesty International wrote to General Garcia Meza to appeal for the release of all those detained as a result of the coup. It expressed alarm that the Minister of the Interior, Colonel Luis Arce Gómez, had been unable to provide the press with the names or number of people in custody. It deplored tiie use of ambulances in armed attacks and for taking away prisoners. It asked for information on the health and whereabouts of 55 prisoners. On 14 August 1980 the government replied that Amnesty International's information was based on falsehoods from the press. The Minister of the Interior would publish a list of the names of all political prisoners and details such as their place of detention and the charges against them. However this information has not been made available.
Sweeping arrests were reported in towns and industrial centres throughout Bolivia. In the mining areas of Huanuni, Catavi and Siglo Veinte, where strikes against the coup had been organized, troops attacked with tanks and heavy weapons to put down any resistance to the military take-over. The armed forces also took over or destroyed the miner's radio stations. On 21 August 1980 Amnesty International publicized reports that in early August troops had killed a group of miners and peasants in the mining district of Caracoles, in the department of Oruro, that women had been threatened and ill-treated by troops, and the bodies of the dead removed before they could be identified. A large number of people were reported missing.
Foreign nationals in Bolivia, particularly missionaries and journalists, were also violently treated. Amnesty International made urgent appeals on behalf of tlu-ee citizens of the United States of America detained in August. Two Maryknoll priests, the Reverend William Coy and the Reverend John Moynihan, were detained by the army in Riberalto, Pando, and accused of being "pro-communist". They were released after a few days. A journalist, Mary Helen Spooner, was arrested on 6 August 1980 in La Paz after she had written an article about members of the military government being involved in cocaine smuggling. In a statement made after her release and printed in the Financial Times of London on 15 August 1980 she said that for six days she had been kept in a closet that was four feet square, and had been threatened with death by the Minister of the Interior.
On 8 September 1980, in a pastoral letter entitled "Dignity and Liberty", the Bolivian Bishops Conference expressed its concern about human rights violations including torture of priests and nuns.
Six weeks after the coup the military allowed some 250 Bolivians
117
who had sought refuge in embassies in La Paz to leave the country. At the same time the government granted access to the prisons to the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and representatives of the Roman Catholic church.
An Amnesty International delegation visited La Paz from 16 to 25 November 1980 to investigate human rights violations. In talks with government officials the delegates raised Amnesty International's concern about the torture and ill-treatment of political prisoners. The authorities assured them that all remaining political prisoners would be freed by the end of November 1980. During the mission many vritnesses reported that arrests were continuing, usually during the curfew. Relatives were generally not told where the prisoner was being taken. Some prisoners belonging to left-wing political parties were taken to private houses and tortured. In February 1981 Amnesty International submitted a memorandum to the Government recommending the release of all prisoners of conscience, the investigation of "disappearances" and an immediate end to torture. Although the government's promise to release all political prisoners by the end of November 1980 was not kept, a substantial number of these prisoners were sent into exile during November and December. Others were placed under house arrest.
On 22 January 1981 Amnesty International expressed its concern to General Garcia Meza about the killing of eight members of the Movimiento de la Izquierda Revolucionaria (MIR), Movement of the Revolutionary Left, a political party which won six seats in the 1979 election. On 15 January 1981 a group of civilians and soldiers, acting on the instructions of the Minister of the Interior, surrounded a house in La Paz where the MIR were holding a meeting. Although the people inside were unarmed they were killed; according to some reports they were tortured first. Amnesty International called on the government to investigate these events fully and asked for details of Gloria Ardaya and Gregorio Andrade, who had been taken into custody. Among the dead were Artemio Camargo, the union leader in the COB of the FSTBM. He worked in the Siglo Veinte mine and had been in hiding since the coup. Gloria Ardaya and Gregorio Andrade, a leader of the Federación de Colonizadores, Peasants' Federation, were held in incommunicado detention for several weeks and tortured. They went into exile. Amnesty International submitted information on these cases to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States (lACHR).
Since the coup torture has been widely used. One of the main centres for tortUfe was the Servicio Especial de Seguridad (SES), a special security department created by Colonel Arce Gómez and under the control of the Ministry of the Interior. The most common
118
methods reported by former prisoners were: beatings, burning with cigarettes, water and electric shock torture.
On 2 February 1981 Amnesty International issued an urgent appeal on behalf of a group of four mineworkers arrested on 12 January 1981 in Siglo Veinte and Catavi. On 16 January 1981 more people were briefly detained and beaten. The four miners originally detained — Octavio Carvajal Dalence, Pablo Rocha Mercado, Asencio Cruz and Germán Gutiérrez Ricaldi — were accused of being "subversive delinquents" by the Commander of the Second Division of the Army in Oruro and expelled to Peru. The forcing of dissidents into exile has left hundreds of families destitute.
On 9 March 1981 Amnesty International issued an urgent appeal on behalf of: Julieta Montaño, leader of the Unión de Mujeres de Bolivia (UMBO), the Union of Bolivian Women; and Casiano Amurrio, leader of the Campesinos Independientes, a peasant organization. Julieta Montaño was placed under house arrest, and Casiano Amurrio was sent into exile after several weeks detention in Departamento de Orden Politico (DOP), Department of Political Order, La Paz.
Since the coup most political 'and trade union leaders have been exiled. By 5 March 1981, according to figures provided by the Intergovernmental Committee for European Migration, 840 people had left Bolivia for political reasons. In February 1981 Amnesty International called upon the authorities to allow all those exiled to return.
