Kenya
Amnesty International's main concern was the use of the death penalty. On 27 August 1980 Amnesty Intemational appealed to President Daniel arap Moi to exercise presidential clemency on behalf of all those under sentence of death, and deplored reports that six people had been executed at Kamiti prison in Nairobi on 4 August. It was not known whether further executions were carried out
Although no details were issued by the government Amnesty International believes that in August 1980 over 100 people were in Kamiti prison under sentence of death, mainly for robbery with violence. Those charged with this offence are tried by a resident magistrate, are not eligible for state legal aid, and are subject to a mandatory death sentence on conviction. Most are not legally represented and few of those sentenced succeed in completing the legal formalities to appeal against sentence.
Amnesty Intemational was also concemed at incidents in Garissa, capital of the north eastern province, in November 1980. The majority of people in this area are of Somali ethnic origin, and it has been a restricted area since the secessionist conflicts of the 1960s, when a Somali movement fought unsuccessfully for the area to become part of Somalia.
On 2 November 1980 a government district officer was murdered near Garissa, and seven others — mostly government officials — were killed in another attack in Garissa on 9 November. After the second incident the security forces engaged in reprisals against ethnic Somalis in Garissa. They reportedly burned down a section of the town, committed numerous assaults, and killed an unknown number of people. Virtually the whole ethnic Somali population of Garissa was rounded up and detained in the open for several hours; some were held under these conditions for two days without food or water. Many ethnic Somalis living in other parts of Kenya were also arrested for short periods and interrogated. By April 1981 no one had been charged in connection with the murders in Garissa.
52
