Yemen (People's Democratic Republic of)
Amnesty Intemational's concerns included prolonged detention without trial, inadequate procedures in the trials of political prisoners, "disappearances" and the death penalty.
During the year it worked on behalf of 40 prisoners, of whom 30 were adopted prisoners of conscience; they probably represented only a small portion of the total. Official news of the prisoners was rarely available and in the recent past no responses of substance have been received from the authorities to the numerous inquiries made by Amnesty Intemational.
The 30 prisoners of conscience included 12 members of the former Federal Govemment which operated under British colonial mle before independence in November 1967. Five were sentenced in Febmary 1968 to between 10 and 15 years' imprisonment on charges
382
of high treason and feudalism. The remaining seven have been held since 1967 without charge or trial at al-Mansurah Prison. During 1980 Amnesty International learned of the release of two of this group, Ali Atif Kalidi and Nasir bin Abdullah al-Wahidi, both of whom had been sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment in 1968 but had remained in prison after completing their sentences.
Amnesty International also adopted as prisoners of conscience 10 farmers arrested on 16 November 1976 for protesting against a government decision to ban the consumption, sale and purchase of the narcotic shrub qat. Eight were originally sentenced to death and two were sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment. The death sentences were later commuted to between 10 and 15 years' imprisonment, and the two 10-year sentences were commuted to eight years. The prisoners' place of detention was unknown.
Amnesty International has continued to work on behalf of 18 political prisoners detained between 1970 and 1975 who have not been charged or brought to trial. The whereabouts of 10 of these prisoners was not known and there were fears that they might no longer be alive. One was Abdul Malik Ismail Muhammad, former Ambassador to Cairo, who was arrested at Aden airport in May 1975. Neither his family nor friends have seen or heard of him since.
According to reports hundreds of people have "disappeared" since independence in 1967 and some have "disappeared" from prisons where they had been receiving regular visits from their families. Despite persistent inquiries their families have not been able to trace their whereabouts or confirm whether they were still alive.
On 9 March 1981 Amnesty International cabled President Ali Nasir Mohammad expressing concern and seeking official confirmation of a report in the Lebanese newspaper As-Safir of the execution of Mohammad Saleh Muti', former Minister of Internal and Foreign Aff"airs. In a later unconfirmed report the Kuwaiti newspaper Al-Watan said that the Minister had been killed trying to escape from prison.
