Tanzania
Amnesty International's main concerns were detention without trial and the retention of the death penalty.
The one remaining person adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience, Nasreen Mohamed Hussein from Zanzibar whose movements had been restricted since becoming a "forced bride" in 1971, was finally, in July 1980, able to leave the country to be reunited with her relatives in exile.
Amnesty International was concerned about detention without trial on the mainland under the Preventive Detention Act of 1962. This empowers the authorities to detain any person without charge or trial for an indefinite period. It has been used against political opponents and people suspected of serious criminal offences. Amnesty International believes that more than 100 detainees were held under this act.
A similar detention act in Zanzibar was invoked in June 1980, amid widespread short-term arrests of suspected political opponents, to detain 16 people publicly accused of plotting to overthrow the ruling Zanzibar Revolutionary Council (ZRC). ZRC Chairman Aboud Jumbe announced the following month that the detainees would be charged and tried when investigations were completed. Ten of the 16 detainees were released uncharged on 26 April 1981. Attorney General Damian Lubuva announced that they had been "pardoned". The six remaining detainees were still held without charge or trial. There was no response from the authorities to Amnesty International's requests for information about these detainees and their treatment, or its call for them to be charged and tried or released.
Over 6,000 prisoners were freed by presidential amnesty in 1980, the great majority of whom were convicted ordinary criminals. They included Eliyah Chipaka and John Chipaka, who had been convicted of treason and sentenced to life imprisonment in 1971. A number of
untried detainees were also released during the year. Released detainees were often subject to administrative restrictions prohibiting them from employment in public service or travelling abroad.
The government's investigations into allegations of torture and killing of prisoners in Mwanza and Shinyanga in 1976 finally led to the prosecution of those responsible. In two separate trials, 12 senior security and police officers including two Regional Police Commanders were sentenced to prison terms ranging from five to eight years for causing the death by torture of prisoners arrested in Mwanza and Shinyanga in January 1976. They had led a special security operation on the instructions of a high-level security committee chaired by the then Prime Minister, Rashidi Kawawa, inquiring into a wave of unsolved murders in the two regions. According to evidence produced in court, over 800 men and women were arrested and systematically tortured; at least four victims died as a result. A doctor who administered methedrine, a "truth drug", to the prisoners at the request of security officers was later disciplined by the Tanzania Medical Council, and left the medical service.
