China
The main concerns of Amnesty International were political imprisonment, unfair trial procedures, and the use of the death penalty. In the past year there has been a noticeable deterioration in the human rights situation marked by a number of arbitrary arrests and increased restrictions on civil liberties.
On 27 September 1980 the Chief Procurator, Huang Huoqing, announced that the case of "the Lin Biao - Jiang Qing counter-revo-lutionary clique" had been investigated and sent to the Supreme People's Court for prosecution. The defendants, 10 former leading officials, were described as " 10 major crhninals" and included the so-called "gang of four": Jiang Qing (Mao Zedong's widow), Zhang Chunqiao, Yao Wenyuan and Wang Hongwen. A fifth civilian defendant, Chen Boda, was to be tried with the "gang of four" by a civilian tribunal. The other five defendants — all former military commanders — would be tried by a military tribunal. Both tribunals would be part of a special division of the Supreme People's Court formed especially for the occasion with over 30 judges.
The civilian defendants were chained with "counter-revolutionary" offences including "conspiring to overthrow the political power of the dictatorship of the proletariat and splitting the nation", "organizing and leading a counter-revolutionary clique", "framing and persecuting party and state leaders and usurping party and state power" and "torturing people to extract confessions". The five military defendants were also charged with "plotting to murder Chairman Mao and instigating coxmter-revolutionary armed rebellion". This charge referred to the attempted coup by former Defence Minister Lin Biao, who disappeared in September 1971. By the time the trial started the five former commanders had already spent more than nine years in detention.
In announcing the forthcoming trial, the Chief Procurator indicated that trials of alleged followers of the "gang of four" would be held throughout the country during the following months. The indictment, which became available later, named 60 other people allegedly involved.
On 13 October 1980 Amnesty International wrote to the Chief Procurator, Huang Huoqing, urging a full and fair trial for all political defendants and stating that in its experience when former political officials were prosecuted on charges connected with their actions
208	
when in office, there was an inherent danger of internationally agreed standards for a fair trial being jeopardized by political considerations. It cited principles such as the right of the accused to be presumed innocent until proven guilty, guaranteed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and asked for clarification of the facilities for the defendants to present their defence. Referring to the Chief Procurator's statement that as well as the 10 "principal defendants", others would soon be tried separately, Amnesty International urged the govemment to make public full details of the people concerned, the charges against them and relevant legislation, and the dates of their trials.
The trial of the 10 started in Peking on 20 November 1980. The defendants were offered a number of leading Chinese jurists as defence counsel, but several refused. Only chosen "representatives of the masses" were admitted in court. Selected extracts were shown on television and published in the official press. A few unofficial reports of the proceedings showed that the selective reporting by the official news media was politically biassed against the defendants. For instance statements implicating Mao Zedong which were said to have been made by Jiang Qing in her defence were not reported. During the last hearing on 29 December 1980 the prosecution demanded the death sentence for Jiang Qing, but the penalties it requested for the other defendants were not disclosed. The court then adjoumed to decide its verdict.
After the announcement on 25 January 1981 that two of the defendants, Jiang Qing and Zhang Chunqiao, had been sentenced to death, Amnesty Intemational appealed to the authorities to commute the death sentences. In both cases the sentences were passed with a two-year stay of execution and, according to the law, execution depends on the prisoner's behaviour during that period. In a news release on25 January 1981 Amnesty Intemational pointed out that in some other cases prisoners who had been given a suspended death sentence had eventually been executed. Furthermore the procedures instituted for the trial meant that the decision of the special court was final and none of those convicted would have the right to appeal.
Amnesty Intemational declared that the proceedings had failed to meet internationally agreed standards for a fair trial. From the outset an assumption of the defendants' guilt was evident in official statements and press reports. No witnesses were reported to have been called for the defence during the trial, which was surrounded by secrecy and of which only selected extracts were published. It was also evident from the indictment that some of the charges were of a purely political character and unrelated to actions that might be reasonably regarded as criminal.
209	
Amnesty Intemational reiterated these concerns in a letter to the Prime Minister, Zhao Ziyang, on 30 April 1981 saying in particular that the standards applied at the trial of the 10 former officials might have an adverse effect on the conduct of other political trials. These concerns had been reinforced by statements made after the trial by jurists including the President of the Supreme People's Court, Jiang Hua. In early March. 1981 he said in a report to the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress that the trial had set an example for judicial work and that the judgement would "withstand the test of time and strengthen China's socialist legal system."
Amnesty Intemational also raised other cases which had come to its attention, including that of a group tried for political offences in January 1981 in Kunming, Yunnan province. They were officially described as a "counter-revolutionary clique plotting to overthrow the govemment and topple the proletarian regime". According to Kunming radio on 23 January 1981 the alleged leader of the group, Wang Yongkun, had "actively followed the Jiang Qing counter-revolutionary clique" and gathered a group of more than 10 people who from March 1967 "held many meetings" and "secredy plotted criminal activities to topple Premier Zhou Enlai". However the report gave no information on any such "criminal activities" except for the accusation that, in May 1976, Wang Yongkun and his group, "thinking that the chance for counter-revolution had come", wrote posters and slogans "slandering and levelling false charges against party and state leaders" which they posted in the centre of Kunming and other places. In its letter, Amnesty Intemational expressed concem that Wang Yongkun and eight others tried with him were sentenced to penalties ranging from 15 years' imprisonment to three years' surveillance on the basis of accusations which appeared to be purely political. The letter asked for information on the precise charges, on the nature of the evidence on which the charges were based, and on the facilities for defence at the trial.
While noting official measures to restore proper legal process over the past years and official comments indicating that increased attention should be paid to the rights of citizens, Amnesty International also raised several cases of people who appeared to have been denied the most fundamental protection and who were held for the peaceful exercise of basic human rights. Ren Wanding, formerly chairperson of the defunct unofficial group, the "Chinese Human Rights Alliance", was arrested in Peking on 4 April 1979 while putting up a poster criticizing the restrictions on unofficial publishing imposed a few days earlier by the Peking municipal authorities. Since then no information has been disclosed on the charges against him and his whereabouts. Despite many appeals his fate remained unknown
210	
and he has now been detained for two years, apparently without charge or trial.
Liu Qing, an editor of the dissident magazine April Fifth Forum, was arrested in Peking on II November 1979. He had distributed an unauthorized transcript of the trial of Wei Jingsheng, the former editor of the unofficial magazine Exploration, who was sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment in October 1979 on political charges. Nothing was heard of Liu Qing for several months after his arrest and his family was neither informed of any charges against him nor allowed to see him. It is reported that in August 1980 the Peking Public Security Bureau informed his relatives that he had been sent to Shaanxi province for three years of "re-education-through-labour". This punishment can be imposed by a simple recommendation by the police, without the person concerned being charged or tried. Liu Qing has received an administrative punishment amounting to detention without trial for the peaceful exercise of his human rights.
Another editor of the April Fifth Forum, Xu Wenli, and one of his associates, Yang Jing, were reported to have been arrested in Peking on 10 April 1981. It was also reported that their relatives were neither told of the reasons for their arrest nor informed of their whereabouts. This contradicts the provisions of the Arrest and Detention Act adopted by the National People's Congress in 1979, which stipulated that the family should be informed of the reason for arrest and the place of detention within 24 hours (Article 5) and that the person arrested should either be formally charged or released within three to seven days (Article 8). Amnesty International urged the Prime Minister to look into these and other similar cases so that the detainees might be promptly released or brought to a fair and open trial.
Until his arrest Xu Wenli worked as an electrician in a Peking factory. He was the founder of the April Fifth Forum, which is thought to be the first unofficial magazine to have appeared in Peking in the autumn of 1978. By June 1979, when unofficial journals were banned, the group publishing the magazine consisted of about 20 people, mainly young workers and some members of the Chinese Communist Youth League. The group decided to cease publication in March 1980 after strong warnings from the authorities. Since then the group has circulated a private newsletter and joined in appeals with other similar groups calling for the release of imprisoned dissenters. According to sources in Hong Kong on 10 January 1981 Xu Wenli appealed to the authorities about Liu Qing, asking for his relatives to be informed of his whereabouts and conditions and for him to be granted a proper trial or released if innocent. Xu Wenli was reported to have been taken away from his house at midnight on 10 April 1981
211	
by the police who also confiscated his tape recordings and personal papers. No further information has been received on his or Yang Jing's detention.
These arrests followed a series of warnings in the official press in early 1981 against people considered too critical of the government or who "attacked the party leadership and socialist system". An unpublished Communist Party document is reported to have called for a total ban on " illegal publications and organizations" and to have named several potential victims of disciplinary action.
Other supporters of unofficial groups and magazines were reported to have been arrested in several cities during the year. In some cases detention lasted only a few days, and in others the detainees were sentenced. Three printing workers from Taiyuan, Shanxi province, were tried in February 1981 for "organizing a counter-revolutionary group". The three, Wang Jianwei, Zhang Jianxin and Chen Yuming, were accused of forming an independent party, the "Chinese Democratic Party", which had published a manifesto criticizing the one-party rule of the Communist Party and demanding a "government of union". They are believed to have been arrested in 1980 in Taiyuan. According to an official press report, Zhang Jianxin and Chen Yuming were sentenced to three years' and Wang Jianwei to two years' imprisonment by Taiyuan Intermediate People's Court.
A 78-year-old Roman Catholic priest, Father Stanislas Shen, was reported to have been arrested on 6 May 1980 in Shanghai on charges of "hampering production and modernization", after a pilgrimage of several thousand people near Shanghai. Despite his age and a heart condition Father Shen was sent to the Beimaoling labour camp in Anhui province, where he had apparently already spent 20 years in detention. He had been released from there two years previously. Despite appeals on-his behalf, he was still held there in late 1980.
Hao Ming, an art critic and journalist from Hong Kong, has been detained incommunicado without charge since his arrest in Shanghai on 7 October 1980 during a trip to China. Hao Ming, better known under his pen-name Fang Dan, had emigrated from China to Hong Kong in 1974 but had returned on several short visits since then. His sister in Peking was officially informed of his arrest by the police on 5 November 1980, but was not told the reasons for his detention or where he was being held. By mid-January 1981 his whereabouts were still unknown and no charges had yet been made public against him. His wife, who lives in Hong Kong, had received no answer from the government departments in Peking to which she had written inquiring about her husband's arrest. Fang Dan was thought to have been arrested because of his close personal contacts with certain intellectuals, artists and high-ranking cadres in China. The purpose of his last trip to
212	
China was to attend an unofficial art exhibition in Unimqi (the capital of Xinjiang province, in the northwest).
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about the use of the death penalty for a wide range of criminal and "counterrevolutionary" offences. As part of its work for the abolition of the death penalty around the world, it published a dossier on the death penalty in the People's Republic of China, and appealed for commutation of death sentences on humanitarian grounds in all cases which came to its attention.
