Bangladesh
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the continued imprisonment of political prisoners under special legislation; the trial of prisoners on charges of "anti-state activities" by military courts applying summary procedures; the inadequate protection of political prisoners in jail; prison killings; and the large number of executions, including those of people convicted by military courts without the right of appeal.
Arrests of politically active workers, students and trade union leaders continued to be reported, but details about individual prisoners of conscience seldom reached Amnesty International. In several cases the Supreme Court ruled that the detention of political prisoners was illegal and ordered their release, and the government has declared several amnesties, some of which have been of benefit to a small number of political prisoners.
On 22 April 1981 the Deputy Minister of Home Affairs stated in the Jatiya Sangsad (parliament) that 403 people were detained without trial. He said the government "reviews the cases from time to time and releases those who are considered eUgible to be freed". Amnesty International continued to work for the release of several adopted prisoners of conscience held for many years without trial; one of them, Habibullah Khan of Pathuakhali, has now been detained for more than eight years.
The statement did not specify under which laws the 403 prisoners were held, but it is presumed to be the Special Powers Act which provides wide powers to detain political prisoners. In addition, an unknown number of political prisoners were still imprisoned after conviction by martial law courts under the provisions of the Fifth Amendment to the Constitution. This specifies that convictions
200	
passed by military courts remain valid despite the lifting of martial law in April 1979. It was not known how many of the estimated 1,000 prisoners convicted by martial law courts since 1975 were still in detention.
Amnesty Intemational continued its exchanges with the Home Ministry about the political detainees it has adopted as prisoners of conscience. Of the 383 political prisoners detained under special legislation whose names were given to Amnesty Intemational by the government of Shaikh Mujibur Rahman in 1975, the government has now released all but six. In response to its letter of 3 April 1980 and a cable of 27 May 1980 to the Home Minister inquiring about the arrest of 53 members of the Bangladesh Communist Party (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1980) Amnesty Intemational was informed that all members of the Communist Party were released in June 1980 except the Secretary General, Mohammad Farhad, who the govemment said was awaiting trial on a charge of "criminal conspiracy and waging or attempting to wage war". Amnesty International continued to investigate his case. It had adopted as prisoners of conscience the other members of the Communist Party detained under the 1974 Special Powers Act without specific charges.
On 13 August 1980 the govemment announced the release of 3 31 prisoners, including 17 political detainees whose names were given to Amnesty Intemational by the government on 19 September 1980. On 7 November 1980 the govemment announced a further amnesty for prisoners on the occasion of National Revolution and Solidarity Day, according to reports in the Bangladesh press "as part of the government's efforts to remove congestion in jails as well as expediting trial cases". (In April 1980 the government announced that more than 83,000 cases were pending before the Bangladesh courts.) The govemment said it expected 1,500 prisoners would benefit from the amnesty but political prisoners held for "anti-state" activities would not be released. On 26 March 1981 the govemment announced another amnesty of 194 prisoners of whom 35 were said to be political detainees. Amnesty International has not received details of their identity.
On 4 November 1980 Amnesty International wrote to President Ziaur Rahman to reiterate its grave concern about the inadequacy of measures to protect political prisoners. Killings of political prisoners in jail have been reported particularly since 1975, and^ in those rare instances where inquiries have been instituted by the govemment, their findings have not been publicized. In September and October 1980 there were violent incidents in Rangpur, Mymensingh and Magura jails. On 12 October 1980 prisoners took control of Khulna District jail holding 24 warders hostage and reportedly demanded the
201	
release of all prisoners detained for more than three months without trial. They demanded the abolition of the death penalty and improved prison conditions, including regular visits by High Court judges to the jails. On 21 October armed police entered the prison and the number of prisoners killed in the ensuing fighting was officially put at 39. Two hundred others were reportedly seriously injured, of whom 117 were police, according to the government. An opposition source put the number of prisoners killed as far higher.
On 4 November 1980 Amnesty International wrote to President Ziaur Rahman expressing grave concern about the incident and urging the government to set up an independent investigation to establish responsibility for the killings, and publish the findings. The government said that the prisoners were killed in fighting between two opposing groups of prisoners but public reaction in Bangladesh reflected a widespread belief that the police had killed them. On 22 October 1980 the government announced it had ordered a judicial inquiry by the district and sessions judge of Jessore but the findings have not been pubhshed. At the time of the incident the government admitted to serious prison overcrowding and that conditions were "awful": there were then 911 prisoners in the jail, which had an official capacity of 245.
On 27 November 1980 the Jail Reforms Committee, headed by Justice Munim of the Supreme Court, submitted its final report to the government. The committee was established on 4 November 1978 with a mandate to recommend prison reforms and changes in the prison code. The Home Minister, A. S. M. Mustafizur Rahman, said the government would "try to base its proposed improvements in the jails on the recommendations of the Jails Reforms Committee", but, as far as is known, the government did not publish the committee's report or its recommendations. On 24 November the Home Minister announced plans to build a separate prison for political detainees outside Dacca.
On 12 January 1981 it was reported that a prisoner awaiting trial, Jheru Karmaker, had died in Khulna Jail hospital. According to the superintendent of the jail he had been admitted from police custody to the jail hospital with "marks of physical torture".
Torture has also been reported in the Chittagong Hill Tracts, an area in south-eastern Bangladesh inhabited by a tribal population many of whom are Buddhists or Christians. They have opposed the settlement of Bengalis from the plains, a policy encouraged by successive Bangladeshi governments, and have demanded a return to a greater degree of autonomy. Particularly since 1975, the political demands of the tribal population have been accompanied by acts of violence. Amnesty International has received an increasing number
202	
of allegations that members of the armed forces and police as well as tribal people have been killed in guerrilla activities. There have also been continuing reports that the security forces were responsible for mass arrests, torture and forced expulsion of tribal people in the Hill Tracts. The allegations were difficult to assess particularly since official permission is required to enter the area.
On 4 November 1980 Amnesty International asked the government to investigate the events of 25 March 1980 when up to 300 tribal people were reportedly shot by the defence forces, and which had been reported widely in the press. It urged the government to set up an independent inquiry and asked for details of the number of people arrested in the Chittagong Hill Tracts in connection with political activities, and the charges against them. Sofarthegovemmenthas not replied.
Fighting in the Chittagong Hill Tracts persisted and on I December 1980 the government introduced the Disturbed Areas Bill in the Jatiya Sangsad. The bill was strongly opposed by political parties and the Supreme Court Bar Association, and has been referred to the Standing Committee on Law and Parliamentary Affairs. It empowers the government to declare any part of Bangladesh a "disturbed area" by simply giving notice in the government gazette. Specified military, paramilitary and police personnel may, if in their opinion "it is necessary for the maintenance of public order", "fire upon or otherwise use force, even to the extent of causing death, against any person engaged in any unlawful activity", which the bill defines widely as activity "prejudicial to the sovereignty or territorial integrity of Bangladesh" or to Bangladesh's "security or public order". The bill allows for the arrest and detention of prisoners without trial, apparently indefinitely. People committing or advocating "unlawful activity" can be sentenced to imprisonment or death by hanging or shooting.
Amnesty International wrote to President Ziaur Rahman on 2 February 1981, saying it was concerned that the bill would authorize official personnel to shoot to kill people on mere suspicion. It drew the government's attention to the United Nations Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials. Amnesty International also expressed concern that the wide powers to arrest and detain people suspected of committing "unlawful activity" would allow people to be arrested or killed for the non-violent exercise of human rights. An Amnesty International observer visiting Dacca in April 1981 learned that the bill was still before parliament and was assured by the Vice-President and Minister of Law that Amnesty International's views "would be taken into consideration".
On 9 March 1981 the trial of Colonel (Ret'd) Abdul Aziz Pasha,
203	
Colonel Didarul Alam, Colonel (Ret'd) Norunnabi Choudhury and two civilians, Kazi Munir and Mosharraf Hussain, opened before the Dacca Field General Court Martial. They were charged with holding secret meetings and inciting armed personnel to military rebellion. The accused were alleged to have planned to stage a coup on 17 June 1980.
On 17 March 1981 Amnesty International cabled President Ziaur Rahman expressing concern that, despite the lifting of martial law, two civilians were among the accused on trial before a military court, whose summary proceedings Amnesty Intemational had previously described as "falling far short of intemational standards" {Report of an Amnesty International Mission to Bangladesh, 4-12 April 1977). It urged the government to grant a fair and public trial to all the accused but no reply was received. Amnesty Intemational sent an observer to the trial and to hearings of the petition submitted by Mosharraf Hussain, one of the five accused, to the Division Bench of the Supreme Court, challenging the military courts' jurisdiction to try civilians. The observer arrived in Dacca on 9 April 1981 and left on 20 April 1981 after finally having been informed that he would not be allowed to attend the Field General Court Martial proceedings. During his stay he met the Deputy Attorney General (Criminal), defence lawyers, the Vice-President and Minister of Law, Justice Sattar, and the Joint Secretary of the Home Ministry. He discussed Amnesty Intemational's concerns about the trial and about provisions in the Disturbed Areas Act. After his departure Amnesty International cabled the President to explain why the delegate had leftDacca: "His inability to attend the trial greatly heightens concern about the standards of fairness and openness adopted by the Field General Court Martial. The mle of law requires that justice must not only be done, but must also be seen to be done". Although appreciating that defence facilities were apparently available to the accused, Amnesty International feared that the trial fell short of internationally recognized standards. Amnesty International understood that the entire prosecution evidence was based on statements by two of the five accused who had tumed state witness, and that some confessions were allegedly obtained under duress. It said trial standards of independence and impartiality were not met by judges who were career army officers and therefore part of the executive. It added its belief that the trial of civilians before such courts would appear to be against the spirit of the constitution. Amnesty International said it was disturbed that no reasons for the court's decision were required and that there were no provisions of appeal, as required by Article 14(5) of the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Amnesty Intemational appealed to the President to transfer the trial
204	
to an independent court where full legal safeguards, including the right of appeal, were observed. The government was also asked to investigate allegations that confessions had been obtained under duress.
The number of executions was high and included prisoners executed for "political and anti-state activities". On 27 May 1980 the Home Minister stated that 424 people had been executed over the past five years. Many of these death sentences were apparently passed by military courts with no appeal. The sentence has to be confirmed by the President.
Only rarely did details of individuals sentenced to death reach Amnesty International. In its letter of 4 November 1980 Amnesty International asked the government to give the names of all people under sentence of death but this information has not been received. It also expressed grave concern about the hanging in Dacca Central J ail on 4 June 1980 of four members of the Awami League, reportedly convicted by a Special Military Court on charges of murdering political opponents. The executions were apparently carried out without the accused being granted the minimum safeguard of the right of appeal.
