Colombia
In August 1980 Amnesty International presented the Government of Colombia with a 25 8-page report. Based largely on the findings of a mission to Colombia in January 1980 it documented abuses by government forces including arbitrary arrests, torture, and the unexplained killings of peasant and Indian leaders in rural areas. The report, published on 22 September, expanded a memorandum delivered to the government in April 1980. The report emphasized that the state of siege in force almost continuously for 30 years and recent special security laws had facilitated human rights abuses by security forces; in particular by providing for the trial of civilians by military courts on a wide range of chargés and with limited rights to defence.
The report cited more than 600 individual cases, a large number in detail, including many extracts from testimonies of prisoners detained in 1979 and early 1980. It detailed interrogation procedures that included torture: hanging by the arms, the use of drugs, electric shock, rape and near-drowning. It also described Colombian army establishments where torture was alleged to have been practised. A doctor took part in the mission and carried out physical and psychological examinations of 27 of the people whose testimonies alleging torture were included in the report In most cases he found that the evidence was compatible with the allegations of torture and in some cases that "there was clear evidence that the alleged torture had in fact taken place". The report paid particular attention to abuses of power in the extensive rural areas under military control, the so-called "militarized zones". Security measures intended to combat active guerrilla opposition groups affected the peasant population as a whole through "continual searches, detention and use of torture ..." which created an atmosphere of "permanent threat and terror". The mission delegates visited 11 prisons in seven cities, two military installations used as detention centres, and two hospitals, with the full cooperation of the authorities.
The government responded at length to the April 1980 memorandum based on the mission, describing it as "libellous" and abusive of Colombia's sovereignty. This commentary was included as an appendix to the report published in September 1980, Informe de una
130
Misión de Amnistía Internacional a la República de Colombia. The response to the September 1980 report was limited to a short telegram in which President Julio César Turbay Ayala deplored the "bias" of Amnesty International.
Several testimonies in the mission report alleging torture in army installations and poHtical killings by military personnel have received independent confirmation from a group of officers and non-commissioned officers formerly attached to Úíq Batallón de Inteligencia y Contra-Inteligencia "Charry Solano" (BINCI), the Colombian army's chief military intelligence group. The five officers wrote to Amnesty International and other international organizations on 20 July 1980, claiming they had been wrongfully accused of "common crimes" and jailed by military authorities. They alleged the authorities themselves were responsible for ordering serious criminal acts of political repression. The five alleged that they had been ordered by the intelligence batallion headquarters to torture political detainees. They named batallion personnel who had been detailed to serve as a "terrorist group called the Triple A" which murdered several members of the political opposition, and bombed three Bogotá periodicals (Alternativa, El Bogotano, and Voz Proletaria). The statement did not reach Amnesty International until January 1981 when it was published in several newspapers in Colombia and Mexico. The situation of the officers remained unknown.
The officers' statement described the torture and killing by military intelligence of guerrilla leader José Martínez Quiróz and other prisoners in 1978 and early 1979. In November 1978 the press had reported leaflets announcing the formation of a "death squad" called the Alianza Anticomunista Americana (AAA), American Anti-communist Alliance, which claimed responsibility for killing José Martínez Quiróz.
The officers described their involvement in the interrogation of guerrilla suspects in January 1979 in the Escuela de Caballería, Army Cavaliy School, in Usaquen, and in a nearby secret detention centre, known as the Cuevas de Sacromonte, Caves of Sacromonte. They described the detention and torture of five prisoners for whom Amnesty International had appealed in January 1979, including Dr Olga López de Roldán and a "tall and dark Uruguayan", later identified as photographer Sergio Betarte Benitez, detained in Bogotá on 3 January. Amnesty International later received detailed testimonies" from each of the prisoners who claimed independently that they had been taken from detention in the Escuela de Caballería to a secret underground installation they could identify only by the name used by their captors, the "Caves of Sacromonte". While none of the prisoners could describe the entrance to the caves or their exact
131
location as they were blindfolded, the testimony of the five officers identifies the Caves of Sacromonte as part of the Army School of Communications at Facatativá (near Bogotá) used for the interrogation of "very special cases":
"There is a promontory which can be seen at about 300 metres from the entrance or guardpost of the military installations. It is a sort of anti-aircraft shelter... artificial caves with a very long corridor, about 150 metres long. At the sides there are three large rooms".
Each of the prisoners described being beaten while hung by their arms. Dr Olga López said "... they put my arms behind, they padded my wrists, and with some ropes lifted me up". Sergio Betarte Benitez also said his wrists were padded "with a blanket in order to leave no marks", before being suspended by a rope hanging over a beam. The officers' statement described the torture in the Caves of Sacromonte in almost identical terms, reporting that prisoners were blindfolded, stripped naked, bound, and beaten systematically while suspended from a roof beam with their hands behind the backs. Dr Olga López was released in January 1981, after two years' detention; Sergio Betarte remained imprisoned without trial.
The Procuraduría General de la Nación, the National Office of the Attorney General, which has special constitutional authority to investigate reports of human rights abuses in Colombia, was asked in February 1981 by a group of Colombian parliamentarians to investigate the allegations.
Since the April and August 1980 exchanges with the government there have been several significant developments. The April 1980 memorandum had recommended lifting the state of siege, and noted that Colombia was obliged, under the terms of the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the American Convention on Human Rights, to report to the United Nations and the Organization of American States any extraordinary measures restricting human rights, their reason, what rights are suspended, and for how long. In July 1980 the govemment notified the Secretary-General of the United Nations that by Decree 2131 of 1976, it had been declared "that public order had been disturbed and that all of the national territory was in a state of siege", and that the measure would be lifted "when the necessary conditions prevail".
Govemment representatives have also described a law of amnesty as a step towards the eventual lifting of the state of siege. Signed into law by President Turbay on 23 March 1981, it granted a four-month amnesty to insurgents who laid down their arms, providing they were not implicated in kidnapping, extortion, arson and other "acts of
132
ferocity and barbarity". After this period the government was to take into account the guerrillas' response to the amnesty in determining whether to accept petitions from prisoners held on charges of or convicted of rebellion, sedition or rioting (rebelión, sedición o asonada).
In March 1981 the Supreme Court challenged the legality of the Security Statute decreed under special state of siege powers by President Turbay on 6 September 1978, which provides heavy penalties for a wide range of acts concerning public order, and conflicts with a new penal code that came into force in January 1981. A court decision was pending on whether the entire Security Statute would be annulled, and whether people convicted under the law would benefit from the more favourable terms of the penal code. Should the law be annulled by the court's decision Article 121 of the Constitution allows the executive to decree a similar emergency law immediately which would override the penal code during the state of siege.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports of abuses in the militarized zones, including apparently arbitrary detentions, torture and the killing of captives by local army patrols. Amnesty Intemational made inquiries into a number of cases including that of campesinos (peasant farmers) Luis Orlando Rodriguez and his son Federico Rodriguez Contreras. On 29 October 1980 they were apprehended as they were clearing underbmsh on their land at Los Regaderos, Tame, in the intendencia (county) of Arauca. An army anti-guerrilla patrol, led by officers whose names are in the possession of Amnesty Intemational, tortured the men on the spot, robbed them and forced them and three other captives as yet unidentified to dig their own graves. They were then shot. Regional and national authorities have reportedly obstmcted or ignored requests by local community organizations to investigate the deaths, and have refused permission to exhume the bodies.
Most of the campesinos reportedly detained in the militarized zones were charged with having "aided guerrillas" by giving them food or shelter. Most were reportedly apprehended in their homes or while working on their own small farms. Abuses reported in Arauca county are generally attributed to army units under the regional command of the VII Brigada de Institutos Militares, Brigade of Military Institutes, in Villavicencio, Meta department, south of Arauca.
The cases of six campesinos from the Tame, Arauca region, detained in November 1980 were being investigated. They were held in Villavicencio awaiting court martial on charges of aiding the guerrillas; the 12-year-old son of Celino Jaimes Rozo, one of the six, was detained with them for 20 days. Detailed testimonies from three
133
of the men said that they were held bound to posts in the open air at a rural army campsite for the first few days. After four days' detention at the military air base at Saravena a military intelligence officer arrived (whom they named). He beat and kicked them during interrogation while they were held handcuffed, standing, for 48 hours without food and water. One of the six admitted having once given food to guerrillas passing through his farm, but denied being a collaborator.
Similar cases have been reported from Yacopi, Cundinamarca, another militarized zone. It is reported that a system of mihtary passes has been instituted for local residents, and campesinos have to report to the Yacopi military base every three, eight or 15 days. One unexplained killing by an army patrol in the Yacopi area was that of campesino José Angel Bustos who was shot dead in his house in the village of Bilbao, and whose body was taken away by helicopter. His body was later recovered by members of the community from the army post at Terán, Cundinamarca.
The procedure by which a zone is "militarized'' was illustrated in Caquetá county in southeastern Colombia, an area in which the guerrilla groups FARC and M-19 had reportedly been responsible for four kidnappings and 17 murders in 1980. In January 1981 the Comandante General (commander general) of the army, Fernando Landazábal Reyes began "Operation Command Number 12" in Florencia, Caquetá, to coordinate the operations of 5,000 troops being sent to the area. The troops included batallions of Cazadores (Hunters) and the elite Batallón Colombia, special counter-in-surgency forces of the army. Eight military districts were established (cantones militares), and special travel restrictions, military passes, and regular reporting to military posts were imposed on the population Several inquiries have been made by Amnesty International into abuses reported in Caquetá in 1981, including the detention in April 1981 of Ignacio Mora, a leader of tíie Paujil, Caquetá, city council, and his subsequent death at the Paujil military post.
Recently reported abuses by army forces were not limited to militarized zones. Gerardo Antonio Bermudez was detained on 9 March 1981 in a rural area near Barrancabermeja, Santander department. He was handcuffed, told his captors were from the "death squad", and taken on foot into the hills. There he was hung by his arms from a tree and beaten; and the following day he was taken to a cell in the army complex at Barrancabermeja of i)\Q Nueva Granada batallion. His testimony described in detail torture there by army interrogators including: beatings; immersion in water; being hung by the arms; bums on the back with cigarrettes; forced standing for five days and nights; and electric shocks, including shocks to the tongue. Uniformed army troops detained Marco Fidel Pasos Martínez and
134
Luis Eduardo Picaso Estrada on 10 January 1981 in Valledupar, César department. The two young men were found dead two days later; their lx>dies bore marks of torture, and they had been shot by submachine-gun.
Although serious reports of torture have been received in the past year, they differ to some extent from those of 1979 and 1980 when most involved torture carried out in the major military establishments such as the Brigada de Institutos Militares in the capital. Many recent reports have been of campesinos apprehended in isolated rural areas, who were tortured on the spot in temporary army bivouacs. The methods required no special equipment pr technical sophistication: captives were bound to trees or handcuffed to posts, exposed to the sun by day, and insects by night; forced to remain standing for days on end; hung by the arms while beaten by rifle butts; heads were submerged in dirty water. Captives were frequently threatened with the torture or murder of their families.
There has been some evidence of recent initiatives taken against torture by civil police forces. In its response to the Amnesty Intemational memorandum in April 1980, the government had reported the dismissal and imprisonment of one police official involved in torture. Trade unionist Adolfo Leon Pomo was said to have been "tortured by an agent of the F-2 of the police, who seated him on an anthill resulting in insect bites on his genitals". In a similar case, the Attomey General ordered a disciplinary hearing against two agents of the Departamento Administrativo de Seguridad (DAS), the civilian political police, for the arbitrary detention and torture of three suspected thieves in Medellin, Antioquia department in July 1979. The prisoners were reported to have been bumed with cigarettes, stripped and beaten, and given electric shocks on the genitals and the back; a medical doctor gave evidence confirming that torture took place. In December 1980 the Attomey General ordered the agents to be dismissed, although no criminal or civil charges were brought. Amnesty Intemational received no information on measures to discipline or prosecute military personnel implicated in torture or other grave abuses against prisoners.
During the year Amnesty International worked on behalf of 33 Colombian prisoners adopted as prisoners of conscience or being investigated. Twenty-one of them were released after trial by court martial, after being held in pre-trial detention for up to two years. Eight prisoners whose cases were being investigated were members of the trade union at the Anchicayá Hydro-Electric Power Station and were detained between May and June 1979 on charges of rebelHon; six of them have been released.
In March 1981, 74 members of the guerrilla group M-I9 were
135
taken into military custody in the Ecuador-Colombia frontier region: 27 were reported captured by Colombian troops while inside Ecuador, while 47 others surrendered to Ecuadorian authorities in the town of San Lorenzo. Despite requests for political asylum, the Ecuadorian army summarily returned the 47 to Colombia. Ecuador's Foreign Minister, Dr Alfonso Barrera, publicly expressed to Amnesty International his commitment to remain in personal contact with Colombian authorities to ensure the personal safety of the prisoners.
