Yugoslavia
The past year has seen an increase in political trials. In June 1980 the Federal Public Prosecutor spoke in a newspaper interview of a rise in the number of political offences since the end of 1979, which he attributed to intemational tensions and to increased activity by political emigres and internal "enemies" following the illness and death (on 4 May 1980) of President Tito. In July 1980 Amnesty Intemational wrote to
340 	
the Federal Public Prosecutor expressing concem at the rising number of political trials and at the heavy sentences imposed on people convicted of "hostile propaganda" under Article 133 of the criminal code. It also reiterated its concem at the vague formulation of this article which enabled it to be used to imprison individuals for the non-violent expression of their beliefs, in contravention of intemational human rights instmments to which Yugoslavia is a party. Tanjug, the official Yugoslav news agency, reported that a meeting of public prosecutors on 21 April 1981 had noted that the number of political offences had risen over the previous year to 553, of which 93 percent were characterized as "minor verbal misdemeanours", and had decided that no more "compromises" would be made in dealing with political offenders. This decision appears to have been partly prompted by a renewed outbreak of nationaUst unrest in the predominantly Albanian-populated autonomous province of Kosovo in March and early April.
Prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International in the past year have included 11 ethnic Albanians. Eight from Kosovo were sentenced on 9 June 1980 to between three and eight years' imprisonment by the district court of Pristina on charges of "hostile propaganda" and "association to carry out hostile activity". The eight accused — Shefqet Jashari, Ramadan Pllana, Avdi Kelmendi, Avdyl Lahu, Isa Demaj, Sulejman Quqalla, Skender Jashari and Hysen Gervalla — were reportedly among several hundred people detained in Kosovo in late 1979 after anti-govemment pamphlets had been circulated and anti-government slogans had been painted on walls in towns in the province. In July 1980 a further three ethnic Albanians, from Macedonia, were sentenced by the district court of Skopje to between three and six years' imprisonment. They were charged under Article 13 3 with having presented " a malicious picture of the position of the Albanian nationality in Yugoslavia with a view to destroying the Yugoslav nations' and nationalities' brotherhood, unity and equality". Amnesty Intemational received unconfirmed reports that there was at least one other trial of Albanian nationalists in Prizren in early summer 1980.
Other cases taken up for adoption or investigation by Amnesty International in the past year included those of a Franciscan novice and a student at a Franciscan seminary, two Moslem religious officials, and an Orthodox priest, his brother and two acquaintances — all from the Republic of Bosnia-Hercegovina.
According to reports Franjo Vidovic (22), a Franciscan novice and Ivan Tumdic (20), a student at the Franciscan seminary in Visoko were arrested early in April, following a police raid on the seminary at the end of March 1980. It was reported that during
341 	
searches police found cuttings from the newspaper Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (published in the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG)), articles from a Croatian emigre journal and nationalist poems. On 26 May 1980 Franjo Vidovic and Ivan Turudic were sentenced by the district court of Sarajevo on charges of "hostile propaganda" to six and five and a half years' imprisonment respectively.
Amnesty International was investigating the cases of Muharem Hasenbegovic (aged 35), chief Imam of the mosque in Gorazde and Ago Curovac (aged 52), a watch-maker and the mosque's treasurer. In September 1980 they were sentenced to four years' imprisonment on charges of having "provoked national and religious hatred or intolerance". The charges were allegedly based on conversations in which Ago Curovac criticized the authorities, and on a sermon preached by Muharem Hasanbegovic in which he urged parents to bring up their children in Moslem traditions.
On 30 December 1980 the district court of Sarajevo sentenced the Orthodox priest, Father Nedjo Janjic, his brother Momcilo Janjic, and two friends to prison terms of between four and six years on charges of "provoking religious and racial hatred". According to an official press report. Father Janjic (aged 24):
"took advantage of the religious ceremony of the christening of his son to sing at his house, together with a number of guests, including members of the parish church council, nationalist songs, and to incite those present to chauvinist euphoria".
Although the prohibition of incitement to national, racial or religious hatred is an internationally accepted restriction of the right to freedom of expression Amnesty International considers that the singing of nationalist songs at a private christening party could not reasonably be held to constitute such incitement. Amnesty International has therefore adopted all four men as prisoners of conscience.
In October 1980 Amnesty International sent two observers to the trial of Dragutin Trumbetas by the district court of Zagreb. In May 1980 Dragutin Trumbetas, a 42-year-old typesetter and artist, was arrested on his return to Yugoslavia after 14 years as a migrant worker in the FRG. Customs officials had found a number of Yugoslav emigre journals in his luggage and letters he had received from the editors of one of them. He was charged with "participation in hostile activity" and "hostile propaganda". He was released from preventive detention after a month. The court found him guilty on both charges, but taking into account mitigating circumstances imposed a sentence below the prescribed minimum. He received a sentence of 18 months' imprisonment and at the end of April 1981 was still at liberty pending appeal. In a letter to the Federal Secretary of Justice Amnesty
342 	
International stated that it considered that the evidence against him was not sufficient for conviction. Amnesty Intemational considered that Dragutin Tmmbetas' conviction contravened intemational human rights standards and was incompatible with Yugoslavia's intemational commitments. Amnesty International urged that his appeal be upheld.
In Febmary 1981 Amnesty Intemational sent an observer to the trial of Dr Franjo Tudjman (aged 59), a former prisoner of conscience, by the district court of Zagreb. Dr Tudjman, a historian, veteran partisan and former army general was indicted for "hostile propaganda" with aid from abroad. He was accused of having "falsely presented the position of the Croat people as well as the implementation of the democratic freedoms of Yugoslav citizens". The charges were based on statements in interviews with three foreign journalists between 1977 and 1980, and in a discussion with a Serbian student, Vladimir Markovic, an adopted prisoner of conscience (see Amnesty International Report 1980). Dr Tudjman was sentenced to three years' imprisonment; he remained at liberty pending appeal. To Amnesty International's knowledge Vladimir Markovic, who in February 1979 was confined by court order to psychiatric hospital following the publication in an emigre journal of a letter in which he had cited Dr Tudjman, was still detained in the psychiatric wing of Belgrade prison hospital at the end of the year.
On 16 Febmary 1981, the eve of DrTudjman's trial, Tanjug announced that three petitions to the Yugoslav State Presidency had been rejected. The first petition, of June 1980, signed by 36 Belgrade intellectuals, called for an amnesty for people who had "committed the offence of expressing prohibited political views". The second, of October 1980, signed by over 100 academics, lawyers, writers and artists, called for the deletion of a passage making it a criminal offence to depict socio-political conditions in Yugoslavia "falsely and maliciously" from Article 133 of the criminal code, dealing with "hostile propaganda". The third, of November 1980, signed by 43 Zagreb intellectuals, called for an amnesty for political prisoners. Although the constitution guarantees the right of petition, the Tanjug statement said that the petitions had been rejected as "legally and politically unacceptable", and charged their authors with "evil and immoral intentions" and with having deliberately organized a "campaign to discredit Yugoslavia's high reputation in the world".
On 21 November 1980 Dobroslav Paraga, a 19-year-old law student from Zagreb who had collected signatures for the Zagreb petition was arrested. On 25 November he was brought before an examining magistrate, when he made a confession on which his subsequent indictment was based. He later retracted this confession,
343 	
stating that he had made it under pressure from the police who had denied him food from his arrest until 26 November and had subjected him to repeated prolonged interrogations and to intimidation including death threats. This retraction was reportedly not recorded in the court dossier until 6 January 1981, nor was it mentioned in the indictment. On 16 March 1981 he was formally charged with "hostile propaganda" and "hostile activity". According to the indictment in July 1980 he had visited in the FRG Stjepan Bilandzic, a Croatian political emigre from whom he "received the task" of starting a dissident bulletin in Zagreb and money for this purpose as well as numerous emigre publications, found in the Zagreb flat of a friend of Dobroslav Paraga, Ernest Brajder. He was also accused of having obtained signatures for the petition under false pretences, and of having sent a copy of the petition and a list of signatories Xo Der Spiegel, a magazine published in the FRG. Ernest Brajder was arrested on 24 November 1980 and committed suicide on 27 November, according to official reports. No further details concerning his death were available at the end of April I98I. By the end of April 1981 Dobroslav Paraga was still detained awaiting trial. Amnesty Intemational appealed to the authorities to release him and,to drop all charges.
On 2 April 1981 Vlado Gotovac, a writer and former prisoner of conscience, was charged with "hostile propaganda" with aid from abroad and with "provoking national hatred and discord" in interviews he had given to three foreign joumalists between 1977 and 1980 in which, according to the indictment, "he falsely represented the position of the Croatian people and also the realization of the democratic freedoms of the citizens of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia". He remained at liberty pending trial, Amnesty International appealed for the charges to be withdrawn.
Dr Marko Veselica, an economist and former prisoner of conscience, was arrested on 24 April 1981 on similar charges, based on an interview he gave in August 1980 to a news magazine published in the FRG, in which he claimed that the Republic of Croatia was economically and politically disadvantaged within the Yugoslav federation. He was also accused of "participation in hostile activity", for allegedly sending articles about human rights violations to political emigres for publication and for presentation to the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe held in Madrid. Amnesty International appealed for his release from detention, and for the charges to be dropped.
In April 1981 after reports of numerous arrests in Kosovo, following nationalist demonstrations and riots by ethnic Albanians, Amnesty Intemational asked the authorities for details of the charges against the detainees and called for an urgent review of all cases and
344 	
the release of all those in detention for having exercised, non-violently, their right to freedom of expression. According to official statements in the press the demonstrations began on 11 March when some students at Pristina university protested about living conditions. On 25 and 26 March there were further demonstrations in Prizren and Pristina. According to official figures 23 demonstrators and 12 police were injured and 21 people arrested. These disturbances grew into widespread demonstrations and riots on 1, 2 and 3 April in Pristina and other towns in Kosovo. Demonstrators, including students, high school pupils, workers and peasants, reportedly demanded that Kosovo — a constituent part of the Republic of Serbia — be given the status of a republic within the Yugoslav federation. A number of demonstrators reportedly called for Kosovo's union with neighbouring Albania. The demonstrations culminated in clashes with security forces in which, according to official statements, up to 11 people were killed and 261 injured. Unofficial sources have alleged that the numbers were far higher. On 24 April Kosovo's Vice-Premier announced that 194 people had been sentenced in summary trials for their part in the demonstrations and that 28 others were detained for investigation as suspected organizers.
Violations of criminal procedure have undermined legal safeguards for the accused, contravening both the national law and intemational standards. A number of prisoners of conscience have been arrested without warrant. Yugoslav law stipulates that in exceptional cases the militia and state security police may detain a person without formal charges for up to three days. Several reports have indicated that during this period detainees have been subjected to severe psychological and sometimes physical pressure to obtain confessions, and that this period has sometimes been illegally extended beyond three days. Pressure has also been applied to witnesses to obtain testimonies, including holding them in police custody for up to three days. In several cases the power of the police to deny a passport, without giving reasons, has been used to pressurize witnesses, who were migrant workers on holiday or would-be migrant workers, into testifying against the accused. The investigation of political cases has sometimes been conducted almost exclusively by the state security police in contravention of legal provisions.
Amnesty Intemational has also been concemed that the accused's right to a lawyer of his or her choice and access to this lawyer has in a number of cases been denied or seriously restricted. Contrary to Yugoslav law the accused has not always been informed of the right to defence counsel. Some have been obliged to accept a state-appointed lawyer. In one case the accused was not informed by the investigating magistrate that a lawyer had been engaged by his family for him, and
345 	
this lawyer was denied access to his client. It was reportedly not until over four months after his arrest — two days before his trial — that the accused was granted access to defence counsel. There have also been complaints that lawyers have been denied the right to examine the dossier or have only been allowed to take handwritten notes of the contents of the dossier on court premises. The principle of public trial has also been violated by restricting access to the courtroom to a few people issued with official passes. The court has often refused to allow evidence and the calling of witnesses for the defence. Amnesty International believes that such trials have been weighted in favour of the prosecution and that internationally recognized standards of fair trial have not been met.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concerned about prison conditions for prisoners of conscience, in particular poor diet, ill-treatment by guards and punishment for disciplinary offences by isolation or solitary confinement, sometimes for long periods.
Despite numerous appeals by Amnesty Intemational to the head of state to mark the state anniversary on 29 November by granting pardon to all prisoners of conscience, only five cases taken up by Amnesty Intemational benefited from pardons granted to 82 criminal and political prisoners. Fatmir Salihu was released and Professor Davor Aras, whose sentence had been suspended on health grounds since March 1979, was exempted from serving,the remainder. Three others received a reduction of sentence of between six months and one year.
The Yugoslav criminal code prescribes a discretionary death sentence for particularly grave murder cases, certain "crimes against the state" and acts of political terrorism. During the year Amnesty International leamed of three death sentences passed and two executions.
