India
Amnesty International concerns were the reintroduction of statutory provisions for preventive detention, widespread police brutality, torture, persistent reports of deaths in police custody, and kiUings of political activists by the police. It was also concerned that executions have resumed since the Supreme Court upheld the constitutional validity of the death penalty.
India ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights on 10 April 1979, but the government made a declaration before signing which included an important reservation on the ap-phcability of the safeguards against arbitrary arrest and detention: "With reference to Article 9 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Government of the Republic of India takes the position that the provisions of the Article shall be so applied as to be in consonance with the provisions of clauses (3) to (7) of Article 22 of the Constitution of India. Further, under the Indian legal system, there is no enforceable right to compensation for persons claiming to be victims of unlawful arrest or detention against the state". (Article 22 of the constitution provides the constitutional basis for preventive detention.)
In a letter of 4 November 1980 to Prime Minister Indira Gandhi Amnesty International expressed its belief that the declaration rendered void the text and meaning of Article 9 of the covenant and recommended its withdrawal. On 30 April 1980 Amnesty International had urged the government to ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which allows individuals to petition the Human Rights Committee for alleged breaches of the covenant after all domestic legal mechanisms
213	
have been exhausted. On 4 November 1980 the Joint Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs, replied that "the government of India are of the view that complaints by individuals against any executive action should be dealt with only by national courts and not by an International Organisation. It is, therefore, not considered necessary to ratify the Protocol."
On 23 September 1980 the President of India announced the National Security Ordinance (NSO), which was replaced by the National Security Act (NSA) on 23 December 1980. Like the ordinance, the act gives wide powers of arrest and detention without trial to both the central and state govemments. Detention may be ordered for three months initially and the orders may be renewed for up to 12 months. The grounds for detention are widely defined; officials may order people to be detained to prevent them "from acting in any manner prejudicial to the security of the state . . . the maintenance of public order ... or the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the community". Detainees have to be informed of the reasons for detention normally within five and not more than 10 days after arrest and within three weeks the grounds for detention have to be put before an Advisory Board consisting of three active or retired High Court judges. The opinion of the Advisory Board is binding upon the government. However detainees have no right of legal representation before the Advisory Board, and if the board does not confirm the grounds for detention, a fresh detention order can be made upon release.
Strong opposition to the reintroduction of statutory provisions for preventive detention was expressed in the press and in parliament. Some Indian states were entirely opposed to detention without trial but others said they would use it to detain critics of the government. At the end of April 19^ 1 the Supreme C ourt was still hearing a petition challenging the constitutional validity of the NSO. The petition was brought by a member of parliament of the Communist Party of India (Marxist) from Bihar who had been detained under the NSO despite the state government's earlier assurance it would not be used against political opponents.
Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Prime Minister on 4 November 1980 to reiterate its long-standing concerns about the use of preventive detention. It said that the proposed statutory detention laws bypassed long-established legal procedures according to which charges have to be brought in an independent court, the accused has the right to a defence lawyer and the right of appeal. Amnesty International said the provisions of the NSO negated fundamental legal safeguards laid down in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. It
214	
expressed concern at the departure from these international human rights standards in peace-time without due regard for the provisions of Article 4 of the covenant, which lays down specific limits for derogation from provisions of the covenant in "time of public emergency which threatens the life of the nation". Amnesty International expressed the fear that the wide powers for detention in the ordinance would enable central and state government officials to hold people of dissenting views in prolonged detention without trial. Amnesty Intemational members around the world wrote to the government reasserting the organization's concerns about preventive detention. However the Home Ministry's letter of 4 November 1980 to Amnesty Intemational stated: "You have suggested that provisions relating to preventive detention should be deleted from the Constitution of India. In the totality of the circumstances obtaining in this country, the Government of India does not consider it necessary to amend the Constitution in order to dispense with the provisions relating to preventive detention".
On 6 December 1980 the government said 207 detainees were held under the provisions of the NSO, with the largest numbers in Uttar Pradesh (65) and Madhya Pradesh (63). Prime Minister Gandhi assured opposition members on 10 January 1981 that the act was not intended to curb political dissent. India's Home Minister, Zail Singh, gave similar assurances when introducing the National Security Bill in the Lok Sabha (parliament) on 12 December 1980 but added that the government would not hesitate to use preventive detention "to put down violent forces trying to sabotage democracy". The provisions of the NSO appear to have been used on a relatively small scale in a few states to detain some hundreds of detainees suspected of minor criminal acts and some on apparently political grounds. However reports indicated that the NSA had been used in most states and that detainees included critics or suspected critics of the govemment held on vaguely defined grounds of national security.
Students, trade unionists, members of political parties and others have been arrested under the NSA and the NSO for engaging in nonviolent political activities. Reports included the arrest of members of the Communist Party of India and the Communist Party of India (Marxist) in Andhara Pradesh; sympathizers with the Communist Party of India (Marxist-Leninist), known in India as "Naxalites", in the Punjab and Tamil Nadu; members of the Muslim League in Uttar Pradesh; and members of the Congress (I) Party, the Jammat-e-Islami (Party of Islam), and the People's League in the state of Jammu and Kashmir, which has its own preventive detention law, the Public Safety Act. Arrests have also been reported from the states of Rajasthan, Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh and Orissa. Many
215	
arrests under the NSA resuhed in short-term detentions as the Advisory Boards and the state High Courts ordered the release of some detainees ruling that there were insufficient grounds for detention. For example Shankar Guhar Niyogi, a well-known labour leader from Bhopal, was one of the first arrested under the NSA on 11 February 1981, but his release was ordered by the Madhya Pradesh Advisory Board on 19 March, which found the grounds for his detention "flimsy".
Civil disobedience protests continued in Assam against immigrant workers, mainly of Bengali origin. On 5 April 1980 the state was declared a disturbed area, and the 1955 Assam Disturbed Areas Act and Armed Forces (Assam and Manipur) Special Powers Act, 195 8, came into force. Section 4 allows army officers to "resort to firing, even causing death" to prevent a "breach of the peace". Between September 1979 and December 1980 more than 290 people were reported to have died in violent clashes over demands for the eviction of the non-Assamese population. Several hundred students have been detained under the provisions of the Assam Preventive Detention Ordinance, promulgated on 18 April 1980. Eight leaders of the opposition movement were ordered to be released by the Gauhati High Court on 9 June 1980, which found that the detention orders were "bad in law and void". The court observed that "the vagueness of the grounds infringed the fundamental rights of the detainees under Article 22(5) of the Constitution". In addition several thousand people have been arrested under the NSA and NSO in connection with large-scale peaceful political protests, but most were released within days of their arrest.
On 26 May and 23 June 1980 the Joint Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs, replied to Amnesty International's request for information about six political prisoners. Five had been released. Amnesty International continued to investigate the imprisonment of the sixth, Binod Kumar Sharma, who had been arrested on 4 March 1975 in Bihar for alleged left-wing activities, charged with offences under the penal code, but not tried. The High Court was hearing a petition for the withdrawal of his case. Amnesty International also investigated the cases of two political prisoners in Andhra Pradesh: Ch. Venkati and G. Venkatyya, who have been detained without trial for three and four years respectively.
After presenting an aide-mémoire in April 1980 (see Amnesty International Report 1980) Amnesty International wrote to the Prime Minister on 28 August expressing deep concern at reports of frequent deaths in police custody. Most were poor people, including Harijans (untouchables); in several instances they had been taken into custody without charge. The Indian press reported at least 27
216	
deaths in police custody between January and September 1980 and formal inquiries in no more than 12. Official reports often stated the cause of death to be "disease or suicide" but unofficial reports alleged torture and police brutality. Police officers appear only rarely to have been suspended pending inquiry, and the Supreme Court of India in a judgment of 12 March 1980 expressed surprise at this. Where police officers have been prosecuted, they have rarely been convicted.
In its letter of 28 August 1980 Amnesty Intemational said that the right to life and freedom from torture was not effectively protected in India. It urged the government to establish an independent body to investigate complaints of ill-treatment, torture and deaths in police custody; specific legal measures to protect suspects from ill-treatment and torture; full investigations of the record and conduct of responsible police officials; and the incorporation of the United Nations Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials and the United Nations Declaration on the Protection of all Persons from Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment into the training of police personnel throughout India, and their translation into the various Indian languages.
On 3 September 1980 Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Govemors and Chief Ministers of India's 22 states with the text of the aide-mémoire asking them to take similar steps. It asked the Chief Ministers of Bihar, West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Kamataka, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Haryana, Tamil Nadu, Tripura and the Lieutenant Govemor of New Deltii to investigate specific deaths in police custody which had occurred in their states. During November and December 1980 Amnesty Intemational undertook a campaign urging the central and state governments to implement the Amnesty Intemational recommendations. On 29 October 1980 the Chief Minister of Tripura, Nripen Chakraborty, replied that a magisterial inquiry had been instituted into the death in police custody of Renu Rai Deb Barma. The govemment said the inquiry had established that the cause of death was a stroke, but the report was not included in the reply. Amnesty International wrote to the Chief Minister on 28 November 1980 asking him to investigate the death of another prisoner, Chaitra Mohan Jamaitia. According to a report in the Hindustan Times of 12 Febmary 1981, the Lieutenant Governor of New Delhi, Mr Jagmohan, asked the Federal Home Minister Zail Singh to investigate immediately the deaths in police custody of three men: Emmanuel, Raegeria and Laxman Singh. Amnesty International received no replies from the other 10 states it wrote to about the allegations of deaths from police brutality and torture. Reports of deaths in police custody continued in 1981.
Acts of serious police bmtality and atrocities continued throughout
217	
the year. The pressing need for police reform was confirmed by the Prime Minister herself when commenting on widely publicized reports that at least 36 suspected criminals had been deliberately blinded with needles and acid in the state of Bihar between October 1979 and November 1980. Two men described how they had their eyes pierced and soaked in acid. One man said that after his eyes had been punctured with a bicycle spoke they were covered with acid soaked pads and bandages. Amnesty International cabled the Chief Minister of Bihar on 28 November calling for an independent investigation whose findings would be published.
The Indian parliament called for a report and an inquiry and for the suspected police officers to be charged. The Bihar government announced on 30 November that an inquiry had been ordered and suspected police officers charged with "negUgence". The Supreme Court sent two officers to Bhagalpur jail to investigate the reports, and ordered 31 of the prisoners to be examined in a New Delhi hospital. It also ordered the Bihar government to provide detailed information on the arrest and detention of the prisoners, and the steps taken to prosecute policemen who had blinded prisoners. However of the 15 policemen originally suspended at least 12 have since been reinstated. At the end of April 1981 hearings before the Supreme Court were continuing, but the press reported that the Bihar Government had failed to provide the Supreme Court with documentation as requested.
On 29 December 1980 the All India PoUce Federation urged the government to create an "independent" police force free from "illegal executive orders". The Secretary General of the Federation, Mahen-dra Singh Adit, said there were thousands of instances where subordinate officers had to obey such orders which were often " verbal and secret", and if they refused to obey they would later be harassed and victimized. He added that the Windings of arrested men in Bhagalpur must have occurred through such executive orders and urged the government to institute an "in-depth inquiry".
Further evidence of police atrocities during interrogation was reported. Nine men were interviewed out of 12 who alleged their legs had been broken by the Varanasi police. Krishna Murari Singh, 29 years old, stated that, on 21 July 1979:
"I was stretched on the floor... two people were standing on my thighs and stamping. Then two persons caught hold of my left foot and began lifting it upwards. One person kicked my knee joint viciously, breaking the kneecap. Then a policeman's boots repeatedly pounded my damaged left knee... Somebody again lifted my leg and rotated it in a clockwise direction."
218	
Three of the 12 men developed serious gangrene infections and had a leg amputated. The police denied the charges and the Senior Superintendent of Police in Varanasi was reported on 5 February 1981 as saying: "The injuries might have been caused during the course of lawful arrest".
Amnesty International remained concerned that no effective measures have been taken to prevent police brutality and torture. On 4 November 1980 the government informed Amnesty Intemational that Indian laws contained adequate provision for safeguarding human rights and sufficient safeguards against police bmtality and torture. "Furthermore, the terms of reference of the National Police Commission set up by the govemment of India include enquiry into the system of investigation, use of improper methods, the extent of their prevalence and suggestions as to how the system may be modified or changed and made an efficient and scientific one consistent with human dignity and how the related laws may be suitably amended. The recommendations of the National Police Commission would be examined carefully and appropriate action taken by the govemment". Although six reports are believed to have been submitted so far by the commission, only one was put before parliament in 1980.
The Supreme Court continued to hear petitions from prisoners complaining of "overcrowding", "inhuman conditions" and ill-treatment in jail. More than half of them were in the states of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. On 4 February 1981 the Supreme Court expressed concem at the "disturbing state of affairs with regard to the administration of justice in Bihar". Eight prisoners held for eight years and more without trial had applied to the Supreme Court. It directed that all prisoners held for more than two years without trial should be provided with free legal aid and should be released on bail, or their trial should be started within two months.
Amnesty Intemational was gravely concerned by persistent reports that alleged members of the Communist Party of India (Marxist-Leninist), known as Naxalites, and their sympathizers, had been killed in incidents which the police officially described as "encounters". Relatives alleged that they were deliberately shot by the police after arrest, and that some had been tortured.
On 18 December 1980 the Minister of State for Home Affairs, Yogendra Makwana, said that in the state of Andhra Pradesh 216 Naxalites had been killed by the police in encounters since the start of the Naxalite movementin 1968. Seven of them had been killed during 1980. The State Minister said such killings have also occurred in the states of Maharashtra, Tripura, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal and Oris s a. In the North Arcot and Dharmapuri districts of the state of
219	
Tamil Nadu 13 alleged Naxalites were killed between August and December 1980, after a bomb exploded in the area on 6 August 1980. The Statesman of 8 March 1981 reported that after the incident 1,000 villagers, many of them Harijans, were arrested. Between 100 and 120 of them were still reportedly detained in March 1981. On 28 March 1981 in the state assembly the Tamil Nadu Finance Minister, V. R. Nedumchezhiyan, denied opposition charges that all 13 men killed had been taken by the police and shot However as far as Amnesty International is aware no inquiries have been instituted into these cases. Press reports confirmed that official inquiries into such incidents were rarely instituted and then only under intense public pressure; when policemen were suspended in connection with murders they were usually reinstated shortly afterwards.
Amnesty International was concerned that the recommendations in its aide-mémoire of April 1980 were not implemented. It had recommended that official impartial commissions inquire into alleged killings by the police, that the government pubhsh the outcome, and that full investigations be made into the record and conduct of police officials named in such incidents, in line with the United Nations declaration against torture.
On 9 May 1980 the Supreme Court of India dismissed a petition brought by Mai Singh and others challenging the constitutionality of the death penalty in India. On receiving the petition, the Supreme Court had stayed all executions. Of the 130 prisoners awaiting execution at the time of the Supreme Court's judgment, 15 had exhausted all appeal procedures and had their clemency petitions rejected. On 14 May 1980 Amnesty International cabled President Neelam Sanjiva Reddy and Prime Minister Gandhi to urge clemency for all the condemned prisoners who were again facing immediate execution. It stressed that the hopes of the condemned men had been raised by the Supreme Court's earlier staying order and urged clemency on humanitarian grounds. Amnesty International learned that one prisoner was executed on 29 July 1980.
On 4 September 1980 Amnesty International urged the President to use his powers of clemency to prevent further executions. During the following three months Amnesty International members wrote to the President, the Prime Minister, and the Governors and Chief Ministers of the 22 states appealing for clemency. In response the Chief Ministers and Govenors of several states replied that no executions had taken place in their states, and the Government of West Bengal voiced its opposition to the death penalty altogether. Amnesty International made further appeals for individual prisoners facing execution. On 23 April 1981 Amnesty International members cabled the government to urge clemency for Ranga and Billah. The
220	
Supreme Court on 23 April had ordered them to be executed as soon as possible.
