Botswana
Amnesty International was concerned about the forcible repatriation of four South African refugees.
Despite the return home of more than 20,000 Zimbabweans in the first months of 1980, and the resulting reduction in the refugee problem, there were signs of increasing tension between the government and the South African refugee community. After the departure of the Zimbabwean refugees the Botswana Government announced its intention to relocate the great majority of South African refugees in a vacated settlement camp at Dukwe, in a remote area some 130 kilometres northwest of Francis-town. The refugees resisted this move, apparently out of fear that the camp was vulnerable to attack by South African security forces and out of misgivings about conditions. Some refugees went into hiding in Gaborone, but they eventually went to Dukwe after the authorities threatened to deport them back to their country of origin. A few refugees are said to have opted for repatriation rather than move to Dukwe.
Tension between the Botswana Government and the South African refugees reached a peak in January 1981 when Daniel Kwelagobe, Minister of Public Service and Information, visited Dukwe and issued a strong warning that refugees absent from the camp without permission would be liable to summary repatriation. He announced that four refugees had already been "de-recognized" by the authorities and deported to South Africa. This was confirmed by the South African authorities, who acknowledged that four refugees had been detained at the border on 15 January 1981.
Amnesty International expressed concem to the Botswana authorities about the summary deportation, and asked for clarification of the number and identities of those deported. Some unconfirmed reports had suggested that more than four refugees had been deported, and that at least one of those subsequently detained had died in security police custody in South Africa. The Botswana authorities named the refugees as Michael Lithoko, Wilson Fanyana Mashaba, Joseph Minare and Strike Mashilane. On 25 February 1981 Louis Le Grange, South Africa's Minister of Police, told the House of Assembly in Cape Town that no refugees deported from Botswana since the beginning of the year were in police custody at that time. He stated also that there were no cases in which charges had been brought against such deportees. However it was not clear from the Minister's statement
31
precisely when the four refugees had been released from detention in South Africa.
Towards the end of March 1981 the Minister of Public Service and Information issued a public assurance that Botswana had not changed its policy of granting asylum to political refugees from South Africa. He insisted that "genuine and well-behaved refugees who co-operated with the government would never be harassed during their stay at Dukwe camp".
