Namibia
The main concerns of Amnesty International were detention without trial and administrative restriction, torture, prison conditions, and the death penalty.
Intemational efforts to obtain a political settlement leading to the independence of Namibia and the withdrawal of South Africa's administration and military forces continued but were unsuccessful. The gradual process of transferring power from the South African Govemment to an internal administration dominated by Dirk Mudge's Democratic Tumhalle Alliance (DTA) continued throughout the year. In July 1980 a 12-member Council of Ministers was formed from among the 50 members of the National Assembly. Headed by
69
Dirk Mudge as Chairman, and composed of representatives from each of the 11 officially-designated population groups, the council was given certain executive powers and control over more than 20 government departments previously administered directly by the South African authorities. However South Africa's Administrator-General retained power of veto over the council's actions; and direct control over key aspects of policy such as defence and security, foreign relations and negotiations concerning Namibia's independence remained with the South African Government.
In October 1980 the South African State President extended military service to all black men aged between 16 and 25 years. Many are believed to have left the country to avoid conscription.
This exodus prompted the leaders of five main churches to address a petition to the South African President at the end of October 1980, in protest against the extension of military service to blacks.
Throughout the year there were further extensive violations of human rights. Many people were detained without trial and others were restricted under administrative orders. There were allegations of torture and two important political trials took place, one of which resulted in the imposition of the death penalty. There were renewed attacks into Angola by South African military forces at war with the South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO) guerrillas, and this reportedly resulted in the deaths of many civilians. In early 1981 a foreign mercenary who deserted from the South African Defence Force (SADF) alleged that the military unit to which he had been attached had carried out atrocities in Angola.
Earlier, in June 1980, disturbing reports had appeared in a Lutheran church publication and a Windhoek newspaper. These alleged that a secret assassination squad had been established by the South African authorities under the code-name Koevoet, and that a death list of 50 names had been drawn up. Those included on the list, some of whose names were published, were said to be targets because of their supposed sympathy for SWAPO, recognized by the United Nations as the sole legitimate representative of the people of Namibia. They were said to include Bishop Kleopas Dumeni, a leading Lutheran pastor based in Ovamboland. These allegations were denied by Dr Viljoen, then Administrator-General. However in November 1980 the Lutheran church printing press at Oniipa in Ovamboland was destroyed by a bomb explosion widely attributed to South African security agents. The printing press had previously been destroyed in a similar way in May 1973, but had been rebuilt in 1975.
Several long-term political detainees who had been adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International were released during the year. They had mostly been held since May 1979 under
70
Proclamation AG26 of 1978, which empowers tiie Administrator-General to order the indefinite incommunicado detention of any person whom he considers likely to promote "political violence and intimidation". The Administrator-General is not obliged to state why an individual is detained and detainees are denied any effective means of challenging their detention orders. Those freed included Axel Johannes, Administrative Secretary of the legal, internal wing of SWAPO, who was released in late July 1980. He had been held without trial for some 15 months, and had been imprisoned without trial for most of the period since 1974. Like a number of other former detainees, he was immediately restricted under a "release warrant" issued by the Administrator-General. As a result he was subjected to partial house arrest, ordered to report regularly and frequently to the police, prohibited from receiving visitors at his home and restricted to a particular district. Those subject to release warrants are also prohibited from working as teachers or in the public service. Some detainees were restricted at the time of their release to districts far from their homes and families. These release warrants, similar in form to banning orders imposed on dissidents in South Africa, are of unlimited duration.
In addition to the powers of preventive detention under AG26, the South African authorities possess wide powers of detention without trial under the Administrator-General's Proclamation AG9 of 1977. This provision, which is applicable throughout most of northern Namibia in those areas designated "security" districts, appeared to be most extensively used to hold people for interrogation. Detainees were held incommunicado and at any place designated by the authorities whether or not it fell within a security district They may be held indefinitely, and have no recourse to the courts or other legal means to effect their release. No details were provided by the South African authorities of the numbers and identities of those detained, and official secrecy surrounded the location of detention camps and interrogation centres. Relatives and lawyers of detainees have no right to information about their detention, let alone the reasons for their arrest or the conditions under which they are held. AG9 thus provides a potential for the "disappearance" of individual detainees.
One known group of almost 120 detainees held under AG9 were about to enter their fourth year of continuous incommunicado detention at the end of April 1981. They have been held since they were abducted by South African military forces in May 1978 from a camp for Namibians at Kassingai in southern Angola. Some 200 people are believed to have been seized at that time, but about 60 were released within a few weeks. The International Committee of the Red Cross has been permitted to visit those who are still held near
71
Mariental, southeast of Windhoek at least three times since mid-1980. However, the identities of those detained have not been disclosed and it is believed that no visits by relatives have been permitted. Several were reported to have escaped in December 1980, but all but one appear to have been recaptured.
It is not clear what was the legal basis for their arrest in the period between their abduction in May 1978 and the introduction of legislation, one year later, amending AG9 to authorize indefinite detention. Before May 1979 the maximum period of incommunicado detention without charge under AG9 was 96 hours. It has not been possible to verify allegations that the detainees were tortured in the months aftèr their abduction, or whether this group of detainees, together with those 60 or so who were released shortly after the attack on Kassinga, were the only people captured during South African raids into Angola.
The use of indefinite incommunicado detention for interrogation has long been associated with the use of torture. In September 1980 Amnesty Intemational received information from authoritative sources naming several detainees who had been tortured and ill-treated while detained under AG9 in mid-1980. One detainee was reported to have been taken bhndfolded to a secret detention centre and then interrogated under torture. Similar allegations of torture were made by Rauna Nambinga, a former nurse and member of SWAPO, after leaving the country in late 1980. She claimed that she had been tortured with electric shocks while detained at Oshakati in July 1980. She was held under AG9 from mid-July until November.
Earlier in the year the South African authorities had arrested four members of the Namibia National Front (NNF) political party who alleged that another NNF member, Albertus Kanguootui, had been ill-treated by security police while in detention. They made this claim after visiting Kanguootui at the Katutura State Hospital in Windhoek. He was alleged to have told them that he had been "brutally assaulted" and required hospital treatment as a result Kanguootui was not called as a witness by the state and, as he was still in detention at that time, could not be called by the defence, but a medical report submitted to the court suggested that his allegations were false. The four NNF officials were convicted and fined. Kanguootui was eventually freed uncharged in January 1981 after more than five months in detention.
Two major political trials ended in October 1980. One resulted in the conviction of Ida Jimmy for statements she had made at a SWAPO rally in Luderitz in mid-July, and a seven-year prison sentence. The other trial, which ended on 13 October 1980, involved two farmworkers from the Grootfontein area charged under the South
72
African Terrorism Act which is applied in Namibia. Markus Kateka and Hendrik Kariseb were jointly charged with helping SWAPO guerrillas responsible for an attack on the farm of their employer. No one was injured or killed as a result of the attack, but upon conviction Kariseb received a 10-year prison term and Markus Kateka was sentenced to death. The trial judge denied Kateka leave to appeal, but this was later granted by the Chief Justice of South Africa. His appeal was due to be heard by the South African Appeal Court at Bloemfontein in May 1981.
Amnesty International continued throughout the year to work for the release of individual prisoners of conscience. In addition, concerted international appeals were made on behalf of two groups of detainees arrested in mid-1980 and held incommunicado without charge or trial, and on behalf of Markus Kateka, sentenced to death in October 1980. Amnesty International also reported formally on human rights violations in Namibia to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in August 1980, and to the Fourth Committee of the United Nations General Assembly in November 1980.
