Cameroon
The major concerns of Amnesty International were long-term detention without trial of suspected political opponents and poor prison conditions.
In a year which brought the release of most prisoners of conscience known to Amnesty Intemational, high-ranking members of the government and of the judiciary publicly stated their belief that human rights were respected in Cameroon. At the reopening of the Supreme Court in November 1980, its President drew attention to legal safeguards to protect the rights of the accused. However individuals arrested on suspicion of political offences have not benefited from such safeguards; they have either been tried before military tribunals without defence counsel or have been held without charge or trial.
Amnesty Intemational continued to seek the release of all the detainees held without charge or trial since July 1976, when some 200 students, teachers and white-collar workers were arrested for allegedly distributing anti-government leaflets. In February 1980 Amnesty International publicly appealed for the release of some 50 members of this group held in the Prison de production, labour camp, at Yoko and at the so-called Re-education Centre at Tchollire. Both of these institutions contain sections which are effectively administrative internment centres. After a decree remitting sentences for convicted prisoners on Cameroon's National Day on 20 May, most of these untried detainees were freed. Only Gaspard Mouen, Martin Ebelle-Tobo, Emmanuel Bille and André Moune were still reported to be in detention. No adequate explanation has been given by the authorities to justify their continued detention without charge or trial. Amnesty International was also concerned by reports that other political prisoners were being held without charge or trial, including three army officers, arrested in September 1979 after an alleged coup attempt, and an unknown number of Jehovah's Witnesses.
Although no new reports of torture against identified detainees have been received. Amnesty Intemational was concerned by claims that suspects held in custody by the police or the paramilitary police, known as the Brigade mixte mobile, have been beaten and ill-treated as a matter of course. Standards of food and hygiene were reported to be very poor at both Yaounde central prison and the administrative internment centre at Tchollire. Both prisons lacked adequate medical facilities, and access at Tchollire to families and friends was severely restricted.
33
