Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
The major concerns of Amnesty International were the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, frequent allegations of torture and ill-treatment, executions and extrajudicial killings. It was particularly alarmed by official calls for the "physical hquidation of enemies of the revolution" and the subsequent killing or wounding of a number of Libyan citizens living abroad.
During the year Amnesty Intemational worked on behalf of 74 prisoners of conscience and learned of the release of 12. Most prisoners of conscience were believed to be held in Tripoli Central prison and in Kuweifiya prison, Benghazi.
Amnesty International continued to follow two trials involving prisoners of conscience (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1980). The first trial involved a group of 18 journalists and writers arrested in December 1978 and accused of forming a Marxist organization. The second was a retrial of 10 defendants originally arrested in 1975 on charges of forming a secret political organization. According to unofficial sources five of the 18 joumalists and writers were released and the other 13 sentenced to life imprisonment; and two of the 10 defendants in the retrial were sentenced to life imprisonment, and the rest acquitted but not necessarily released. Amnesty Intemational has so far been unable to verify these reports.
Amnesty Intemational received reports of widespread arrests among Muslim activists. A number of senior military and civilian officials were also allegedly arrested early in 1980 and tried in Febmary 1981 by Revolutionary Courts set up at the Revolutionary Committees' meeting in February 1980. Amnesty International was concemed that the legal safeguards at these trials were inadequate: the tribunals were composed of members of the Revolutionary Committees rather than the judiciary, and the rights of the defence were severely restricted.
At the beginning of March several alleged former members of the pro-Iraqi wing of the Ba'ath Party, which is banned in Libya, were arrested, and later tried. Amnesty International has not yet been able to ascertain the precise charges against them, the type of court in which they were tried, nor the outcome of the trial.
Amnesty Intemational noted the passage on 27 January 1981 of Law No. 4 of 1981 which prohibits lawyers from practising privately. Under this law all lawyers become employees of the Secretariat of
370
Justice. Fears were expressed by tlie Arab Lawyers Union and individual Libyan lawyers about the effects of this measure on the independence of lawyers and on their freedom to provide proper legal defence for political prisoners.
Towards the end of the year first-hand reports of torture reached Amnesty Intemational. Detainees were allegedly tortured in various centres belonging to the intelligence services in Tripoli and Benghazi. Detainees were apparently held incommunicado for unlimited periods and their families were not informed of their whereabouts. According to these reports, the most common torture techniques were electric shocks, in particular to the head and genitals, and beatings on the soles of the feet (falaqa). Several deaths in custody have been reported, including three lawyers who were former members of the Ba'ath Party. Reliable unofficial reports suggested that these deaths resulted from torture.
Amnesty International has also learned of a serious deterioration in prison conditions for prisoners of conscience. Many have allegedly been transferred to overcrowded cells, compelled to wear prison clothes and their books and writing materials have been confiscated. Amnesty Intemational was particularly disturbed by the report of a riot at Tripoli Central prison on 4 September 1980 during which five prisoners were shot and wounded by prison officers.
Libya retains the use of the death penalty for a wide number of offences, many of a political nature and not involving use or advocacy of violence. In addition official calls for the "physical liquidation of enemies of the revolution" have been followed by a number of extrajudicial killings. On 5 February 1980 the third meeting of the Revolutionary Committees held at Gar Younis university, Benghazi,, issued a declaration caUing for, among other things, the "physical liquidation" of enemies of the revolution living abroad as well as of other "elements obstructing revolutionary change" in Libya. Since then more than a dozen Libyan citizens have been killed or wounded in assasination attempts in Great Britain, Federal Republic of Germany, the United States of America, Italy, Greece and the Lebanon. On 30 April 1980 Amnesty Intemational submitted a memorandum to the authorities in which it called upon them to renounce immediately the declaration concerning the "physical liquidation" of its opponents and to implement fully the provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which Libya ratified in 1970. No reply has been received.
At the beginning of March 1980 press reports quoted Colonel Mu'ammar Gaddafi declaring "the masses have the right to liquidate their enemies at home and abroad", in a speech marking the fourth anniversary of the establishment of People's Congresses in Libya. He
371
added later "It is a matter of honour to jail or liquidate the enemies of the authorities". On 3 March 1981 at the final session of the fourth meeting, Libyan Revolutionary Committees were reported to have "reaffirmed their determination to continue the physical liquidation of the enemies of people's authority at home and abroad".
On 25 February 1981 a revolutionary tribunal in Tripoli passed the death sentence in their absence on four Libyans in exile. Mohammad YoussifLamgarief, former Libyan Ambassador to India, was reported to be among those sentenced to death. Mohammad Lamgarief was one of three high-ranking Libyan officials who reportedly resigned during the year, and joined the Libyan opposition in exile. The others were Ahmed Ibrahim Ehwas, former Libyan chargé d'affaires in Guyana, and Abdul Salam Ali Aila, former chargé d'affaires in India.
In December 1980 Amnesty Intemational received information about the arrest of 15 people in a mosque in Tripoli, five of whom were allegedly executed, including Sheikh El Bishti, a mosque official. In a cable to the Libyan Secretary of Justice on 24 December 1980 Amnesty Intemational asked for clarification of these reports and information on the whereabouts of those detailed and the charges against them. It has received no reply.
Morocco and Western Sahara
During the year to 30 April 1981 Amnesty Intemational's concems were the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, long-term incommunicado detention, "disappearances", and allegations of ill-treatment and inadequate medical care for prisoners. In addition Amnesty Intemational was concerned about reports of human rights violations committed by the Polisario Front.
After a period of relative quiet, in early 1981 there was renewed unrest which led to a number of arrests among students and members of the major left-wing opposition party, the Union socialiste des forces populaires (USFP). Socialist Union of Popular Forces. Two referendums were held in May 1980: one modifying the rules of succession to the throne and the comF>osition of the Regency Council, the other extending the term of parliament from four to six years. They both received an overwhelmingly positive vote, but the second was
372
opposed by the USFP which promised to withdraw its elected deputies from parliament when their four-year term expired in 1981. In the background was Morocco's continuing war with the Algerian and Libyan-backed Polisario Front over the Western Sahara. Morocco claims the Western Sahara as part of its national territory while the Polisario Front claims the area should constitute an independent Saharan Arab Democratic Republic.
Despite amnesties in July 1980 affecting 91 political prisoners, Amnesty International was concerned about new arrests and about the continued imprisonment of substantial numbere of prisoners of conscience. It was also concerned about prolonged incommunicado detention and allegations of ill-treatment in police detention centres. Medical care for prisoners was also reported to be inadequate. Morocco retains the death penalty but no executions were reported during the year. In February 1981 Amnesty Intemational sent a mission to Morocco to discuss its concems with officials; a memorandum was to be submitted to the authorities presenting these concems in detail.
During the year Amnesty Intemational worked on behalf of more than 250 individual prisoners. Among cases from previous years were more than 130 members of various Marxist-Leninist movements and of the Union nationale des forces populaires (UNFP), National Union of Popular Forces, tried and sentenced in 1977 or earlier; two trade unionists arrested in April 1979 and both now released; 15 peasants from Beni Mellal arrested in December 1979 and sentenced to up to three years in prison; and approximately 30 people from southern Moroccan towns who were taken into custody as long ago as 1975 and most of whom have not reappeared. During the year Amnesty Intemational took up for investigation the cases of more than 60 other inhabitants of southern Moroccan towns such as Tan-Tan and Goulimine, who were also reportedly taken into custody by the security forces as long ago as 1975 andwhose whereabouts were still not known. Repeated inquiries to the authorities concerning the whereabouts of these latter two groups have so far had no result. Unofficial reports, which Amnesty Intemational has not been able to verify, have indicated that several hundred such people were in custody and that they were held in secret detention centres in southern Morocco, as well as in local police detention centres.
Several other groups of cases were closely followed. During 1980 26 people, most of whom called themselves Saharans and who had all been arrested in 1977, were convicted and sentenced in four separate trials to terms of up to five years' imprisonment on charges of forming an illegal association and plotting against the security of the state. Amnesty Intemational was seeking further information to determine
373
whether or not they were prisoners of conscience. Over 20 members and officials of the USFP, arrested principally in Tiznit and Fqih ben Saleh in January and March 1981, received prison sentences of up to 13 months in trials on charges including disturbing public order, incitement to unrest, unlicensed association and disrespect towards authority. The results of several appeals in the USFP cases were due in May 1981.
In July 1980, under royal amnesties which freed 91 political prisoners, 20 prisoners adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience were released, all of whom had been tried in 1977 or earlier. They included the poet Abdellatif Laabi. Amnesty International had appealed urgently on his behalf on 8 May 1980 after reports that he was being denied urgently needed medical care while in custody. Like many other amnestied prisoners Abdellatif Laabi was subjected to restrictions after release: in particular, he has not been issued a passport which would allow him to accept offers of specialist medical care from abroad and has not been permitted to take up his former occupation as a teacher in the public education system. Despite press speculation at the time of the July amnesties that all political prisoners would be released — such a measure had already been called for by all parties represented in the Moroccan parliament — no further amnesties affecting political prisoners were announced, other than informal assurances that a number of exiles would be permitted to return. Among them was Abderrahman Youssoufl, Deputy Secretary General of the Arab Lawyers Union and member of the political bureau of the USFP, who had been in exile since 1965.
On 23 July 1980 Amnesty International sent a cable welcoming the amnesties, but on 3 September it expressed its disappointment at their limited application. No further royal amnesties took place during the year. There was particular disappointment on 3 March 1981, the 20th anniversary of King Hassan II's accession to the throne, since Amnesty International's delegation to Morocco had been informally assured by responsible government officials that this occasion was likely to be marked by a substantial amnesty for political prisoners. On 23 March 1981 Amnesty International sent a telegram to Prime Minister and Minister of Justice Maati Bouabid expressing its "profound disappointment that ... the pardons granted on the occasion of the Feast of the Throne did not affect either prisoners taken up by Amnesty International nor other political prisoners still held in Moroccan prisons".
Among the prisoners released during the year whose cases Amnesty International had followed were more than 80 people detained without trial since 1977 in Meknes civil prison. They had spent almost three years in detention without trial, and many had been
374
held incommunicado for more than one year, when in March 1980 they went on hunger-strike calling for their release or trial. Shortly afterwards, charges against more than 40 were dropped and they were set free. The rest were provisionally released pending trial and were tried in the months that followed. All were freed by the end of April 1981, most having been convicted but sentenced to terms shorter than the time they had already served; a small number were either acquitted or required to spend some additional months in prison to complete their sentences.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed at the use of prolonged incommunicado detention, which is provided for under garde-d-vue procedures, which allow the detainee to be held without access to lawyers, family or independent medical staff for 96 hours, with a possible extension of 48 hours. These periods are doubled for acts threatening the security of the state according to the code of criminal procedure. However these extensions have often been renewed repeatedly, leading to incommunicado detention lasting months and sometimes years. It is to this period that allegations of ill-treatment usually refer. Although a new code of criminal procedure which might limit such incommunicado detention is said to be under consideration by the govemment, all the practices, laws and legal precedents which facilitate incommunicado detention remain and may be invoked at any time.
Serious allegations have reached Amnesty Intemational that many individuals in southern Moroccan cities such as Goulimine and Tan-Tan and in areas farther south have been held in incommunicado detention for long periods; the whereabouts of many were unknown.
A number of military officers convicted of involvement in coup attempts of 1971 and 1972 have served their sentences but have not yet been released. Despite repeated inquiries from Amnesty International, the Morrocan authorities have refused to say where they were being held. Recent reports indicated that a number were held in appalling conditions in secret prisons, and that up to 10 may have died as a result.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about inadequate medical care for prisoners. Vital speciahst care was frequently unavailable and routinely prisoners had to wait more than a month for a medical examination by a qualified doctor. In addition the supply of prescribed medicine was often unacceptably delayed, frequently for more than a month. Amnesty International continued to receive worrying reports about the health of individual prisoners. On 16 June 1980 Amnesty Intemational cabled Prime Minister and Minister of Justice M. Bouabid, Minister of Interior Idris Basri, and Minister of Health Rahal RahaU, to express concem
375
over reports that prisoners held at Kenitra civil prison, who had gone on hunger-strike on 15 May 1980, had been refused medical care. In July 1980 Amnesty Intemational medical grouf» urged the authorities to provide independent psychiatric examinations for three prisoners: Hassan el-Bou, Miloud Achdini and Zaoui el-Meliani, all reportedly severely mentally disturbed and being treated only with tranquillizers. Hassan el-Bou and Miloud Achdini had been adopted as prisoners of conscience and Amnesty Intemational urged their immediate release. Zaoui el-Meliani was released under the amnesties of July 1980 but Hassan el-Bou and Miloud Achdini remained in prison and, despite another urgent appeal from Amnesty Intemational on 26 September 1980, their condition was reported to be serious. The treatment prisoners received in hospital wards reserved for them was apparently inadequate, and frequent complaints have reached Amnesty International that prisoners have been harassed by police officers on duty in the wards.
Allegations of ill-treatment in police custody included the case of several USFP activists arrested in Tiznit in January 1981 who showed the court marks on their bodies which they claimed were evidence of ill-treatment at the hands of the police. The court rejected their request for medical examinations to verify these claims.
Morocco retains the death penalty for several crimes. Although a number of prisoners remained under sentence of death no one was executed during the year. There have been no executions since 1973, when at least 26 people were executed, although more than 50 death sentences have been passed since then. On 21 September 1980 Amnesty Intemational appealed urgentiy for the commutation of death sentences passed on two men convicted of murdering Omar Benjelloun, director of the newspaper Al-Muharrir and member of the political bureau of the USFP, in December 1975. The prisoners have not been executed, but it is not yet known whether the sentences have been officially commuted.
Amnesty International was also concerned about serious allegations of human rights violations committed by the Polisario Front. In particular it received information that a number of Polisario Front members had been arrested by the Polisario Front between 1975 and 1979. None of the people arrested have been heard of since. Amnesty Intemational raised this matter with representatives of the Polisario Front on several occasions and provided a number of names. After the Polisario Front had persistently denied the allegations, but had failed to refute them in detail or provide further information on the fate of the named individuals, Amnesty Intemational issued a public statement on lOFebmary 1981:
376
"According to the allegations reaching Amnesty International, hundreds of Polisario members have been arrested since 1975 for criticizing the movement's internal policies ... The present whereabouts of most of the alleged prisoners are not known... These reports say political prisoners were made to do hard labour and were ill-treated . . .
. . . Polisario has consistently denied such reports. Amnesty International said . . . Polisario had not refuted the allegations in detail or provided information which might allay its concerns. Amnesty International added that as far as it knew, no impartial international organization had been able to investigate fully the situation in the Western Sahara as it affects prisoners."
