Mozambique
Amnesty International's concerns were detention without trial, the conduct of trials before the Revolutionary Military Tribunal and the death penalty.
During the year there were reports of fighting between government forces and guerrilla fighters belonging to the Movi-mento Resistencia de Mozambique (MRM), Mozambique Resistance Movement, which allegedly receives South African backing. In July 1980 more than 270 MRM personnel were reported killed and 300 captured when government forces destroyed a major MRM base near the Zimbabwe border. However further clashes occurred and in December 1980 refugees fleeing into Zimbabwe alleged that the MRM had launched a campaign of terror and carried out atrocities against civilians in the Espungabera area. The government also faced armed opposition from Africa Livre, the Free Africa Movement
There was also increasing tension with South Africa, particularly after South African soldiers raided a suburb of Maputo, the capital, at the end of January 1981 and destroyed houses occupied by members of the African National Congress (ANC). Following the raid, in which a number of South African refugees were killed, eight members of the armed forces were paraded at a rally and accused of treason and corruption in connection with the attack. Six United States citizens allegedly engaged in espionage were expelled and a number of other foreign nationals and Mozambique citizens were detained. Most were reportedly released by mid-April 1981.
Long-term detention without trial remained one of Amnesty International's primary concerns.
It was not possible to estimate accurately the number of long-term detainees, and difiicult to discover their identities. In May 1980 a US journalist estimated that as many as ten thousand people might be detained in "re-education camps", one of which he had visited, and that up to three thousand of these might be held for political reasons.
68
A number of releases were reported. In May 1980 it was announced that the resettlement in Niassa province of 600 former prisoners granted amnesty in October 1979 would be completed by 1 June 1980. At the end of 1980 a further 600 prisoners held since an abortive revolt in December 1975 were also pardoned, though 15 others also detained at that time may yet face trial before the Revolutionary Military Tribunal.
In June 1980 three prison guards accused of ill-treating prisoners were prosecuted. All were convicted and sentenced to short terms of imprisonment and fines. They included the chief prison officer at Machava Central Prison in Maputo.
At least seven people convicted of politically-motivated offences were sentenced to death and executed. In October 1980 three people were sentenced to death by the Revolutionary Military Tribunal in Maputo after being convicted of espionage and military sabotage. They were executed within a few days. Amnesty Intemational protested against these executions and appealed to President Samora Machel to exercise clemency in any future cases. Amnesty International made a new appeal for clemency in February 1981 when four alleged members of Africa Livre were sentenced to death, but they too were executed.
All seven death sentences were imposed by the Revolutionary Military Tribunal, a military court established in March 1979 to hear cases involving treason or other security offences. The tribunal, over which military officers preside, meets in camera. Defendants are not permitted legal counsel.
