Egypt
Amnesty International's principal concerns in Egypt were arrest, detention and imprisonment for the non-violent expression of political behefs, new legislation restricting the freedom of political exi>-ression and the death penalty.
During the year a number of significant developments took place which influenced human rights. In May 1980 President Muhammad Anwar Sadat assumed the premiership in addition to the presidency, and the state of emergency, which had been in force for many years, was lifted. The state of emergency was of considerable concem because it had invested the President with extraordinary powers over the judiciary, and had facilitated the arrest and detention of people subsequently considered by Amnesty Intemational to be prisoners of conscience.
In May 1980, before the lifting of the state of emergency and restructuring of the cabinet, a group of prominent Egyptians, including former ministers, academics and lawyers had signed a statement criticizing the government's policies and in particular the political role of the President. They called for the independence of the judiciary, the abolition of all special courts such as state security or military courts, the lifting of all restrictions on freedom of opinion, publication, printing and the press, and the freedom to form associations, trade unions and political parties.
Several new laws were promulgated when the state of emergency was lifted. These included Law 105 on the establishment of state security courts, published in the Official Gazette on 31 May 1980, which estabhshed that the state security court comprises three judges from the court of appeal, and provided for two officers of the armed forces to be added by presidential decree. The state security court can try people accused of political offences with which prisoners of conscience have in the past been charged. There is no appeal against judgments made by the state security court. Perhaps the most significant change was that the President's power under the state of
354 	
emergency to approve or veto court judgments was removed by Law 105 of 1980, which treats the court's decision as final.
On 15 May 1980 Law 95 on "the protection of values from shameful conduct" was promulgated. Offences punishable include opposing religious doctrines, inciting young people to renege on religious and moral values, disseminating false information, and certain offences punishable by imprisonment under existing laws relating to illegal political organizations. Many terms of this law are vague and ill-defined. Sanctions are non-custodial and include being barred from election to the People's Assembly, trade union organizations or press associations, not being allowed to set up or participate in political parties, and being barred from working in certain professions which may infiuence public opinion, such as journalism.
Amnesty Intemational received reports of numerous arrests on political grounds during the year. These included the arrest in September 1980 of about 50 people accused of illegal political activities in connection with the Communist Party, and more than 20 alleged members of a splinter group of the Islamic Liberation Party. At the end of April 1981 it was not known whether any charges had been preferred.
Further arrests were reported in February 1981 during Cairo's International Book Fair, at which Israel was represented for the first time. Some of those arrested were accused of participating in protests against the Israeli bookstall; others, including Kamel Zouheiri, then head of the Egyptian Journalists' Union, were accused of disseminating anti-Israeli propaganda when they signed a petition calling for a boycott of the Israeli bookstall. All have since been released from detention.
Shortly afterwards President Sadat called on Egyptian journalists working abroad who had written material critical of the Egyptian Government or its policies to retum to Egypt before 15 May 1981, when they would benefit from an amnesty.
More than 70 arrests took place in March 1981 when the intelligence services claimed to have uncovered an illegal communist organization. Those arrested were held initially at the Citadel Prison for interrogation but were subsequently transferred to Tora Agricultural Prison, in a suburb of Cairo. A considerable number of those detained were already facing trial before the state security court in Cairo on charges of illegal Communist Party activities between the end of 1977 and August 1979, and had been provisionally released pending the outcome of the trial. Their rearrest caused the trial which began in October 1980 to be postponed again. Amnesty International viewed this trial of 30 people with particular concern because the defendants
355 	
appeared to be on trial for the non-violent expression of their political beliefs, and they faced a maximum punishment of life imprisonment with hard labour under Law 40 of 1977.
On 29 April 1981 the popular poet Ahmed Fu'ad Negm was arrested in C airo. He had been in hiding since March 1978, just before being sentenced by a military court on 25 March 1978 to one year's imprisonment with hard labour. His trial followed a meeting with students at Ain Shams University in November 1977 when his poetry was recited and sung. Charges against him included insulting fhe head of state. Ahmed Fu'ad Negm has been imprisoned many times because of his work, and has been adopted as a prisoner of conscience. He was held in the Citadel Prison in Cairo.
In September 1980 Amnesty International learned of the execution by hanging at Beni Suef Prison of a man convicted of murder. In January and February 1981 it learned offive death sentences passed by criminal courts in Cairo, Mansoura, Minia and Zagazig. All five people, including two women, had been convicted of murder. Amnesty International appealed to President Sadat to commute all the death sentences on humanitarian grounds. In September 1980 press reports indicated a change in legislation which would increase the number of offences punishable by death under Egyptian law. The maximum punishment of life imprisonment with hard labour for rape would be replaced by the death penalty.
