Syria
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about prolonged detention without trial, the lack of legal safeguards in the trials of political prisoners, the use of torture and the death penalty. It was also concerned about increasing reports of arbitrary imprisonment, "disappearances" of detainees, extrajudicial killings and torture by the Syrian security forces during the year.
The state of emergency, now in its 19th year, suspends all constitutional guarantees and gives the Minister of Interior, in his capacity as emergency law governor, extraordinary powers of arrest and detention. During the year various sectors of society expressed opposition to the emergency regulations, including some professional associations, trade imions, political parties outside the ruling National Progressive Front and the/¿A wo« al-MusUmin (Muslim Brotherhood). In some instances the government retaliated by punishing opponents.
During the year Amnesty International worked on behalf of 107 political detainees, 70 of them adopted prisoners of conscience. It has continued to seek the fair trial or release of 18 members or supporters of the previous government, detained since 1970; of seven members of the Kurdish Democratic Party detained without trial since 1973; and of 20 alleged political opponents of the government who had been abducted at various times from the Lebanon. In November 1980 a number of reports indicated that former President Nur al-Din Atassi had been moved from al-Mezze prison to house detention where he
377
was allowed to live with his family. However later reports suggested that he was returned to prison in March 1981.
In December 1980 Amnesty International adopted as prisoners of conscience 23 Syrian lawyers detained following the dissolution on 9 April 1980 of the General Congress and the regional assemblies of the Syrian Bar Association. The arrests came after the lawyers staged a one-day national strike on 31 March 1980 in support of their call for an end to the state of emergency and for reforms in the emergency legislation; for the abolition of the state security courts; for a boycott of such courts by all lawyers; and for the release of all untried detainees. Amnesty International appealed on behalf of the detained lawyers in June and July 1980 and their release was urged by the international legal community. The strike was supported by the doctors', engineers' and architects' associations as well as by several trades unions which went on strike for several weeks in a number of northern towns. In response the government closed down the national and regional assemblies of the Bar, medical and engineers' associations and arrested many of their members. Their places of detention have not been made public and those detained have not been allowed visits from relatives or lawyers.
In February 1981 Amnesty International adopted as prisoners of conscience 10 members of the banned Syrian Communist Party Political Bureau including its Secretary General, Riad al-Turk, and his wife Asmah al-Feisal. Amnesty International had appealed urgently on behalf of Riad al-Turk after receiving reports that he had been severely tortured and had been rushed to an intensive care unit at a Damascus hospital for emergency treatment. At the end of April 1981 his place of detention was not known. Another member of this organization, Omar Kashash, arrested in February 1981, is a former adopted prisoner of conscience detained without trial from June 1978 until February 1980.
Amnesty International received several first-hand accounts of ill-treatment and torture of suspects during interrogation. A doctor who was briefly detained in September 1979 before being released and fleeing the country said that he had been tortured by systematic beatings on the soles of his feet and by electricity applied to his shoulder blades and his genitals. He was medically examined by a British doctor in September 1980, a year after the alleged torture; the examination revealed 50 to 100 healed scars on his back and two similar scars on his genitals which according to the doctor's report "are not compatible with natural causes and are the result of external trauma, which could have been electrical."
Amnesty International continued to receive disturbing information on human rights violations by the security forces and specifically by
378
the Saray al-Difa' (Special Defence Units) under the command of President Assad's brother, Rifa'at Assad. Eye-witnesses have reported seeing security forces ill-treating and torturing people under interrogation in makeshift detention centres. Relatives have said they were unable to trace people arrested because they did not know where the security forces had taken them or because prisoners were moved from prison to unknown destinations. Executions were reported after trials by military court with summary rules of procedure which denied the defendants the right to defence by lawyers and the right of appeal.
Over the past year there have been a number of reported executions. In June 1980 the intemational press reported that 17 army officers had been executed for "treason and disaffection" after criticizing President Assad's brother. Amnesty International cabled President Assad requesting confirmation and urging commutation of any remaining death sentences on humanitarian grounds. In July 1980 the Syrian People's Assembly ratified a law making membership of the Muslim Brotherhood a capital offence. An amnesty was declared for all members who gave themselves up within one month and this was later extended to two months. In September 1980 the Jordanian News Agency Petra carried a report that 200 Muslim Brothers had been executed at a camp in al-Raqqa after having given themselves up under the terms of the amnesty. The same news agency carried reports in January 1981 that 200 members and supporters of the Muslim Brotherhood were executed at al-Mashraqiyya square in Aleppo, and a few days later it reported the execution of nine pilots. These reports were publicly dismissed by the Syrian authorities as hostile propaganda and as exaggerated accounts of raids by the security forces on Muslim Brotherhood hiding-places. Amnesty Intemational has not been able to confirm these accounts.
In a letter to President Assad in August 1980 Amnesty International expressed concem over the growing number of reported executions and said it was greatly disturbed by recent moves to increase the number of capital offences. Amnesty Intemational also expressed its grave concem over the reported killing by security forces of hundreds of prisoners, mainly Muslim Brothers, at Tadmur (Palmyra) Prison on 27 June 1980 and urged President Assad to set up a committee of inquiry and make public its findings. In 1981 two Syrian members of the Saray al-Difa' (Special Defence Units) arrested in Jordan gave details of the massacre on Jordanian Television and admitted having taken part in it. Amnesty Intemational has received no response from the authorities.
Also of concern were allegations that the security services were responsible for the assassination abroad of several prominent figures opposed to the govemment, including Salah al-Din al-Bitar, a founder
379
ofthe Ba'ath Party, who was shot in Paris in July 1980, and Banan Ali-Tantawi, wife of Issam al-Attar, the Director of the Islamic Centre in Aachen and a leader of the Muslim Brotherhood, who was shot in March 1981.
