Singapore
Amnesty International was con-cemed about the prolonged detention without trial of political prisoners under the Internal Security Act 1961 (ISA). Some prisoners have been held for 18 years. It appealed for the immediate and unconditional release of all prisoners held under the ISA or for their early trial in open court. It was also concerned about the use of the death penalty
258	
and appealed to President Benjamin Sheares to commute all death sentences.
Under Section 8( 1 )(a) of the ISA, a person may be detained if the President believes it is necessary "with a view to preventing that person from acting in any manner prejudicial to the security of Singapore or any part thereof or to the maintenance of public order or essential services therein". These preventive detention orders cannot be challenged in the courts; they are valid for up to two years and may be renewed indefinitely. A press statement issued by the Prime Minister's Office on 31 March 1980 declared that a condition for the release of prisoners held under the ISA was "a public undertaking disowning the Communist Party of Malaya's use of force and terror to overthrow the Government". Amnesty International was concerned that the prisoners' alleged connections with the CPM were never proved in open court, and believed that many were imprisoned for the peaceful exercise of their right to freedom of expression and association. The same statement from the Prime Minister's Office allowed the prisoners voluntary exile as an alternative to release. Prisoners who refused these conditions would be released only "when they [were] assessed to be of no danger to Singapore".
Amnesty International believed that these conditions had created a situation where prisoners were pressurized to make the undertaking. Instances of torture and ill-treatment of detainees held under the ISA were described in the Report of an Amnesty International Mission to Singapore, 30 November to 5 December 1978, published in January 1980. On I July 1980 Amnesty International wrote to Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew about the commission of inquiry he had appointed to look into allegations of ill-treatment in interrogation and detention centres. It pointed out that the commission's conclusion that "the process of interrogation does involve psychological stress" but not torture was apparently based solely on interviews with prison doctors and examination of medical records in only three cases. The commission did not appear to have investigated fully the findings of the Amnesty International report which detailed the ill-treatment of 21 detainees, including the case of Ho Piao, whose sworn affidavit testified to assault and repeated dousing with water in refrigerated rooms, and the cases of Chai Chong and Chow Tien Pao who were allegedly beaten after their hunger-strike in 1978. It appeared from the press statement that the commission had not interviewed the detainees. Although the press statement stressed the opportunities for detainees to draw the attention of their lawyers, families, doctors and officials from outside the internal security department to torture and injuries inflicted upon them, Amnesty International noted that in practice these opportunities were severely
259	
restricted. Amnesty Intemational reiterated its recommendation that a public commission of inquiry be set up to investigate all allegations of ill-treatment cited in the report.
Amnesty Intemational did not know of any recent arrests under Section 8(l)(a) of the ISA. It continued to appeal on behalf of three prisoners of conscience held without trial since 1963, amongst the longest detentions for political prisoners anywhere in the world. They were Ho Piao, a former secretary of the National Seamen's Union, Dr Lim Hock Siew, the former Secretary General of ih^Barisan Sosialis, (Socialist Front), and Lee Tze Tong, a trade union leader and Member ofParliament for thecoma« Sosialis. Anotherprisoner, DrPoh Soo Kai, detained under the ISA from 1963 to 1973, was rearrested in 1976 and has been adopted as a prisoner of conscience. All four men had been active in the opposition and Amnesty Intemational believed that they were detained for expressing views opposing govemment policies. Dr Lim Hock Siew and Lee Tze Tong have been living in enforced exile on small islands off the main island of Singapore since October 1978 and February 1980 respectively. Both were served with restriction orders under Section 8(1 )(b) of the ISA which imposes restrictions on residence, travel, association and activities and prohibits them from addressing public meetings. Amnesty International continued to urge their unconditional release.
Chi a Thye Poh, a former Member of Parliament for the Barisan Sosialis, editor of the party's newspaper and an assistant lecturer at Nanyang University, has been detained without trial since October 1966 and has been adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience. Before his arrestunderthe ISA, Chia Thye Poh had been fined in May 1966 for publishing a "seditious article" in the Barisan Sosialis newspaper Chem Sien Pau. The article criticized the govemment's treatment of another Barisan Sosialis Member of Parliament then held in detention under the ISA. Tan Kim Oh has also been detained under the ISA since 1966, when he was an undergraduate student at Nanyang University. Tan Kim Oh was known to have been a leading opponent of "suitability certificates", which the government had introduced as a requirement for entry into institutions of higher education. Amnesty Intemational has adopted him as a prisoner of conscience. Kuo Pao-kun, aged 41, who at the time of his arrest in March 1976 was the secretary of the Chinese Chamber of Commerce and the director of a theatrical troupe, was released on 1 October 1980 but Amnesty Intemational has the names of 32 detainees believed to be detained under the ISA.
On 15 October 1980 Amnesty International urged President Benjamin Sheares to commute the death sentences on Ong Ah-chuan and Koh Kai Cheng after the failure of their appeal to the Judicial
260	
Committee of the Privy Council in the United Kingdom. They had been given a mandatory death sentence for a drug trafficking offence. Ong Ah-chuan was executed in February 1981. In a cable to President Sheares on 6 March 1981 Amnesty Intemational expressed its grave concem at this execution and reiterated its appeal to the President to commute the death sentence on Koh Kai Cheng and all death sentences submitted to him in the future. Ten people were believed to be on death row for drug trafficking offences.
