Gambia
On 31 October 1980 six members of a political group called the Movement for Justice in Africa (MOJA) were arrested in the capital, Banjul, and charged with "managing an unlawful society" and "possessing firearms and ammunition". Less than 48 hours earlier, MOJA and another organization called the Gambia Socialist Revolutionary Party (GSRP) had been declared "unlawful societies" under the terms of the 1971 Societies Act, which empowers the President to outlaw any society deemed to be "prejudicial to or incompatible with the interests of the defence of the Republic, public safety, public order, public morality or public health...". MOJA and GSRP were banned shortly after the killing of Eku Jacob Mohoney, Deputy Commander of the Field Forces, the Gambia's army, and official announcements that Libyan agents had been involved in an attempt to overthrow the government At President Dawda Jawara's request, Senegalese troops intervened to protect strategic points in Banjul. Diplomatic relations with Libya were severed.
Trial proceedings against the six accused, all of whom were released on bail in December 1980, began in the Magistrates' Court in late November 1980. On 4 April 1981 the court ruled that four of the accused — Bekai Jobe, Pamodu Jobe, Mamadou M'Boge and Solomon Tamba — had no case to answer and should be released. Proceedings continued against the two remaining defendants — Fakkeba Juwara and Koro Tijan Sallah — and had not finished by the end of April 1981.
Amnesty International expressed concern that the charges against
45
the six accused might relate to their activities as members of MOJA before it was banned, activities which were then lawful. In addition some of the accused were specifically charged with "possession of arms and ammunition", although authoritative sources suggested that a police search at the home of Koro Tijan Sallah had uncovered nothing more dangerous than a bow and arrows and several shotgun cartridges. In response the government insisted that the trial was a criminal one without p>olitical connotations. However the authorities allowed an Amnesty International observer to attend the trial in late December 1980 and early January 1981.
In December 1980 Mustapha Danso, a private in the Field Forces, was convicted of murdering the Deputy Commander of the Field Forces, Eku Jacob Mohoney, and sentenced to death. He was granted the right to appeal, but no appeal proceeding had been lodged by the end of April 1981.
