Malaysia
Although a number of prisoners have been released since the beginning of 1980, Amnesty International was still concerned about the indefinite detention without trial of several hundred Malaysians under the Internal Security Act 1960 (ISA). It was also concerned about the sudden resumption of executions in February and March 1981.
About 80 prisoners have been adopted as prisoners of conscience or were being investigated by Amnesty Intemational. These prisoners were held under the ISA, which permits the detention without charge or trial, for renewable two-year periods, of people regarded by the Minister of Home Affairs as a threat to the security of Malaysia. As noted in the Report of an Amnesty Intemational Mission to the Federation of Malaysia, published in August 1979, the ISA has been used to detain members of the legal opposition, as well as trade unionists engaged in legitimate trade union activity. Tan Hock Hin, former Assistant Secretary General of the Labour Party of Malaysia, has now been detained for 14 years without trial because of his political activity. Like all political prisoners held under the ISA, Tan Hock Hin has never been formally charged, but was served with a two-year detention order which has been repeatedly renewed since his arrest in 1967. He was held in the Batu Gajah Special Detention Camp.
In June 1980 Amnesty Intemational renewed its appeals for the release of Abdul Samad bin Ismail, the former managing editor of the New Straits Times and one of Malaysia's leading intellectuals, who had been detained since 1976 for alleged involvement in "communist subversion". Unlike most people detained under the ISA, Samad Ismail was held at an undisclosed Special Branch Holding Centre in Kuala Lumpur, where he was kept in solitary confinement. Fears for his health were expressed on many occasions in view of these conditions. Samad Ismail was released in early February 1981 after making a statement on television renouncing his previous beliefs.
Amnesty Intemational was particularly concerned by the condition of Yong Ah Chit, formerly a teacher and President of the Chinese Language Society of the University of Malaya, who was arrested in 1975 under the ISA and detained at the Taiping Detention Camp. In September 1979 Amnesty International issued an appeal on his behalf after learning that he was showing signs of severe mental stress resulting from his four-year detention. It was feared that continued
240	
detention would lead to further, possibly irreversible, deterioration. Later reports indicated that Yong Ah Chit's condition was worsening, aggravated by the considerable pressure being exerted on him to make a public "confession" of his alleged subversive aims. This pressure was reported to have continued even after he agreed to sign a pledge to refrain from all future political activity. He was in a state of acute depression at the time he was released, and Amnesty International learned later that he committed suicide in July 1980 shortly after his release. Amnesty International renewed its appeals to the government to improve medical facilities for people held under the ISA and to abandon the common practice of requiring "confessions" as a condition of release.
These concerns were again raised in April 1981 in a letter to the Prime Minister, Datuk Hussein bin Datu Onn, in which Amnesty International also welcomed the releases which had taken place since 1980. Among those released were Samad Ismail; Dr Syed Hussein Ali, 44, an associate professor of sociology at the University of Malaya before his arrest in 1974, who was released in September 1980; and Encik Abdullah Majid, a former Deputy Minister who had been arrested in November 1976 together with Encik Abdullah Ahmed, another former Deputy Minister, after an intense power struggle within the ruling United Malays National Organisation. Abdullah Majid was released in February 1981 after publicly denouncing his own previous pro-communist feelings.
In its letter to the Prime Minister Amnesty International cited figures given in a recent letter from Tan Sri D. B. W. Good, the Chairman of the Advisory Board responsible for reviewing detainees' cases and making recommendations to the Minister of Home Affairs. According to Tan Sri Good, of 740 detainees whose cases were reviewed by the Advisory Board between January and October 1980, 200 were released. Amnesty International welcomed these releases and asked for a list.
Noting that several recently released prisoners had made public confessions and statements renouncing their beliefs, and recalling the case of Yong Ah Chit, Amnesty International again urged the government not to require "confessions" as a condition of release. It also called on the government to stop serving renewable restriction orders on released detainees. Stringent restrictions were placed on most detainees at the time of release, limiting where they might live, travel and work, banning political activities and requiring them to report regularly to the police. Such constraints amounted to a continued serious curtailment of their civil and political rights.
Amnesty International said it understood that most prisoners held under the ISA in the Batu Gajah and Taiping Detention Camps were
241	
arrested because they were regarded by the Ministry of Home Affairs as a threat to the security of the country, and not because they had committed criminal offences or engaged in acts of violence. Amnesty International stressed that the system did not afford any chance of a fair review of their cases, as the periodic reviews by the Advisory Board appeared to rely largely on reports made by the Special Branch officers who were also responsible for advising the Minister of Home Affairs on detentions. Most detainees refused to attend interviews. Amnesty Intemational asked for clarification of the criteria used by the Advisory Board, and for detainees to be allowed legal representation during reviews by the board, as the first steps towards preventing arbitrary decisions.
Amnesty International also asked about conditions at the Batu Gajah Special Detention Camp, where regulations enforced since 1977 have imposed a severe regime on the 100 or so prisoners held there. The prisoners are held in isolation most of the time. In principle they are allowed out of their cells for a weekly bath and a daily walk, but the frequency and duration depend on the goodwill of the camp's staff In addition mail and family visits are severely restricted. Amnesty Intemational was concerned that the mental and physical health of detainees was likely to deteriorate under such conditions, and urged the govemment to repeal the Internal Security (Detained Persons) (Amendment) Rules 1977.
Amnesty Intemational was seriously concerned by the resumption of executions in February and March 1981. Nine young men were executed in the seven days to 4 March 1981, after being convicted of illegal possession of firearms under the ISA. The ISA prescribes a mandatory death sentence for murder or illegal possession of firearms. These latest executions brought the number of people hanged since March 1980, when executions resumed after a lapse of 11 years, to 20.
One of those hanged on 4 March, Teh Cheng Poh, a 31-year-old carpenter, was sentenced to death by the Penang High Court in November 1976 after being convicted under the ISA of possessing a home-made pistol and five rounds of ammunition. His appeal to the Federal Court was dismissed in March 1977, but the Privy Council in London upheld the appeal in December 1978 when it mled that Teh's trial was null and void, as the regulations under which he had been tried were outside the authority of the constitution. The Federal Court ordered a retrial before the High Court at which he was again found guilty. His last appeal to the Federal Court was dismissed in January 1980.
About 50 other condemned prisoners were awaiting execution in Pudu Prison in Kuala Lumpur. By the time executions were resumed
242	
11 had exhausted their legal appeals, and their one hope lay with Malaysia's Pardons Board Only five death sentences are said to have been commuted in the past two years.
A 31-year-old Singaporean, Tan Chay Wa, was sentenced to death in January 1981 after being convicted under the ISA of possessing a pistol. After his arrest in 1979 he was served with a two-year detention order for alleged involvement in underground political activities and it was only later that he was charged with possession of the pistol.
Amnesty Intemational cabled the Prime Minister on 27 Febmary and 4 March expressing deep concern at the resumption of executions. It wrote again on 9 March 1981 urging the government, on humanitarian grounds, to commute the sentences of all those still awaiting execution.
