BURKINA FASO
Some 30 leading trade unionists were arrested in May and June and detained without trial for their non-violent opposition to the government. Six of them were
still held in October, when President Thomas Sankara was overthrown and killed in a military coup. The six were then released. Some 40 associates and support-ers of Thomas Sankara were arrested following the coup, some of whom were still held without charge at the end of the year.
On 15 October President Sankara's government was overthrown in a coup led by Captain Blaise Compaor6, the former Minister of Justice. President Sankara and at least 12 other people were killed when troops attacked the government headquarters at the Conseil de I'Entente buildings. Captain Blaise Compaore then announced the formation of the Front popuiaire, Popular Front, a new ruling body. A new government was formed on 31 October.
Troops loyal to President Sankara based at Koudougou and led by Captain Boukary Kabore refused to support the new President. The garrison of Koudougou was attacked on 27 October by government troops. Some army officers were reportedly captured and summarily executed. Captain Boukary Kabore escaped and fled the country. There was no further active opposition within the armed forces to the new government, which was fiercely criticized both at home and abroad for the killing of President Sankara.
A number of political prisoners were released or given reduced sentences in lanuary, including prisoners convicted in connection with explosions in Ouagadougou and Bobo Dioulasso in May 1985. Some 12 of these prisoners remained in detention. Among the prisoners who received reduced sentences were Paul Rouamba, whose sentence was reduced
AFRICA/BURKINA FASO
from life to 20 years' imprisonment, and four prisoners convicted in 1984 of plotting to overthrow the government. None of these prisoners received a fair trial. According to some reports, Paul Rouamba and those convicted with him in 1984 had not even been present at their trial.
In late May and early June, four leaders of the Con/édération syndicaie burkinabé, a national trade union confederation, were arrested in Ouagadougou: Soumane Touré, Adama Touré, Salif Kaboré and Louis-Armand Ouaii. They were arrested by local committees known as Comités de dé/ense de ia révolution (CDR), Committees for the Defence of the Revolution. The arrests were approved by the ruling Conseil national de Ja Révolution (CNR), National Revolutionary Council, headed by President Sankara. The four were accused of provocation, political sabotage and issuing "counter-revolutionary" tracts.
Following these arrests, more than 30 members of various trade unions affiliated to the CSB were arrested in different towns by local CDRs. Some were reportedly tortured. Most of them were members of the Ligue patriotique pour Je développement (LIPAD), Patriotic League for Development, or the Parti communiste révolutionnaire voitajque (PCRV), Revolutionary Communist Party of Upper Volta. They were all accused of subversion and "counterrevolutionary" activities, although no formal charges were brought against them, and they appeared to be prisoners of conscience. Some were released within a short time but several others remained in detention without charge or trial until August. Six of the trade unionists, including Soumane Touré, Adama Touré and Salif Kaboré, remained in detention without charge or trial until 16 October, when they were released following the coup.
In June Alidou Ouedraogo, Secretary General of the Syndicat autonome des magistrats burkinabé (SAMAB), the Autonomous Union of Burkinabé Magistrates, was briefly detained and other SAMAB magistrates suspended from their work for opposing judicial reforms and "revolutionary justice".
More than 40 people associated with the Sankara government were arrested immediately after the coup or in November or December. They included former ministers and officials. Other detainees were members of the Union de iutte
communiste-reconstruite (ULC-R). Union of Communist Struggle-Reconstructed, which had participated in the administration of the Sankara government and which was accused of producing and distributing tracts critical of the new government. Some detainees were released without charge but a number were still held at the end of the year, either at the ConseiJ de l'Entente buildings or at the Gendarmerie nationale in Ouagadougou. Some of them were reportedly tortured or ill-treated.
In January Amnesty International received a response from the government to an inquiry made in 1986 about a report of deaths in custody. Two prisoners allegedly died in May 1986 at the headquarters of the Direction de Ja surveillance du territoire (DST), the security service, in Ouagadougou. The government said that an investigation had found no such deaths in detention. Subsequently, Amnesty International sought further details of the investigation which was said to have been carried out. The organization also sought more details about the trials of alleged government opponents which took place in 1984 and 1986, attempting to ascertain whether they had been fair and conducted in accordance with internationally accepted standards. Amnesty International received no response from the government.
In December Amnesty International sought information from the authorities about the reasons and legal basis for the detentions which followed the October coup. The authorities replied that only 11 people were detained under house arrest for their own security, during investigations of their activities while holding public office. The authorities said that other detainees named by Amnesty International had not been arrested.
The information available to Amnesty International indicated, however, that the total number of political prisoners held was considerably higher than 11. Some of them appeared to be prisoners of conscience, imprisoned solely because of their peaceful opposition to policies of the new government.
In December Amnesty International also asked the authorities whether those released after the coup included detainees arrested in May 1985 in connection with the explosions in Bobo Dioulasso and Ouagadougou and the five people, includ-
AFRICA / BURKINA FASO / BURUNDI
ing Paul Rouamba, who were tried and sentenced in June 1984. The government did not respond to questions about these cases. Amnesty International later learned from another source that the prison sentences imposed on Paul Rouamba and a number of other convicted political prisoners had been reduced.
