ZIMBABWE
Several long-term political detainees continued to be held without trial, although a number were released during 1987. The apparent improvement in the police's treatment of prisoners, noted in 1986, continued through 1987, although there were reports of torture of prisoners in the custody of the Central Intelligence Organization (CIO). The courts continued to impose death sentences and nine prisoners were hanged in May.
Throughout 1987 Zimbabwe faced serious internal security problems and external aggression. Armed bands continued to be active in Matabeleland and Midlands provinces and were responsible for killing dozens of civilians, culminating in an incident at Esigodini in November when 16 missionaries were hacked to death. At various times the government accused South Africa and the minority Zimbabwe African People's Union (ZAPU) of supporting the armed rebels, although both denied this. The year also saw a significant increase in activity inside Zimbabwe by armed groups supporting the Resistencia NacionaJ Mogambicana (RNM or RENAMO), Mozambique National Resistance, an organization opposed to the Government of Mozambique. These groups were responsible for a number of mass killings of villagers in eastern districts.
In May a Zimbabwean woman was killed in bomb and rocket attacks on houses in Harare used by South African exiles. South African Government forces appeared to have been responsible.
Talks aimed at unifying the ruling Zim-
babwe African National Union-Patriotic Front (ZANU-PF) and ZAPU continued intermittently throughout 1987. In December the two parties announced that they had agreed to merge under the name of ZANU-PF. Two constitutional amendments abolished the separate electoral roll whereby white voters had chosen 20 members of the 100-seat House of Assembly and introduced a system in which Prime Minister Robert Mugabe became executive President.
A number of prisoners, mainly ZAPU supporters, were held without charge throughout 1987 under the Emergency Powers (Maintenance of Law and Order) Regulations which permit indefinite administrative detention without trial. In most cases it was alleged that they supported armed opponents of the government. The government is not obliged by law to publish details of those detained, but official statements suggested that about 30 detainees were held under these regulations at the beginning of 1987. Fewer were probably detained at the end of the year. Those still held included Makhatini Guduza, a senior ZAPU official forcibly returned from Botswana, where he had been granted political asylum, in February 1986 (see Amnesty international Report Î987]. He was unlawfully detained until January 1987, when he was brought to court on a charge of leaving the country illegally and reportedly acquitted. However, he was immediately rearrested and served with a detention order. He remained in Chikurubi Prison, Harare, at the end of the year.
Also in Chikurubi were Neil Harper and John Austin, two senior customs officials alleged to have spied for South Africa, who continued to be detained despite a recommendation from the specially constituted Review Tribunal that they be released. The tribunal is obliged to consider all detainees' cases within 30 days of their detention and every six months thereafter. It is government-appointed, sits in camera and its recommendations are not binding. However, since independence in 1980 it has been most unusual for the government not to comply with a Review Tribunal decision. Neil Harper and John Austin were arrested in early 1986, charged under the Official Secrets Act, had the charges dropped and were then detained (see Amnesty international Report 1987). On several occasions they challenged the
AFRICA/ZIMBABWE
legality of their detention in court, although there was no opportunity for the courts to review the reasons for their detention - the Review Tribunal alone adjudicates on the grounds for a detainee's imprisonment. Amnesty International considered that Neil Harper and John Austin were probably prisoners of conscience, detained because of their legitimate professional activities.
In September and October a number of ZAPU officials were arrested and detained for short periods. They included Francis Mukombwe, the member of Parliament for Binga; Welshman Mabhena, the party's secretary general; and Mahuzu Ncube, administrator of ZAPU's Bulawayo office. The arrests followed the closure of ZAPU offices throughout the country and a ban on its meetings. These restrictions were later lifted. Most of those arrested appeared to have been released uncharged though it seemed that Francis Mukombwe might be prosecuted.
A number of political detainees were released during 1987. They included Samson Moyo, who was detained without charge by the CIO in Gwanda, southwestern Zimbabwe, from September 1986 until April 1987. In January his wife and other members of his family were arrested and detained for some weeks. There was no apparent reason for his detention other than his membership of ZAPU.
Amnesty International continued to investigate the cases of three people arrested in late 1985 who had apparently "disappeared" while in official custody. Edward Moyo, who had previously given evidence to a Commission of Inquiry into army abuses inMatabeleland, was arrested in Tsholotsho in July 1985. A few days later his brother, Shadreck Denga Moyo, responded to an instruction to report to a CIO official at Mabutweni police station in Bulawayo. Neither of them were seen afterwards. Fraser Gibson Sibanda was arrested by police on 3 November 1985 while attending a church service in Bulawayo. His wife made inquiries at several police stations and was told that he was in the custody of Police Internal Security and Intelligence (PISI). The reason for his arrest was apparently that he had worn a badge depicting ZAPU's leader, Joshua Nkomo. He too was not seen again. The Zimbabwean authorities offered no explanation for the whereabouts of these three prison-
ers and failed to respond to calls for investigations into their apparent "disappearance".
Amnesty International did not receive any reports of torture by the Zimbabwean police during 1987, although there were several reported cases involving officials of the CIO. For example, Odile Harington, who was found guilty of spying for South Africa, told the High Court in December that she had been tortured by the CIO. She said that she had been beaten, had her head forced into a bucket of water and had been subjected to sexual humiliation. The trial judge acknowledged that she might have been "mistreated" but took no steps to investigate her allegations further.
Zimbabwean courts imposed at least seven death sentences in 1987, all for murder - somewhat fewer than in recent years. Nine prisoners convicted of murder were hanged within a few days of each other in the capital city, Harare, in May. The Sheriff of Zimbabwe, a High Court official, said the executions were "in line with the Government's desire to rid society of undesirables".
Amnesty International continued to press the government to release all political detainees, unless they were to be charged and brought promptly to trial, as well as seeking investigations into reports of "disappearances" and torture. The organization protested at the nine hangings carried out in May, and called for clemency for all those under sentence of death.
