HONDURAS
There were frequent short>term political detentions and hundreds of peasants were jailed for brief periods in connection with land disputes. The torture of detainees was frequently reported. The government failed to take steps to clarify the fate of more than 100 people who reportedly "disappeared" in custody between 1980 and 1984 under previous governments.
On 7 August Honduras was one of five Central American states to sign the Central America Peace Agreement (see entry on Guatemala). The agreement led to the creation in October of a National Reconciliation Commission to resolve social divisions and study human rights issues, including the release of political prisoners. Twenty-nine political prisoners were released in an amnesty declared on 26 November. Fifteen of them were peasant farmers who had been detained in connection with land disputes and accused of terrorist offences. The other 14 were trade unionists who had been detained during a strike in November, shortly before the amnesty, and accused of subversion.
Marco Danilo Guardado Nájera, a peasant leader and prisoner of conscience, was released in June after acquittal by an appeals court. He had been held for 10 months at Trujillo, department of Colón, apparently because of his activities as a leader of a farming cooperative. He had been charged, however, with sedition and
THE AMERICAS / HONDURAS
disturbing the peace (see Amnesty international Report Í987].
Ezra Honám Roiz Andino was detained at Tegucigalpa airport in July and may have been a prisoner of conscience. He had sought asylum abroad in 1982, after leaving Honduras with false documentation, and returned openly in July in an attempt to regularize his situation. However, he was arrested on arrival from Nicaragua and held in unacknowledged detention for more than two weeks by the Dirección Nacional de Investigaciones (DNI), the plain clothes investigative division of the police force. He was later charged with falsification of documents and impersonation. Although he was named in the November amnesty, his release was still pending at the end of 1987. It appeared that he may have been imprisoned on account of the activities of his mother, a prominent trade unionist and opponent of the government.
Many trade unionists, students and members of civil associations were detained incommunicado for several days, apparently as a form of harassment. These detentions breached the constitutional requirement that no one may be held for more than 24 hours before being brought before a judicial authority.
One such case was that of Rosa Dilia Rivera, a worker with the women's organization Comité para el Desarrollo Integrai de la Mujer Campesina (CODIMCA), Committee for the Complete Development of Peasant Women, and with the Comité Coordinador de Organizaciones Populares (cœp). Coordinating Committee of Popular Organizations, in the department of Copán. She was detained in May in her home in the village of San José de las Palmas by members of the Seventh Infantry Battalion. They questioned her for three days about her political activities, then released her without charge. She had previously been detained on several other occasions for brief periods.
Allen Palacios, a young Jesuit seminarian of Belizean nationality, was reportedly detained incommunicado for several days and then summarily expelled from Honduras. He was arrested on 3 July at a military checkpoint in Colón department and transferred to the custody of the Fuerzo de Seguridad Pública (FSP), the Hon-duran national police. The authorities denied that he was in custody but then
expelled him from the country on 9 July for possessing "subversive literature", apparently a published study of the Jesuits.
Four men were detained in August in Comayagua and accused of placing a bomb in the town. The bomb had exploded in a restaurant on 8 August, slightly injuring several people, including United States servicemen from the nearby military base of Palmerola. Those arrested included Alex Fernando Castro Martinez, a student who was held incommunicado for eight days. The authorities denied that he had been detained and ignored habeas corpus writs issued on his behalf. However, on 27 August he appeared at a press conference organized by the DNl and admitted participation in the bombing. He also named Jorge Arturo Reina as the person who planned the bombing and supplied the bomb. Jorge Arturo Reina is a former rector of the National Autonomous University of Honduras and leader of the M-LIDER movement, Movimiento Liberal Democrático Revolucionario, a social democratic grouping within the ruling Liberal Party. At the time, he was the M-LIDER's candidate for the presidency of the Liberal Party's Central Executive Committee. Two other leading local members of M-LIDER were also detained: Mariano Lagos Donaire, a lawyer, and Rafael Flores, a retired schoolteacher. Immediately after the press conference, Alex Castro was brought before a court, where he retracted his earlier statements and said they had been made under pressure. All four prisoners were released by the court a week later, with all charges against them dropped.
Hundreds of peasants were reportedly detained for short periods during the year after they occupied land to force implementation of land redistribution legislation. In some cases they were held on charges under anti-terrorist legislation and faced penalties of up to 20 years' imprisonment. Most of them, however, were released due to lack of evidence after a few weeks' or months' imprisonment. Others benefited from the 26 November amnesty for political prisoners.
Torture continued to be reported during the year. Methods included beatings, placing of rubber hoods over victims' heads and tightening them around the neck, hanging by the wrists or feet, and electric shocks. Psychological pressures
THE AMERICAS/-HONDURAS/JAMAICA
and threats, including mock executions, were also reported.
Doris Rosibel Benavides Tarrius, a psychologist, was reportedly detained by DNI agents in March on suspicion of having links with the guerrilla group Fuerzas Populares Revolucionarias "Lorenzo Zelaya" (FPR), "Lorenzo Zelaya" Popular Revolutionary Forces. According to her testimony after release, she was held for 19 days, first in the ÜNI headquarters in San Pedro Sula and then in the First Artillery Battalion in Zambrano, department of Francisco Morazán. She alleged that she had been beaten and kicked, tortured with electric shocks, hung by the limbs from a metal bar and raped. She was released in April on a street close to the Mexican Embassy in Tegucigalpa, the capital city, and told that if she did not enter the Mexican Embassy quickly, she would be killed. She subsequently went into exile. The government denied that she had ever been arrested.
Allegations of torture also followed the arrest of 14 peasants in early October in the department of Yoro. They were allegedly questioned about offences including bank robbery, attempted kidnapping and murder, and their suspected membership of the FPR. All of them were members of the Central Nacional de Trabajadores del Campo (CNTC), National Confederation of Rural Workers. Nine were released on bail soon after their arrest and medical evidence appeared to corroborate their claims of torture. Margarita Murillo, women's affairs secretary of the CNTC and a pastoral agent with the diocese of Santa Rosa de Copán, was among those detained. She alleged that she had been raped, that a hood had been tightened over her head repeatedly and that hot needles had been inserted in her body. After her release, she reportedly required hospital treatment for injuries sustained in detention. Carlos Martinez Ramirez alleged after release that he had been hung by the feet, beaten and tortured with electric shocks for three days before he had "confessed" to the accusations against him in order to avoid further ill-treatment. All 14 CNTC members, who denied involvement in subversive activities and said that their detention was due to conflict over land claims, benefited from the November amnesty.
New evidence emerged during the year that the armed forces had been responsible
for many "disappearances" which took place between 1980 and 1984. Florencio Caballero, a former interrogator for a special military intelligence unit known as Battalion 3-16, left the country and made public information about the work of this unit. He said it had been established in the late 1970s and operated under the direction of military officers who were directly responsible to the head of the Honduran armed forces. The unit, he said, carried out the kidnapping, torture and execution of more than 100 people during the early 1980s. Most of the victims "disappeared" in custody and had not been accounted for by the authorities.
Florencio Caballero said that one of those abducted and killed by Battalion 3-16 was Manfredo Velásquez Rodríguez, a student of economics at the Universidad Autónoma de Honduras, Autonomous University of Honduras, and leader of the students' association in the economics faculty. He had been seized in the centre of Tegucigalpa in September 1981 by six armed men in civilian clothes who beat him and forced him into their vehicle. His family made repeated attempts to learn his whereabouts, but without success. The case was one of four heard during the year by the Inter-American Court of Human Rights of the Organization of American States in San José. Costa Rica. The cases of two Costa Ricans and another Honduran who reportedly "disappeared" in custody in Honduras were also heard. In October relatives of the "disappeared" prisoners and representatives of Honduran human rights organizations testified before the court, which was expected to pass judgment on the government's culpability in 1988.
Amnesty International missions visited Honduras in January and September. During the first mission, meetings were held with a wide range of non-governmental sources. Amnesty International submitted a memorandum to the government in July, drawing attention to the practice of short-term detention without due process, allegations of torture and continuing concern about unclarified "disappearances". During the second mission, Amnesty International's delegates met government officials, including representatives of the Ministries of Foreign Affairs and the Interior and Justice, the Supreme Court of Justice, the Attorney General, and mem-
THE AMERICAS/-HONDURAS/JAMAICA
bers of the Joint Chiefs of Staff of the armed forces.
Amnesty International frequently issued urgent appeals during the year in cases of concern about torture during prolonged unacknowledged incommunicado detention.
