COMOROS
Two prisoners of conscience and 16 other political prisoners sentenced after unfair trials in 19.85 and 1986 remained in prison throughout 1987, although others were released. Members of opposition political parties were reported to have been briefly detained at the time of elections in March. More than 40 people were arrested at the end of the year and accused of involve« ment in a coup attempt. Some were reported to have been tortured and at least three were said to have died in custody.
Twenty prisoners sentenced in November 1985 for alleged participation in a coup attempt were still in prison at the beginning of the year. Sixteen had been members of the Presidential Guard and were
serving sentences of life imprisonment. The other four were civilians and were all members of the Front démocratique des Comores (FDC), Democratic Front of the Comoros, who did not receive a fair trial. They were believed to be prisoners of conscience. Two of the four were released in August but the other two - Moustoifa Said Cheikh, the FDC's Secretary General, and Abdou Mhoumadi - remained in prison serving sentences of life imprisonment and eight years respectively. They were held in M'dé and Voidjou military camps.
Other prisoners who were convicted in luly 1986 for belonging to the FDC were released during the year. Of 42 prisoners convicted, 18 were still held at the beginning of 1987: 13 were released in lanuary by the President and the five others were believed to have been freed after completing their sentences.
New politically-motivated arrests were reported during the year. Four supporters of the FDC were arrested in early lanuary but released uncharged soon afterwards. In March at least 200 members and supporters of opposition parties were reported to have been arrested at the time of elections to the Federal Assembly, but they too were released after a short time. All 42 seats of the Federal Assembly were taken by the ruling and sole legal party in the Comoros, ri/nion comorienne pour le progrès, the Comorian Union for Progress.
At least 40 people were reportedly arrested in late November and early December, following what the authorities said had been an unsuccessful coup attempt. The government alleged that a group of unarmed people, some of whom were former members of the Presidential
AFRICA / COMOROS / CONGO
Guard and Comorian Armed Forces, had attempted to enter Itsundzu prison in order to seize arms and to free the members of the Presidential Guard sentenced to life imprisonment in November 1985.
A number of those arrested were reported to have died as a result of torture while they were in the custody of foreign mercenaries working as officers in the Presidential Guard. Among the victims were Ali Ngaya, from Badjini in the south of the island of Grand Comore; Ali Wadili, aged 19; and Idi Boina from the capital, Moroni. The dead bodies of these three men were described by eye-witnesses as having been mutilated, suggesting they had been tortured. The other detainees were still held incommunicado at the end of the year without having been charged or tried.
Amnesty International continued to appeal to the government to release prisoners of conscience Moustoifa Said Cheikh and Abdou Mhoumadi. Amnesty International also expressed concern to the authorities about reports that at least three people arrested in late 1987 had died as a result of torture, and called for an urgent investigation.
