NIGERIA
More than 100 people were sentenced to death and there were at least 45 executions, most of which were carried out publicly. The majority of those condemned to death and executed were sentenced by tribunals from which there was no right of appeal. The right of appeal to a higher court was also denied to more than 170 people tried in connection with religious riots which broke out in March in Kaduna state. More than 20 trade union leaders were detained without trial for up to one week in December and four leading members of former governments remained under restriction, without trial, throughout the year.
The arrests of trade union leaders, all of whom appeared to be prisoners of conscience, occurred in December after the national trade union federation, the Nigerian Labour Congress (NLC). began a campaign against the removal of government oil subsidies. On 14 December three NLC officials were detained by the State Security Service. In the days following. NLC president Alhaji Ali Chiroma and more than 20 regional NLC officials were also detained. They were held under State Security Decree No. 2 of 1984, which
provides for administrative detention without trial. Although the authorities declared an intention to charge them with sedition, they were released without charge by 22 December.
Alhaji Shehu Shagari and Alexander Ekwueme, the former President and Vice President whose civilian government was overthrown in a military coup in 1983. remained under restriction throughout the year. They had been released from detention without trial in July 1986, on condition that they remained in their homes in rural areas.
Another former head of state, Major-General Muhammadu Buhari, and former Chief of Staff, Supreme Headquarters. Major-General Tunde Idiagbon also remained restricted without trial throughout the year, reportedly under house arrest. They had been removed from power in a bloodless coup in August 1985.
Clashes between Christian and Muslim students in Kafanchan, Kaduna state, on 6 March sparked riots in other parts of the state. Nineteen people were killed and over 450 buildings destroyed, including churches and mosques. More than 600 people were arrested, including children nine years of age, and there were unconfirmed reports that detainees had been ill-treated in detention. President Ibrahim Babangida subsequently claimed that some of the violence had been engineered by subversives. By the end of the year, more than 170 defendants had appeared before the Civil Disturbances Special Tribunal, established by Decree No. 2 of 1987, and more than 50 had been convicted. Most were convicted of arson, riot and unlawful assembly. The five-member tribunal was headed by a Supreme Court judge. Its other members, who included an officer in the armed forces, were not required to have legal training. Those convicted by the tribunal had no right of appeal to a higher court and sentences were subject only to confirmation by the Armed Forces Ruling Council, the supreme executive body. At least seven were sentenced to prison terms of between four and five years for possession or publication of seditious materials. Amnesty International investigated whether they were prisoners of conscience.
Most of the people known to be held under sentence of death were tried before Robbery and Firearms Tribunals, estab-
AFRICA/NIGERIA/RWANDA
lished under the provisions of the Robbery and Firearms Decree of 1984 to ensure that armed robbery cases were tried without delay. Some procedures of these tribunals, notably an absence of the right to appeal to a higher court, contravened basic international standards on application of the death penalty. Cases involving other serious offences, such as murder, were tried before the High Court and appeals could be made to the Appeal Court and then to the Supreme Court.
Seventy prisoners under sentence of death in Benin City prison, Bendel state, assaulted an official on 6 May, apparently in an unsuccessful attempt to prevent the hanging of two prisoners and in protest against prison conditions. Twenty-four prisoners were killed during the quelling by prison officials and police of a subsequent riot, and more than 40 prison officials were subsequently dismissed, transferred or disciplined. A judicial commission of inquiry established to examine the causes of the riot heard allegations that prisoners had been clubbed to death by prison officials. The commission submitted its conclusions to the Minister of Internal Affairs in October. By the end of the year, these findings had apparently not been made public.
In September the Federal Military Government reportedly ordered the governors of Lagos, Ogun, Oyo and Ondo states to execute at least 100 individuals sentenced to death for robbery. The directive, which was to be carried out by the end of the month, was apparently issued following intensified police action against an upsurge of armed robbery. Many of those sentenced to death were believed to have been tried before Robbery and Firearms Tribunals and sentenced to execution by firing-squad. Others, including some 19 people under sentence of death in Lagos state, were believed to have been convicted by the High Courts and to be awaiting appeal hearings. Amnesty International was unable to learn whether the executions took place. However, an acting governor in Lagos state was reported to have signed death warrants authorizing the execution by firing-squad of people sentenced by the High Courts to death by hanging.
Amnesty International appealed to the Nigerian authorities throughout the year for commutation of individual death sen-
tences and for an end to executions. The organization also asked about the powers of the Civil Disturbances Special Tribunal to impose death sentences and made inquiries about the detention of trade union leaders in December.
