LIBERIA
Several suspected opponents of the government were detained for short periods, but none were brought to trial. One death sentence was known to have been imposed by the courts, but it was not known whether any executions took place.
There were major developments affecting the judiciary following the resignation in June of most Supreme Court judges at the request of President Samuel Doe, who said there was corruption and malpractice within the judiciary. A new Chief Justice was appointed but he refused to take up his post when former Minister of Justice Chea Cheapoo, who had previously been arrested on suspicion of embezzlement, was made a judge. In response. President Doe appointed Chea Cheapoo as Chief Justice and overruled a decision by the House of Representatives to reject his appointment. However, in December President Doe intervened personally to free a judge and a businesswoman after Chea Cheapoo had ordered their detention for allegedly attempting to bribe him. The President then instigated impeachment proceedings against Chief Justice Cheapoo. After being impeached by the legislature, he was charged with libel for accusing the President and the Minister of lustice of taking bribes.
Several people were detained without trial for political reasons. Gabriel Doe was arrested in January, apparently on suspicion of helping Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf. a former government minister and prisoner of conscience, to leave the country in 1986 after her life had been threatened. He was apparently charged with piracy and released on bail, but the case against him did not proceed. However, he was rearrested in September, again apparently in connection with Ellen Johnson-Sirleafs departure from Liberia. He was held incommunicado and in harsh conditions in the Post Stockade, a military prison in Monrovia, and a lawyer who sought access to him was also briefly detained. In mid-October Gabriel Doe was transferred to a civilian prison and allowed access to his lawyer. He was released in late October after apparently being charged with forgery, but no further legal proceedings against him were reported by the end of the year.
In another case, Zaye Gontee, a businesswoman, was arrested in May and detained incommunicado and without trial for over three months in the Post Stockade. She was apparently suspected of contact with Liberians living abroad who were opposed to the government. However, no charges were brought against her and she was released in August after an application for habeas corpus was granted by
AFRICA/ LIBERIA/ MADAGASCAR
the Criminal Court.
John Vambo, a journalist, was also detained without charge in August after he photographed a dispute in the street in which a military police officer was involved. He was held for nearly six days, during which time he reportedly slept in a cell only one metre high.
There were new allegations of abuses by the security forces in Nimba county, the home area of the leader of an unsuccessful 1985 coup attempt, Brigadier-General Thomas Quiwonkpa. In April, for example. 14 people were reported to have been arrested and held without charge for several weeks following an incident in which a group of people, including children, had been shot at by soldiers. In September four people, two of whom were traditional chiefs, were detained for between one and three weeks, apparently because they were suspected of being in contact with exiled government opponents. President Doe appealed in November for exiles to return and ordered roadblocks throughout Nimba county to be removed.
One death sentence was announced during 1987, following a murder trial in March in Nimba county. The outcome of the defendant's appeal to the Supreme Court was not known nor whether the execution was carried out. According to the trial judge, it was scheduled to take place in April.
Amnesty International appealed on behalf of Gabriel Doe, calling for his immediate release if he were not charged. No response was received.
