NIGER
An amnesty for over 100 political prison-ers in detention or under house arrest, some of whom had been detained and restricted without trial almost continuously since 1974, was ordered by a new head of state in November. Colonel Ali Safbou, Chief of General Staff, was appointed head of state by the ruling Supreme Military Council following the death of General Seyni Kountche on 10 November. In further moves in December, President Saibou announced that other political detainees would be brought to trial and commuted all death sentences.
Before President Kountche's death, over 100 people were held without charge or trial for political reasons. They were
AFRICA/NIGER
held in administrative detention or under house arrest and had been arrested in previous years for a variety of reasons. Many appear to have been prisoners of conscience. Others were alleged to have been involved in conspiracies to overthrow the government. Most of them were released in the amnesty on 20 November.
Cyrille Gabriel, a former government minister, was among 44 people released from administrative detention under the amnesty. He had been detained without trial since 1975, apparently because he had disagreed with President Kountché over government policy. Boulama Manga, previously a gendarmerie officer and member of the ruling Supreme Military Council, was also released. He had spent over seven years in detention without trial, apparently for refusing to take up a government post to which he had been assigned in June 1980. Also released was Adamou Harouna, a senior government official held since February 1983, apparently for criticizing a member of the government. Also freed were 15 people arrested after an unsuccessful coup attempt in March 1976, who were mostly former members of the security forces but also included Sanoussi Jackou. He worked at Niamey University at the time of his arrest and was one of about seven prisoners who had apparently remained in prison after serving five-year prison sentences imposed in 1976.
Sixteen people detained without charge or trial following an attempt to overthrow the government in October 1983 were among the 44 released detainees. They included the wives and domestic employees of former Lieutenant Amadou Oumarou, known as "Bonkano",
the former President's special security advisor. He was alleged to be one of the leading conspirators but escaped arrest by fleeing the country. As many as 19 other people suspected of involvement in the same coup attempt were not released and reportedly remained in custody at the end of the year. They included Mahamane Sidikou, a former senior government official who was reported to have been seriously ill while in detention. In December, President Saibou stated that they would be brought to trial.
Almost 60 people were released from house arrest under the November amnesty, including former President Hamani Diori. He had been detained for six years following his overthrow in 1974 and was then placed under house arrest after his release from prison. Five members of his government, who had also been placed under house arrest following release from detention. were also freed, as was Djibo Bakary, former leader of the Sawaba political party, who had been detained without trial from 1975 to 1980 and then put under house arrest.
A number of death sentences were commuted at the time of the November amnesty. Seven out of 12 members of the Tuareg ethnic minority sentenced to death following an attack on government buildings in Tchin Tabaraden in May 1985 had their sentences commuted to life imprisonment. It was not clear what had happened to the other five, although unofficial sources suggested that they had died in detention.
A further amnesty for convicted political prisoners was announced on 17 December. President Saibou stated that it specifically excluded those still detained in connection with the coup attempt of October 1983 who would shortly be brought to trial. He also announced that he had ordered a general amnesty for all nationals of Niger who had been involved in opposition to the government, that work would continue on a new Constitution, and that local and regional elections would be held.
On 30 December President Saibou announced that all death sentences which had been confirmed on appeal and were not the subject of further judicial review were being commuted to life imprisonment; it was not known how many prisoners benefited from this.
Amnesty International welcomed the
AFRICA/NIGER/NIGERIA
release of those who had been detained and held under house arrest without charge or trial for political reasons, and the commutation of all death sentences. Over the years, the organization has raised many of these cases with the authorities but has never received any response to its inquiries and appeals.
