SOMALIA
More than 50 prisoners of conscience were held throughout 1987. One of them had been detained without charge or trial almost continuously since 1969, when the present government came to power. There were hundreds of new politically-motivated arrests and many people were detained without trial. Among them was at least one person who had been returned to Somalia against his will after unsuccessful attempts to seek asylum in other countries. A number of other people were imprisoned after unfair trials, including nine religious teachers who were prisoners of conscience. The nine prisoners' initial death sentences were later commuted to life imprisonment. There were reports that political prisoners were tortured and several prisoners of conscience were said to be seriously ill as a result of harsh prison conditions. An unknown number of people were sentenced to death and there were at least four public executions. UnofTicial sources suggested that more than 100 people were executed but this information could not be confirmed. There were also reports of extrajudicial executions.
Increasing armed conflict in the riorth, particularly in the areas between Hargeisa and the border with Ethiopia, led to widespread arbitrary arrests, ill-treatment and extrajudicial executions by the security forces. Civilians suspected of collaborating with the armed opposition Somali National Movement (SNM) were targets of these abuses. The SNM, which is based in Ethiopia, launched several attacks against
government forces during the year and was responsible for killing some government officials in the north, as well as several SNM members in Ethiopia who were alleged to be Somali Government agents.
Large numbers of people were arrested in the north in mid-January and the following weeks. They were detained for long periods without charge. Arrests in Hargeisa. Burao, Berbera and Gebiieh followed attacks in the region by the SNM, the assassination of the regional security chief and demonstrations against the government in these towns. The identities of few detainees held by the security forces, particularly the National Security Service (NSS), could be confirmed. Some of those arrested in the north were released after relatives paid bribes or ransoms. Several hundred who had been detained outside the framework of the law were reportedly freed in November, following an official review of detentions in the area. However, several hundred people were believed to be detained without trial in the north at the end of the year.
In October a Somali asylum-seeker was returned to Somalia from Norway and arrested on arrival by the NSS. He was detained for nearly two months and tortured under interrogation about his attempts to seek asylum and alleged contacts with the SNM abroad. After his release, he again left Somalia.
Many political detainees arrested in previous years were still held without trial at the end of 1987. They included Yusuf Osman Samantar, a prisoner of conscience detained without trial since 1975. His arrest in 1975 followed six years of almost continuous detention without trial.
Some 70 civilians and members of the armed forces who had been arrested in mid-1986 because of their non-violent religious activities also remained in detention without charge or trial at the end of 1987. They had criticized the government for not following Islamic teaching and laws and had called for the repeal of restrictions on the right to religious freedom. Among the detainees was Sheikh Mohamed Moallim Hassan, a former director general in the Ministry of Justice and Religious Affairs, who had been a prisoner of conscience following a previous arrest.
Several hundred Ethiopian nationals who had entered Somalia to seek asylum or had been abducted from eastern
AFRICA/SOMALIA
Ethiopia by Somali forces during the armed conflict with Ethiopia in 1977 in the Ogaden area, were held incommunicado at a secret camp controlled by the NSS near Hawai in Somalia's Lower Shebelie region. They appeared to be prisoners of conscience, held because of their national origin. A number of Ethiopian asylum-seekers allegedly detained on security grounds, some of whom were released in 1987, also appeared to be prisoners of conscience. It was reported that up to 7,000 other Ethiopians accommodated in officially recognized refugee camps were forcibly conscripted into the army in August and September. Other refugees were reportedly imprisoned for seeking to evade this form of conscription.
In April nine Islamic teachers who had been arrested in Mogadishu in May 1986 were condemned to death by the National Security Court. They included a 60-year-old sheikh, Hassan Olhaye Khalil, and a blind Quranic teacher, Sheikh Nur Barud Gurhan. They were convicted under the 1970 National Security Law on charges including "exploiting religion for creating national disunity or subverting or weakening state authority", which carries a mandatory death sentence. None of the defendants was represented by legal counsel of his choice, and their trial lasted only a few hours. They had no right of appeal. However, their death sentences were commuted to life imprisonment by President Mohamed Siad Barre on 4 August. At least five other prisoners of conscience were sentenced to long prison terms at the conclusion of the same trial.
Four people arrested in December 1986 were executed in public in Hargeisa on 13 August 1987, shortly after the National Security Court convicted them of the murder of the NSS regional commander. Colonel Ahmed Aden Abdi. The four included Abdi Ahmed Jama, a businessman who was said to be seriously injured as a result of torture. Another person arrested in connection with this murder was Mohamed Jama, a former airline pilot. Unofficial sources reported that he died in custody in mid-July as a result of torture. Mariam Aden, a housewife, and a number of traders and students were also sentenced to long prison terms in the same trial.
No information about the trial proceedings was disclosed by the authorities, but it appeared that some defendants had been
convicted on the basis of unsubstantiated allegations that they supported the SNM. Many other people were detained after Colonel Abdi's murder, for which the SNM claimed responsibility. Some of them escaped when the SNM attacked Hargeisa on 15 May and others were apparently released without charge later in the year.
In February reports indicated that six former members of Parliament, detained since 1982, were to be tried. The trial had not occurred, however, by the end of the year. The six included Ismail Ali Abokor, a former Vice President; Omar Arteh Ghalib, a former Foreign Minister; and Mohamed Aden Sheikh, president of the Somali Academy of Sciences (see Amnesty International Report 1987J. In September Brigadier General Mahmoud Ghelle Yusuf, a government minister who is also President of the National Security Court, announced that the trial of the six would begin on 1 February 1988. It was believed that Ismail Abdi Yunis, a former university dean, Suleiman Nuh Ali, an architect, and 14 other political detainees would be tried at the same time and that they would face charges carrying a mandatory death sentence. Despite repeated assurances by government law officers that the prisoners would have access to legal counsel for preparation of their defence, none of them apparently had been permitted to consult a lawyer from the time of arrest in 1982 to the end of 1987.
The authorities continued to disclose few details about the conduct of trials before the National Security Court, but it was clear that defendants did not receive fair trials. They had no right to legal counsel until they were formally charged, usually shortly before their trial began, and access to a lawyer of their choice was restricted. Trials were often short or summary and most of the judges were military officers, some of whom had no legal training. In contravention of international standards, there was no right of appeal to a higher court, even in cases where the death sentence was imposed.
Many political prisoners sentenced after unfair trials before the National Security Court in previous years remained imprisoned. They included Aden Yusuf Abokor, a hospital director, and 13 doctors, teachers, businessmen and students. They were arrested in Hargeisa and sentenced by the National Security Court in
AFRICA / SOMALIA / SOUTH AFRICA
1982 to prison terms of up to 30 years for belonging to an allegedly subversive organization. The organization was a community self-help group. Amnesty International investigated the cases of numerous other prisoners who in 1987 were serving prison sentences imposed by the court in previous years for alleged subversion or links with the SNM.
In October a presidential pardon was announced to mark the 18th anniversary of President Mohamed Siad Barre's accession to power. Although 1,697 convicted prisoners reportedly benefited from the pardon, the identities of those released were not disclosed. No prisoners of conscience were known to have been among those freed.
There were reports of prisoners being tortured and ill-treated, particularly those arrested in the north by the National Security Service. In a testimony consistent with other descriptions of torture in Somalia, one political prisoner reported that he had been kicked and beaten with truncheons while bent backwards in a position nicknamed the "Mig", subjected to electric shocks, submerged headfirst in water until he nearly drowned and beaten on his sexual organs while tied to a steel frame. Female prisoners were reportedly sexually assaulted, as were women in their homes during frequent security force searches for political opponents in the north.
Conditions in prisons were harsh, particularly in the maximum security prisons of Labatan Jirow, near Baidoa, and Lanta Bur, near Afgoi. Many political prisoners were reportedly held incommunicado, denied medical attention and required to rely on relatives for food. Relatives often had to bribe prison staff to deliver food to their family members. Some prisoners apparently became ill as a result of harsh conditions and inadequate medical treatment, including Omar Arteh Ghalib and Mohamed Aden Sheikh {mentioned above); Safia Hashi Madar, who worked as an aid agency official before her arrest in 1985; and Mohamed Ali Sulub, a doctor freed from prison in 1986 and rearrested in early 1987.
It was not known how many death sentences were imposed or executions carried out during the year. In addition to the four public executions which took place in Hargeisa in August more than 100 executions may have occurred. Some 50 people
were reportedly executed in Hargeisa in mid-January and a similar number of military personnel in August and September. The death penalty was mandatory for several offences addressed in National Security Court trials, some of which did not involve violence. In some cases death sentences were carried out only hours or days after conviction. Reports of alleged SNM supporters being extrajudicially executed in the north were frequent but difficult to confirm.
There were also unconfirmed reports that several SNM members in Ethiopia, who were accused of being Somali Government agents, were executed by the SNM.
Amnesty International appealed during 1987 for the release of prisoners of conscience detained without trial or sentenced after unfair trials. The organization sought the commutation of death sentences imposed on nine Islamic teachers in April and urged that, as prisoners of conscience, the nine should be released unconditionally.
