BRAZIL
There were frequent reports of torture and ill*treatment of criminal suspects, including children, in police custody. Reports of killings by "death squads" allegedly composed of state police offi-cers increased. There were further attacks and killings in the context of land disputes which appeared to be condoned by local state authorities and in December miii-tary police were reported to have killed a number of people without provocation in connection with a protest by gold prospectors. Several people were imprisoned briefly as prisoners of conscience.
The Congress began drafting a new Constitution but this had not been completed by the end of the year. There was discussion of agrarian reform, the role of the armed forces, the rights of indigenous populations and other issues, including the merits of a parliamentary system of government and the term of office of the President.
Among those imprisoned briefly as prisoners of conscience were Danilo Groff, a member of the opposition Partido Democrático dos TrabûJhadores, Democratic Workers' Party, and Mauricio Pencak, a trade union leader. They were both arrested in June after a bus in which President José Sarney was travelling was stoned by a crowd in Rio de Janeiro. They were detained incommunicado for five days under the Law of National Security and charged with organizing the attack. This was the first time the Law of National Security had been used since President Sarney came to power in 1985, although it
had been used previously during the period of military rule for the arbitrary detention of a number of prisoners of conscience. The incommunicado order was lifted but a judge ordered that the two men should be detained for a further 15 days. The Supreme Military Tribunal, a military appeals court, rejected a habeas corpus petition for the release of Danilo Groff on the grounds that this could prejudice the police investigations. Amnesty International believed that the two men had been arrested because of their affiliation to opposition parties and that there was no evidence to support substantive charges against them. On 7 August both men were granted a presidential amnesty and released.
There were frequent reports that criminal suspects had been tortured or ill-treated by police while in custody. In January, for example, five peasants were arrested without warrant in Pará State and held together with a sixth man arrested in neighbouring Goiás State. They were held incommunicado for between seven and 10 days, during which time they alleged that they were tortured. They were later charged with the murder of a local landowner and his driver, but escaped before being brought to trial. The Brazilian Constitution stipulates that arrests may be made only when the accused is caught in /logrante deJictu or when a warrant or judicial order from the competent authority has been issued. Neither of these applied in this case. The authorities sought to explain this by saying that they had been held for questioning, although there is no legal basis for this. Despite their allegations of torture and ill-treatment, the six were denied access to lawyers and were not allowed medical examinations until some 30 to 40 days later.
In another case, 12 alleged bank robbers arrested in Recife alleged that they had been kicked and beaten with sticks, burnt with cigarettes and suspended on the pau-de-arara (parrot's perch) by police in order to force them to confess. Subsequently, the governor of Pernambuco gave an undertak-taking to Amnesty International that the allegations would be investigated.
There were also reports of a number of deaths in police custody as a result of beatings or what appeared to be extrajudicial executions. For example, Cléber Goulart, who was a key witness in the
THE AMERICAS/BOLIVIA
prosecution of police officers in Porto Alegre for alleged torture, was shot dead by police on 14 May (see Amnesty international Report 1986 and 1987). The police said he had tried to resist arrest when he was caught robbing a supermarket. A witness to the shooting of Cléber Goulart was also detained and died in unclear circumstances while being taken to a police station. It was alleged that he had been beaten to death by police officers.
Several police officers were prosecuted in connection with the death of a swimming instructor, Marcellus Gordilho Ribas, who was beaten to death in custody on 17 March in Rio de Janeiro after being stopped and searched for drugs. The police officers responsible were later convicted of the relatively minor offence of abuse of authority and received suspended prison sentences of 18 months.
In cities throughout Brazil there were numerous complaints alleging police violence against criminal suspects, including children. In Rio de Janeiro there was an alarming increase in the number of killings attributed by the press to the policio mineira, "death squads" allegedly composed of state police officers. Between November 1986 and April 1987 about 1,000 such killings were reported. Meanwhile Brazil's severely overcrowded prisons showed signs of continuing unrest because of alleged ill-treatment and poor conditions. In the course of the year these tensions erupted into episodes of rioting and hostage-taking.
In late December military police were alleged to have killed up to 20 people at Marabá in the Eastern Amazon. They attempted to clear some 2,000 people, mostly gold prospectors and their families, who had blockaded a bridge over the Tocantins river for two days in protest against unsafe working conditions at a nearby open-cast mine. Shortly before, those occupying the bridge had agreed to withdraw the blockade but military police were apparently ordered by the State Governor to clear it by force before this could take place. Both ends of the bridge were sealed, tear-gas was fired into the unarmed crowd and military police advanced from both ends beating people as they went and firing guns. Eye-witnesses, including Federal Police officers, reported that no warning was given and no time allowed for evacuating the bridge. The military police
said three people had been killed but other sources suggested that the true number was about 20 and that they included a pregnant woman, whose body had been thrown from the bridge, and an 11-year-old boy.
There were continuing politically-motivated attacks on peasant leaders and their advisers, a number of whom were killed. While these killings were mostly carried out by pistoJeiros (gunmen) or other private security personnel employed by local landowners or their organizations, there was no evidence that the Brazilian authorities intended to tackle this problem. The Ministerio de Re/orma Agraria e Desenvoivimento (MIRAD), Ministry of Agrarian Reform and Development, reported in July that such crimes had become more flagrant and deliberate and were openly carried out "by professional killers hired by landowners in order to repress and eliminate rural workers and professionals acting in their defence". However, there was much evidence to suggest complicity between those responsible for killings and various state authorities who failed to investigate individual killings or bring the perpetrators to justice. To the best of Amnesty International's knowledge, between 1980 and 1987 no landowner or pistoieiro was convicted of the murder of a peasant.
In one case, Paulo Fontelles de Lima, a lawyer and human rights activist, was shot dead by gunmen in broad daylight near Belém, Paré State, in June. Shortly before, he had taken on the defence of some peasants accused of killing a landowner. He was well known as an advocate of agrarian reform and had previously received death threats which he had asked the authorities to investigate, without result. No one had been arrested for his murder, which was believed to have been committed by professional killers, by the end of 1987. In another case. Father Francisco Cavazzutti, an Italian priest, was shot and blinded by a gunman in August as he was finishing celebrating mass for a peasant community in Goiàs State. Father Cavazzutti had allegedly given advice to local peasants involved in a land dispute.
Amnesty International sent a mission to Brazil in June. The delegates had discussions with state officials in Parâ about apparent deficiencies in the administration of justice and submitted a detailed
THE AMERICAS / BRAZIL / CANADA / CHILE
report on a number of cases of alleged extrajudicial executions which had occurred in the context of land disputes. They raised with officials other complaints such as the alleged torture and ill-treatment of peasants by police, particularly in the south of the state. In Sao Paulo State, Amnesty International's delegates raised reports of ill-treatment of prisoners. They visited several prisons and detention centres, including the Casa de Deiengdo in Sao Paulo city, a prison with over 6,000 inmates.
As a result of the visit Amnesty International wrote to the Sao Paulo Secretary of justice about allegations that prisoners at the Casa de Deiengdo had been tortured by night duty guards and that two prisoner representatives, who had submitted a report to the authorities about these abuses, had been ill-treated. Amnesty International had also received information indicating that, contrary to regulations, prisoners had been held for periods exceeding 30 days in punishment cells where conditions were extremely harsh. Prisoners were held naked in their cells and deprived of blankets and natural light. Following a prison riot in the Sao Paulo State Penitentiary at the end of July, in which a number of guards were taken hostage, 29 prisoners and one of the hostages were killed. Amnesty International called upon the governor of Sao Paulo to establish an independent commission of inquiry to investigate disquieting allegations that some prisoners had been deliberately executed. A state inquiry exonerated the police, but autopsy reports on some of the prisoners, which were made available to Amnesty International, taken in conjunction with other evidence, failed to dispel concern that some of the killings may in fact have been deliberate.
