TOGO
Two prisoners of conscience were released before completing sentences imposed in 1986 and several long-term political detainees, held without trial, were freed. However, at least two other suspected government opponents were arrested. One of them had been tried in absentia before his arrest and was still held at the end of 1987; the other was released. Reports that both of them had been tortured in custody could not be verified. In October the head of state commuted the death sentences imposed in 1986 on 11 people convicted of plotting against the government. A number of measures were taken to safeguard human rights, including the restoration of a 48-hour limit on incommunicado detention, the creation of a National Commission of Human Rights, the signing of the United Nations Convention against Torture and the decision to ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
The two prisoners of conscience were released in lanuary. Yema Gu-Konu and Ati Randolph had been arrested in September 1985 and sentenced to five years' imprisonment in luly 1986 for possessing and distributing leaflets opposing the government. They were both reportedly tortured in pre-trial detention {see Amnesty InternationaJ Report 1987).
Further releases occurred in October when 10 long-term political detainees, all of Ghanaian nationality, were released without charge. They included G.A.B. Akrong, also known as the Apostle Barna-
AFRICA/TOGO/UGANDA
bas, who had been a newspaper publisher and evangelist in Ghana. He had been held without trial since May 1983. Amnesty International had first inquired about his detention in 1985 and the government had denied that he was in custody.
In October it was reported that Lawoé Folly Sossou, an opponent of the government who had been tried in absentia in 1986, had been forcibly abducted from Aflao in neighbouring Ghana by members of Togo's security service and returned to Togo. In December 1986 a court convicted him of bringing explosives, arms and ammunition into Togo in July 1986. His sentence was eight years' imprisonment and a fine. In October he was reportedly held at Akodessewa police station in Lomé, in contravention of the 48-hour limit on incommunicado detention, and tortured. His whereabouts was not clear at the end of the year.
On 22 October another man of Togolese origin living abroad, Jacob Dosseh Law-son, was arrested while visiting Lomé to attend his father's funeral. He had been living in France since 1973 and had obtained French nationality. The authorities apparently suspected him of acting as a go-between for opponents of the government. He was held in police custody for four days, then for a week in prison before he was released without charge and allowed to leave the country. He was allegedly suspended from an iron bar and beaten while held at Akodessewa police station in Lomé.
In March the government reintroduced a 48-hour limit on detention in police custody before referral to the Procuracy. This limit had been formally abandoned in December 1985 and the security forces had been legally able to detain suspects incommunicado indefinitely.
A National Commission of Human Rights was created by law on 9 June. The Commission's declared purpose was to protect human rights throughout the country. It was given authority to obtain administrative records, when necessary, in order to investigate cases of human rights abuses. The 13 members of the Commission are elected from various professional organizations. During the second half of the year, the Commission on several occasions acted to ensure that the 48-hour limit on detention in police custody was respected. The Commission was inaugur-
ated on 21 October, when President Gnas-singbe Eyadema marked the occasion by commuting to life imprisonment the death sentences imposed on 11 people in December 1986. The State Security Court had convicted the prisoners of involvement in an unsuccessful coup attempt in September 1986. The week before these commutations. the government announced its decision to ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
In January Amnesty International appealed to President Eyadema to commute the death sentences imposed in December 1986 and urged the Togolese authorities to institute a right of appeal to a higher court for all those convicted by the State Security Court. Amnesty International also sought information about the forcible repatriation from Togo in 1986 of two refugees from Benin. One of them. Daniel Djossouvi, was subsequently imprisoned in Benin, where he was a prisoner of conscience. The Togolese authorities did not respond to Amnesty International's request for information.
