SUDAN
Some suspected government opponents were detained, usually for short periods, then released without charge. Judicial punishments of flogging were reported and in May two men were sentenced to limb amputation. Both of these punishments were imposed under legislation enacted in 1983, the so-called "September Laws". More than 60 other prisoners were under sentence of judicial amputation but
none of these sentences were carried out. Court-imposed floggings, however, were carried out during the year. Some 120 prisoners convicted in previous years remained under sentence of death and further death sentences were imposed during the year. Eight people were executed, the first victims of execution since 1985. In two incidents in the south of the country, hundreds of unarmed civilians were extrajudicially executed by military personnel and militia forces.
There was continued armed conflict in the south, where government forces were fighting the Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA). There were many reports of human rights abuses by government forces and pro-government armed groups, including militia forces established by local army commanders. Civilians suspected of supporting the SPLA were reportedly detained, ill-treated and in some cases killed by government soldiers and militia forces. SPLA forces were allegedly responsible for killing some militia officials and civilians. Reports of human rights abuses by government forces and the SPLA were in many cases difficult to verify.
A state of emergency was declared on 25 July for a one-year period on economic and internal security grounds. New emergency regulations were used by the authorities on a number of occasions to ban demonstrations and strikes and to detain people for prolonged periods without charge or trial. However, on 14 December the Attorney General announced the repeal of administrative detention without charge provided under Section 97 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Hundreds of Ethiopian refugees in Khartoum were arrested in April and May during extensive round-ups of refugees accused of residing illegally in the capital city. They were held without charge for days or weeks before being freed or sent to rural refugee settlements. Some were reportedly ill-treated while in custody.
A number of critics and opponents of the government were detained during the year, but most were released within a few days or weeks. They included about 40 members or supporters of the former government who were arrested in July and August for allegedly inciting unrest and calling for the return of former President Nimeiri, then living in exile. Rashid el-Tahir Bakr, a former Attorney General, and
AFRICA/SUDAN
two former government ministers, Badr-el-Din Suleiman and Osman Abu Gassim, were among several people arrested and held under administrative detention orders or emergency regulations. All of these detainees were released without charge on 3 September.
On 11 August 26 student union officials at the University of Juba were arrested for demonstrating against a ban on student political activities imposed by the university. They were held for 12 days and interrogated about their political activities, released, then rearrested two days later and held for another six days.
Many people were also arrested during anti-government demonstrations in Khartoum. In July 12 students arrested in Khartoum during Islamic National Front demonstrations against the government were convicted of demonstrating illegally and sentenced to be flogged. These sentences of 25 lashes each were carried out immediately and the students were then freed.
Several members of the opposition Sudan National Party were also reportedly detained briefly in Kadugli, South Kordo-fan region, during July and August. In October a Khartoum university lecturer, Ushari Ahmed Mahmoud, was held for several hours and interrogated about a pamphlet he had written. The pamphlet criticized the authorities over a massacre carried out by members of the Rizeigat ethnic group in Ad-Daien in Darfur region in March. Victims of the massacre were hundreds of members of the Dinka ethnic group.
The army was believed to have carried out many arrests in rural areas where SPLA guerrillas were active, but detailed information was difficult to obtain. According to a report received in January, 14 people were detained by the army in Sballa, Darfur region. The report said that one detainee died in custody, allegedly as a result of ill-treatment. Detentions by the army were reported in Wau in the southwest, where hundreds of suspected opponents of the government were reportedly extrajudicially executed.
Some 40 regional government officials and others who had been arrested in Malakal in August 1986 were released without charge in April. Their arrests occurred after the SPLA shot down a civilian aeroplane in Malakal. There was no
evidence of their involvement in the incident and they appeared to have been detained as suspected SPLA sympathizers.
Judicial amputation, which was introduced in 1983 as a penalty for theft and other offences, remained in force throughout 1987. In May two people convicted of armed robbery were each sentenced by a Khartoum North court to amputation of a hand and a foot. Other amputation sentences were also said to have been imposed. However, all such sentences, if confirmed on appeal, were automatically subject to review by the Supreme Court. None were carried out in 1987, although more than 60 prisoners were believed to remain under sentence of judicial amputation after conviction for robbery or armed robbery in the three preceding years.
Court-imposed floggings were carried out during the year. Flogging had been introduced as a penalty, often in conjunction with other penalties, for the majority of offences in the September 1983 penal code. In practice, however, the punishment was applied in 1987 only for alcohol-related and sexual offences and offences against public order. People convicted of demonstrating against the government were among those flogged. In January a woman convicted in Omdurman of possessing alcohol was sentenced to 40 lashes. She was flogged in court immediately after being sentenced.
On 14 December the Attorney General announced the formal abolition of flogging for many offences, confirming at the same time its continuation for the above-mentioned offences but reducing the number of lashes to 10.
There were reports, which were difficult to corroborate, of the torture or ill-treatment of political prisoners held by the army in areas of armed conflict. Following earlier judicial inquiries into human rights abuses by the Nimieri government, a judicial investigation was opened into the alleged torture of a trade unionist and leading Communist Party official, Shafii el-Sheikh, who was executed in 1971 after a summary trial for treason.
The number of people sentenced to death in 1987 was not known to Amnesty International. Under the emergency regulations introduced in July, those convicted of armed robbery could be sentenced to death. Two soldiers were condemned to death on 3 June after conviction
AFRICA / SUDAN / SWAZILAND
for instigating an army mutiny and conspiring against the government in September 1985. They were among more than 180 soldiers tried by court martial for involvement in the mutiny. Eighty-three of them were sentenced to prison terms and 99 were acquitted. Appeals against the two death sentences had not been heard by the end of the year.
More than 120 people were reportedly under sentence of death at the end of 1987 after their conviction during recent years for murder. Eight executions were carried out in October after confirmation of death sentences by the Supreme Council of State, the first executions since 1985 and the only executions reported in the year.
There were several reports during 1987 of extrajudicial executions in the south by the Sudanese army, by the pro-government "Anyanya H" armed force and by armed militia forces established by army commanders. The victims were civilians who allegedly opposed the government, but further details were often difficult to confirm.
Members of the Rizeigat ethnic group attacked Dinkas seeking police protection in Ad-Daien on 28 March. The police had initially protected the Dinkas but subsequently, the mob killed several hundred Dinkas. They were burned alive in locked railway carriages or at the railway police station. Some of them were also killed while trying to escape from the mob. Rizeigat militia members were allegedly part of the mob. Ethnic tensions between the Rizeigat and the Dinka in the area had been exacerbated by abuses against Dinkas committed by Rizeigat militia personnel. These abuses were partly in reprisal for killings of militia by the SPLA, which is composed mostly of Dinkas. The militia had reportedly killed several Dinkas, sexually assaulted many Dinka women and abducted children into domestic slavery.
In Wau. the capital of Bahr-el-Ghazal region, several hundred members of the Dinka ethnic group were killed by army and Fertit tribal militia personnel on 11 and 12 August. More than 60 victims were said to have been killed while held in military custody and many others were reportedly machine-gunned and thrown into the river. Several hundred other Dinkas were killed by the army and militia in Wau from 6 to 11 September after a shootout between the army and police officers
who had reportedly tried to prevent the killings of Dinkas.
No independent investigations by the government into the incidents in Ad-Daien and Wau were known to have begun by the end of the year.
Amnesty International appealed to the government to commute the two amputation sentences imposed in May. The organization called for the abolition of amputation as a cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment which contravenes the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. Sudan ratified both agreements in 1986.
