ANGOLA
Many people were imprisoned for alleged membership of the Uniao Nacional para a Independéncia Total de Angola (UN> ITA), National Union for the Total Independence of Angola. UNITA, an armed opposition group active in many parts of the country, has received military support from the South African Defence Force. Many of those imprisoned had been arrested in previous years. Most of them were held without charge or trial, although some 10 of these detainees were tried in January along with other political prisoners. At least two people were sentenced to death and the real number of death sentences imposed was believed to be higher. It was not known if there were any executions.
There was continued fighting in many areas between government troops, which had Cuban support, and UNITA and South African military forces. Many people, including civilians, were reportedly killed in the conflict and both sides accused the other of torturing and killing civilians. It was not possible to verify such allegations or attribute responsibility for individual killings. In September there was a major prisoner exchange in which Captain Wynand du Toit, who had been captured in 1985 in Cabinda, was exchanged for 133 Angolan soldiers held by South Africa.
Many alleged UNITA supporters were taken prisoner during government security force operations against UNITA guerrillas. Others were arrested on suspicion of supporting or assisting UNITA by supplying, for example, food, shelter or in-
formation. One of those held was Cléudio Fereira Songamaso, director of legal affairs of the Angolan Red Cross Society. He had been arrested in mid-1986, apparently on suspicion of assisting UNITA, and held incommunicado for several months without charge in the security service detention centre in Luanda. He remained at the centre, known as the "Catete Road prison", until his release in October 1987.
Most of those accused of supporting UNITA were held for long periods without trial. They were reportedly detained in Luanda and various provincial capitals, and in detention camps such as Bentiaba Camp, formerly known as Sao Nicolau, in Namibe province. For example, Bernardo Cassueca Sautale, allegedly a local UNITA leader and organizer, was believed to remain without trial in Moxico province.
Some detainees were sent to "reeducation" centres for political instruction with the declared aim of "reintegrating" them into society. One such case was that of Silvestre Kiambulo, a former teacher who had joined UNlTA's military force. He was officially reported in January to be ready for "reintegration" following a period of "re-education" which began in October 1985.
Long-term political detainees without links to UNITA included a number of asylum-seekers. Three Zairian asylum-seekers, all former members of the Forces armées zoiroises (FAZ), Zairian Armed Forces, were arrested in December 1985 upon arrival in Angola. They remained in detention through 1987 at Sao Paulo prison in Luanda, although the authorities gave no reasons for their imprisonment and no charges were brought against them.
Some members of the Tocoist Church were detained for long periods after violent disturbances in late 1986 and early 1987 on suspicion of opposing the government. The Church of Our Lord Jesus Christ on Earth, known as the Tocoist Church, had split into two main factions after the death of its founder, Simao Gonçalves Toco, in January 1984. A dispute between the factions resulted in the death of two people in November 1986 near the town of Catete in Bengo province. Jorge Pambu and other members of one faction were subsequently arrested and held in the "Catete Road prison" in Luanda. In February Cris-tôvâo Tavares and other members of the
AFRICA/ANGOLA
same faction, some of whom were armed, marched to the prison to demand their release. When violence broke out, two members of the security forces and at least 30 demonstrators were reportedly killed. Some unofficial sources estimated the number killed at more than 100. Cristóvào Tavares and a number of others were arrested. There were reports that some sect members who had not been involved in the demonstration were later arrested at their homes and that some of those arrested during the demonstration, who had incurred injuries, died from lack of medical attention in prison. Government spokesmen later accused the leaders of the disturbances of subversive action favouring opponents of the government. Some of those arrested were subsequently released without charge, but Cristóvào Tavares and Jorge Pambu had apparently not been charged or released by the end of the year.
Twenty-nine defendants accused of crimes against the security of the state were tried by the People's Revolutionary Tribunal in January. Fourteen of them were convicted. The charges included treason, conspiracy, rebellion, and economic sabotage. Details of the charges were not made public, but at least six defendants were accused of committing politically-motivated offences in connection with UNITA activities. Four others were charged with membership of a little-known opposition group, the Movimento Nacional de L/nidade Socialista Angolano (MUSAj, Angolan Socialist Unity Movement. Moisés André Lina, the alleged leader of MUSA, was convicted of treason and sentenced to death. A former major in the armed forces, he had left Angola in 1977 for Portugal, where he formed MUSA. He later returned to Angola secretly and was arrested in 1983. Three other alleged MUSA members were convicted with him and given short prison sentences.
Felix Mateus Murgar, found guilty of murder by the First District Court in Lobito in August, was also sentenced to death. This case was the first in which an ordinary district court was known to have imposed a death sentence. Both he and Moisés André Lina lodged appeals, but the appeals had apparently not been heard by the end of the year. Unofficial sources suggested that further death sentences were imposed by Regional Military Tribunals but this information could not be
confirmed. One death sentence imposed in 1986 on an army captain convicted of murder was commuted later that year.
Hundreds of prisoners were held by UNITA during the year. Some 200 of them, including two Cuban pilots, were paraded before journalists in November at UNlTA's Jamba headquarters in southeastern Angola. Amnesty International also received reports about the killing of prisoners by UNITA in previous years. For example, Aurora Katalaio and several other people were reportedly accused of witchcraft and put to death in the Jamba area in September 1983. Aurora Katalaio, the widow of a UNITA official, had studied psychology in Switzerland over 10 years earlier.
During the year UNITA reportedly abducted a number of civilians, including expatriates working in Angola, from areas under government control. Three Swedish aid workers were captured north of Luanda in September. One died shortly after his abduction and the other two were released by UNITA at the end of November.
Two nationalist organizations based in Angola, the African National Congress (ANC) of South Africa, and the South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO) of Namibia, allegedly held prisoners in Angola but their number and the identity of some detainees were not known. At least one person was said to be held near an ANC camp at Quibaxe in Kwanza Norte province, although the reasons for his detention and his legal status in Angola were not clear. Some 100 people suspected of spying for South Africa were also believed to be held by SWAPO at a camp in Kwanza Sul province. They included SWAPO activists who had been prisoners of conscience detained in previous years by the South African administration in Namibia.
Amnesty International was concerned about long-term detention without charge or trial and sought information from the government about the imprisonment of numerous political detainees. The organization received no reply. Amnesty International also appealed to President José Eduardo dos Santos to commute the death sentences imposed on Moisés André Lina and Felix Mateus Murgar if confirmed on appeal.
AFRICA/BENIN
