EQUATORIAL GUINEA
Six political prisoners sentenced after an unfair trial in 1986, some of whom may have been prisoners of conscience, were reportedly freed in an amnesty in October. They had been convicted of insulting the head of state. Six other political pris* oners sentenced at the same trial re« mained in prison at the end of 1987.
The six who were released were among some 50 prisoners, including ordinary criminal offenders, who had their sentences reduced in a measure of clemency to mark the 19th anniversary of independence on 12 October. The six, ail former senior government ministers or officials, had been arrested following the discovery of an alleged plot to overthrow the government
in july 1986. They included Guillermo Nguema Ela Mangue, a former Minister of Finance; Tarsicio Mane Abeso, an official in charge of diplomatic missions in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs; and Damián Ondo Mañe, the former National Director of the Bank of Central African States. All six had been convicted by a military court in August 1986 of "insulting the Head of State" and sentenced to 28 months' imprisonment.
The trial of these prisoners in August 1986 was unfair (see Amnesty International Report 1987) and Amnesty International investigated reports that at least some were prisoners of conscience. Like other trials of political prisoners which have taken place in Equatorial Guinea, it failed to conform to international standards in several important respects. Five unfair trials, which took place between September 1979 and August 1986 and resulted in a total of 12 death sentences and 11 executions, were described in a 13-page report, Military Trials and the L/se of the Death Penalty in Equatorial Guinea, published by Amnesty International in May. At each trial the presiding judge was a serving member of the government, which raised serious doubts about the courts' impartiality.
According to military law in Equatorial Guinea, both civilians and members of the armed forces accused of offences against state security may be tried by military courts under "most summary" procedures which limit the rights of the accused and powers of defence counsel. For example, the defence has no right to challenge the findings of the judge who carried out the pre-trial investigation. The accused.
AFRICA/EQUATORIAL GUINEA/ETHIOPIA
whether military or civilian, must be defended by a serving military officer, thereby restricting their rights to counsel of their choice. Under the "most summary" procedures, defendants have no right to appeal against their conviction and sentence, even if they have been sentenced to death.
In May Amnesty International urged the government to take steps towards making existing laws and practices consistent with international standards of fair trial. The government did not respond in detail to Amnesty International, but in September Equatorial Guinea acceded to both the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and its Optional Protocol which permits the monitoring body, the Human Rights Committee, to receive complaints from individuals. Article 14 of the Covenant contains the requirement that the authorities institute guarantees of fair trial, which in the past have been denied to defendants tried by Equatorial Guinea's military courts. Amnesty International welcomed Equatorial Guinea's accession to these international human rights instruments.
