SOUTH AFRICA
Hundreds of prisoners of conscience, including children, were held on account of their non-violent opposition to apartheid. Thousands of people were detained without charge or trial under state of emergency regulations, which were renewed for a further year and extended in June, or under other security laws permitting indefinite incommunicado detention without trial. There were renewed reports of the torture and ill-treatment of prisoners, particularly political detainees held without charge, and deaths in custody under suspicious circumstances. Many people were prosecuted for alleged political offences and it was common at such trials for detainees who had not been charged to be compelled to give evidence as state witnesses. In a number of cases, both defendants and witnesses under detention complained of torture or ill-treatment.
The number of people executed increased to an unprecedented level and many new death sentences were imposed. There were 164 executions in Pretoria Central Prison and hangings were also
AffiICA/SOUTH AFRICA
reportedly carried out in Transkei and other nominally independent "homelands". Critics and opponents of the government were attacked by so-called "vigilantes", allegedly linked to the security forces or acting with their complicity, who were responsible for a number of killings.
There was continued armed opposition to the government, particularly by guerrillas belonging to the banned African National Congress (ANC). They were believed responsible for a number of bombings and other acts of sabotage, some of which resulted in death. Several ANC activists based in Swaziland were also killed. The ANC and Swazi authorities accused South African security forces of responsibility for these killings.
Nationwide state of emergency regulations, in force since 12 June 1986, were renewed for a further year by State President P.W. Botha on 11 June. The new regulations were similar to those they replaced but the powers of arbitrary arrest and detention without charge granted to all security force personnel were increased. Detainees could be held for up to 30 days, 16 days longer than previously permitted, without reference to higher authority. Thereafter, the Minister of Law and Order retained, and in many cases exercised, power which effectively permitted him to extend detention indefinitely without giving advance notice to anyone and without a hearing. The new regulations also extended the immunity of all police and security forces to prosecution for any acts committed "in good faith" in connection with their use of emergency powers.
Many hundreds of prisoners of con-
science were detained under the emergency regulations in 1987. Some were held for relatively short periods but others remained in custody without charge or trial throughout the year. The long-term detainees included Raymond Suttner, a university law lecturer, and Sehlolo Dennis Neer, a leading Port Elizabeth trade unionist. Both men had been detained hours before the nationwide state of emergency was first imposed in June 1986. Other leading anti-apartheid activists such as Zwelakhe Sisulu, a newspaper editor, and the Reverend Molefe Tsele, a Lutheran pastor and spokesman for the National Education Crisis Committee, also remained in detention throughout 1987. They had both been arrested in December 1986.
Other detainees held under emergency regulations included leading members of the United Democratic Front (UDF), such as Murphy Morobe and Mohammed Valli, who were arrested in July, and other political activists, black community leaders, trade unionists, human rights workers, students and members of the End Conscription Campaign.
There were numerous reports that emergency detainees were held in severely inadequate prison conditions and subjected to overcrowding, poor food and denial of proper medical care. Many children and young people were also among those detained. In April the government acknowledged that 1,424 of 4,224 detainees then held under the emergency regulations were under 18. Some, including girls aged 12 and 13 years, were released hours before the emergency was renewed in June and then immediately detained again. In early October. 41 children were released from detention. Sixty-nine others, including one aged 15 and 16 aged 16, then remained in custody under the emergency regulations, according to the Minister of Law and Order.
Thirteen children were also among more than 200 people held incommunicado under the Internal Security Act at the end of July, according to official figures. One was under 15, but his identity was not disclosed. Section 29 of the act, the legal basis for these detentions, permits the security police to hold detainees without charge incommunicado and in solitary confinement indefinitely for interrogation. The act also permits the police to
AffiICA/SOUTH AFRICA
withhold information on detainees' whereabouts.
In exceptional cases, evidence couid be produced to show that Section 29, despite its wide-ranging nature, had been abused. Court action in these cases resulted in the release of detainees. In separate judgments made in luly, the Rand Supreme Court ordered security police to release Mike Roussos, a prominent trade union official, and Lawrence Ntlokoa and Bongani Dla-mini, two leading members of the Kagiso Residents' Organization (KRO). In both cases, the detainees had initially been held under emergency regulations and then placed under Section 29 provisions, apparently in attempts to deny them access to lawyers. Mike Roussos had been arrested in May at the height of a strike by members of his union. The KRO leaders, however, had been held since June 1986, when they were involved in a court action against the government connected with alleged killings of township residents by the security forces. The action was suspended after they and other KRO executive members were detained.
More than 250 people were reportedly detained under Section 29 during 1987. They included Jaki Seroke, a writer and founding member of the African Writers' Association, who was detained in Soweto on 8 September, and Lizo Pityana, formerly banned and a prisoner of conscience. Lizo Pityana was taken from his home in Zwide, Port Elizabeth, in the early hours of 10 December. In these and many other cases, the authorities gave no reasons for the detentions and would not disclose where the detainees were held. Both men were still detained incommunicado at the end of the year.
Many politically-motivated arrests also occurred in the so-called homelands. In KwaNdebele, for example, there were numerous arrests of local people, including schoolchildren, who opposed a proposal that the South African Government declare KwaNdebele "independent". In Venda, one of four nominally independent homelands, those held included the Reverend Tshenuweni Simon Farisani, a Lutheran Church dean, former prisoner of conscience and victim of torture. Arrested in November 1986 and detained incommunicado, he went on hunger-strike at the beginning of January. In a letter smuggled from prison, he alleged that his life had
been threatened by a security policeman who tortured him during a previous detention. An Amnesty International delegate visited Venda to inquire into his detention but was denied access to him, despite the widespread international concern voiced about his safety in detention. Subsequently, Amnesty International renewed its call for his release. Dean Farisani was freed unconditionally on 30 January but the authorities in Pretoria then prevented him from travelling freely within South Africa.
Torture and ill-treatment of prisoners, particularly political detainees held without charge, remained common and widespread. There were persistent reports of detainees, including children, being beaten with s/amboks (rhinoceros-hide whips), hooded and subjected during interrogation to electric shock torture or partial suffocation with plastic bags or rubber tubing pulled over the face, a method of torture which leaves no marks. Many detainees were held in prolonged solitary confinement and allegedly threatened with death or injury to themselves or their relatives and abused by security police interrogators. For example. Father Casimir Paulsen, a Roman Catholic priest, testified after his release from 85 days' detention in Transkei that he had been stripped naked, handcuffed and partially suffocated by security police who repeatedly thrust his head into a bag filled with water. He was released without charge and never informed of the reason for his detention. He said other detainees in Transkei had received even more prolonged torture. In another case, 22 young people, including children aged 14, were reportedly beaten and tortured in August by police at Petrus Steyn in Orange Free State province.
Further evidence of torture in 1987 and earlier years emerged at a number of political trials and at several inquests into deaths of detainees. In June a magistrate ruled that 10 Lebowa homeland police had caused the death in 1986 of Makompo Kutumela, a Black Consciousness activist (see Amnesty InternationaJ fleport 1987). He had received at least 41 sjambok blows and had been denied medical treatment before his death. In August another inquest ruled that Peter Nchabeleng, a UDF leader and former political prisoner, had been beaten to death by Lebowa police in April 1986. Neither case, however, was known
AffiICA/SOUTH AFRICA
to have resulted in prosecution by the end of 1987 of the police officers responsible.
It was not clear whether the Lebowa Indemnity Act was officially interpreted as granting the officers immunity from prosecution. Enacted in December 1986, this law granted immunity retroactively to all Lebowa officials, including police, for acts committed between 1 June 1985 and the imposition of state of emergency regulations, which also contained an immunity provision, in June 1986.
At least two detainees held under emergency regulations and one detainee held under Section 29 died in custody in 1987. Ashley Kriel, an alleged ANC guerrilla, also died in suspicious circumstances. Police said he was shot during a struggle when they tried to arrest him in July but an eye-witness reportedly claimed that he was handcuffed before he was shot. An autopsy finding that he had been shot in the back at point-blank range was also said to be at variance with the police account.
In one case, two police officers were tried on charges of murdering a detainee, Wheanut Stuurman, whom they had arrested for wearing a Cradock Youth Association T-shirt. Both officers were members of a police unit operating in Cradock in July 1986. They were charged after one member of the unit broke silence and alleged that they had detained and tortured several black residents of Ling-elihle township, including Wheanut Stuurman, who was so severely tortured that they decided to shoot him dead. The trial was still in progress at the end of the year.
There were many new political trials in 1987. Some of the legal proceedings were marked by serious deficiencies and some of them involved prisoners of conscience. The long-running treason trial of 19 UDF and Black Consciousness movement leaders continued throughout the year in the Pretoria Supreme Court. In a notable development in March, the presiding judge abruptly dismissed one of his two assessors, technical experts appointed to assist him, apparently because he considered him sympathetic to the accused. The judge then dismissed a defence motion challenging his own impartiality and calling on him to withdraw from the trial.
The Reverend Arnold Stofile and three others were jailed by the Ciskei Supreme Court in May after a trial held mostly in
camera. Much of the prosecution case was based on the testimony of detainees who were obliged to give evidence as state witnesses before they were released. One witness subsequently retracted his testimony, claiming he had implicated the Reverend Arnold Stofile only under duress. The trial judge rejected this retraction and accepted the initial testimony. The identity of another key prosecution witness was withheld even from defence lawyers and the court.
The death penalty was used on an unprecedented scale. There were 164 executions in Pretoria Central Prison. All of the victims were men, and all but nine of them were black. Other executions were believed to have taken place in the nominally independent homelands. At least two of those executed had been sentenced for a politically-motivated killing. Further death sentences for politically-motivated crimes were imposed by the courts but had not been carried out by the end of the year.
On 1 December the Appeal Court confirmed the death sentences imposed on the "Sharpeville Six" — five men and a woman convicted in 1985 in connection with the killing of a black township councillor during civil unrest in September 1984. The court conceded that there was no proof of direct involvement by any of the defendants in the killing, amid allegations that certain statements presented by . the prosecution as evidence had been obtained under torture. The six defendants were petitioning the State President for clemency at the end of the year.
There were new allegations that police and other security forces committed extrajudicial executions, as in the case of Ashley Kriel, mentioned above, or condoned attacks on government opponents by so-called "vigilantes". There appeared to be close links between the police and urban township groups such as Ama-A/rika in the Port Elizabeth-Uitenhage area and the Mbokhoto organization in KwaNdebele. Members of Mbokhoto were subsequently incorporated into the police force as "KitsKonstabels" (instant police). It was also alleged that police failed to investigate certain politically-motivated killings, even when sworn affidavits were presented to them documenting the crimes.
There were further attacks by unknown assailants on critics or opponents of the
AFRICA / SOUTH AFRICA / SUDAN
government, a number of whom were killed. They included Eric Mntonga, a former prisoner of conscience, who was killed in July shortly after he organized a controversial meeting in Senegal between the ANC and prominent white advocates of political reform. Police had not identified those responsible for his killing by the end of the year, nor had they identified people responsible for the killings of Victoria Mxenge and other anti-apartheid activists in previous years.
Throughout the year. Amnesty International campaigned for the release of prisoners of conscience and for the prompt, fair trial or release of other political detainees. The organization made many appeals on behalf of individual detainees, urged impartial investigation of torture allegations and called for commutation of the death sentences imposed on the "Sharpeville Six" and other prisoners. Amnesty International also made available information on its concerns in South Africa to the United Nations Special Committee against Apartheid and other UN bodies.
