MOZAMBIQUE
Abuses of human rights, in particular the long-term detention without trial of political prisoners, continued against a background of widespread armed opposition to the government and economic disruption. However, the government also took action to improve respect for human rights. Two prisoners of conscience and over 30 other political prisoners were released in December and the sentences of some 30 other political prisoners convicted after unfair trials were reduced, although they remained in prison. Court-imposed floggings were reported during the First half of 1987.
AFRICA/MOZAMBIQUE
There was continued fighting throughout the year between government forces and the armed opposition, ftesistencia NacionaJ Mogambicana (RENAMO or RNM), Mozambique National Resistance. It was particularly intense in the central provinces during the first half of 1987. The government, which was assisted by Zimbabwean and Tanzanian troops, claimed that the RNM received provisions and other support from South Africa.
The internal conflict was marked by reports of human rights abuses, including the torture and killing of civilians and summary executions of both soldiers and civilians. However, Amnesty International was not able to establish responsibility for individual killings. The government claimed that RNM guerrillas deliberately killed civilians in attacks on villages and on road and rail traffic. The worst incident occurred on 18 July, when over 400 civilians were killed, apparently by the RNM, at Homoine, in Inhambane province. The government accused South Africa of responsibility for organizing the RNM attack, but the South African Government denied this. RNM officials abroad denied that the Homoine killings were committed by the RNM and attributed them to mutinous local militiamen. A joint Mozambican-South African working group was set up to investigate the incident but its findings had not been made public by the end of the year.
The RNM was reported to be holding many prisoners captured during raids on towns and villages either in 1987 or in previous years. They were said to include children, some of whom, it was alleged, were subsequently made to participate in acts of violence. They also included a number of foreigners: six were released and seven more captured in May. Some of those taken prisoner by the RNM were reported to have been summarily killed soon after their capture.
Official sources reported that about 100 RNM fighters were captured during the year. One of them. Simiao Laquene, reportedly told journalists on 21 September that he had been in the RNM camp from which the attack on Homoine had been launched. Unarmed civilians suspected of supporting the RNM were also detained. Among them were several railway workers arrested in May who were accused of providing information to the RNM which
had enabled it to carry out attacks along the "Beira Corridor", the area through which a railway line, a road and an oil pipeline link the port of Beira with Zimbabwe. At least three other people were arrested and accused of participating in armed attacks on four buildings in a Maputo suburb on 29 May. None of these civilians or captured RNM rebels were known to have been charged or tried.
Most political prisoners were held for long periods without charge or trial. Among them were RNM activists, civilians suspected of supporting the RNM and people arrested in the mid-1970s who may have "disappeared".
Suspected RNM activists arrested since the early 1980s were believed to be held without any form of judicial procedure in prisons or detention camps near provincial capitals. Those who surrendered to the authorities were sent to special centres with the declared aim of eventually rehabilitating and releasing them.
In December the People's Assembly enacted an amnesty law which guaranteed that armed government opponents who surrendered within a 12-month period would eventually be released into civilian life.
Untried political detainees suspected of supporting the RNM by providing information or other assistance were believed to be held in Maputo or in provincial capitals by the Servigo NacionaJ de Segurunga Popular (SNASP), People's National Security Service. Some were heid in Machava barracks on the outskirts of the capital, Maputo, in the custody of the SNASP. Like all detainees held by the SNASP, they had no right to ask a court to examine the legality or grounds of their detention. Many were initially held incommunicado. One, Joao Libio Martins do Quental, a Portuguese pilot, was arrested in December 1984 at Maputo airport, apparently on suspicion of air-lifting supplies from South Africa to the RNM. He was reportedly flogged for an alleged disciplinary offence in October 1986. Another untried detainee, Paulino Tenis Botao, a former local government official, was arrested in 1982 or 1983, apparently on suspicion of sympathizing with the RNM. According to a law passed in December which reduced the sentences of convicted political prisoners, untried detainees could also qualify for release. However.
AFRICA/MOZAMBIQUE
none were reported to have been released as a result of this law by the end of 1987.
No long-term detainees held in detention or "re-education" camps since the mid-1970s were known to have been released during the year (see Amnesty Internationa] Report 1987). One of those still apparently detained was José Eugénie Zitha, a book-keeper and medical student who was arrested in Maputo in October 1974, soon after the Frente da Libertagao de Mogambique (Frelimo), Mozambique Liberation Front, joined a transitional government in the period leading up to independence in July 1975. He was taken to Nachingwea, Frelimo's base camp in southern Tanzania, where in April 1975 he was accused before a gathering of journalists and Frelimo activists of spying on medical students. He was reportedly transferred with other prisoners to a detention camp in Mozambique but his subsequent whereabouts were unknown. Like other prisoners transferred from Nachingwea to detention centres in Mozambique, he seemed effectively to have "disappeared" (see Amnesty International Report 1987).
About 40 convicted political prisoners were reportedly released during the year, either on expiry of their sentences or in December when the government reduced the sentences of all those convicted by the Revolutionary Military Tribunal — in effect, all the country's convicted political prisoners. Among those freed in December was Dr Bonifàcio Ricardo José, a prisoner of conscience. He had been convicted in December 1979 of being an "active member" of a clandestine organization set up to support the RNM and sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment.
Two other people imprisoned after trials by the Revolutionary Military Tribunal had their 20-year sentences reduced in December to 15 years. Pedro José Gon-calves, a storekeeper, had been arrested in Madimba, near Mozambique's frontier with Malawi, in March 1978 and accused of illegally crossing the border. Security officials searched his house and found an unfinished play which he had written satirizing the head of state. He was convicted of insulting the head of state, agitation, illegally leaving the country and espionage. Dion Finlay Hamilton, a British citizen whose sentence was also reduced, was convicted in February 1983 of complicity in an RNM attack in Beira.
The trials of these prisoners by the Revolutionary Military Tribunal had not been fair. Some defendants had not been informed of their impending trial until they appeared in court, and only then had they been formally told the charges against them and introduced to their officially appointed defence counsel. None of the defendants were given an adequate opportunity to defend themselves. They had no right to appeal to a higher court against the verdicts or sentences.
Some 50 people were sentenced by district and local courts between January and June to floggings of between four and 45 lashes. Most of the floggings were reported to have been carried out in public. Three women received sentences of five or 10 lashes each, and two men received the maximum sentence of 45 lashes. One had been convicted of rape by the Maputo City People's Tribunal in January and sentenced to eight years' imprisonment; the other was convicted of theft by Marrupa Communal Village Tribunal in Cabo Del-gado province in June. In contrast, from July to December Amnesty International learned of no court-ordered floggings. However, floggings and beatings continued, particularly by members of the FoJicia Popular de Mogambique (PPM), Mozambique People's Police, at transit control points. These practices were criticized by the Mozambican authorities but nevertheless persisted.
Amnesty International called for the release of two convicted prisoners of conscience, Dr Bonifacio Ricardo José and Leonardo Mabunda (see Amnesty International Report 1987). Both were released in December. The organization continued to investigate the cases of both convicted and untried prisoners whom it believed might be prisoners of conscience. In particular, it urged the authorities to make information available about a number of prisoners arrested and sent to "reeducation" camps in the mid-1970s, but neither Amnesty International nor their relatives obtained any new information about them or their whereabouts. Amnesty International also called for the abolition of flogging, which it considers to be a cruel, inhuman and degrading punishment, and for measures to protect prisoners against torture and ill-treatment.
AFRICA/NAMIBIA/NIGER
