UGANDA
More than 4,000 alleged political opponents of the government were detained without trial during 1987, mainly from northern and eastern Uganda where the army was fighting armed rebels. The head of a non-governmental human rights body was arrested in February and held under a law allowing indefinite detention without trial. Reports continued of prisoners being tortured by a particularly severe means of tying known as kandooya.
AFRICA/TOGO/UGANDA
although the government stated early in the year that the practice was forbidden and its use appeared to decline. There were continuing reports of extrajudicial killings of prisoners or non-combatant civilians by soldiers, although many of these allegations were difHcult to confirm.
When President Yoweri Museveni's National Resistance Movement (NRM) government came to power in January 1986, it introduced various institutional safeguards against human rights violations which remained in force in 1987. The post of Inspector-General of Government, with widespread powers to investigate individual complaints of human rights abuse, was formally established by statute in 1987. A Commission of Inquiry into Human Rights Violations committed by governments from 1962 until January 1986 continued to hear evidence. Its hearings cast considerable light on the scale of abuses under the governments of Presidents Idi Amin and Milton Obote in the 1970s and early 1980s. In October President Museveni announced that he was considering extending the Commission's mandate to allow it to hear evidence of alleged human rights abuses under the present government.
When the NRM came to power, the code of conduct for the National Resistance Army (NRA), formulated while it was a guerrilla army, was incorporated into Ugandan law. A number of NRA soldiers were disciplined under this code of conduct or charged under the criminal law with offences involving abuse of civilians. However, Amnesty International remained concerned that in many of the cases no adequate investigation was carried out and no disciplinary action taken. In international forums, such as the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity, the Ugandan Government continued to advocate collective international responsibility for protection of human rights.
Throughout 1987 parts of northern and eastern Uganda were affected by the activities of armed government opponents, apparently owing allegiance to various political organizations led by former ministers in the governments of President Amin, President Obote and Major-General Tito Okello. However, the most active armed group was the Holy Spirit Battalion,
led by Alice Lakwena, believed by her followers to have supernatural powers. Alice Lakwena's supporters suffered severe casualties in clashes with the NRA until November, when the Holy Spirit Battalion was apparently broken up after attacking the southern town of Jinja. There were frequent reports of killings by rebels, especially of members of locally elected Resistance Committees and others thought to be government supporters. In particular, armed rebels killed a number of Resistance Committee members in the Busia area of eastern Uganda.
In February soldiers arrested Lance Seera Muwanga. secretary general of the non-governmental Uganda Human Rights Activists, originally set up by Ugandan exiles in Scandinavia to monitor human rights abuses under the Obote government. A few days later he was served with a detention order under the Public Order and Security Act 1967, which permits indefinite administrative detention without trial. In March the government told Amnesty International that only five people were detained under its provisions: four officials of previous governments who also faced criminal charges in connection with alleged human rights violations, and Lance Seera Muwanga. He was apparently detained because of an interview in the magazine A/rican Concord, in which he criticized the NRA's human rights record. Amnesty International considered that he was a prisoner of conscience. He remained in detention at Luzira Upper Prison, Kampala, at the end of 1987.
At least 4,000 prisoners were believed to be in unlawful detention after being arrested by the NRA, usually in the course of counter-insurgency operations in northern and eastern Uganda. In response to inquiries about such prisoners, the Ugandan authorities sometimes described them as "prisoners of war", although in many cases they appeared to be non-combatant civilians detained because of alleged support for armed rebels. There was no legal basis for their imprisonment, since the army has no special powers to arrest or detain civilians under Ugandan law. Some were held in military barracks, but many were held as so-called "lodgers" in civil prisons — that is, they were held under the authority of the military but under the administration of the civil prisons service. Many were from among the Nilotic ethnic
AFRICA/TOGO/UGANDA
groups of northern and eastern Uganda and members of the Uganda People's Congress, the party of former President Obote. Amnesty International believed that many of these detainees might be prisoners of conscience, imprisoned because of their ethnic origin or their presumed political affiliations. There appeared to be no effective procedure for investigating their cases and determining whether they were to be charged with a criminal offence.
Since there was no legal basis for the detention of these prisoners, there was no enforceable guarantee of such rights as family visits and consultation with a lawyer. "Lodgers" in civil prisons were theoretically governed by the Prisons Act which guarantees these rights, but in practice these could often be denied by the soldiers guarding the prison. For those held in military barracks, even this limited guarantee did not exist, although in some cases families were allowed to visit prisoners. In some cases the NRA defied writs of habeas corpus and failed to produce prisoners before the courts when required. The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) was given access to a number of civil prisons holding political detainees. However, despite government assurances that the ICRC would be allowed to visit detainees in military custody, this was in practice restricted to one visit to Gulu barracks in April.
Conditions in the prisons were believed to be very poor, largely because of severe overcrowding. In June detainees at Luzira Upper Prison rioted in protest at poor food. Medical attention seemed inadequate and Amnesty International was concerned about a number of deaths in detention.
A number of children were apparently detained in poor conditions. For example, Kenneth Oloya, aged 15. and his brother Bosco Okura, aged 14, were arrested by soldiers in Kitgum district, northern Uganda, on 31 January. They were believed to have been transferred successively from Kitgum to Lira and thence to Lubiri barracks in Kampala. From there they were moved to Kirinya Prison in Jinja, where many "lodgers" were held and where the government acknowledged that they were detained without charge. They were later moved again to Murchison Bay Prison, Luzira. The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights — which the government stated its intention to ratify —
provides in Article 10 that children shall be "brought as speedily as possible for adjudication". Kenneth Oloya and Bosco Okura were still held without charge at the end of 1987.
In August the trial began in the High Court of seven people charged with treason who were alleged to have plotted to overthrow the government — the first treason trial since the NRM government came to power. The accused included former government minister Evaristo Nyanzi and Anthony Ssekweyama, a newspaper editor who had previously been detained by the Obote government and adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience (see Amnesty International Report 1987). A number of others charged with them were released before the case came to trial. The trial was continuing at the end of the year. Amnesty International attempted to establish the fate of 25 alleged supporters of the restoration of the monarchy in the southern region of Buganda, who were arrested in August 1986 and charged with treason but not brought to trial in 1987 (see Amnesty international Report 1987). Some of them may have been released during 1987. In February, 10 people, including former army officers, were arrested in Tororo and charged with treason. They had not been brought to trial by the end of 1987 and at least four of them remained in custody.
In March the Minister of State for Defence assured Amnesty International representatives that NRA soldiers were forbidden to tie prisoners in the manner known as kandooya or "three-piece tying", with the victim's arms tied above the elbow behind his or her back (see Amnesty international Report 1987). This was known to have caused paralysis of the lower part of the arm in some cases; in other instances the arm became gangrenous and had to be amputated. On occasions it was reported that victims had also been beaten on the chest, preventing them from breathing properly and sometimes killing them. Amnesty International considered that the practice was a form of torture. In the course of 1987 the organization noted a decline in the number of cases of kandooya reported, although it was not clear that it had been eradicated.
During 1987 there were many reports of extrajudicial executions by the NRA in the course of its counter-insurgency opera-
AFRJCA/UGANDA/ZAIRE
tions. Such allegations often proved impossible to confirm. Amnesty International submitted to the Ugandan Government details of a number of cases where it felt that there was strong evidence that the army had been responsible for deliberately killing non-combatant civilians or prisoners. On 12 January NRA soldiers are reported to have arrived at Agwata, near Lira in northern Uganda, in search of a former soldier named George Omara. When they did not find him. they apparently tied his brother kandooya-style and beat him. Later George Omara arrived and the soldiers are reported to have shot him dead. On about 19 February NRA soldiers reportedly arrested 19 people at Otuboi in Soroti district. They were taken to Serere and subsequently to a swamp called Atira, near Soroti town, where soldiers shot them on 26 or 27 February. Eighteen are said to have died but one survived and later escaped.
In early March, at a village called Seven Gorner-Pujwani in Gulu district, soldiers are reported to have arrived at the home of Yokoyardi Onyony Okot, a retired parish chief. They are said to have shot him dead, along with his nephew, Lukel, the current parish chief. On or about 20 March, in Alerón village in Gulu district, soldiers reportedly arrested Xavier Moro Olwedo, a former Uganda Airlines official, and tied him kandooya-style. The following morning they are said to have killed him by slitting his chest open and to have partially buried him in a shallow grave.
In August there were reports that NRA soldiers had executed wounded rebel prisoners after a battle in Soroti.
In April the legislature, the National Resistance Council, amended the penal code to extend the death penalty to armed smugglers. Amnesty International did not learn of any death sentences imposed under this amendment in 1987. In March the government told Amnesty International that 66 people were under sentence of death in Luzira Upper Prison. No judicial executions had been carried out since 1977. The advisory committee on the prerogative of mercy, which is constitutionally required to review the cases of all those sentenced to death, had not existed since 1981. However, in March a committee was appointed. None of those under sentence of death at that stage had been executed by the end of 1987. However, at
least seven soldiers were executed from April 1987 onwards after being convicted by military tribunals of offences under the army code of conduct. Five had been convicted of murder and one of robbery.
In March an Amnesty International delegation visited Kampala to meet government offícials and carry out research. Following this mission. Amnesty International submitted an aide-mémoire to the government in July, summarizing the organization's concerns and asking the government to investigate a number of cases of unlawful detention without trial, torture and extrajudicial execution. In October Amnesty International made this document public. At the end of 1987 the organization had still not received any substantive response from the government. In August and September an Amnesty International delegate observed the trial of Evaristo Nyanzi and six others charged with treason in the High Court in Kampala.
