CHAD
Many opponents or alleged opponents of the government, including prisoners of conscience, were detained without trial and held incommunicado throughout 1987. Those arrested during the year in-
cluded relatives of government opponents. New information was received about several deaths in detention and about extrajudicial executions allegedly committed by government forces in 1986. The fate and whereabouts of many people who "disappeared" in custody in previous years remained unclear.
Fighting resumed between government troops and armed opposition groups both in southeastern and northern Chad. In August there were clashes between Chad-ian and Libyan forces over the disputed Aouzou strip. However, armed groups supporting the Gouvernement d'union national de transition (GUNT), Transitional Government of National Unity, the coalition which had governed Chad between 1979 and 1982, no longer controlled substantial territory in northern Chad. Some groups that had supported the GUNT were reconciled with the government and integrated into the regular army.
In the southeast, armed groups composed mainly of members of the Hadjeraï ethnic group clashed with government forces. A new armed opposition group formed at the end of 1986, the Mouvement pour le saiut national du Tchad (MOSA-NAT), Movement for the National Salvation of Chad, was active in the Guéra, Salamat and Moyen Chari regions.
Many suspected opponents of the government were believed to be held without trial throughout 1987. No one is believed to have been brought to trial for alleged political offences since President Hissein Habré came to power in 1982. Those detained were held in various places in N'Djamena: at the headquarters of the Direction de Ja documentation et de ia sécurité (DDS), the national security service; at a building belonging to the Société tchadienne d'énergie électrique (STEE), the Chadian Company of Electric Energy; at the headquarters of the Brigade spéciale d'intervention rapide (BSIR), Special Rapid Intervention Brigade; at the headquarters of the gendarmerie, the rural security forces; and in the President's headquarters.
Conditions of imprisonment at all of these detention centres were reported to be harsh. During 1987 information was received about a number of deaths in detention in 1986. The victims were said to include Alhadj Dana lyo, Hassana Tom and Boulama Hassana, all of whom had
AFRICA / CHAD
been arrested in April 1986 for allegedly supporting an opposition group. They were reportedly held at the BSIR, then transferred to the DDS headquarters for interrogation and moved again in May 1986 to the gendarmerie. Alhadj Dana lyo and Boulama Hassana died there in May 1986; Hassana Tom died in August of that year. The deaths were apparently caused by malnutrition, deliberately harsh prison conditions and lack of medical treatment. In November Guilou Hassane, who was detained for over two years, died in a secret detention centre where conditions were also harsh.
It was reported in 1987 that a number of people who had voluntarily returned to Chad in 1986 after seeking asylum abroad had been arrested on arrival in Chad. Reports said that in some cases they were detained for long periods and in others killed in detention. Abdoulaye Awidjeli Bichara, an asylum-seeker who returned to N'Djamena from the Federal Republic of Germany in April 1986, was detained on arrival by the DDS and died four days later at the DDS headquarters as a result of torture. Fadoul Bechir Haggar and Abdoulaye Abdelrazik, who returned in 1986 from Sudan and Cameroon respectively, were said to have been executed extrajudicially in N'Djamena in October 1986 by members of the Sécurité présidentielle (SP), the presidential security service. Two others who returned from a neighbouring country, Hadja Merami and her daughter Azzina Sako, were arrested in February 1986 on arrival in Chad and held in secret detention throughout 1987 at the STEE building in N'Djamena.
Arrests of suspected government opponents were also reported during 1987. Mabrouka Houni Rahil, a businesswoman who had supplied food to the armed forces of the GUNT when it was in power in the early 1980s, was arrested a few weeks after she returned to Chad in July following five years abroad. She was apparently assured by the authorities that if she returned, her teenaged daughter, Mardié Ibrahim, would be released from detention. However, both Mardié Ibrahim and her mother remained in detention at the end of 1987. Other members of the family were also held briefly.
Those detained included a number of people held on account of family connections with government opponents. For ex-
ample, Abdellatif Tidjani, a security officer at N'Djamena airport, was arrested in March. He had apparently sent a letter to his brother-in-law, a former security official who had left Chad and was suspected of opposing the government. Moussa Konaté, a teacher who had been arrested in April 1986 in N'Djamena, also remained in detention. He is the uncle of Mahamat Sidi Baby, an opponent of the government who had escaped from custody in 1986. After the escape, five of Mahamat Sidi Baby's relatives were arrested. All of them except Moussa Konaté were later released.
The DDS arrested more than 30 people belonging to the Hadjerai community, including civil servants and businessmen, at the end of May and in june in N'Djamena. The arrests occurred after they had protested against the killing of an elderly Hadjerai dignitary by members of the security forces belonging to the Gorane, the ethnic group to which President Habré belongs. All those detained were still held incommunicado without charge or trial at the end of the year.
Saleh Gaba, a Hadjerai journalist, was arrested in mid-june, apparently on suspicion of opposing the government. He had been detained previously on two occasions: in December 1981, when the GUNT was in power, and for one month in late 1984. fiadio Tchad, the official radio service. confirmed that he was arrested in lune, saying that he was serving a prison sentence for killing two villagers and for illegally possessing a weapon. Unofficial sources, however, confirmed that he was held incommunicado and had not been tried. He was still held in secret at the end of 1987.
Information was received during 1987 about a number of extrajudicial executions alleged to have taken place in 1986, when many suspected members of armed opposition groups were reportedly arrested, secretly detained and killed without any form of judicial procedure. For example, N'Gamani Abba was said to have been abducted in February 1986 from Kousséri in neighbouring Cameroon by members of the Chadian security service. They held him at the DDS headquarters in N'Djamena until the night of 22 April 1986, when he was taken to the President's headquarters and summarily executed. There were further allegations of extrajudicial executions in 1987 but by the end
AFRICA/CHAD/COMOROS
of the year, Amnesty International was unable to confirm individual cases.
The whereabouts and fate of a large number of GUNT combatants and civilians imprisoned after fighting at Faya Largeau in july 1983 remained unclear. Unofficial reports suggested that some of them had been summarily killed by government troops. Amnesty International also obtained no further information about the "disappearance" of six civilians arrested at Abeche in luly 1983 (see Amnesty International Report 1986).
Amnesty International continued to urge the government to clarify the fate of the prisoners who reportedly "disappeared" and to investigate allegations of extrajudicial execution. In lune the organization urged the government to release all prisoners of conscience and to ensure that all other detainees be fairly and promptly tried or released. Amnesty International also called for the implementation of specific measures to protect human rights and for an impartial investigation into the death in detention during 1986 of Abdoulaye Awidjeli Bichara. However, the government did not respond.
In September Amnesty International published a report, RepubJic of Chad: "Disappearances", Extrajudicial Executions and Secret Detention, and renewed its appeal for the release of prisoners of conscience and for the fair and prompt trials of all other political detainees.
