HAITI
The year was marked by a serious escalation in violations of human rights. Scores of people, including children, were de-
tained secretly and without legal remedy, and there were widespread reports of torture, ill-treatment and deaths in detention. There were also reports of "disappearances". Many civilians were shot dead or injured by the security forces, and there were also killings by armed men in civilian clothes believed to be security force personnel or members of the Tonton Macoute militia acting on behalf of, or with the tacit consent of, the authorities. The judicial death penalty was abolished but at least 46 people were reported to have been summarily executed in Fort Dimanche, a military establishment, on 28 and 29 November.
A new Constitution drawn up by an elected Constituent Assembly was approved overwhelmingly in a national referendum in March. It abolished the death penalty and contained other positive measures affecting human rights, such as the establishment of detailed detention procedures and the right of detainees to be free from "moral pressure or physical brutality". It also defined the procedures to elect a new President by February 1988. These included the formation of a Conseil éJectoraJ provisoire (CEP), Provisional Electoral Council, as an independent body to oversee the electoral process.
In June the Conseil national du gouvernement (CNG), National Government Council, the civilian-military junta which took power in February 1986 when Jean-Claude Duvalier fled the country, attempted to change by decree the electoral procedures laid down in the Constitution. This resulted in widespread protests, including several general strikes, which led the CNG to rescind the decree. From July onwards, many CEP members, other electoral workers and opponents of the CNG were attacked by government-backed groups, including the officially disbanded Tonton Macoute militia which had re-emerged as an active force over the previous few months. Two prospective presidential candidates were killed in highly suspicious circumstances and many electoral workers and others reportedly received death threats. There were killings by gangs of armed men who were widely believed - and in some cases shown - to include members of the security forces and the militia. This culminated in the killing in the capital of at least 30 unarmed civilians, including a foreign
(%%**&&'1%%**)&&&%%%$
THE AMERICAS/-HONDURAS/JAMAICA
journalist, by Tonton Macoutes and security personnel as crowds queued up to vote on 29 November, the day scheduled for the presidential elections. The government called off the elections and set a new date in January 1988, but also dismissed the CEP and blamed it for what had occurred.
Many people, including children, were arbitrarily arrested and detained, often without access to lawyers or relatives. In Port-au-Prince, the capital, most were held in the Service des Recherches Criminelles, the Criminal Investigations Department of the police; in the Casernes Dessalines, a military barracks; or in Fort Dimanche, where many prisoners had been killed during the Duvalier period, and which was to be closed according to an announcement by the CNG in 1986. Among those detained were eight trade union leaders who were arrested in June after a general strike called by the Centrale autonome des travailleurs haïtiens (CATH), Autonomous Haitian Workers Federation. They were released after a week and some were reported to have been badly beaten. Many young people were arrested shortly before the November election as suspected members of local self-defence groups which had been formed in response to the activities of armed gangs.
Some detainees were reported to have died in prison or to have been executed extrajudicially. A former detainee held briefly in the Recherches Criminelles in October alleged that 43 people had died in custody there between August and October as a result of torture or ill-treatment or because of malnutrition and a lack of medical attention. Later it was reported that at least 46 people were summarily executed at Fort Dimanche on 28 November. The victims were believed to include some of the many young people from Carrefour Feuille in the capital who had been detained and taken away in truck-loads in the days leading up to the November election. Other detainees were also feared to have been summarily executed.
By the end of the year, some of those arrested in the preceding months had apparently "disappeared" in custody. For example, there was no information about the fate or whereabouts of Johnny Cadet and Wilner Joseph Mills, both of whom had been arrested in Port-au-Prince in September by armed men in civilian clothes and believed to be security agents.
Three men, allegedly members of the Organisation pour la libération d'Haïti, Organization for the Liberation of Haiti, were arrested in February following a robbery which resulted in the deaths of two police officers. They were reported to have been tortured in the Casernes Dessalines. Eddy Moïse was said to have been repeatedly beaten with a stick during his first two months in custody and to have suffered perforated eardrums as a result. He and the other two were moved to the National Penitentiary in April. In November they went on hunger-strike for five days to protest at their treatment and the delay in bringing them to trial. The Ministry of Justice stated that their case would shortly be heard and that a medical team would be sent to examine them.
At least 23 unarmed people, including women and children, were reported to have been killed deliberately and many others wounded by security forces and gunmen working with them during protests against the government in June and July. In one incident, two young boys were said to have been shot dead by soldiers in Port-au-Prince on 3 July. One was said to have been pushed to the ground, trampled on and shot, and the other to have been shot when he shouted in horror. In another incident, a 12-year-old boy, Bonet St Hubert, was reportedly shot by soldiers without provocation; he later had to have one of his arms amputated.
Journalists attempting to report political events and Catholic Church activists were among those singled out for harassment, including death threats and attempts on their lives. For example, Wilson Briseau from Radio L'Arc-en-Ciel was wounded by soldiers during an anti-government demonstration on 29 July. He had previously been arrested by soldiers on 30 June and later abandoned in a field in a state of shock. Father Jean-Bertrand Aristide, a vociferous opponent of the CNG, and a number of other priests and nuns, including the coordinator of Tet Ansamn, a Catholic peasant organization advocating land reform, narrowly escaped death on 23 August after what appeared to be a deliberate attempt on their lives by soldiers and Tonton Macoutes. They were returning to the capital from Pont Sondé near St Marc after a memorial service for some 200 members of Tet Ansamn who had been killed at Jean-Rabel on 23 July. The killings
THEAMERICAS/ HAITI / HONDURAS
look place during a clash between the group and people acting on behalf of local landowners who were believed to include Tonlon Macoutes. A government inquiry into this incident failed to apportion blame for the killings. The only arrests in connection with the incident were of members of Tet Ansamn, who were later released.
Yves Volel, a lawyer and presidential candidate, was shot dead by police in plain clothes on 13 October. This occurred outside the Recherches CrimineJies, where he had gone on behalf of a client, Jean Raymond Louis, who had been arrested on 11 September. Yves Volel was shot as he stood talking to journalists, with a copy of the Constitution in his hand. Despite evidence to the contrary from eye-witnesses, the authorities claimed that Yves Volel was killed because he was accompanied by armed men and intended to release Jean Raymond Louis by force. Jean Raymond Louis was released on 14 December and alleged that he had been beaten every day for a week after he had sought assistance from Yves Volel.
The death penalty was abolished for all offences under the new Constitution adopted in March. In February and March Amnesty International had called on the government to commute death sentences passed on Adherbal Lherisson and Serge Gaston, both former officials under Jean-Claude Duvalier accused of perpetrating human rights abuses. The death sentences were believed to have been commuted, and at the end of 1987 they were serving prison terms in the National Penitentiary.
Amnesty International repeatedly asked the government about individual detainees, seeking details of the reasons for their arrest and of their whereabouts and legal status. It urged that all those in custody should be safeguarded against torture or ill-treatment. On several occasions Amnesty International expressed concern about reports of extrajudicial executions and called for impartial investigations into such incidents. Amnesty International continued to press for an investigation into the "disappearance" in detention of two detainees - Chariot Jacquelin (see Amnesty iniernaiional Report 1987) and Vladimir David - in 1986, and of nine others in the early 1980s. However, no action was taken by the authorities.
Amnesty International submitted in-
formation to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, the United Nations Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances, the UN Special Rapporteurs on torture and on summary or arbitrary executions and to the UN Expert on Haiti.
