TANZANIA
Two prisoners of conscience were detained without trial or restricted throughout 1987. At least seven people were sentenced to death but no executions were reported to have taken place.
Under the Preventive Detention Act of 1962, the President may authorize the indefinite detention of anyone deemed to be "dangerous to peace and good order". This provision was used to detain James Mapalala and Mwinyijuma Othuman Up-
AFRICA/TANZANIA/TOGO
indo. who were arrested in 1986 apparently for advocating the repeal of the 1965 law that made Tanzania a one-party state (see Amnesty internationaJ Report 1987). They were adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International. In August the Director of Public Prosecutions informed Amnesty International that their detention orders had been rescinded and that they were no longer imprisoned. This, it subsequently became clear, was not correct and in October, the two men petitioned the High Court to seek their release. Their presidential detention orders had been rescinded, but they had then been held under the Deportation Ordinance, which allows citizens to be restricted to specified areas for security reasons and which provided a basis for their continued imprisonment. The High Court rejected their petition. They were apparently no longer imprisoned but were restricted to the islands of Mafia in the Indian Ocean and Ukerewe in Lake Victoria under the Deportation Ordinance at the end of 1987. Amnesty International continued to regard them as prisoners of conscience.
Five other detainees appeared in court in February charged with assisting two suspects accused of treason to escape from custody in 1983. They had been held without trial under the Preventive Detention Act since their arrest in 1983. They were sentenced to terms of imprisonment ranging from two and a half years to three years. In December three of them were acquitted after they successfully appealed to the High Court against their conviction and sentence.
At least seven people were sentenced to death for murder during the year, but, as in recent years, no executions were reported. In March the Zanzibar House of Representatives amended a 1969 law which allowed the death penalty for smuggling cloves, substituting a prison sentence. No one was known to have been executed for this offence while it carried the death penalty.
