MALI
One prisoner of conscience was detained without charge for a short period. Two long-term political prisoners were reported to have died in Taoudenit prison camp. At least 19 people were sentenced to death during the year, but it was not known whether any executions were car« ried out.
Samba Diallo, a college lecturer, was detained without charge for one week following his arrest in March, reportedly for criticizing the head of state. General Mous-sa Traore, at a private meeting. He was taken to a punishment cell in the main
AFRICA / MALI / MAURITANIA
police station in Timbuktu, over 1,000 kilometres from Bamako, the capital, where he lived. He was subsequently released without charge.
Two political prisoners were reported to have died in Taoudenit prison camp in the far north. In August the authorities apparently confirmed the death of Yous-souf Balla Sylla, who was sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment in October 1978 after being convicted of plotting to overthrow the government. Sounkalo Samake, who was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment in the same trial, was also reported to have died. In recent years it has been reported that prisoners in Taoud6nit have been denied proper medical treatment and permitted no contact with their families. Several prisoners are known to have died there in recent years, apparently as a result of the lack of medical facilities and severe conditions, particularly at the salt mines where they are forced to work. Six of 27 defendants sentenced to imprisonment with hard labour in 1978 for conspiring to overthrow the government were reported to be still held in Taoudenit, all in poor health. They included Karim Dembele, a former army officer and member of the military government, and Alou Mahamane Traore, a former air force officer.
On 22 September General Traore granted a presidential pardon to some 30 prisoners to commemorate independence day. They included Ahmadou Kone and four other former officers in the armed forces who were convicted in 1977 of attempting to disrupt the internal security of the state. The identity of the others released was not revealed, and it was not known whether any prisoners of conscience were among them.
At least 19 people were sentenced to death in 1987, three of them in absentia, but it was not known if there were any executions. Four of the 19 were convicted on criminal charges, one in absentia, in lune. Fifteen people were also known to have been sentenced to death by the Special Court of State Security, a special court whose jurisdiction includes offences involving state property. All 15, who included two sentenced in absentia, were convicted of misappropriating state funds. The death penalty is mandatory under law in Mali for anyone convicted of embezzling more than 10 million CFA francs (US $36,000).
