CONGO
Four prisoners of conscience arrested in 1986 were held without trial throughout the year. Several political prisoners convicted in 1986 were still held, some of whom may have been prisoners of con* science. Following arrests of suspected government opponents in July and again
in September, allegations were received that some detainees had been tortured. A number of Zairian refugees living in the People's Republic of the Congo were arrested in October but most had been released by the end of the year.
In July several senior members of the security forces and civilians were arrested and detained incommunicado on suspicion of supporting former President Joachim Yhombi-Opango and conspiring against the present government. They included Colonel Blaise Nzalakanda, who had been a prisoner of conscience from 1984 to 1986. He was released without charge a few weeks after his arrest in 1987. Others detained included Lecas Atondi Monmondjo, director of the Office national des librairies popuJaires (ONLP), National Office of Peoples' Bookshops, and Lieutenant-Colonel Henri Eboundit, Deputy Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces. Both men were still held at the end of the year without charge, trial or referral of their cases to a court or judicial authority. Lieutenant-Colonel Eboundit was reportedly tortured.
The army clashed in September with supporters of the former President. Armed encounters took place in Owando, in the northeast of the country, after officials and troops entered the area to investigate suggestions that the former President and one of his associates, Pierre Anga, had been involved in the conspiracy. Government troops launched an assault against barricades erected around Owando and took control of the town. According to the government, four people were killed during the assault on Owando. Unofficial sources claimed that the true number was much higher.
Some 60 or 70 people were arrested, but Pierre Anga and former President Yhombi-Opango were reported to have escaped. The former President later gave himself up. Those detained included a Roman Catholic priest. Father Joseph Ndinga, a prisoner of conscience accused of supporting the rebels after he advised his congregation not to get involved in the confrontation. All were still being detained without charge or trial at the end of the year.
The government continued to detain four other prisoners of conscience without charge or trial throughout 1987. Georges Mafouta-Kitoko, Christophe Samba and
AFRICA / CONGO / CÔTE DIVOIRE
Florent Kihoulou were arrested in April 1986, apparently on suspicion of meeting to discuss the political situation in the country. They were detained, without being referred to the Procuracy, by the state security service. Jean-Félix Demba-Ntelo also remained in security service custody without charge or trial at the end of 1987. He was arrested in December 1986 for allegedly producing a leaflet in support of Jean-Pierre Thystère-Tchicaya, a former senior official of the ruling party (see Amnesty internationai Report 1987).
Claude-Ernest Ndalla, who was sentenced to death in August 1986 after conviction for a 1982 bomb attack at Brazzaville airport, remained under sentence of death throughout 1987.
Three of his co-defendants who were sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment, Daniel Biampandou, Claude Kembissila and Gaspard Kivouna, remained in prison throughout the year. Amnesty International was concerned that their trial had not been fair and that Daniel Biampandou and Claude Kembissila might be prisoners of conscience. Jean Bouissou, a French national who was convicted with them and sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment, was released in January and expelled from the country.
In October at least a dozen asylum-seekers of Zairian nationality, some of whom were recognized as refugees by the office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, were arrested. Among them was Boy Buta Lumbwele Jacques, a journalist working for the J'agence France-Presse (AFP) news agency. No reason was given for the arrests, which may have resulted from their political activities in opposition to the Government of Zaire. By the end of December, all but two had been released without charge.
In February Amnesty International submitted a 27-page report about the August 1986 trial before the Revolutionary Court of Justice to the Minister of Justice and other government officials. The report detailed Amnesty International's reasons for concluding that the trial was unfair (see Amnesty international Report 1987), criticized the unlimited powers of the state security service to detain suspects incommunicado, and referred to reports that defendants had been tortured. It recommended specific measures to prevent human rights violations and to ensure
enforcement of existing legal safeguards against arbitrary detention and torture. Amnesty International also called for those convicted by the Revolutionary Court of Justice to be allowed to appeal against their conviction and sentence to a higher court and for the death sentence imposed on Claude-Ernest Ndalla to be commuted.
Amnesty International appealed in 1987 for the release of Georges Mafouta-Kitoko and the two prisoners of conscience arrested with him and detained without trial since 1986. The organization also adopted Jean-Félix Demba-Ntelo and Father Joseph Ndinga as prisoners of conscience and investigated the cases of others arrested during the year, such as Lecas Atondi Monmondjo, who might be prisoners of conscience. Following the arrest of security force personnel in July, Amnesty International sought assurances that they were not being tortured and that their cases would be addressed within the framework of the law. In reply to renewed appeals for Claude-Ernest Ndalla's death sentence to be commuted, the Minister of Justice said in February that appeal for clemency was still under consideration.
