VENEZUELA
Many people were arrested in connection with anti-government demonstrations; most were released but several were sent for trial before military tribunals. Other long-standing political prisoners remained on trial before military tribunals whose procedures were extremely protracted. There were new reports of killings by police in circumstances that strongly suggested they were extrajudicial executions. One military cadet died, apparently as a result of torture.
There was continued debate within the government and the press about a crisis
within the administration of justice and the prison system, undermining the rights to fair trial within a reasonable time and to humane treatment in prison.
Demonstrations and violent disturbances broke out in April and November, when students and others protested against government policies at a time of increasing economic difficulties. On both occasions the protests were sparked off by the deaths of students, the first when a student was killed by a private citizen in March, and the second after another student died in police custody in November. The demonstrations resulted in violence and at least three people were shot dead by police. Many people were injured, especially during the wave of protests from April to July. Among them were demonstrators who suffered multiple buckshot wounds when police opened fire on them at close range. The government said that the protests were part of a subversive plan, but there appeared to be little evidence to support this claim.
Hundreds of people were arrested between April and July, including demonstrators and others who were taken from their homes by police as alleged instigators of the protests. Police were said to have used unnecessary violence during raids on suspects' homes and sometimes to have taken relatives when the wanted person could not be found. Witnesses reported that some members of the police squads conducting raids were hooded and that in some cases they did not show legal warrants. Many of those held reported being denied contact with relatives, despite an express prohibition of incommunicado detention in Venezuelan law.
THEAMERICAS/VENEZUELA
All but 34 of those detained as a result of the mid-year protests were released unconditionally within a few weeks. The authorities publicly accused the 34 of involvement with the guerrilla group Bandera Roja, Red Flag, which conducted armed activities in Venezuela in the 1960s and 1970s, and said that they would stand trial before military tribunals. The 34 included trade unionists, students, community leaders and people who had been charged with politically-motivated crimes years before but then released. Seventeen were freed after several more weeks. The remainder were formally indicted and sent for trial under the provisions in the Military Penal Code dealing with "military rebellion". Charges against eight were dropped in July following widespread student protests, and another four were released later. The eight remaining prisoners were still awaiting trial at the end of 1987.
Fifteen other people also remained in custody charged with "military rebellion". They had all been arrested between 1978 and 1984. Their trials were marked by particularly slow proceedings and allegations that the military tribunals were not impartial. Eder de Dios Puerta Aponte was acquitted in September, five years after his arrest, but he was still in prison at the end of the year awaiting confirmation of the verdict by the military court of second instance. Two other prisoners were convicted and sentenced to 16 years' imprisonment at the same trial. In a separate case, two defendants were convicted in December and received 16-year sentences, over six years after their arrests.
Allegations persisted that people held in connection with anti-government protests were detained arbitrarily and ill-treated by police. The lack of effective safeguards for detainees included inadequate habeas corpus provisions. According to the courts' interpretation of these provisions, habeas corpus is not applicable until eight days after detention. Although a new law on amparo - a remedy intended to protect constitutional rights -was introduced in Parliament in December, the proposal did not modify the existing practice concerning habeas corpus.
The Law of Vagrants and Crooks was used to send hundreds of individuals believed by police to be dangerous to society, but against whom there was no evidence of involvement in punishable offences, to
"work colonies" in the southern jungle for periods of up to five years. The procedure does not allow access to the courts and there is no right to legal defence. This was used against a journalist known for his reporting of corruption in Bolivar state. Victor González had been arrested in November 1986 and ordered to spend three years in work colonies. In January 1987, following representations from his lawyers and international journalists' organizations, the order was changed to confinement to the town of Tumeremo in Bolivar state. Other journalists were reported to have received death threats, been assaulted by people associated with local government leaders, or been threatened with imprisonment.
There were new reports of police killings of civilians, particularly in the barrios or poor urban neighbourhoods, where evidence suggested that the killings were unprovoked and deliberate. For example, Martin Soto Mijares was shot in the back and killed on 23 April by police. Witnesses said the police had tried to plant a weapon on him to simulate an armed confrontation. Elias Avila Bogado, aged 18, was shot and injured on 21 November in unclear circumstances. He was later removed from hospital by police officers, despite objections from doctors who were preparing to treat him. He was found dead the next morning on the outskirts of Caracas.
A 16-year-old cadet at a military training school, José Luis Palomares, died in hospital on 19 September, reportedly as a consequence of torture inflicted on him at the school. He had apparently been captured trying to escape from the establishment. Before he died, he told relatives that he had been tortured and said he had been threatened with reprisals if he named his attackers. Another youth was reportedly suffering from serious psychiatric and physical disorders as a result of ill-treatment at the same establishment.
Most investigations into alleged excesses by the police, including killings, continued to make little progress. For example, the number of official investigations initiated into police killings averaged 200 per year between 1981 and 1984. However, in only a few of the cases were formal criminal proceedings completed. In April 1987 relatives of victims in the state of Carabobo publicly denounced state attorneys and judges who, they claimed, had
THE AMERICAS / VENEZUELA
acted "dishonestly and negligently" in the investigation of 24 cases of suspected unlawful killing by police officers between 1983 and 1986.
Amnesty International wrote to President Jaime Lusinchi on 17 March to raise its concerns about protracted proceedings in trials of political prisoners by military courts, the application of the Law of Vagrants and Crooks, ill-treatment in prisons and in police stations and the pattern of killings and "disappearances" of alleged criminal suspects. During the year it also raised a number of individual cases with the Attorney General's office, which is in charge of investigating complaints of human rights violations.
In December Amnesty International sent a mission to Venezuela to discuss these concerns with the government. The delegation found that there was active concern within certain official bodies about human rights issues arising from the problems within the administration of justice and prison system. However, the delegates urged that more governmental attention should be given to other areas of concern such as safeguards for police suspects, better access to legal defence and more effective remedies for victims of police abuse.
