GAMBIA
Several alleged members of a banned opposition political organization were arrested and held briefly, as were a number of students who demonstrated against government policy in February. At least one other critic of the government was imprisoned throughout the year.
In April three suspected members of the Movement for Justice in Africa (MO)A). which was banned by the government in 1980, were arrested and charged with membership of an unlawful society. Naku-lang Ceesay and Salieu Puye, both teachers, and Ismaila Sanyang, an employee of the Ministry of Agriculture, were subsequently released on bail and were not known to have been tried by the end of the year. In May Omar Jabang, an active member of the Gambia Anti-apartheid Society, was also arrested for suspected membership of the MOIA. but he was released uncharged shortly afterwards.
In February several students were reported to have been arrested for participating in demonstrations calling for changes in the educational system, but were apparently released uncharged a few days later.
One prisoner arrested for criticizing the government in 1986 remained in custody. Boubacar Langley was arrested for displaying a banner critical of the government during celebrations on 18 February 1986 marking the anniversary of the country's independence. Soon afterwards he was transferred to a mental hospital, although there was information to suggest that he was not mentally ill. He apparently dam-
AFRICA/GAMBIA/GHANA
aged his room at the hospital in protest against his arrest, and in May 1986 he was sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment for damaging public property.
In response to Amnesty International's inquiry about the reasons for Boubacar Langley's arrest, committal to a mental hospital and subsequent conviction on criminal charges, the Director of Public Prosecutions stated that Boubacar Langley had been referred to a mental institution because his behaviour appeared abnormal. Thereafter, he added, a psychiatric report had found that he did not suffer from mental illness, and following the ruling he was prosecuted for unlawfully causing damage to property.
