CAMEROON
At least 40 political prisoners were held in Cameroon throughout 1987, mostly after unfair trials following a coup attempt in April 1984. During the year several journalists and an academic were detained for short periods on account of their political views. One Jehovah's Witness was sentenced to prison, while others were re-leased from detention without trial. Death sentences continued lo be imposed and there were reports for the first time in many years of public executions. Refugees from Chad were detained in Yaoun-dé, the capital city, where they faced the risk of being returned to Chad.
In June Augustine Kong, a Jehovah's Witness, was sentenced to two years' imprisonment by the Limbe court of first instance on a charge of practising a banned religion. Documents published by the Jehovah's Witness sect, banned in Cameroon since 1970, were found in his possession and Augustine Kong admitted being a member. This was the first known trial of a Jehovah's Witness in Cameroon. Other members of the sect have been held without trial. Two Jehovah's Witnesses - André Beyegue Yakana and Njiofack Paris - who had been detained without charge or trial since 1984, were released during 1987.
Other prisoners of conscience, mostly journalists, were held for relatively short periods during 1987. In January two journalists from the Cameroon Tribune newspaper were held for nearly a month. Zam-bou Zoleko and Jean Mboudou were questioned about the publication in their newspaper of the text of a presidential decree.
AFRICA/CAMEROON
which had already been published in the Official Gazette. Jean-Claude Ottou, a television journalist, was detained for eight months without trial after his arrest in April, following the publication of a pamphlet critical of the government.
In April four Cameroon Tribune journalists and a university professor were detained for five days after a public conference on political literature in Cameroon. The journalists were apparently detained because of an article which criticized some of the conference participants who were closely associated with the government. Professor Ambroise Kom had made remarks during the conference which were deemed critical of the head of state.
Most of the political prisoners known to be held in 1987 had been imprisoned after an unsuccessful attempt to overthrow the government in April 1984. Some had been sentenced to terms of imprisonment after unfair trials before a military tribunal, and were still held in prison after the expiry of their sentences. Others who had been acquitted by military courts were nonetheless imprisoned. For example. Nana Hamadou, former director of the Governor of Adamaoua's Office, completed his sentence in August 1986 but had not been released by the end of 1987. Moudio Hildi-na, former assistant to the Prefect of Mbal-mayo, also remained in custody although he was due for release in December 1986. No new charges were brought against either prisoner and the authorities did not explain their continued imprisonment.
As many as 10 people arrested after the 1984 coup attempt were still believed to be detained without trial in 1987. In January at least four went on hunger-strike in support of their demand for fair trial or release; the authorities are not believed to have reacted to this demand. Information received during the year indicated that a number of those detained without trial may have been arrested after the coup attempt solely because of comments they had made about it. Among them were Christophe Zangbou and Jean Ngogang, two electricians at a brewery in Bafoussam who were arrested in May 1984. Since 1985, both have been held in Yoko labour camp.
Many of those convicted in 1984 and still held in 1987 were tried by military courts which did not conform to internationally recognized standards of fairness.
Their trials were held in camera and some of the accused had no legal representation or were represented by state counsel assigned just a few hours before the trial. There was no right of appeal to a higher court and, in at least one case, there were serious doubts about the independence of the judges who presided at the trial.
Several possible prisoners of conscience detained for reasons unconnected to the 1984 coup attempt remained in prison throughout the year. They were not held under any formal preventive detention procedure, no move was made to charge or try them and they had no opportunity to challenge their continuing detention. They included Ambroise Medjiadeu, a teacher from Garoua who was arrested in 1985, apparently on account of his political views. He was held in Tcholliré detention camp. Frédéric Batoum and Samuel Zeze, two supporters of the opposition political party, the Union des populations du Cameroun (UPC), Union of Cameroon-ian Peoples, were arrested in late 1985, released in August 1986 and then rearrested in November 1986. They too were apparently detained on account of their non-violent political activities.
Several long-term untried political detainees were released during 1987, including two detainees, Max Abessolo and Luc Minkoulou, who had been held since 1979 for suspected involvement in a coup attempt.
At least 12 refugees from Chad were arrested in Kousseri in northern Cameroon in April 1987 and were still held at the end of the year. The Cameroonian authorities gave no reason for their detention. Amnesty International was concerned that they might be tortured or killed extrajudicially if returned to Chad. In the past Chadian refugees have reportedly been abducted by members of the Chadian Security Service from the Kousseri area of Cameroon, taken back to Chad and summarily killed. Amnesty International therefore urged the Cameroonian authorities not to return these refugees forcibly to Chad.
An unknown number of death sentences were imposed and there were at least two executions during the year. Most death sentences were imposed for murder, but they were also imposed in at least five cases for "aggravated theft", a broadly defined offence. On 28 August two public executions were carried out in Douala
AFRICA / CAMEROON / CAPE VERDE / CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
amid considerable publicity. They were the first public executions known to have taken place for many years. Both prisoners had been found guilty of murder and aggravated theft.
Amnesty International sought the unconditional release of Augustine Kong, who was held as a prisoner of conscience on account of his religious affiliation. Amnesty International investigated the reasons for the imprisonment of the political prisoners held during 1987 and pressed the authorities to release those political prisoners held beyond the expiry of their sentences if no new charges were to be brought against them. In April Amnesty International wrote to President Paul Biya in detail on its concerns about a number of political prisoners' cases and submitted recommendations relating to measures needed to protect human rights. However, there was no response from the government.
