AFGHANISTAN
More than 7,000 political prisoners were said by the government to have been re-leased by the end of July, following the announcement of a general amnesty in January. Despite the amnesty, some political prisoners sentenced after trials which did not conform to international standards remained in prison. New reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners were received, although on a lesser scale than in previous years. The government failed to take any action to clarify the fate of those who "disappeared" in detention following the April 1978 revolu-tion. The death penalty continued to be used but the government stopped announcing the imposition of most death sentences and executions. There were also new reports of extrajudicial executions by Soviet troops and Afghan security forces.
On 1 January Dr Najib (who later became Afghanistan's President and reverted to his former name of Najibullah), the General Secretary of the ruling People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA), announced a policy of national reconciliation which was backed by the Soviet Union. He said the policy would be based on six principles including an amnesty, a six-month cease-fire and an end to the war. However, the reconciliation policy was rejected by all sections of the armed opposition who perceived it as an attempt to persuade them to disarm while Soviet forces remained in Afghanistan. As a result. fighting intensified during the year, particularly in the north and in the southeastern province of Kandahar, giving rise to many civilian as well as military casualties. One authoritative source estimated that there were over 14,000 civilian casual-
ties between the end of 1986 and September 1987. The flow of refugees into Pakistan continued. The number of Afghan refugees in Pakistan and Iran was estimated to be over five million, the largest refugee group in the world.
Information about human rights violations continued to be difficult to obtain and corroborate as a result of the war and social dislocation, but there was some relaxation in the government's stance towards human rights investigators. For example. Professor Felix Ermacora, the Special Rapporteur appointed by the United Nations in 1984 to examine human rights in Afghanistan, was allowed to visit Afghanistan for the first time in July-August 1987. However, the government did not respond to Amnesty International's repeated requests for information.
In April Afghanistan ratified the UN Convention against Torture.
Amnesty International continued to receive reports of torture and executions of Soviet and Afghan soldiers and of supporters of the government by opposition groups. Amnesty International condemns the torture or killing of prisoners under any circumstances, whether by government or non-government forces.
The general amnesty decreed on 25 January led to the release of 5,000 political prisoners by the end of April and a further 2,000 by the end of July, according to the authorities. The number of releases could not be independently confirmed. Many who were "released" were taken straight into military service.
Four known prisoners of conscience, all former academics at Kabul University, were released. Professor Hasan Kakar was released on 2 March and the others -Professor Habiburahman Halah, Dr Shuk-rullah Kohgadai and Dr Osman Rustar -were released in the following months. They were said by a senior official of Kabul University to have been restored to their former posts. Five other prisoners who were believed to be possible prisoners of conscience were also released, but some 30 others, all members of the Afghan MeJJat, the Afghan Social Democratic Party, were still believed held at the end of 1987.
The government did not respond to repeated requests for information about the fate of people, including children, who "disappeared" after being detained, particularly between 1978 and 1982. One of the
ASIAANDTHE PACIFIC / AFGHANISTAN / AUSTRALIA
cases being investigated is that of Shams Rahman, who "disappeared" at the age of 15.
A pattern of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners in Afghan security police interrogation centres, in prisons and at military posts continued, but appeared to be on a lesser scale than in previous years. At least four new cases of torture occurred between January and June 1987 in Bamian, Faryab, Ghazni and Kabul provinces. One prisoner was held in Ghazni in May 1987, and was alleged to have been given electric shocks with wires attached to his ears, tongue, fingers and toes while detained by the security police. Another prisoner was kicked in the chest and beaten so severely at Pul-e-Charkhi Prison, Kabul, that he was still coughing up blood when interviewed by Amnesty International in November 1987. Subsequently, both prisoners were released and sought refuge in Pakistan, where they both required psychiatric counselling as a result of their treatment in detention. In a speech before the UN Commission on Human Rights in February, Amnesty International described the systematic torture and ill-treatment of prisoners in 1986 and earlier.
There were a number of allegations of extrajudicial executions of Afghan civilians by Soviet and Afghan troops. For example, 17 civilians, all males aged from 14 to 60, were alleged to have been killed in August by government troops at Mush-wani village in the Saraikhoja district (also known as Mir Bacha Kot district) of Kabul province. They were said to have been killed with grenades after which their bodies were dumped in a well, apparently in reprisal for the killing of some government troops by guerrillas in an earlier incident near the village.
In another case, an eye-witness reported that 14 people, including two women and a child, were killed on 16 November 1986 when Soviet troops attacked a bus travelling along a road in Fakiran sub-district, about five kilometres from the town of Zargonshahr in Paktika province. In all, 35 people were said to be in the vehicle when it was attacked. There had apparently been no recent fighting in the area but Soviet forces had been discouraging movement as it is close to the Pakistan border.
Amnesty International sent a telex to Dr Najibullah on 21 January to welcome the
announcement of the amnesty for political prisoners and to ask for a list of all prisoners who were to benefit from the amnesty. In February Amnesty International gave the Afghan authorities details of the 35 political prisoners belonging to the A/ghan Meilat and of Dr Mohammad Younis Akbari, a nuclear physicist under sentence of death since 1984. It asked whether these prisoners were to benefit from the amnesty declared under the national reconciliation policy. On 15 May, Amnesty International wrote to the Chairman of the Supreme Commission for National Reconciliation, asking him to confirm Professor Kakar's release and asking him whether the other three prisoners of conscience, the 35 political prisoners of concern to Amnesty International and Dr Akbari would benefit under the amnesty. There was no response.
In September the organization wrote to the government inquiring about the health of a blind woman prisoner. In this, as in all other cases, the government failed to respond to Amnesty International's requests for basic information about prisoners.
