SENEGAL
More than 150 people were imprisoned on suspicion of supporting a separatist movement in the Casamance region. Most of them were released before the end of the year, as was a prisoner of conscience held since 1982. Some of those released alleged that they had been tortured or ill-treated in custody.
The security forces in the Casamance region arrested 149 people between November 1986 and February 1987, mostly at Thionk-Essyl and Bignona. A majority
AFRICA/SENEGAL
of those arrested were peasant farmers, some of whom were elderly. They were accused of organizing a meeting and collecting money to support a movement seeking independence for the Casamance region. Many of them alleged that they were beaten and subjected to other ill-treatment at the time of their arrest and during detention by the gendarmerie, the rural police force, at Bignona and Ziguin-chor. Some of them said they were beaten severely, burned with cigarettes, suspended from iron bars in contorted positions for long periods, beaten on the soles of their feet or tortured with electric shocks during interrogation. Some also said that they were handcuffed throughout their detention by the gendarmerie and denied adequate food and medical care.
Under the law. those arrested can be held for no more than four days by the gendarmerie before being referred to the procuracy. In fact, however, it appeared that most of the 149 people arrested were held incommunicado for more than a week before they were formally remanded in custody and transferred to a prison in Dakar. All of them were then charged with endangering the integrity of national territory, endangering the security of the state and belonging to an illegal association. These charges were based on allegations that they had collected money for or provided food to individuals who had evaded arrest after disturbances in Casamance in 1982 and 1983 and who were living in the bush in the region. Their activities were apparently interpreted by the gendarmerie as involvement in a clandestine separatist organization, although there seemed to be no evidence that those
arrested belonged to such an organization.
Ninety-seven of those arrested were released on bail in April. Most of the others remained in pre-trial detention until November, when they were also released on bail. Only 10 were still held in Dakar Prison at the end of the year. These include five people from the Casamance region who were arrested on similar charges in July and two prisoners who were apparently detained in neighbouring Guinea-Bissau and returned to Senegal, although the full circumstances of their arrest were not known. Among them was Abdoulaye Badji, a 14-year-old boy, who was still held in December.
In May another suspected supporter of a separatist movement in Casamance, Pathé Camara, who is known as "Djibril", was arrested. He was accused of providing weapons to government opponents and imprisoned in Ziguinchor. Members of the Senegalese gendarmerie apparently arrested him in Guinea-Bissau, but it was not clear if the arrest took place with the approval of the Guinea-Bissau authorities and it seemed that his case had not been examined by any court in Guinea-Bissau. The evidence against him was based mainly on the fact that he worked as a gunsmith. After 10 days in the custody of the gendarmerie in Ziguinchor, where he was allegedly ill-treated, he was charged with smuggling, arms trafficking and activities threatening public security. However, his case was not referred to the State Security Court and at the end of the year, he was still' held without trial in Ziguinchor. It seemed that there was insufficient evidence to bring him to trial and that he might be a prisoner of conscience.
A number of prisoners from Casamance who were arrested in 1982 and 1984 remained in prison. Many of them were convicted of involvement in acts of violence following the imprisonment of a Roman Catholic priest. Father Augustin Diamacoune Senghor. Father Senghor was regarded as a leader of the Casamance movement demanding independence for the region.
Father Augustin Diamacoune Senghor was arrested in December 1982 and charged with endangering the integrity of national territory. He was sentenced to five years' imprisonment by the State Security Court in Dakar in December 1983. In 1987 Amnesty International received addition-
&&&&&$%%%%%*****
AFRICA /SENEGAL/SEYCHELLES
al information about this case and considered him to be a prisoner of conscience, imprisoned for peacefully expressing views critical of the government policy on the Casamance region. He was released from Thiès Prison on 22 December, three days before his sentence expired. Two other prisoners tried and convicted with Father Senghor, Mamadou Sané and Mamadou Diémé, were also released in late December.
On 10 April a court in Dakar convicted seven police officers of beating a criminal suspect to death in custody. They were sentenced to two years' imprisonment and a fine. A few days later, in reaction to the convictions, hundreds of police officers went on strike in Dakar, Thiès and Diour-bel, marching in protest against the sentences. The whole police force was subsequently suspended by presidential decree on the evening of 14 April. However, a large number of police officers were reinstated later.
In January students at the Cheikh Anta Diop University in Dakar went on strike to protest against delays in payment of their grants. On 22 January the Groupes mobiles d'intervention, the anti-riot police, occupied the university campus and clashed with groups of students. According to official sources, 17 people were injured. However, student sources indicated that the number of casualties was higher.
In July Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Justice, inquiring about those arrested in Casamance in late 1986 and early 1987. In reply, the government provided details of charges against all those detained. Following the conviction in April of seven police officers for torturing to death a prisoner, Amnesty International urged the authorities to include clear instructions about the prohibition of torture in the training of all personnel involved in law enforcement or guarding prisoners.
In December an Amnesty International representative visited Senegal to seek further information about the Casamance arrests and to discuss these cases with government officials.
