MADAGASCAR
Thirty-eight political prisoners arrested in 1985, including some who may have been prisoners of conscience, remained in custody throughout the year without trial. Students arrested in February 1987 were also held without charge or trial. Many other prisoners held on criminal grounds reportedly died as a result of malnutrition and harsh conditions.
The 38 political prisoners arrested in August 1985 were suspected of belonging to banned fCung Fu martial arts clubs. All of them were detained without trial in Arivonimamo Prison, except Samuelle
Andrianarijaona. She remained in hospital, where she had been taken in August 1985 to receive treatment for injuries sustained at the time of her arrest.
In December 1984 there had been violent clashes between members of Kung Fu clubs and Tanora Tonga Saïna (TTS), "Youth Who Are Aware of Their Responsibilities". Earlier in 1984 the clubs had been declared illegal because they had become increasingly identified with opposition to the government. In August 1985 heavily armed government security forces attacked the principal Kung Fu headquarters. A number of people were killed in the attacks and some 200 people were detained. Most of the detainees were later provisionally released. The 38 people who remained in prison along with other Kung Fu club members were charged on 9 November 1987 with various political and criminal offences but had not been tried by the end of the year. Some of those detained without charge since August 1985 may have been prisoners of conscience.
Many students were arrested in connection with protests against government plans to reform the universities. Student strikes started when these plans were announced in November 1986. In February there were violent confrontations between students, who occupied university buildings in Antananarivo and other cities, and security forces. In March striking students continued to demand the release of some 40 students who had been detained. Subsequently, most of those detained were believed to have been released without charge. Francis Aimé Mandialahy, a student leader, was arrested on 7 May. He is the adopted son of Monja Joana, the leader
*)&&(%%%%+**&&&%
AFRICA / MADAGASCAR / MALAWI
of the opposition party ModagasiJcaro Otronin'ny Malagasy (MONlMA), Madagascar for the Malagasy. Francis Aimé Mandi-alahy reportedly escaped from custody shortly after arrest.
Amnesty International continued to receive reports of overcrowding, malnutrition and lack of adequate medical facilities in prisons. For example, the prison at Antanimora on the outskirts of Antananarivo reportedly held several thousand more prisoners than it was designed to accommodate. Prisoners who received no extra food from their families to supplement the prison diet, which consisted almost entirely of the vegetable cassava, were said to be severely malnourished. Many deaths apparently resulted from prison conditions. In early 1987 reports indicated that at least one prisoner died each day in Antanimora prison.
During the year Amnesty International continued to investigate the cases of the 38 prisoners held without trial since 1985. The organization called for their fair trial or release. Amnesty International also sought information from the authorities about students arrested in February but received no response.
