RWANDA
Almost 300 prisoners of conscience, convicted in 1986 for belonging to illegal religious sects, were freed in |uly. Three others, convicted in 1981, were freed in December. Other political prisoners re-mained in custody, including one prison-er of conscience convicted in 1981 and a former prisoner of conscience rearrested in 1986, who remained in detention without trial throughout 1987. More than 500 death sentences were commuted by the head of state in July, but others were imposed by the courts. No executions were reported.
Some 288 people convicted in October 1986 by the State Security Court on charges relating to membership of religious sects which the authorities considered to be subversive remained in prison until July. They were members of four sects: the Abarokore, the Elect; the Abanfu b'imana bihana, Repentant People of God; the Abafampero, Temperance Movement; and the Abayohova, Jehovah's Witnesses. Eleven of these prisoners were aged under 18 at the time of their arrest and were serving sentences of four years' imprisonment. Most of the others were serving eight-year sentences, while 48 (most of them Jehovah's Witnesses) had received 10-year sentences and three Jehovah's Witnesses had been sentenced to 12 years'
AFRICA / RWAN DA / SENEGAL
imprisonment (see Amnesty InternationaJ Report 1987).
After investigating the cases of these prisoners for some months after their trial, Amnesty International concluded in early 1987 that they were prisoners of conscience. It believed that these prisoners had been imprisoned and convicted because they refused to take part in the activities of the ruling Mouvement révolutionnaire national pour Je développement (MRND), Revolutionary National Movement for Development, the only permitted political organization.
Other people associated with the same four religious sects who had been arrested during the second half of 1986, but who had not been brought to trial, were still held during the first half of 1987, and further arrests of religious sect members occurred. In July, however, at the time of the 25th anniversary of Rwanda's independence, the government announced that all the prisoners convicted on account of their membership of religious sects were being released. It was later reported that all the other sect members who were in custody had also been freed.
Following these releases, a small number of people convicted by the State Security Court in 1981 of distributing documents which the State Security Court considered seditious remained in prison. They included four prisoners of conscience. all of whom had been convicted in 1981. Amnesty International considered that they had been exercising their right to freedom of expression. Three of the four were released in December, along with one other convicted political prisoner, before completing their sentences. One other prisoner of conscience convicted in similar circumstances. Antoine Mihigo, was believed to have been freed after serving a six-year prison sentence. At the end of 1987, only one prisoner of conscience convicted in 1981 was still held: Donat Murego, a former Ministry of Justice official sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment.
Another person convicted in 1981 remained in custody throughout the year without being brought to trial. Apollinaire Bikolimana had been released at the end of his sentence in April 1986 but rearrested in June 1986. He was said by the government to be accused of subversion, but it appeared that he might be a prisoner of conscience.
As in previous years, there were reports of untried political prisoners being severely beaten and confined to cachots noirs, unlit punishment cells, for long periods. Some convicted political prisoners were also held in harsh conditions, particularly in the high security unit at Ruhengeri Prison, where the inmates were seldom allowed out of their cells for exercise or to see visitors. No visits at all during 1987 were allowed to a group of prisoners convicted in June 1985 of participating in extrajudicial killings of political prisoners in the mid-1970s. Five of them were under sentence of death and all were awaiting the outcome of a review of their cases by an appeal court. By the end of 1987 no appeal hearings had been held.
At the time of the anniversary of independence in July, several hundred death sentences were commuted. The government announced that all death sentences which had been confirmed upon appeal and which were not the subject of further judicial review were being commuted to sentences of life imprisonment. In May 1986 an Amnesty International mission to Rwanda had been told that 560 people whose appeals had been refused were under sentence of death; by July 1987 the total was believed to be higher.
In June Amnesty International submitted a 20-page report to the Rwandese Government, specifying its reasons for considering the 288 members of religious sects to be prisoners of conscience and explaining why it had concluded that their trial had been unfair. There was no reply from the government, but in July they were released.
