PERU
Hundreds of people, the majority of them peasant farmers, were victims of unacknowledged detention, "disappearance" and extrajudicial execution carried out by police, military and civil defence forces in the "emergency zones". Opponents of the government continued to face arrest and trial on false charges of terrorism. A number of prisoners of conscience were released during 1987, although many others continued to experience long delays in their trials.
THE AMERICAS/ PERU / ST VINCENT AND THE GRENADINES
Reports of torture and execution-style killing by the guerrilla group Sendero Luminoso {Shining Path) increased dramatically. Principal targets continued to be government development workers, community leaders, members of labour organizations and legal parties who have refused to collaborate with the organization. The Shining Path carried out mass execution-style killings in communities suspected of aiding the security forces. In the community of Rumirumi in the province of La Mar, Ayacucho, 24 peasant farmers were killed in December. The insurgents, dressed in military-style uniforms, forced the leaders and youths of the community into the local school, where they were beaten, shot and hacked to death. A new pattern of selective assassinations by the Shining Path also emerged. Victims were prominent members of the ruling party, AJianza Popular Revoiucionaria Americana (APRA), American Popular Revolutionary Alliance.
New legislation for curbing terrorism was introduced. Congress was called into special session in March and approved Law 24651, which increased the maximum penalty for acts of terrorism to 25 years' imprisonment and prescribed prison terms of between 10 and 20 years for people convicted of assisting terrorist activities. The law also incorporated the crime of terrorism in the penal code, thereby revoking Decree Law 046 of 1981. Most political prisoners, including many prisoners of conscience, had previously been charged under Decree Law 046.
Members of the opposition Izquierda Unida alliance boycotted the special session because the government failed to include in the agenda consideration of a draft law approved by the Senate in De-
cember 1986. This bill envisaged the exclusion from military jurisdiction of offences not related to military service, such as genocide, torture, secret arrest, forcible "disappearance", rape and aggravated homicide. The purpose of the bill was to hold members of the police and armed forces accountable for human rights violations by ensuring that trials would be heard before civilian courts. The bill was not debated by Congress during 1987.
Most members of the armed forces prosecuted for alleged human rights violations were tried in military courts. These courts acquitted all such defendants. On rare occasions, the Supreme Court of Justice has ruled that police officers accused of human rights violations should be tried before civilian courts. One such case led to the conviction of 11 civil guards on charges related to the killing of 33 peasant farmers in Soccos, Ayacucho department, in November 1983. They received prison sentences ranging from 10 to 25 years. The Supreme Court of Justice upheld the verdict in October.
In June President Alan Garcia promulgated Law 24700 to establish special tribunals to try people accused of terrorism. This law provides certain safeguards for detainees' rights, including the compulsory presence of a prosecutor from the Public Ministry at all stages of police investigation. Human rights lawyers, however, have expressed concern about suspension of the right to present a petition of habeas corpus on behalf of a detainee during the initial 15-day period of police detention.
President Garcia announced on 28 July the lifting of the curfew in Lima. He also said that the state of emergency in the city of Ayacucho, which had been in force since 1982, would be lifted in the near future. However, the state of emergency in Ayacucho was renewed in September for a further 60 days, following an increase in Shining Path attacks.
In areas under a state of emergency, certain individual rights are suspended and security forces have powers to arrest people without a warrant and to restrict freedom of movement and assembly. In practice the security forces have frequently exceeded even these powers and committed widespread and systematic human rights violations in the emergency zones, including torture, "disappearances" and extrajudicial killings.
By October the state of emergency co-
THE AMERICAS/ PERU / ST VINCENT AND THE GRENADINES
vered 26 provinces in seven of the country's 25 departments. In November, it was extended to a further seven provinces in the northern department of San Martin, after rebels of the Movimiento Revolucionario Tupac Amaru (MRTA), Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement, occupied several small towns and attacked army posts in the area.
Reports of "disappearances" and killings in emergency zones were most often received, as in previous years, from the departments of Ayacucho, Huancavélica and Apurimac. Some reports were also received from Puno and Lima. The Attorney General sent a group of public attorneys in September to Huamanga in Ayacucho department to investigate alleged "disappearances" in the area. In its preliminary report, the group said that 142 "disappearances" were reported in Ayacucho and Apurimac departments in the first eight months of 1987. Forty-eight people were subsequently located, according to the report, although three of them were found dead soon after their arrest by military personnel and 36 reappeared after release from the custody of the security forces.
Many of those who had been released told the public attorneys that they had been tortured in detention. José Gómez Figueroa, who was detained on 16 September in Ccarhuapampa, Ayacucho department, by an army patrol from the Tambo military barracks, was released without charge 11 days later. He alleged that he and other prisoners had been hung by their arms, which had been tied behind their backs, and that soldiers urinated in their faces when they asked for water. Other methods of ill-treatment and torture reported to the investigative commission included beating, burning and suspension by the arms for prolonged periods. The public attorneys who carried out the investigation complained that the Head of the Political Military Command in Ayacucho had not cooperated with them and that officials obstructed them at "Los Cabitos" Barracks in Ayacucho, the military headquarters for the Ayacucho emergency zone. They said that the officials had failed to respond to over 95 per cent of their requests for information about detainees.
The Attorney General informed the congressional Human Rights Commission that the number of "disappearance" cases formally presented to his office was 2,714, of
which 350 were "resolved". Local human rights groups, however, estimated that some 3,200 people had "disappeared" in the emergency zones since 1982. In 1987 a new pattern emerged: nearly half those reported as "disappeared" reappeared alive after several weeks or months in the unacknowledged custody of the security forces. Many detainees said they had been arrested by the armed forces and held incommunicado in military installations, where they were tortured and forced to sign false confessions before transfer to police custody and subsequent appearance before the courts or release.
In December the Attorney General announced that a further 57 people reported to have "disappeared" in Ayacucho and Apurimac had reappeared. He claimed that "the Political Military Command in the zone is applying a new methodology, temporary 'disappearance', in order to avoid the cases being presented to human rights organizations." Also in December, Congress announced the creation of a commission to investigate "disappearances" which occurred between 1980 and 1985.
Amnesty International worked on behalf of 79 prisoners of conscience or individuals who may have been prisoners of conscience during the year. The majority of them were peasant farmers from the emergency zones or leaders of community organizations believed to be detained on false charges of "terrorism". Many prisoners who had spent several years in detention were released during 1987 after acquittal or dismissal of charges against them for lack of evidence. They included Filomeno Munoz Rojas and Justa Pizarro, a peasant farmer and his wife, who had been arrested in July 1983 at their home in Huaral, Lima department, and accused of collaborating with Shining Path guerrillas. Initially they were taken to a police post, where they were allegedly tortured and forced to sign false statements of having sheltered a group of Shining Path members which had passed through their village the night before their arrest. The couple, parents of seven children, was held for over four years in Lima prisons awaiting a verdict in their case. They were acquitted in November.
There were new developments during the year in cases of human rights violations which occurred in 1986. When the authorities quelled mutinies in three Lima jails organized by political prisoners (see
THE AMERICAS/ PERU / ST VINCENT AND THE GRENADINES
Amnesty internafional Report 1987), hundreds of prisoners died. Many of the dead had been summarily executed after they surrendered to the authorities and scores of others remained unaccounted for. In )anu-ary Amnesty International sent to President Garcia the findings of its own investigation, which were subsequently published in a report entitled "Disappearances", Torture and Summary Executions by Government Forces after the Prison Revolts of /une 1986. Amnesty International concluded that there was evidence to suggest that the civilian and military authorities had attempted to cover up the gross human rights violations which had occurred during the prison mutinies.
In August Congress reactivated a Commission of Inquiry, composed of 13 members from both Houses of Congress, to investigate the mutinies and establish responsibility for violations committed by government forces. The Commission presented two reports to Congress in December, a majority report signed by five members of the ruling APRA party and two representatives of other political parties, and a minority report signed by the Commission's president and five members of opposition parties.
Although the two reports produced by the Commission of Inquiry coincide in the background to the prison mutinies and the events during the riots, they contain fundamental diñ'erences in their evaluation of events and recommendations. The majority report limited responsibility for the abuses to the military and police officers who quelled the riots and their commanding officers. It also held the national director of penal institutions and the former Attorney General responsible for failing to prevent abuses which they knew were occurring. The report concluded that the murders committed in the prisons were neither an expression of a government policy of extermination nor a response to an armed forces institutional strategy.
The minority report accused President Garcia and his Cabinet of "primary responsibility" for the killing of 249 political prisoners and for covering up military intervention on the prison island of El Frontón. It concluded that more than 100 prisoners had been killed on El Frontón. The minority report also assigned criminal responsibility to prison authorities, the former Attorney General and police and military officials
charged with quelling the mutinies because they participated or acquiesced in the violations committed. These violations included torture and extrajudicial executions of prisoners. The report called for the impeachment of the Cabinet and recommended that the Public Ministry and judicial authorities, acting within their respective areas of jurisdiction, determine the extent to which the authorities involved in the events should be held criminally responsible.
The majority report was approved by Congress, in which the APRA has a majority, on 11 December.
Amnesty International continued throughout the year to work for the release of prisoners of conscience and investigated the cases of people who may have been prisoners of conscience. The organization also submitted information on its concerns in Peru to the relevant bodies of the United Nations and the Organization of American States.
