GUATEMALA
The scale of both civil conflict and human rights violations was lower than in the early 1980s, when the official security forces were responsible for a pattern of gross human rights violations. However, suspected critics and opponents of the government continued to be subjected to arbitrary seizure, torture, "disappearance" and extrajudicial execution. The victims included trade unionists, peasants, students, teachers and lay church workers. Relatives attempting to discover the fate of their "disappeared" family members reported threats and harassment. The abuses were reportedly carried out by police and military personnel acting in uniform or, most often, in plain clothes in the guise of "death squads".
On 7 August Guatemala (along with Costa Rica, El Salvador, Honduras and Nicaragua) signed the Central America Peace Agreement in Esquipulas, Guatemala. intended to achieve peace in the region. Its 10 points included a call for an amnesty which was to contain provisions to guarantee the inviolability of life, and physical safety of those amnestied.
However, the Peace Agreement had limited effect on human rights protection in Guatemala. While "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions continued, the government did not acknowledge holding any political prisoners and announced no releases under the amnesty called for in the agreement. A military-promulgated amnesty passed in January 1986, on the eve of civilian President Vinicio Cerezo's accession to office, granted immunity to those responsible for "political crimes and related common crimes" committed under General Efrain
THE AMERICAS / GUATEMALA
RÍOS Montt's administration between March 1982 and January 1986. Thus the amnesty clause of the Peace Plan effectively extended immunity to those who have committed such crimes since President Cerezo came to office. Amnesty provisions applicable to opposition forces who agreed to lay down their arms appear not to have been respected.
Among the victims of abuses which occurred in 11987 was Débora Carolina Vásquez Velásquez, a university student who was forcibly abducted in April by seven heavily armed men in plain clothes in Guatemala City. Although traffic police saw the abductors' car enter the Justo Rufino Barrios military barracks in Guatemala City, the authorities at no time admitted her detention. Following international protests at reports of her abduction and "disappearance", Débora Vásquez was released. During nine days in unacknowledged detention, she was reportedly bound and blindfold and subjected to death threats and torture, including beatings and near asphyxiation. In several other exceptional cases, people who reportedly "disappeared" were released after international expressions of concern, but without government acknowledgement that they had been in custody.
The great majority of those who were abducted during 1987 either were found dead or remained "disappeared" at the end of the year. Four armed men in plain clothes abducted Alma América Garrido de Girón, a teacher, on 14 January. Three days later her body was found bearing marks of torture. Her father said at her funeral that he believed members of a government security agency were responsible for her death.
Two agronomists, Danilo Sergio Alvar-ado Mejia and René Haroldo Leiva Caxaj, were abducted on 17 and 19 October respectively by armed men in civilian clothes. Both agronomists were found dead on 23 October. In December six policemen were arrested in connection with the killings, which the government maintained were committed for personal rather than political reasons. Also in October three members of a peasant league were reportedly abducted from the San Basilio estate, in the department of Suchitepé-quez, by members of the armed forces and taken to the local military base. The body of one, Manuel Chin Bosos, was found
early in November. The fate of the other two men, whose detention was denied by the authorities, remained unclear at the end of the year.
Abuses continued despite new measures to improve the human rights situation announced by the authorities at the time of the return to civilian government and thereafter. The 1985 Constitution, which came into force when President Cerezo took office, provided for establishment of a Congressional Human Rights Commission and a Human Rights Attorney. The Commission is mandated to propose and promote human rights legislation and the attorney is responsible for receiving and investigating complaints of human rights violations. The working methods of the Commission remained unclear throughout 1987. The function of the Human Rights Attorney's office also remained unclear. The attorney himself was not appointed until August, some 20 months after President Cerezo assumed office.
A new presidential commission on disappearances announced by President Cerezo in April had also failed to identify its mandate and composition by the end of the year. Under its original terms of reference, the commission was to have completed its investigations within three months. Two commissions formed under the previous government of General Oscar Humberto Mejia Víctores to investigate "disappearances" had disbanded themselves without producing any significant findings.
Similarly, little progress was apparent in the investigations undertaken by Judge Olegario Labbé Morales, appointed by the Supreme Court in May 1986 to pursue habeas corpus applications filed with the courts on behalf of people said to have "disappeared"; Judge Labbé reportedly declined to pursue available information concerning those cited as responsible for specific "disappearances" or extrajudicial executions.
In any case, the January 1986 amnesty and the amnesty provisions of the 1987 Central America Peace Agreement appeared to forestall the possibility that any investigations into human rights abuses would result in the prosecution of those allegedly responsible.
In May Amnesty International published a report, Guatemala: The Human
THEAMERICAS/GUATEMALA/GUYAMA
Rights Record, which called for full and impartial investigation of past human rights violations in order to identify the structures and policies that had permitted violations on a gross scale over a long period and in order to prevent their recurrence. In particular. Amnesty International expressed concern that the January 1986 amnesty might lead those responsible for past violations to believe that they could again act with impunity.
In July Amnesty International repeated its call for thorough investigation of all "disappearances", including a number which had occurred since President Cerezo assumed office. One of the many unresolved "disappearance" cases cited by Amnesty International was that of Luis Fernando de la Roca Elias, a student who "disappeared" following his abduction in September 1985. His mother established in 1986 that two cars used by her son's abductors had been registered to the military. At the end oi 1987, the man's mother charged that neither the military nor Judge Labbé had pursued the writs of habeas corpus she had filed on her son's behalf.
In November Amnesty International called on officials, including Judge Labbé, to investigate the "disappearance" earlier that month of Reyes Anibal Arizandieta Franco, a sugar cane worker and member of a Christian community. Eye-witnesses to his abduction by four men in plain clothes alleged that they had previously seen the abductors wearing army uniforms.
During 1987 Amnesty International also expressed concern that members of the Grupo de Apoyo Mutuo por ei Aparecimiento con Vida de Nuestros Familiares (GAM), a group of relatives of missing people, continued to be subjected to death threats and harassment, apparently because of their efforts to locate their "disappeared" relatives. In October 1987, for example, GAM member Violeta de León reportedly began receiving death threats after she submitted papers to Judge Labbé which named the army and police intelligence agents whom witnesses said were responsible for her son's "disappearance" in 1984. Amnesty International urged that all appropriate measures be taken to ensure the safety of Violeta de León and all of the group's members.
In October the organization again called on the authorities to investigate the shooting of a child in May 1986. The child
was paralysed in the attack, which was carried out by armed men allegedly connected with the authorities and apparently directed against the father, trade unionist José Mercedes Sotz. Three months earlier the father had reportedly been seized and beaten by men linked to the authorities because of his activities with the Sindicato Centra] de Traba/adores Municipales (SCTM), Central Municipal Workers Union. Members of the union have been continuing targets of human rights violations. For example, in September 1987 SCTM member Carlos Pérez Oscal was held for three days by heavily armed men believed to be officially linked to the municipality of Guatemala City. While in custody, he was reportedly subjected to intimidation and ill-treatment because of his trade union work.
In December Amnesty International provided information on its concerns in Guatemala to the United Nations, in connection with the work of the International Commission of Verification and Follow-up. The Commission is charged with monitoring implementation of the Central America Peace Agreement.
In 1987 Guatemala declared its acceptance of Article 62 of the American Convention on Human Rights, thereby accepting the binding jurisdiction of the Inter-American Court for cases subsequent to the date of the declaration. However, the government's ratification in February of the Inter-American Convention to Prevent and Punish Torture contained the reservation that once legal remedies had been exhausted, a decision acquitting a person of torture would be final and could not be submitted to any international forum. The reservation was made although Article 46 of the Guatemalan Constitution states that human rights treaties ratified by Guatemala were to prevail over domestic law.
