BOLIVIA
A number of trade unionists and peasants were arrested and detained for short periods in connection with demonstrations, work stoppages and other peaceful protests against government economic policies. There were reports that youths held at a drugs rehabilitation centre were beaten and that two died, one in December 1986 and one in January 1987. There was little progress in the trial of the former President, General Luis Garcia Meza, and others on charges involving human rights violations.
The leader of one of the main teachers' unions and other members of teachers' unions were arrested in February after they opposed government plans to reduce spending on education and reorganize the school year on a regional basis. Daniel Agudo, secretary general of the Con/ede-ración de Trabajadores de Educación Urbana de Bolivia, Bolivian Urban Education Workers Union, was held for several weeks and then charged with sedition and disrespect towards the authorities. By the end of the month he had been provisionally released, as was Wilma Plata, the leader of the La Paz teachers' union, who had also been charged. Their trial was still in progress at the end of 1987. Others who were arrested in La Paz, Santa Cruz and Cocha-bamba were released, apparently without charge, during February.
Further arrests occurred in late July during an oil workers' pay dispute. On 26 July the government declared the country's oil fields to be national security con-
THE AMERICAS/BOLIVIA
cerns and placed them under military jurisdiction in order to pre-empt a threatened strike. This meant that anyone supporting the strike would be treated as a deserter. Twenty-nine oil union leaders were detained but they were released within a few days when the dispute was resolved on 2 August.
Eleuterio Gutierrez Marcani, a former trade union leader at a state-owned mine, remained in pre-trial custody throughout 1987. He had been held since September 1985 on a charge of theft which, he claimed, had been brought against him on account of his trade union activities. The evidence against him was allegedly based on a statement extracted under duress from a witness who subsequently retracted it. The witness alleged that he had been threatened and beaten by police who forced him to incriminate Eleuterio Gutierrez Marcani.
There were reports that youths held at the Granja de Rehabiiitociôn (a drugs rehabilitation centre) in Ghimoré, near Cochabamba. were routinely beaten and ill-treated by guards. The Gronja is the responsibility of the Unidad Môvil para el Area Rural (UMOPAR), a specialized narcotics branch of the Bolivian police force. Those held there were mostly young people requiring treatment for drug addiction or who had been accused of committing minor criminal offences. Some of them had not been formally charged or brought before a judge and were held in violation of the Bolivian Code of Minors.
Information was received about two deaths at the Gronja, which were said to have occurred after the inmates concerned had been beaten by a guard. Cleomedes Claros Jiménez, aged 16, died on 22 December 1986. He had been arrested without any warrant or explanation the previous afternoon. The death certificate gave "acute anaemia" and "severe bruising" as the cause of death. Witnesses alleged that he had been beaten repeatedly on the night of his arrest with a broom handle. His body was returned to his family for burial and although they protested about the state of the body, no autopsy was performed. The second death, which occurred a few days later on 2 January, was of Remy Barrios Suarez, aged 15, who had been detained in October 1986. He was due to be released the next morning after the local military commander issued an order accepting that
his detention was unlawful, as Remy Barrios Suárez was below the age of legal responsibility. In his case an autopsy was carried out which gave "convulsive syndrome" as the cause of death. Three months after the deaths had occurred a further police investigation was carried out.
On 9 March Gonzalo Peñaranda Fernández hanged himself in prison. He had been sentenced to death in 1986 for the murder of a child. An appeal against the sentence was pending before the La Paz District Court, on the grounds that the sentence violated Article 17 of the Bolivian Constitution prohibiting the use of the death penalty (see Amnesty IniernationoJ Report 1987).
In November the Human Rights Committee monitoring adherence to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights said the Bolivian Government had violated the Covenant in the case of four men who had been detained in Luribay in 1983 and freed three years later. The Committee found that the prisoners had been tortured and ill-treated and that during the initial period of detention, their rights to due process had been denied. The Committee reminded the Bolivian Government of its obligation under the Covenant to provide compensation to the victims and to take steps to prevent a recurrence of these violations.
In February Amnesty International called for the release of the teachers' union officials as prisoners of conscience. It also expressed concern to the Minister of the Interior about reports that criminal charges against Eleuterio Gutierrez Marcani might be politically-motivated and based on a statement obtained under duress. In September, following reports of the two deaths at the Granja, Amnesty International sought and obtained details of criminal investigations into the event from the authorities. After studying the report, however. Amnesty International remained convinced of the need for a full and impartial investigation into the allegations of arbitrary detention and ill-treatment of inmates at the Granja. In particular. Amnesty International recommended further investigation into the cases of Cleomedes Claros Jiménez and Remy Barrios Suárez, given that the official causes of death were insufficiently precise to dispel concern.
THE AMERICAS/BOLIVIA
