SEYCHELLES
One prisoner of conscience continued to serve a sentence imposed after his conviction on charges believed to have been politically motivated. Two people briefly detained in September 1986 for political reasons reported that the Seychelles authorities had tortured them.
Royce Dias was found guilty in 1985 of possessing cannabis and sentenced to five years' imprisonment. However, available evidence suggested that the charge was fabricated and the real reason for his imprisonment was his opposition to the government (see Amnesty InternationaJ Report 1986). Royce Dias was held at lie Longue Prison, where conditions were poor, and was reportedly in ill-health.
Also serving a sentence at lie Longue for drug possession was John Both, a supporter of exiled former President James Mancham. Amnesty International investigated reports that he, too, was imprisoned for his political views.
Evidence that two alleged government opponents were tortured came to light in 1987. In statements published during the year, Benjamin Pierre-Louis and Antonio Morin, businessmen from the island of Pras-lin, claimed that they were arrested by a police officer and soldiers in September 1986. They were apparently accused of participation in an arson attack on Praslin airport. Both men said that they were severely beaten, pistol-whipped, kicked in the face and threatened with execution. Benjamin Pierre-Louis also alleged that he was burned with cigarettes and that his hair and beard had been set on fire. Antonio Morin
AFRICA / SEYCHELLES / SIERRA LEONE
alleged that an object had been inserted into his anus. The following day they were released from custody without charge and admitted to hospital where both required treatment in an intensive care unit for two weeks. The authorities made no public response to the men's claims of torture and were not known to have conducted an inquiry into their allegations.
SIERRA LEONE
Sixteen people were sentenced to death after a maior treason trial but they had not been executed by the end of the year. In November a state of "economic emergency" which allowed the government to detain people without trial was declared. There were reports that conditions in the country's prisons remained harsh.
About 50 people were arrested in March in connection with a conspiracy to overthrow the government. A number were released uncharged, but 18 people were charged with treason and murder. Among them was the then Vice President, Minister of Justice and Attorney General, Francis Minah. Their trial began in June before the High Court in Freetown. In October, 16 were found guilty of treason and sentenced to death. Four were also convicted of murdering a police officer killed at the time of their arrest. A soldier and a police officer were not convicted of treason but were sentenced to prison terms for failing to report the conspiracy to the authorities. All submitted appeals to the Court of Appeal, but their cases had not been heard by the end of 1987.
New reports suggesting that prison con-
ditions remained very harsh were received during 1987. Severe food shortages for prisoners continued, but unlike previous years when a large number of prisoners died as a result of the conditions (see Amnesty international Report 1987), few prisoners were reported to have died. The local press reported that food supplies destined for prisons had been illegally diverted and sold and that two senior prison officers were arrested in September on suspicion of selling food supplies meant for prisoners. No details about any proceedings against them were available by the end of the year.
A commission of inquiry, chaired by a High Court judge, was established by the government in September to investigate the administration of the Prisons Department and the welfare of prisoners and to recommend improvements. The commission was established apparently because of reports from various sources about harsh conditions of imprisonment. It had not made any of its findings public by the end of 1987.
In November the head of state, Major-General Joseph Momoh, declared a state of "economic emergency" intended to help solve the country's serious economic problems. The state of "economic emergency" allowed for the deportation, exclusion, restriction or detention without trial of people whose activities were considered by the authorities to be "inimical to the good administration of Sierra Leone". A large number of people were arrested under these emergency regulations in November and December. At the end of 1987 a number of them had been charged and tried for economic offences but others were still held in pre-trial detention.
An Amnesty International delegate observed parts of the treason trial when it began in June. He concluded that the conduct of the proceedings he attended appeared to conform to internationally recognized standards for fair trial. Amnesty International expressed concern at the death sentences imposed on the 16 men convicted in October and called on President Momoh to commute them if they were confirmed by the Court of Appeal. No other death sentences and no executions were reported in Sierra Leone in 1987.
%%%$***)&&&%%%%%
AFRICA/SOMALIA
