DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
One prisoner of conscience continued to be held. Several dozen prisoners, including some who may have been detained for political reasons, were believed to be still imprisoned despite judicial orders for their release. There were reports of ill-treatment, both of prisoners and of Haitian workers. One person remained "disappeared". Eight people were killed during demonstrations, at least some in circumstances suggesting that they may have been extrajudically executed.
Following allegations of fraud during the 1994 presidential elections. President Joaquin Balaguer agreed to serve an abbreviated two-year term with new elections scheduled for May 1996. There were several protests and strikes about economic issues during the year, some ending in clashes between the security forces and demonstrators.
The police continued to refuse to comply with three judicial decisions ordering the release of prisoner of conscience Luis Lizardo Cabrera, who was arrested in 1989 for alleged involvement in a bombing (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 to 1995). The authorities also denied allegations that he was ill-treated in 1993.
In January prisoners rioted in La Victoria National Prison near the capital, Santo Domingo, demanding the release of over 100 prisoners whose freedom had been ordered by the courts. Following a visit to the prison, the District Attorney of Santo Domingo. Joaquin Castillo, ordered the release of 30 prisoners. By the end of the year, it was not clear how many of the others, some of whom it was feared may have been detained for political motives, remained in detention. In April a government report into conditions in the same
prison found chronic overcrowding, ill-treatment of juvenile detainees, frequent beatings and denial of basic facilities.
In September some 40 Haitians working on the state-run Monte Llano sugarcane plantation were reportedly rounded up, driven away in a cattle truck and beaten by security guards. Two of them suffered multiple fractures and had to be hospitalized. Those responsible were reportedly later arrested but by the end of the year none had been brought to trial. In December a group of alleged illegal immigrants from Haiti were reportedly detained for several days and beaten by soldiers in San Cristobal. Subsequently, a bus in which they were being transported back to Haiti crashed and five of them died, reportedly after having been abandoned by the authorities.
The government continued to deny any involvement in the "disappearance" of Narciso González (see Amnesty International Report 1995] and again failed to carry out an independent investigation into the case.
Eight people were killed during demonstrations, some in circumstances suggesting that they may have been extrajudicially executed. In June a 13-year-old boy was shot dead during a demonstration in Villa Altagracia by the Under-Secretary for Sport, Francisco de la Mota, who was subsequently charged with manslaughter. Four others were shot dead by soldiers in Santo Domingo in March and three in San Luis in September. It was not clear whether any action was taken against those responsible.
Amnesty International continued to urge the immediate and unconditional release of Luis Lizardo Cabrera and to call for a thorough and independent investigation into the "disappearance" of Narciso González.
