SWITZERLAND
Scores of conscientious objectors to military service were sentenced to terms of imprisonment or compulsory work by military tribunals. There were further allegations of ill-treatment of detainees by law enforcement officers.
Although a national referendum in 1992 voted to introduce, in principle, a civilian alternative to military service, this was still not available during the year.
However, in October parliament gave its final approval to a draft law under which conscripts demonstrating their inability to reconcile military service with their consciences would qualify for the right to perform a civilian service one and a half times the length of ordinary military service. The law was not expected to come into operation until October 1996.
Under the Military Penal Code refusal of military service remained a criminal offence. However, where a tribunal concluded that a conscript was unable to reconcile military service with his conscience because of "fundamental ethical values" he was sentenced to a period of work in the public interest and did not acquire a criminal record. Conscientious objectors who failed to qualify for a sentence of compulsory work because, for example, the military tribunals considered that they opposed military service on political grounds, continued to be sentenced to terms of imprisonment. However, few conscientious objectors were reported to have served prison sentences during 1995 as many cantons had moratoriums on such sentences. Those imprisoned were prisoners of conscience.
There were ftirther allegations of ill-treatment by law enforcement officers. Many of the alleged victims were foreign nationals. Hassan L., a Libyan national, lodged a complaint against police officers after he received near-fatal injuries in February. He was arrested and detained, apparently on suspicion of a drug-related offence. He admitted he was drunk when he was approached by several men in the Letten area of Zurich and he claimed that he did not at first realize they were police officers because they were dressed in plain clothes. He stated that when they began to hit him he picked up a stone to defend himself, but that a bystander warned him that the men were police officers before he could use it. He alleged that after being knocked to the ground, he was handcuffed, seized by the feet and dragged along the ground towards a police vehicle while officers kicked his ribs, chest and neck and jumped on his chest. He claimed that in all some four or five officers assaulted him and that he eventually lost consciousness. He also reported that after transfer to a police station he was punched and struck again. He began to suffer severe pains and was admitted to a
SWITZERLAND/SYRIA
hospital intensive care unit. The hospital issued a medical certificate within hours of his detention recording a chest injury affecting the lining of the lung, two fractured ribs, contusions to his left knee, lower right leg and right cheekbone. As a result of the injury to his lung and consequent breathing difficulties, Hassan L.'s life was in deinger for several days. The police accused Hassan L. of using violence against them. Administrative and judicial investigations were opened into the circumstances of the arrest.
In April cousins Ali Doymaz and Abuzer Tastan, Turkish Kurds with official refugee status in Switzerland, were returning from a visit to Italy when their car was intercepted by three police cars carrying five or six police officers. Ali Doymaz' brother, normally resident in Italy, was also in the car although he had no legal right of entry into Switzerland. Abuzer Tastan alleged that, after checking their identity papers, the police officers dragged them out of the car and hit him on his head, arms, shoulders, back and stomach and that when he asked them not to hit him in the stomach as he suffered from stomach problems, they hit him there again. He claimed that after transfer to a police station in Chiasso, he was beaten and kicked again, made to stand with his arms spread wide open, subjected to racist insults and finally handcuffed to a hot-water radiator. Ali Doymaz said police officers first kicked him and pushed him with their guns and that after transfer to the police station they kicked him again, punched him in the face, pulled his chair from under him making him fall to the floor, subjected him to racist insults and handcuffed him to a hot-water radiator. Both men were accused of smuggling an illegal immigrant into the country and released after paying bail. Medical reports issued by independent doctors who examined the two men recorded swelling on Ali Doymaz' head and face, a red weal on his left collar bone and painful movement in his left shoulder. Abuzer Tastan had bruising on his forearms and it was noted that he was suffering severe stomach pains although he had been cured of a duodenal ulcer a month previously. Both men lodged a formal complaint against the police in )une.
Amnesty International expressed concern that people continued to be punished
for refusing military service on grounds of conscience but welcomed the further progress made towards the introduction, in practice, of a civilicin alternative to military service.
The organization sought information from the authorities on the steps taken to investigate cases of alleged ill-treatment and the outcome of inquiries opened into such allegations. Some authorities gave information about the status of investigations or court proceedings. Others stated that the allegations were unfounded or that injuries sustained by detainees were the result of police officers using the degree of force necessary to subdue a person violently resisting arrest.
