BULGARIA
Torture and ill-treatment by law enforcement officers continued to be reported, resulting in at least two deaths in custody. Many of the victims were Roma. At least one person was killed by police officers in suspicious circumstances. Fourteen people were under sentence of death, but there were no executions.
In January the National Assembly approved a new government headed by Prime Minister Zhan Videnov of the Bulgarian Socialist Party. Some opposition deputies voiced fears that the appointment of certain ministers represented a continuation of the policies of the former Bulgarian Communist Party. For example, the Education Minister, Ilcho Dimitrov, had held the same post from 1986 to 1989 during the forced assimilation campaign against Bulgaria's ethnic Turkish minority (see Amnesty International Reports 1986 to 1991).
In April President Zhelyu Zhelev, speaking to Roma in Sliven, acknowledged for the first time international concern about human rights violations committed against Bulgaria's Roma minority.
In December the National Assembly adopted an armed forces bill which provides for an alternative civilian service of 36 months - twice the length of ordinary militciry service. However, a separate bill to regulate alternative service had not been adopted by the end of the year. Two conscientious objectors to military service were tried in March and June on charges of evading military service and received suspended sentences.
Ethnic Macedonians, members of Obe-dinena Makedonska Organizatsiya "Ihn-den" (omo "Ilinden"), the United Macedonian Organization "Ilinden", continued to be subjected to arbitrary arrest and brief detention in police stations (see Amnesty International Report 1995). In March Yanush Sapundzhiev was detained in Pet-rich for distributing Pirinska Makedonia, an omo "Ilinden" publication. In July, four people were detained in Blagoevgrad for distributing leaflets calling for a peaceful assembly.
There were reports of torture and other ill-treatment by police officers. In February police officers dispersing a crowd of about 150 protesters outside Sapareva Banya kicked and beat many of the protesters, most of whom were elderly. At least 15 people were injured: two required medical treatment for broken limbs and one man had a heart attack after he was taken into a police car.
In March during a police operation against organized crime the police severely ill-treated a number of people in a bar in Sofia, three of whom required emergency hospital treatment. Among the victims was an elderly passer-by who was reportedly thrown out of his wheelchair and beaten after he asked the officers to stop beating another man. In May, two police officers investigating an attempted break-in at a kindergarten in Palikeni shot and injured 16-year-old Misho Manolov. In June, 15-year-old Aleksander Petrov was shot in the pelvis by police officers while allegedly stealing from a food store. In July police officers in Sofia pursuing Simeon Nikolov Galchev after an attempted car theft shot him in the leg. In September, in a children's playground in Sofia, a police officer shot and wounded Iliyan Ezekiev, who had been apprehended for allegedly stealing a television set. No investigations were known to have been initiated into any of these incidents.
BULGARIA/BURKINA FASO
Many of the victims of torture and ill-treatment by the police were Roma. In February Iliya Dimitrov Gherghinov was found dead, with his arms handcuffed, in a street in Gradets. The previous day a police officer, who appeared to be under the influence of alcohol, had been seen hitting Iliya Gherghinov with a piece of wood. No investigation was known to have been initiated into the death. In May Iliya Lambov was reportedly kicked and punched by several police officers who came to his house in Brestovitsa to check identification documents. His wife, who tried to intervene, was kicked in the stomach.
At least two detainees died in custody, apparently as a result of torture. In April Hristo Hristov was taken into custody in Sofia following a confession allegedly made under duress by another detainee. Hours later he was found dead on the floor of his cell, handcuffed to a radiator. An autopsy reportedly established that he had suffered broken ribs and a ruptured main blood vessel as a result of someone jumping on his chest. In May, 17-yecir-old Konstatin Timchev, who was detained in Blagoevgrad, died as a result of a blow to the head with a hard object. Official investigations were initiated into both deaths, prompting the Minister of the Interior, Ljubomir Nachev, to reveal that between March 1994 and April 1995, 17 people had died in suspicious circumstances in police custody.
At least one person was killed in circumstances suggesting excessive use of force by police officers. In March, in Nova Zagora, a police officer reportedly beat and kicked 18-year-old Atañas Angelov, a Rom. His brother, Angel Angelov, approached the police officer, pleading with him to stop the beating. The officer then reportedly drew his gun and fired at the two brothers, killing Angel Angelov and injuring Atañas Angelov. An investigation was initiated into the incident: however, no disciplinary measures were taken against the officer who was reportedly promoted to a higher rank.
A number of death sentences were imposed but by the end of the year only two had been confirmed following appeal. In all, 14 people remained on death row. However, a moratorium on executions imposed in 1990 remained in force.
In March Amnesty International urged Prime Minister Videnov to initiate an in-
vestigation into the killing of Angel Angelov and the ill-treatment of Roma. The newly elected government was urged to ensure that thorough and impartial investigations took place into all reported cases of torture and ill-treatment of Roma since June 1992 (see Amnesty International Reports 1993 to 1995). Amnesty International also called for a full investigation into allegations of ill-treatment during the demonstration at Sapareva Banya and during the raid on the bar in Sofia. In October the organization called for investigations into several incidents of shooting by police officers. No reply ft'om the authorities had been received by the end of the year.
