SWAZILAND
Prisoners of conscience, including political opponents of the government, journalists and trade unionists, were detained for short periods. There were allegations of torture by police. Two people remained under sentence of death.
All party political activity continued to be banned and the rights of freedom of assembly and expression restricted, in the
SWAZILAND
face of continuing demands from trade unionists, students and other sectors of society for political and other reforms. Tension between the government and the Swaziland Federation of Trade Unions (sFTu) over industrial relations issues remained unresolved at the end of the year.
In July the government released the long-awaited report of the judicial commission of inquiry into the November 1990 incidents on the University of Swaziland campus, when students were severely beaten by police and soldiers following class boycotts (see Amnesty International Reports 1991 and 1992). The report criticized the beatings as "brutal and excessive", but recommended the prosecution only of Superintendent Stanley Bhembe, the Assistant Police Commissioner at the time, who was found to have ordered the beatings, and the payment of compensation only to victims who sustained permanent injuries from the assaults. The long delay in the release of the report added to suspicions that controversial findings had been suppressed.
Swaziland ratified the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights.
Political activists and trade unionists were detained for short periods for alleged participation in illegal meetings, rallies and strikes: Many were prisoners of conscience. Seven members of the opposition organization the People's United Democratic Movement (pudemo) were arrested in April in connection with a demonstration held in Mbasheni to protest at the suspension of the Constitution in 1973. The trial of 49 supporters of pudemo and of the Swaziland Youth Congress on charges of participating in an illegal demonstration in December 1994 had not been concluded by the end of the year. The defendants applied to the High Court for an order that the presiding magistrate should withdraw from the case because of concerns about bias on the part of the magistrate. The matter had not been resolved by the end of the year. In January the police had allegedly assaulted some of the accused, who had been released on bail, when they went to arrest them for failing to appear in court.
There was constant harassment of the sftu Secretary General, Jan Sithole, whom the government attempted to deport from Swaziland claiming that he was not a citizen. He received anonymous telephone
death threats in July. In the following month he was abducted, on the eve of a critical meeting between government, employers and union representatives, by four armed and hooded men. They seized his car and forced him into the car boot before abandoning the vehicle in the road. He was found some hours later by a passer-by. No one was brought to justice for this apparent attempt on his life.
Journalists were detained on a number of occasions apparently in reprisal for published culicles critical of government officials. In March, four journalists from the Swazi Observer newspaper were arrested on charges relating to a technical breach of a 1938 law. Before the arrests, the Director of Public Prosecutions (dpp) had allegedly threatened one of the journalists in connection with a report critical of a cabinet minister. After the journalists' arrest, the dpp allegedly visited them in the police cells, verbally abused them, and attempted to obstruct bail proceedings. In an urgent High Court hearing three days after their arrest, the presiding judge reportedly criticized the dpp for abusing his position of authority and referred to the arrest warrants as oppressive and amounting to intimidation. In May the High Court ordered the trial magistrate to withdraw from the case on the grounds of bias. Several weeks later, in June, the dpp ordered the arrest of senior staff and journalists from both the Swazi Observer and the Times of Swaziland on charges of breaches of publishing regulations. Those arrested were released on bail. In August the dpp withdrew charges against the Times of Swaziland staff. However, the Swazi Observer staff were found guilty in the mcigistrate's court of the charges and sentenced to a fine or four years' imprisonment. The newspaper lodged an appeal.
The courts heard evidence that suspects in criminal investigations had been tortured by police. A lawyer representing a University of Swaziland student charged with car theft told a court in March that the defendant had been nearly suffocated with a rubber tube during interrogation. The presiding magistrate examined the student, noting injuries to his eyes and hands. In two separate cases in February before the High Court, defendants alleged that they had confessed to certain crimes after being subjected to a form of torture locally known as "kentucky", in which
SWAZILAND/SWITZERUWD
the victims were suspended from a horizontal pole placed behind the knees with their wrists and ankles shackled together behind them and kicked and spun around. At the judge's request the method was demonstrated in court. In March the Commissioner of Police ordered an investigation into the allegations.
Two prisoners, including one whose appeal had been rejected by the Appeal Court, were under sentence of death at the end of the year. The other prisoner's appeal was due to be heard in 1996. Two other prisoners under sentence of death had their convictions overturned and were released during the year. There were no executions.
Amnesty International expressed concern to the government about the pattern of detentions and harassment of political opponents, journalists and trade unionists, and appealed to the goverrunent to ensure that the rights of non-violent freedom of expression and association were fully respected. It called upon the government to ratify all international human rights treaties and to incorporate their provisions into domestic law and practice.
