JAMAICA
Scores of prisoners on death row were reportedly ill-treated. At least two prisoners died in custody. At least one sentence of flogging was imposed. At least five death sentences were imposed and 61 prisoners remained under sentence of death. There were no executions.
Scores of death row prisoners in St Catherine's District Prison were reported to have been beaten by warders in March, following disturbances at the prison in February. The beatings reportedly took place after order had been restored and prisoners had returned to their cells. Many prisoners were reported to have sustained broken arms and legs, fractured ribs and other injuries. During a search of the prison a warder reportedly ordered another staff member to beat two prisoners, Vivian Goode and Author Henry, who were accused of killing one of the warder's relatives. The prisoners reportedly made several complaints to the superintendent of the prison but no action had been taken by the end of the year.
At least two prisoners died in custody. One death row prisoner was shot dead by prison warders during the disturbances at St Catherine's District Prison in February. In April Ivan Morgan, a former death row prisoner (see Amnesty International Report 1994], died in custody. He had been receiving treatment for stomach pains, but had been refused admission to hospital raising concern that he may have been denied adequate medical care.
Inquests had still not been held into the cases of four death row prisoners shot
JAMAICA/JAPAN
dead by warders at St Catherine's District Prison in October 1993. Although a police report had been sent to the Director of Public Prosecutions in 1994, no decision appeared to have been taken on whether to prosecute those responsible (see Amnesty International Reports 1994 and 1995).
The mother of a man who died while in police custody in 1993 received compensation for her son's death after suing the government. Agana Barret was one of three men who died while being held in Constant Spring Police Station (see Amnesty International Reports 1994 and 1995).
At least one sentence of flogging was imposed. In February Barrington Keslow was convicted of rape and sentenced to 10 strokes of the tcimarind switch in addition to 10 years' imprisonment. It was unclear whether the sentence had been carried out by the end of the year.
At least five death sentences were imposed for murder and 61 prisoners remained on death row. Sixty-two prisoners had their sentences commuted under the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council's 1993 recommendation that all prisoners under sentence of death for five years or more should have their sentences commuted (see Amnesty International Report 1994). There were no executions. The last hanging was carried out in February 1988.
In May Amnesty International wrote to the Commissioner of Correctional Services calling for a full investigation into the shooting of the death row prisoner in February and into the allegations of ill-treatment of prisoners in March. Amnesty International also called for an investigation into the death of former death row inmate Ivan Morgan in April and expressed concern that his death may have been caused by the denial of adequate medical treatment.
In September Amnesty International received a reply from the Commissioner of Corrections stating that the police were carrying out an investigation into the shooting of the prisoner and the allegations of ill-treatment. The letter also said that measures had been taken to ensure the safety of prisoners and "better control" in St Catherine's District Prison. Amnesty International had not been informed of the outcome of the investigations by the end of the year.
