MONGOLIA
Deaths from starvation of prisoners in corrective labour institutions continued to be reported. Unofficial sources reported that 32 death sentences were passed.
Reports continued to be received of inmates in corrective labour institutions dying from starvation or from illnesses which may have been caused or exacerbated by starvation (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1995). Out of at least 191 deaths of prisoners during the year, at least 15 were explicitly attributed to starvation cind at least 52 to tuberculosis. Poor sanitation and inadequate health-care provisions in the penitentiary system were also contributory factors.
Figures for the whole of 1994 published in 1995 by an official commission investigating prison conditions showed
that a total of 189 prisoners had died from various causes, including 58 from starvation, 63 from tuberculosis and 43 from other illnesses. In a statement addressed to the un Secretary-General in lanuary 1995, President Puntsalmaagiyn Ochirbat declared that Mongolia would be seeking "financial and other assistance" from the un to improve conditions in remand prisons and penitentiaries.
The death penalty remained in force for five offences (see Amnesty International Report 1994). Unofficial sources reported that 32 death sentences were passed, eight of which were reduced on appeal to terms of imprisonment. It was not known whether any executions were carried out.
In April Amnesty International published a report, Mongolia: Prison inmates starve to death, which pointed out that changed economic conditions had rendered unrealistic the legal requirement that prisoners must work for their food. It urged the authorities to repeal this legislation and to implement Mongolia's obligations under international standards to provide all prisoners with adequate food and medical care. Amnesty International also made a series of recommendations to safeguard detainees against ill-treatment by officials, including deliberate starvation in pre-trial detention to force confessions. It continued to urge the abolition of the death penalty.
