COTE D'IVOIRE
Four journalists and two publishers, all prisoners of conscience, were sentenced to prison terms. Dozens of opposition party supporters and student activists, including possible prisoners of conscience, were detained, of whom 25 were sentenced to prison terms and others were detained without trial. There were reports of torture and ill-treatment by the security forces, and an opposition leader was assaulted in the presence of a government minister. A new law extended the application of the death penalty and allowed public executions, but no executions took place in 1995.
There was growing political unrest in the run-up to presidential elections in October, the first since the death of Félix Houphouët-Boigny, Côte d'Ivoire's first President, in December 1994. The election, in which President Henri Ko nan Bédié was returned to power, was boycotted by the main opposition parties in protest at the government's refusal to amend the electoral code. Introduced in December 1994, this required presidential candidates to have lived in the country for the five years preceding the election and to have been born of Ivorian parents. It was widely believed to have been designed to prevent former Prime Minister Alassane Ouattara from standing as a presidential candidate. Parliamentary elections were held in November and led to the victory of the ruling party, the Parti démocratique de Côte d'Ivoire, Ivorian Democratic Party.
In September the government banned all demonstrations for the three-month election period after several peaceful
COTE D'IVOIRE
demonstrations became violent when they were broken up by the security forces. Despite the ban, however, there were further opposition demonstrations in the weeks leading up to the presidential election. At least 10 people were killed and many others were shot and wounded by the security forces, and dozens were arrested as several of the protests became violent, resulting in destruction of property. There was also serious ethnic tension in the west: in October, some 8,000 Baoïdé villagers belonging to the same ethnic group as the President took refuge in local towns owing to tension with the more numerous Bétés, the ethnic group to which Laurent Gbagbo, leader of the opposition Front populaire ivoirien (fpi). Popular Ivorian Front, belongs.
In December Côte d'Ivoire acceded to the un Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
Two publishers and four journalists were prisoners of conscience. Abou Cissé, the publisher of the newspaper La Patrie, and one of its journalists. De Be Kwassi, were convicted of offending the Head of State and sentenced to one-year prison terms in February. They had published two articles questioning President Bédié's Ivorian origins and his links to a financial scandal in the 1970s. They were provisionally released in July.
Dembélé Fousséni, editor of an Islamic monthly. Plume libre, and one of its journalists, Kema Brahama, were given 10-month prison sentences after they were convicted of incitement to tribal hatred, disorder and revolt. They had published an article alleging that Muslims were being purged from government jobs because they supported the opposition party of former Prime Minister Alassane Ouat-tara, the Rassemblement des républicains (rdr), Rally of Republicans. They were provisionally released in August.
Aboudralunane Sangaré, Deputy Secretary General of the fpi and director of the newspaper La Voie, was sentenced to two years' imprisonment in December with La Voie journalist Emmanuel Koré. They were convicted of insulting President Konan Bédié in an article which suggested that the presence of the Head of State brought bad luck to a soccer team during a football match. Previously, in June, Abou-drahmane Sangaré had been assaulted in
the presence of a government minister. He was summoned to the office of the Minister of Security in connection with the publication of a satirical article. There, he was stripped to the waist and flogged by four security officials in the presence of the Minister. He was then released. A few days later Aboudrahmane Sangaré met President Bédié who condemned the beating. Aboudrahmane Sangaré lodged a formal complaint about his ill-treatment but had received no official response by the end of the year.
At least 25 opposition party supporters were arrested and sentenced to prison terms ranging from six months to one year. Most of them were prosecuted under a law, passed in 1992 but not previously invoked, under which anyone who calls or leads a gathering is held accountable for any violence that occurs, irrespective of whether they are personally responsible for inciting or perpetrating violence (see Amnesty International Reports 1993 and
1994).	Those sentenced included possible prisoners of conscience. For example, six fpi supporters were arrested at a protest march on 20 September, hours before the ban on demonstrations was announced. They were each sentenced to one year's imprisonment, although there was apparently no evidence produced that they had been involved in any violence. Kah Anderson and Fatou Coulibaly, two local fpi leaders, were also sentenced to 12 and six months' imprisonment respectively at Daloa in September for organizing a march.
Student activists belonging to the Fédération estudiantine et scolaire de Côte d'Ivoire (fesci), Ivorian Federation of Students and School Pupils, also faced continued harassment by the security forces (see Amnesty International Report
1995).	Some FESCi leaders went into hiding after they were threatened with arrest and more than 40 FEsa members were detained when a press conference at the Youpougon university campus in Abidjan was forcibly broken up in June by the security forces. During this incident, Sylvie Anoma was allegedly raped by a member of the security forces, but no official inquiry into her complaint was known to have been held by the end of the year. The detained students were reportedly severely ill-treated before being released uncharged.
COT£ DWOIRE/CROATIA
Guillaume Soro, Secretary General of FESCi, was arrested in September and detained incommunicado. Eight other fesci members, including Dominique Maya and Marius Bossina, were arrested in October and also held incommunicado. In November they and Guillaume Soro were shown on television: they appeared to be in poor physical condition. During the broadcast, Guillaume Soro made what appeared to be a forced apology and called on FEsa activists to stop their activities. All nine were possible prisoners of conscience and were released without charge in December.
New legislation was passed by the parliament in June to extend the scope of the death penalty to cover offences such as robbery with violence, and to allow public executions. This was a seriously retrograde step as the death penalty, although retained in law, had never been enforced. However, by the end of the year the law had not been promulgated by the President and no executions had been reported.
Amnesty International publicly expressed concern in November about the incommunicado detention of the nine FESCI members. The organization also protested against the amendment extending the scope of the death penalty and allowing public executions and called on the government to maintain the effective moratorium on executions. In response. President B6di6 said the new law was required to combat a rise in crime.
