CYPRUS
At least 17 prisoners of conscience, all Jehovah's Witnesses, were imprisoned for refusing on religious grounds to perform military service. A Greek Cypriot soldier who was detained by the Turkish Cypriot authorities appeared to be a prisoner of conscience. A former prisoner of conscience in northern Cyprus alleged that he was ill-treated by the Cypriot police
after his release. A Turkish Cypriot man was allegedly abducted from the un buffer zone and tortured by Cypriot police officers.
The alternative "unarmed military service" provided for conscientious objectors remained punitive in length (42 or 36 months as against 26 months of ordinary military service) and is suspended during periods of emergency or general mobilizations.
At least 17 conscientious objectors were sentenced to terms of imprisonment ranging from two to 15 months. Among them was losif Kourides, a Jehovah's Witness, who was sentenced in May to 15 months' imprisonment for refusing to perform military service on religious grounds. This was his second term of imprisonment for the same off'ence.
In November Giorgos Karotsakis, a Greek Cypriot soldier, was detained by the Turkish Cypriot authorities in northern Cyprus. The exact circumstances of his detention were not known, but it appeared that his detention was probably related to the abduction of Erkan Egmez (see below) and that he was a prisoner of conscience held solely because of his ethnic origin. He was released in December.
Salih Askerogul, a Turkish Cypriot conscientious objector to military service in northern Cyprus (see Amnesty International Report 1994], was released in May after serving about one and a half years of his three-and-a-quarter-year prison sentence. In August, three police officers burst into his home in Limassol without arrest warrant or court order and told him he was under arrest. When Salih Askerogul refused to follow the officers to the police station before speaking to a lawyer, they reportedly threw him against furniture, kicked him and beat him on the head with their revolvers. He was released from detention after 24 hours.
In October Erkan Egmez, a Turkish Cypriot, was allegedly abducted by Cypriot police officers near the village of Akmcilar (Louroutzina) in the un buffer zone. He was held in incommunicado detention for a week during which he was allegedly tortured. He was transferred to hospital where he was examined by a un doctor who reportedly observed injuries consistent with torture. Two and a half weeks after his arrest Erkan Egmez was seen by his own doctor who reported that
CYPRUS/CZECH REPUBLIC
"a number of healed wounds could be observed on various parts of his body made by sharp instruments and heavy beating". On 20 October Erkan Egmez was taken to court and charged with 11 offences, including assaulting police officers. However, all the charges were dropped and he was released in December.
Throughout the year Amnesty International called on the authorities to release imprisoned conscientious objectors to military service and to introduce an alternative civilian service of non-punitive length, with no restrictions on the right of conscientious objectors to apply for such service. In November the authorities informed Amnesty International that as a result of a change in policy, conscientious objectors would in future serve only one term of imprisonment for their refusal to perform military service.
In September Amnesty International urged the authorities to carry out a thorough and impartial investigation into the alleged ill-treatment of Salih Askerogul. In October Amnesty International called on the authorities to initiate a thorough and impartial investigation into the alleged torture of Erkan Egmez. The authorities responded in November stating that Erkan Egmez had sustained injuries to his face and other parts of his body when he fell while trying to escape arrest. In November Amnesty International expressed concern to the Turkish Cypriot authorities about the detention of Giorgos Karotsakis and asked to be informed of his whereabouts and legal situation. No reply had been received by the end of the year.
