BAHAMAS
Three sentences of corporal punishment were imposed. More than 30 prisoners remained under sentence of death. No new death sentences were passed and no executions were carried out.
In July, two prisoners were sentenced to be flogged - the first such sentences to be imposed since the reintroduction of corporal punishment in 1991. Both prisoners were sentenced to flogging in addition to long prison terms for rape, armed robbery and assault. One of the prisoners, Leavon Williamson, had not been legally represented at his trial and reportedly received part of his corporal punishment (six strokes of the rod) before he was able to appeal. In November a third prisoner was sentenced to be flogged for rape.
In July the Bahamas Supreme Court commuted to life imprisonment the death sentence of Dwight Henfield, imposed for murder in 1988, ruling that his execution after a seven-year delay would violate the Constitution. The ruling was based on a November 1993 decision by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council (jcpc) in London, the final court of appeal for the Bahamas, that execution after a delay of more than five years would be presumed to constitute inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment (see Amnesty International Report 1995). Despite the ruling, Dwight Henfield and 14 other prisoners whose death sentences should also have been commuted under the ruling were still on death row at the end of the year, pending an appeal against the decision by the Bahamas Government.
In April the jcpc dismissed an appeal which had argued that the death penalty in the Bahamas was unconstitutional because the method of execution was not specified in the Constitution (see Amnesty
BWiAMAS/BAHRAIN
International Report 1995). This effectively ended a six-year moratorium on executions which had been in force pending the decision. Warrants for the execution of two prisoners were issued soon afterwards, but both received last-minute stays.
No new death sentences were imposed. At least 32 prisoners remained on death row at the end of the year. The last execution in the Bahamas was in 1984.
Amnesty International wrote to the Attorney General stating that the use of corporal punishment contravened international human rights standards prohibiting cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment. The organization appealed for clemency for the prisoners whose executions were scheduled. It urged the government to abolish the death penalty and to ensure that no further sentences would be imposed or carried out.
