LATVIA
At least four prisoners were believed to be under sentence of death. Over 100 asylum-seekers were held in detention, some of whom were allegedly ill-treated.
Following elections which were held in September and October, Andris Skele was confirmed as Prime Minister by parliament in December.
In February Latvia became a member of the Council of Europe and signed the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. It had not ratified this instrument by the end of the year, but undertook to ratify it and to abolish the death penalty in peacetime within approximately one year, and to sign and ratify the European Convention for the Prevention of Tortme and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
At least four prisoners were believed to be under sentence of death at the end of the year. All had been convicted of aggravated murder. Three were known to have submitted petitions for clemency to President Guntis Ulmanis.
In luly the Latvian authorities confirmed that a total of four death sentences had been passed in 1994 (see Amnesty International Report 1995), one of which had been carried out during that year. This information was provided by the Latvian Government to the UN Human Rights Committee which considered Latvia's initial report on its compliance with the
LATVI/VtEBANON
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. In its comments on Latvia's initial report, the Committee recommended that "a firm policy be adopted aiming at commuting ... all death sentences into life imprisonment", pending abolition of the death penalty. In October Amnesty International was informed that the prisoner who was executed in 1994 was Michael Abramkin (see Amnesty International Report 1995).
In March over 100 asylum-seekers, the majority of them Kurds, were detained on a train at the border between Latvia and Russia and later moved to a detention camp in Olaine, near the capital, Riga. In September it was alleged that many of the asylum-seekers, whose number had risen to 140, were beaten by police officers after they had barricaded themselves in the camp in protest at their situation.
In April Amnesty International urged the authorities to treat all asylum-seekers fully in accordance with the relevant international standards for the protection of asylum-seekers, including standards providing that asylum-seekers should not normally be detained. In October the organization called upon the authorities to investigate the alleged beatings of asylum-seekers in Olaine and to bring to justice anyone responsible for human rights violations. In November the authorities informed Amnesty International that none of the "illegal immigrants" detained in Olaine had been ill-treated. An investigation was, however, in progress into allegations that detainees had assaulted a police officer. In December Amnesty International expressed concern that while an investigation had been launched into the alleged assault on the police officer, no similar investigation appeared to have been initiated into allegations that police officers had ill-treated detainees.
Throughout the year Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to commute all pending death sentences and to impose an immediate moratorium on all executions pending abolition of the death penalty. In June Amnesty International asked the authorities for information about people under sentence of death. No reply was received to this letter or to a similar request for information which Amnesty International had made in December 1994.
