TUNISIA
Hundreds of prisoners of conscience were arrested during the year on suspicion of supporting unauthorized political opposition parties. Over 1,000 political prisoners arrested in previous years remained imprisoned, most of them prisoners of conscience. Torture and ill-treatment continued to be reported, particularly during garde à vue (incommunicado) detention, which was often illegally prolonged. At least five detainees died in custody.
In May the ruling party Rassemblement constitutionnel démocratique (rcd). Democratic Constitutional Rally, won 4,084 out of 4,090 seats in the municipal elections.
The government of President Zine el 'Abidine Ben 'Ali used detention and other measures to punish and silence government opponents and critics and their relatives. Many had their passports confiscated or were prevented from leaving the country. Others were repeatedly detained for questioning and threatened with prosecution. Former prisoners of conscience were increasingly ordered to report to police stations regularly. This measure, known as administrative control, was often imposed by the police without any court order. Unprecedented restrictions were imposed on the activities of local and international non-governmental organizations and news media.
Hundreds of prisoners of conscience were arrested and detained for political reasons during the year. Many were released without charge or trial but scores were convicted cmd sentenced. More than 1,000 others continued to serve prison terms. The vast majority were convicted of supporting the unauthorized Islamist political party al-Nahda, and others of supporting the unauthorized Parti
communiste des ouvriers tunisiens (pcot), Tunisian Workers' Communist Party. Three prisoners of conscience were released by presidential pardon in June and November.
Mohamed Mou'ad da, leader of the main legal opposition party, the Mouvement des démocrates socialistes (mds). Movement of Democratic Socialists, was arrested in October, one day after the mds made public a memorandum addressed to the President condemning the increased restrictions on freedom of expression and political activities. Mohamed Mou'adda was accused of activities threatening the external security of the state and of receiving funds from a foreign state. He was still detained awaiting trial at the end of the year.
Najib Hosni, a human rights lawyer arrested in June 1994, remained detained without trial, in breach of Tunisian law which limits pre-trial detention to 14 months. He was charged with falsifying a land contract in 1989 but there were fears that he might have been detained on account of his human rights activities. In November he was reportedly tortiued in the Ministry of the Interior. No investigation was known to have been carried out into the allegations.
Wives and relatives of exiled a!-Nabda supporters were frequently arrested and questioned about the whereabouts and activities of their husbands or relatives. Several reported being ill-treated and threatened with rape while detained. Scores of people, including relatives of Islamist prisoners, were imprisoned for allegedly giving financial assistance to the families of imprisoned or exiled al-Nahda supporters, or for having themselves received financial assistance. Most were also accused of participating in unauthorized meetings and supporting an unauthorized association.
Tourkia Hamadi, a mother of two, was sentenced to six months' imprisonment in May on chcirges of maintaining an unauthorized association and assisting her husband, Fadel Beda, to leave the country. She had been repeatedly arrested and questioned about her husband, a supporter of al-Nahda, who fled from Tunisia in 1992 to seek political asylum in France. He was sentenced, in absentia, to three years' imprisonment on charges of supporting al-Nahda.
TUNISIA
Other prisoners of conscience continued to be imprisoned under legislation which defines "terrorist" activities in vague terms (see Amnesty International Report 1994).
'Ali Ba'azaoui, a high-school teacher in Kairouan, was arrested in May and accused of belonging to an unauthorized association (the pcot) and distributing leaflets calling for the boycott of municipal elections, accusations he denied. In June he was sentenced to three years' imprisonment. His sentence was increased on appeal in August by the addition of three years' administrative control.
Hundreds of known and suspected supporters of al-Nahda were imprisoned. Many were accused of having participated in unauthorized meetings, often several years earlier. Most denied having links with al-Nahda and some stated in court that they had participated only in meetings of the Union générale tunisienne des étudiants (ugte), Tunisian General Union of Students, before it was banned in 1991.
'Imed 'Ebdelli, a philosophy student at Tunis University, was arrested in March. He was held in garde à vue detention in the Ministry of the Interior for 27 days, during which he was reportedly beaten and ill-treated. In May he was tried and sentenced to three years' imprisonment on charges of belonging to al-Nahda and participating in unauthorized meetings. He had been arrested on previous occasions, most recently in November 1991 when he was held in illegally prolonged garde à vue detention and reportedly tortured. Between his release in lanuary 1994 and his arrest in March 1995 he had to report daily to police stations.
Several Tunisians living or studying abroad were imprisoned on their return to Tunisia. They were convicted under legislation introduced in November 1993 which punishes political activities undertaken outside Tunisia, including participating in peaceful meetings and demonstrations, even when these activities are not illegal in the country where they are alleged to have taken place (see Amnesty International Reports 1994 and 1995).
Sofiane Mourali and Hafedh Ben Ghar-bia, both university students in Germany, were arrested in March and April respectively at Monastir airport. Both were prisoners of conscience. They were held in
illegally prolonged garde a vue detention, during which Sofiane Mourali was reportedly tortured. In May Sofiane Mourali was sentenced to three years' imprisonment and five years' administrative control, and Hafedh Ben Gharbia to 14 months' imprisonment, on charges of belonging to al-Nahda, participating in unauthorized meetings, and taking part in a demonstration by the ugte in Germany. They denied the charges. Hafedh Ben Gharbia, who suffered from severe depression, was reportedly not given the necessary medical care.
Torture and ill-treatment continued to be reported in police stations, detention centres and prisons throughout the country and in the Ministry of the Interior in Tunis, the capital. Methods of torture reported included suspension in contorted positions, immersion of the detainees' head in water mixed with chemicals, electric shocks and beatings. Most reports concerned detainees held in garde d vue detention, often illegally prolonged beyond the maximum 10-day period allowed by Tunisian law. There were also increasing reports of ill-treatment and denial of medical care in prisons.
Bachir 'Abid, 'Ali Jallouli and 'Abdel Moumen Belanes, three students arrested in November and charged with activities on behalf of the unauthorized Union de la jeunesse communiste. Union of Communist Youth, were reportedly tortured during prolonged incommunicado detention in the Ministry of the Interior. They alleged that they were subjected to electric shocks on sensitive parts of their bodies; suspended in contorted positions, with their arms and legs behind their backs, and beaten; and suspended by their feet while their heads were plunged into a bucket of water mixed with bleach. They also reported being deprived of food and sleep for up to seven days, during which they were tied to a chair and kept awake by a needle which pierced their necks if their heads drooped. They remained awaiting trial at the end of the year.
Mohamed Hedi Sassi and Hamma Hammami, two pcot activists arrested in 1994 (see Amnesty International Report 1995), were reportedly ill-treated in prison, particularly between March and July. When they went on hunger-strike to protest at their ill-treatment, they were punished by being kept chained by the foot in isolation cells and forbidden visits
TUNISIA/TURKEY
by their families and lawyers. Hamma Hammami was released by presidential pardon in November. No judicial investigation was carried out into these and other cases of allegations of torture and ill-treatment.
Trials of those accused of political offences violated international standards of fair trial. Defendants' complaints that they were tortured and ill-treated during garde d vue detention to force them to sign statements were systematically disregarded by judges. Courts routinely failed to act on requests from detainees and their lawyers for investigations into allegations of torture and ill-treatment.
At least five detainees were reported to have died in custody during the year. One was Sahnoun Jaouhari, a former leading member of the Ugue tunisienne des droits de rbomme (ltdh), Tunisian Human Rights League, and a leading member of al'Nabda. He died in January in 9 Avril Prison. He had been arrested in 1991 and reportedly tortured. He was reported to have been seriously ill long before his death, but had apparently not received the necessary medical care. His family was not allowed to see the body before it was buried.
No investigations were carried out into deaths during garde d vue detention in police custody during previous years, including cases where there was strong evidence that the death had been caused by torture. No information was provided on the case of Kamal Matmati who "disappeared" after arrest in 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1995).
Amnesty International continued to call for the release of all prisoners of conscience, and for an end to the imposition of administrative control on prisoners of conscience after their release. It called for full and independent investigations into allegations of torture and ill-treatment, and for an end to prolonged incommunicado detention. In November Amnesty International issued a report, Tunisia: Repression thrives on impunity. The Tunisian authorities replied on some of the cases raised by Amnesty International, but failed to address the concerns raised.
