TOGO
At least seven possible prisoners of conscience were detained during the year and one prisoner of conscience was released. There were reports of torture and ill-treatment. One person appeared to have been extrajudicially executed and several people were shot dead by soldiers for road traffic offences.
Throughout the year, there were reports that the Forces armées togolaises, Togolese Armed Forces, harassed and intimidated opposition supporters and human rights activists. In January Georges Katé, a supporter of one of the main opposition parties, the Comité d'action pour le renouveau (car). Action Committee for Renewal, was wounded by two people in military uniform. During the same month, soldiers searched the house of Robert Ahlonko Dovi, former president of
TOGO
the Commission nationals des droits de ¡'homme (cndh), National Commission for Human Rights, who had taken refuge in Benin in 1993 after receiving threats, and that of his brother. In February the vice-president of the Ligue togolaise des droits de J'homme (ltdh), Togolese Human Rights League, which had expressed concern at the secret detention of a military officer, was pressed by army officers in the presence of the Procurator of the Republic to sign a letter denying the ltdh's previous statement. In April members of the gendarmerie ransacked Akoto, the home village of Kokouvi Alphonse Masseme, former Minister of Internal Affairs and a prominent member of the opposition.
There was continuing violence in the course of which armed opposition supporters allegedly killed at least seven people, including two children,
Members of the car, who had left the National Assembly after a dispute in 1994, reoccupied their seats in August.
At least seven possible prisoners of conscience were detained, but one prisoner of conscience was released, In mid-January, following a presidential decree, prisoner of conscience Martin Dossou Gbenouga, publisher and director of an independent newspaper, La Tribune des démocrates, was released (see Amnesty International Report 1995}. A week earlier his five-year prison sentence had been reduced to one year by the appeal court.
In June Billy Knok, publisher and director of the satirical newspaper Le Kpakpa désenchanté, was arrested and held for several hours. Police interrogated him about an article which criticized the gendarmerie. In November Fulbert Atisso, director of the newspaper L'Eveil, was arrested for publishing an article claiming that the army had extrajudicially killed four people in September in Akoto. He was detained for more than four weeks at the Civil Prison in Lomé before being released in December. Masseme Koffitseh, who was detained in September, was held for over two months, apparently because he was the nephew of the opposition leader Kokouvi Alphonse Masseme. He was released without charge in November.
Two soldiers who had taken rehige in Benin in 1993 were arrested on their return to Togo. They had fled after at least 20 people, including civilians and soldiers, were summarily executed following
an attack on an army barracks (see Amnesty International Report 1994). Adjété Ako, a non-commissioned officer, and sergeant Djekpo Jolevi were arrested in February and August respectively. They were possible prisoners of conscience. They were still held at the end of the year without charge or trial at the gendarmerie in Lomé. In April Lieutenant Andoué Badié was arrested, reportedly for calling for the release of an army officer who had been arrested in 1994 and held in unacknowledged detention, and for urging reforms within the army. A month later. Lieutenant Awaté was arrested and held for one month for failing to inform his superiors that Lieutenant Badié was calling for reforms. Lieutenant Badié, a possible prisoner of conscience, was still detained uncharged at the end of the year.
Corporal Nikabou Bikagni, a political prisoner serving a three-year prison sentence apparently imposed because of his allegiance to a former prime minister, was released in January under a December 1994 amnesty decree (see Amnesty International Report 1995).
Jérôme Alhadji Koko, the chauffeur of exiled former cndh president Robert Ahlonko Dovi, was arrested in January for possession of illegal arms and ammunition. At the end of the year he was still held without trial at Lomé Civil Prison.
There were further reports of torture. Kokou Koudaya testified that he had been tortured after his arrest in Kara in March 1994. He said that soldiers interrogating him about leaders of the opposition repeatedly tortured him and forced him to sign a self-incriminating statement. His body was extensively scarred. In a written statement, Kokou Koudaya said that soldiers had injected a green liquid into his body and that he had been handcuffed and forced to remain in an upright position for two months. He said that his companion, Delphine Amenyo, who had been arrested at the same time, died in custody 17 days later as a result of torture. Salifou Zakari, a Ghanaian national, was arrested in March 1994 and held at the military camp in Landja where he was tortured. He was subsequently transferred to the gendarmerie and then to the Civil Prison in Kara. During his interrogation, soldiers asked him if he knew Kokou Koudaya. Both Kokou Koudaya and Salifou Zakari were released without charge in August
TOGO/TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
after the CNDH inquired about them. The government took no action to investigate the complaints of torture or to bring to justice those responsible.
In March David Kossi Akakpo, a clerk who had been working with Robert Ahlonko Dovi (see above), was killed in Aflao-Akato Deme in what appeared to be an extrajudicial execution.
On several occasions soldiers killed road-users for driving offences. In May a motorcar driver was shot dead for failing to stop at the place indicated by a soldier. In June, two motorcyclists and a passenger were shot dead by police for not observing the highway code. The authorities undertook no investigations into these killings.
Two Amnesty International delegates, who visited Togo in March to attend the 17th ordinary session of the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights, also met the Prime Minister and the Minister of Justice. The Amnesty International delegates welcomed the release of prisoners of conscience under the December 1994 general amnesty law, but expressed concern that it appeared to grant impunity for human rights violations. The delegates urged the government to order prompt, thorough and independent investigations into all cases of alleged human rights violations. Amnesty International repeatedly expressed concern to the authorities about human rights violations, including extrajudicial executions and torture.
