COLOMBIA
Many hundreds of civilians were extrajudicially executed by the security forces and paramilitary groups and at least 150 people "disappeared". Human rights activists were threatened and attacked. Hundreds of people, including possible prisoners of conscience, were arrested and tried by special courts whose procedures fell short of international fair trial standards. A conscientious objector to military service was imprisoned. Torture was widespread. Several officers were dismissed from the army for human rights violations. Many other armed forces personnel continued to evade accountability for thousands of extrajudicial executions and "disappearances" in recent years. Armed opposition groups committed grave human rights abuses, including scores of deliberate and arbitrary killings and the taking and holding of hundreds of hostages.
The government of President Ernesto Samper twice declared a state of emergency, ostensibly because of the rising level of political and criminal violence throughout the country. The first, in August, coincided with a political scandal triggered by investigations by the Attorney General's Office into alleged financial support from drug-trafficking organizations for President Samper's 1994 election campaign. In October the Constitutional Court declared the state of internal commotion unconstitutional. A state of internal commotion was again declared in November after the murder in the capital, Bogotá, of Alvaro Gómez Hurtado, a leading member of the Conservative Party and former presidential candidate. The government
introduced numerous emergency measures, including house searches without warrant, press censorship and authorization for military and civilian authorities to forcibly evacuate civilians from areas undergoing counter-insurgency operations.
In October talks began between the government and the Jaime Bateman command, a dissident wing of the former m-19 guerrilla organization which demobilized in 1990. Government proposals announced in 1994 to open talks with the Ejército de Liberación Nacional (eln), National Liberation Army, the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia fFARc), Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, and the Ejército Popular de Liberación (epl). Popular Liberation Army, were abandoned in July when the Peace Commissioner resigned. The government refused to authorize initiatives for dialogue proposed by regional authorities.
Political violence escalated in several areas of the country. In the northwestern region of Urabá, Antioquia department, widespread abuses were committed by most parties to the long-running armed conflict between government forces and their paramilitary allies, and the faro, eln and epl armed opposition groups. The armed forces failed to take any action to protect the civilian population from paramilitary and guerrilla attacks and evidence emerged of army complicity and collusion with a major paramilitary offensive launched in 1994. The vast majority of attacks were directed against sectors of the civilian population presumed to support rival armed groups. Several hundred civilians were killed and at least 15,000 fled their homes. A series of massacres in August and September left scores of civilians dead. On 12 August, 18 people, including four women and two minors, were killed by heavily armed men who burst into the El Aracatazzo restaurant in the El Bosque neighbourhood of Chigorodó, Urabá. Many of the inhabitants of El Bosque were supporters of the legal left-wing political party Unión Patriótica (up) Patriotic Union. The killings were attributed to the paramilitary Comandos de Alternativa Popular, Popular Alternative Command, which claimed the attack was in reprisal for the killing of three soldiers and three civilians in Apartado hours earlier. Thirteen people, identified by the authorities as members of a paramilitary organization,
COLOMBIA
were arrested in connection with the massacre; most were released without charge. In a series of attacks in Urabá, apparently in retaliation for the massacre in El Aracatazzo and other paramilitary killings, the farc killed dozens of supporters of Esperanza, Paz y Libertad, Peace, Hope and Liberty, a political party created by demobilized epl guerrillas, whose members were accused by the farc of supporting paramilitary attacks against the Communist Party and the up. On 29 August a group of supporters of Esperanza, Paz y Libertad were forced off a bus in Carepa, Urabá, by a group of armed men and women. The armed group selected 16 who were bound, forced to lie face down and then shot dead.
Widespread human rights violations were reported from several other areas of the country where paramilitary organizations continued military offensives to extend their territorial control. In North Santander and Cesar departments the majority of victims were peasant and community leaders, political activists and trade unionists. Scores of union members and leaders in the palm oil industry were among the victims. On 16 August a heavily armed paramilitary group ransacked and set fire to the homes of several leaders of indupalma, the palm oil workers' union, in San Alberto, Cesar department. Union leader Tomás Cortes was dragged from his home and taken away by the paramilitary group. His whereabouts remained unknown.
On 15 January, 40 gunmen, some in military uniform, seized nine people from the village of Puerto Patiño, municipality of Aguachica, Cesar department. One of the nine was later released; the bodies of seven villagers were found nearby and one remained "disappeared". Clear evidence emerged of armed forces' support for paramilitary activities in Cesar department. Major Jorge Lázaro Vergel, commander of the Aguasclaras military base, was detained in April accused of actively supporting paramilitciry groups operating in the area. The major reportedly told a senior police officer that he had a list of "subversive suspects" who were to be killed by the paramilitary forces.
Over 20 alleged members of paramilitary organizations were arrested by a special unit of the Attorney General's Office in different areas of the country. However,
known paramilitary leaders, sentenced to long prison terms in absentia for multiple political killings and "disappecu^ances", remained at large.
Human rights defenders were again the target of threats and attacks. Human rights lawyer Javier Barriga Vergel was shot dead by two gunmen outside his home in Cúcuta, North Santander department, in June. Javier Barriga worked with the Comité de Solidaridad con los Presos Políticos, Political Prisoners' Solidarity Committee. He and other lawyers in Cúcuta had received death threats from a paramilitary group, Colombia Sin Guerrilla, Colombia without Guerrillas, for defending political prisoners. In February threats against members of the Comité û'vico por los Derechos Humanos en el Meta, Meta Civic Committee for Human Rights, escalated and an anonymous warning was received of an imminent attack against Sister Nohemy Falencia, a Catholic nun and prominent member of the Committee. In April the Committee closed its office in the departmental capital Villavi-cencio and continued its human rights work from Bogotá. However, threats against its members continued. In September Committee member Teresa Mosquera, who had remained in Villavicencio, was threatened with being beaten to death if she did not leave the city within 24 hours.
The killing of so-called "disposables" by "death squads" continued in many cities and towns. Principal victims included petty criminals, drug addicts, prostitutes, homosexuals and young people living in poor neighbourhoods and shanty towns. Some of the hundreds of young people killed in the cities of Medellin, Bogotá and Cali were believed to have been victims of rival street gangs. Many others were killed by gunmen, often hired by local traders, working with the support of the security forces. On 3 May, three youths - Rodolfo Cetre Angola, Hugo Aldemar Manrique and Juan Carlos Girón Hurtado — were arrested in Cali, Valle department, by members of Call's Metropolitan Police and taken to a police station where they were reportedly tortured. Two days later they were accused of theft and transferred to the Valle de Lili juvenile detention centre where they were last seen alive on 7 May. The following day their partially burned bodies were found in another area of the city.
COLOMBIA
Over 150 people "disappeared" after detention by the armed forces, the police or paramihtary groups. In May John Ubate Monroy and Gloria Bogotá were abducted in Cali by heavily armed men who forced them into a car and drove away. Witnesses alerted the police who pursued the car, but were ordered by a high-ranking official of the Metropolitan Police to abandon the pursuit. The whereabouts of the two victims remained unknown. lohn Ubate's relatives and friends received repeated death threats and Astrid Liliana González, his girlfriend, escaped an apparent attempt to abduct her in September.
Paramilitary forces operating in rural areas were responsible for numerous "disappearances" of political and community activists. Wilson Cáceres González, a community leader and former mayoral candidate in Sabana de Torres, Santander department, "disappeared" in April as he was travelling alone on the outskirts of Sabana de Torres. His name had appeared on a death list which had been circulated in the region by the Autodefensas Campesinas de Colombia, Peasant Farmer Self-Defence Group.
Hundreds of people, including possible prisoners of conscience, were arrested and tried by special courts whose procedures fell short of international standards of fair trial.
One prisoner of conscience, Luis Gabriel Caldas León, was imprisoned from June to November for refusing on grounds of conscience to perform military service.
Torture was widespread. Many victims of politically motivated killings were tortured before being killed and their bodies mutilated. Political detainees were also tortured by both the military and police. In September Franklin Bolivar, an eye-wit-ness to the massacre in E¡ Aracatazzo (see above), was detained and taken to the xvii Brigade headquarters in Garepa, Urabá, where he was subjected to torture including prolonged beating with a machete and being suspended by a rope which tied his arms behind his back. He was released without charge three weeks later. Both he and his family reported receiving repeated threats that they would be killed unless he retracted his allegations of torture. In November the UN Committee against Torture expressed grave concern about the persistence of a significant number of violent deaths, torture and ill-treatment, attrib-
uted to members of the army and police on a scale which would appear to indicate a systematic practice in some regions of the country.
In an unprecedented move. President Samper in February accepted state responsibility for the "disappearance", torture and murder of 107 people in Trujillo, Valle department, between 1988 and 1990 and ordered the dismissal of army Lieutenant Colonel Alirio Urueña Jaramillo for his part in the massacres. The President's acceptance of state responsibility for the massacres was based on the findings of an investigative commission established under the auspices of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States (see Amnesty International Report 1995). Members of the security forces and paramilitary organizations identified in the commission's report as responsible for the killings had already been exonerated in disciplinary and criminal investigations. Almost total impunity continued to prevail in judicial investigations into extrajudicial executions, "disappearances" and torture by armed forces personnel. The military justice system, which generally claimed jurisdiction to pursue investigations, routinely dropped charges or acquitted those responsible. However, some disciplinary investigations conducted by the Procurator General's Public Ministry resulted in sanctions being imposed. In September Brigadier General Alvaro Ve-landia Hurtado, commander of the army's m Brigade, and an army sergeant were dismissed from the army by executive decree after an investigation by the Procurator Delegate for Human Rights established their responsibility in the torture and murder of political activist Nydia Erika Bautista in 1987. General Velandia was the highest-ranking serving member of the armed forces to be subjected to disciplinary sanctions for human rights violations. The decision was strongly opposed by military commanders and some sectors of Congress who attempted, unsuccessfully, to reinstate General Velandia. Following the Procurator Delegate's initial call for his dismissal, General Velandia was decorated by order of President Samper. Dr Hernando Valencia Villa, the Procurator Delegate for Human Rights, resigned and left the country in September after being subjected to intimidation and death
COLOMBIA/CONGO
threats. Relatives of Nydia Erika Bautista and witnesses in the investigation also received repeated death threats.
In November the Procurator General ordered the immediate dismissal of two soldiers for the killing of Swiss lay missionary Hildegard María Feldmann and three other people in El Sande, Nariño department, in 1990. Hildegard Feldmann was killed when troops opened fire without warning on the house where she was nursing a sick woman. The dismissed officers had been exonerated by military courts.
Armed opposition groups committed numerous grave human rights abuses, including scores of deliberate and arbitrary killings. In May, four young women -Yaneth Lima González, Guadalupe Romero Oviedo, Yamile Lima González and Isabel Amaya - were taken from their homes in Saravena, Arauca department, interrogated and shot dead by the eln's Domingo Lain command which accused them of being army informants. Civilians living in conflict areas suspected of collaborating with the armed forces or paramilitary groups were threatened and killed. In addition to killings attributed to the farc in Urabá, the epl group operating in the area also carried out arbitrary and deliberate killings. José Elias Suárez, leader of the Zenú indigenous community in El Volao, Urabá, was killed in March by an epl command. He was taken from his home, tied to a nearby tree and hacked to death. Several other members of the Zenú community in El Volao were killed by army-backed paramilitary groups.
At least 400 hundred people were held hostage, principally by the farc and the eln. Some were released after payment of ransom money or the fulfilment of other demands. Others were killed in captivity. In June, two us missionaries, Steve Welsh and Timothy Van Dyke, were shot dead by the farc when soldiers attacked the base where they were held. They had been held hostage for over 17 months. José Antonio Patiño, who was kidnapped by the eln in August, was killed in September, allegedly while trying to escape. When his brother, Julio César Patiño, went to collect his body, he was himself kidnapped by the same group. He remained held at the end of the year.
Throughout the year Amnesty International appealed to the government to con-
duct thorough, independent and impartial investigations into all extrajudicial executions and "disappearances" and called for those responsible to be brought to justice, It called on the government to end impunity by excluding human rights violations from the military justice system and to dismantle parcunilitary groups. It appealed to opposition groups to end deliberate and arbitrary killings and to release all hostages. In an oral statement to the un Commission on Human Rights in February, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns in Colombia.
