ANGOLA
New arrests of government opponents, including possible prisoners of conscience, were reported. There were allegations of torture and ill-treatment of detainees and extrajudicial executions by government troops. The armed opposition Uniao Na-
ANGOLA
Clonal para a Independencia Total de Angola (untta), National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, released some prisoners but failed to account for others, raising concern about their safety, and was responsible for deliberate and arbitrary killings.
A formal cease-fire between the government of President José Eduardo dos Santos and the armed opposition unita led by Jonas Malheiro Savimbi was agreed in February, in accordance with the Lusaka Protocol peace settlement signed in November 1994 (see Amnesty International Report 1995). The un Security Council then established the un Angola Verification Mission iii (unavem iii), to replace the unavem ii mission which had monitored the previous peace agreement of 1991. Warning that its mission could be suspended if the cease-fire should break down, the un initially installed unavem ui for six months but then extended its mandate for a further six months in August. A human rights unit was established within unavem iii. Eight human rights monitors were appointed and, with the assistance of 215 un civilian police, mandated to investigate complaints of human rights abuses. The Comissao Conjunta, Joint Commission, established under the Lusaka Protocol to implement the peace agreement, decided in May to consider human rights at all its regular sessions and requested regular reports on human rights from unavem iii.
There were many violations of the cease-fire and hundreds of people were killed as a result of continued fighting, especially in the north and in Lunda Norte and Lunda Sul. Many people were also killed by landmines and there were re-
ports of new mine laying by both sides. Despite this, the overall level of violence was reduced owing to the peace agreement, humanitarian aid became accessible to more of the population and people displaced by the war began to return to their homes. An agreement between the government and the un High Commissioner for Refugees (unhcr) in June provided for the voluntary repatriation of refugees from neighbouring countries. A similar agreement was also reached between unita and the unhcr for the resettlement of 45,000 people from Jamba, unita's former headquarters, in the southeast.
The planned integration of government and UNrTA troops to form a single army, with demobilization of other troops on both sides, was severely delayed and the timetable for full implementation of the peace agreement was adjusted in June to take account of this. The first un peacekeeping battalions were deployed in June. The Constitution was amended in July in order to create two posts of vice-president, one of which was offered to unita. By the end of the year the Rapid Reaction Police had not been confined to barracks nor were civilians disarmed, as required by the peace agreement.
Fighting continued in Cabinda between government forces and armed separatist groups. One of these, the Frente para a Libertaçôo do Enclave de Cabinda-Reno-vada (flec-r), Front for the Liberation of the Cabinda Enclave-Renewed, agreed a four-month truce in September while it continued negotiations with the government but other Cabindan separatist groups refused to participate.
Under the Lusaka Protocol, the government and unita agreed to release all prisoners held in connection with the conflict but only about 350 such prisoners had been released by the end of the year. The government released over 200 unrta supporters in May but in June it said it was halting releases until unita freed a similar number. However, only 22 were released by unita during the year. It remained unclear how many prisoners were being held by each side and there was mounting concern about hundreds of people whose fate and whereabouts were unknown since their detention or abduction in 1992 and
1993	by the forces of one side or the other (see Amnesty International Reports 1993,
1994	and 1995).
ANGOLA
There were reports of new poHtical arrests of suspected unita supporters and other opponents of the government, including possible prisoners of conscience. Few details were available and independent corroboration was rarely forthcoming. Some detainees were released within days or a few weeks. One of those held was Nzuzi Domingos, a leading member of the Partido Democrático para o Progresso-Ahan^a Naciona} Angolana, Democratic Party for Progress-Angolan National Alliance. He was arrested in May and charged with defamation after he publicly accused the chief of police of involvement in killings of members of the Bakongo ethnic group in January 1993 (see Amnesty International Report 1994). He was freed on bail after over a month in detention but had not been tried by the end of the year.
Some detainees were reportedly tortured or ill-treated. They included two members of the clergy, Reverend Justino Wako and Father Joao Maria Futi, and Joao Baptista Sousa, a journalist. They were detained for several hours with dozens of other people in January when they attended a peaceful political meeting in Cabinda. They were reportedly beaten with batons, kicked and threatened at gunpoint.
Other government opponents were killed in suspicious circumstances, raising fears that they may have been victims of extrajudicial executions. Ricardo de Meló, the director of an independent newspaper, was shot dead in January after publishing an article which implicated senior government officials in corruption. He had received death threats on several occasions and had been briefly detained in November 1994 for criticizing the government (see Amnesty International Report 1995). Police reportedly investigated the killing but the results were not published. In Cabinda, a suspected member of flec, Joao Pequeño, was shot dead by soldiers when they arrested him in July.
There were also reports of government soldiers carrying out extrajudicial executions after taking control of towns previously held by unfta, but few details were available and it was impossible to corroborate the reports.
Amnesty International received new information that Manuel Elemina, a lawyer, had not been killed by government forces in Benguela in 1993 as earlier reported
(see Amnesty International Report 1994). He had been detained for several months from January 1993 and tortured, resulting in permanent damage to his health. He died in 1995.
untfa was responsible for gross human rights abuses, including deliberate and arbitrary killings. In all, unita was known to have releeised only 22 prisoners by the end of the year despite the peace agreement's requirements. UNrrA failed to account for prisoners detained before the peace agreement, as well as two South Africans whom unita had captured and threatened to execute in 1994 (see Amnesty International Report 1995). It continued to deny any responsibility for the fate of Valdemar Peres da Silva (see Amnesty International Report 1994), saying he had never been detained, unita forces reportedly detained other suspected government supporters in 1995. In November unita einnounced that it had captured four South Africans who had subsequently confessed to plotting to kill unita's leader Jonas Savimbi. Their fate was not known at the end of the yeeir.
An unknown number of people were reportedly condemned to death by unita in October for allegedly killing 17 women and children near Negage in Uige province. In response to an appeal by the un Secretary-General's Special Representative to Angola, unita said that the prisoners would not be executed.
unita forces deliberately and arbitrarily killed captured soldiers and civilians. In September or October, Joao Lina was reportedly beaten to death in public by unita forces after two of his relatives fled the area under unfta control in Soyo to an area under government control. His body was reportedly left on public display for some days before his family was allowed to bury him, In October, three members of a Cabindan separatist group were said to have been summarily executed by unita for stealing arms. Five unfta soldiers were also said to have been summarily executed for complicity.
Throughout the year Amnesty International appealed to both the government and unfta to account for the fate of those who had "disappeared" or were missing following abduction since the resumption of hostilities in late 1992. Amnesty International also made inquiries and expressed concern about reports of killings by the government and unita, including
ANGOLA/ARGENTINA
the killing of Ricardo de Melo. In August the organization wrote to the un Special Representative to Angola to seek information and make suggestions to strengthen human rights protection. The Special Representative welcomed these suggestions and informed Amnesty International of protective measures he had implemented.
