SYRIA
At least 1,500 political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, were released, the majority following a presidential amnesty issued in November. At least 200 prisoners of conscience remained held. Some were serving prison sentences, while others were detained without charge or trial. Long-term political detainees, including prisoners of conscience, continued to be tried before the Supreme State Security Court (sssc); at least 21 were convicted after unfair hearings and sentenced to prison terms of between three and 22 years. Several political prisoners continued to be held after their sentences had expired. Scores of prisoners who "disappeared" in previous years remained unaccounted for.
President Hafiz al-Assad issued an amnesty on the occasion of his 25th anniversary in power as a result of which at least
SYRIA
1,500 political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, were released in November and December. A General Amnesty Law (Decree No. 18), which was issued by the President and approved by the People's Assembly in December, was believed to be mainly concerned with prisoners held for non-political offences.
The majority of the 1,500 political prisoners released were alleged members and supporters of the al-Ikhwan al-Mushmun (Muslim Brotherhood) who were among thousands arrested in the early 1980s in connection with the movement (see previous Amnesty International Reports]. Most were released in November and December following the presidential amnesty; others were released in March. It was not known how many of those held in connection with the Muslim Brotherhood continued to be held. Among other prisoners released were doctors, engineers and lawyers who had been arrested following a one-day general strike in 1980 (see previous Amnesty International Reports). In August the Syrian Government stated that 18 medical professionals had been released between 1980 and 1992.
At least 200 prisoners of conscience continued to be held. Some were detained without charge or trial, while others were serving prison sentences, mostly imposed after unfair trials. About a dozen prisoners continued to serve sentences for alleged links with al-Hizb al-Shuyu'i al-Maktab al-Siyassi, the Communist Party-Political Bureau (cppb). Riad al-Turk, a leading member of the Cppb who was arrested in 1980, remained in incommunicado detention without charge or trial. He had been held incommunicado for 15 years and in that time had been allowed only two visits from his wife and daughter (see Amnesty International Report 1995). Ten prisoners of conscience, sentenced in March 1992 to between five and 10 years' imprisonment in connection with the unauthorized Committees for the Defence of Democratic Freedoms and Human Rights in Syria, remained in prison. They included Aktham Nu'aysa, a lawyer, who was reported to be in poor health (see Amnesty International Report 1995).
As in previous years long-term political detainees, including prisoners of conscience, were brought to trial before the sssc, whose procedures fall far short of international fair trial standards (see Am-
nesty International Report 1995). Many, including prisoners of conscience, had been held without charge or trial for up to 13 years. They were tried on charges of belonging to, or activities relating to, various unauthorized political organizations. Many were sentenced to prison terras, while dozens were acquitted or had the charges against them dropped. At least 12 defendants charged in connection with the Hizb al-'Amal al-Shuyu'i, Party for Communist Action, were sentenced to prison terms during the year. They included 'Abd al-'Aziz al-Khayyir, arrested in February 1992, who was sentenced to 22 years' imprisonment in August. This was the longest sentence known to have been passed by the SSSC since July 1992. Some defendants were acquitted; others were released after being sentenced to prison terms almost equivalent to the period they had already spent in pre-trial detention.
At least nine political detainees suspected of links with unauthorized Kurdish organizations were tried before the sssc during 1995 and sentenced to three years' imprisonment. They had been held incommunicado since 1992 and had reportedly been released by the end of the year, after serving their sentences. Other trials scheduled in March were postponed. Defendants included 'Aladdin Ahmad Haraam who had been arrested in October 1992 and was reportedly held in 'Adra prison.
Most of the political detainees held for alleged links with the Hizb al-Ba'th al-Dimuqrati al-Ishtiraki al-'Arabi, Arab Socialist Democratic Ba'th Party, were serving prison terms averaging 15 years imposed by the sssc in 1994.
Most of those tried for alleged links with two unauthorized Nasserist political movements, the Hizb al-Ittihad al-'Arabi al-Ishtiraki fi Suriyya, Arab Socialist Union Party, and al-Tanzim al-Sha'bi al-Dimoqrati al-Naseri, the Nasserist Democratic Popular Organization, were released. However, Marwan 'Az al-Din Ghazi and Ahmad Ma'tuq remained detained in connection with the Nasserist Democratic Popular Organization. Both had appeared before the sssc in 1993 and 1994, but no information was available regarding the outcome of the trial.
Three long-term prisoners of conscience, all former government and Ba'th
SYRIA
Party officials detained without charge or trial since 1970, were released in January. They were: Muhammad 'Id 'Ashawi, aged 65. Fawzi Rida, also in his sixties, and 'Abd al-Hamid Miqdad (see previous Amnesty International Reports).
Up to 80 Kurds were arrested during the year in connection with unauthorized political organizations or activities. More than 60 of them were arrested by the security forces in February and March, apparently after the Kurds defied a ban by the authorities on celebrations for the traditional Nawruz (Kurdish New Year Festival). Most were believed to have been released weeks or months later. Seventeen other Kurds were reportedly arrested in November and December. Their arrests were said to have followed the distribution of leaflets expressing solidarity with the Kurds stripped of Syrian nationality 33 years earlier.
Hundreds of Palestinians and Lebanese nationals arrested on political grounds in previous years in Lebanon or Syria remained in detention (see previous Amnesty International Reports). Most were held incommunicado and their whereabouts were unknown. At least 19 Palestinians who had completed their sentences reportedly remained in detention awaiting deportation. There were also reports that scores of Palestinians, who had been arrested in the mid-1970s and 1980s, had received sentences ranging from 10 years' to life imprisonment. Twenty-six Palestinians arrested in connection with Palestinian political movements and held since 1985 and 1987 were released in June.
At least 80 Lebanese nationals remained held in Syrian jails. They included Butrus Abu-'Abbud, who was arrested in May 1993 at the Lebanese border and was reportedly held in Far' Falastin detention centre in Damascus. His arrest was said to be connected with his political activities in Lebanon.
At least three political prisoners remained in custody despite having completed their prison sentences. They included Khalil Brayez, a writer and former army officer who was in his sixties. He was abducted by Syrian security forces in Lebanon in 1970, possibly in connection with the publication of two books that were critical of the Syrian army during the 1967 war. He had been in de-
tention for 25 years, 10 years beyond the expiry of the 15-year sentence imposed in 1970.
Scores of political prisoners arrested in previous years remained unaccounted for and it was feared that they had "disappeared". They included Wafa' Fahmi "Ubaidat, a Jordanian national, who was reportedly arrested while visiting Damascus in October 1986. Her fate and whereabouts remained unknown.
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the immediate and unconditional release of all prisoners of conscience and for all political prisoners to receive fair and prompt trials, or be released. It urged the authorities to initiate impartial investigations into all torture allegations.
In April Amnesty International published a report, Sjria; Repression and impunity - the forgotten victims. The report was based on a memorandum submitted to the Syrian Government in July 1994 (see Amnesty International Report 1995).
In July Amnesty International received a memorandum from the Syrian Government which addressed some of the organization's concerns. The memorandum stated that individual human rights are protected in Syria by all mandatory legislation including the Constitution, and that the state of emergency, although in force because of the exceptional circumstances in Syria, has rarely been implemented except in a very limited way. The memorandum went on to argue that due procedure is carefully followed by the SSSC and that there are no prisoners of conscience, no "disappearances", no torture, and no impunity for human rights violations in Syria. Amnesty International received no response regarding the numerous individual cases it had previously submitted to the government.
In November Amnesty International wrote to the Syrian authorities welcoming the news that political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, had reportedly been released, and seeking details about the releases and the amnesty. Amnesty International urged the Syrian Government to release all prisoners of conscience and other political prisoners who had not been charged with recognizably criminal offences and fairly and promptly tried.
Amnesty International submitted in April information about its concerns in
SYRIA/TAIWAN
Syria for un review under a procedure established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728F/1503, for confidential consideration of communications about human rights violations.
