MALI
At least 28 possible prisoners of conscience were sentenced to between two and eight months' imprisonment. Scores of people detained following peaceful protests were severely beaten. At least 14 extrajudicial executions were carried out by government forces and by members of a vigilante group, some of whom were members of the armed forces. One person was sentenced to death. A former President of Mali and four other prisoners remained under sentence of death. No executions were reported. Armed opposition groups were reported to have committed human rights abuses, including deliberate and arbitrary killings of civilians.
MALI
There were continuing negotiations between President Alpha Konare's government and rebel Tuareg groups between January and May which resulted in the reintegration of Tuareg groups into the army. At least 6,000 of the 109,000 Tuareg and Arab refugees who had fled to neighbouring countries in previous yecirs returned to Mali voluntarily.
Idrissa Traoré, the son of former President Moussa Traoré, who had been arrested in 1991 on charges of embezzlement and other "economic" offences (see Amnesty International Report 1995], was released in December after the judge decided there were no grounds for prosecution. However, his mother, Mariam Traoré, and his uncle. Abraham Doua Sisoko, who had been arrested at the same time, remained in detention and were apparently awaiting trial, also on charges of embezzlement. In April the government dissolved the National Economic Commission which had been responsible for initiating preliminary enquiries into the alleged embezzlement of state funds by members of Moussa Traoré's family and officials of his former government.
In August scores of people were arrested after a peaceful demonstration to protest against the destruction of houses which had been built 20 years earlier on government property in Niamakoro, Senou and Faladié. Some 50 people were detained at the headquarters of the Groupement mobile de sécurité, Mobile Security Group. Most were beaten during their cirrest and while in custody; one, Ousmane Sidibé. had his arm broken as a result. Some were released, but at least eight, including Mamadou Faraban Doumbia, Amadou Kone and Mamadou Diarra, were tried on charges of disturbing public order and sentenced to terms of imprisorunent ranging from two to eight months. They appeared to be prisoners of conscience.
In September, 20 members of the ./isso-ciation des travailleurs volontaires à la retraite (atvr), Association of Voluntarily Retired Workers, including Amadou Diallo, Aamar Cisse and Dramane Sacko, were arrested at the headquarters of the ruling party, the Alliance pour la démocratie au Mali (adema). Alliance for Democracy in Mali. They had gone to the adema headquarters to inform party officials about the problems facing retired workers
and to complain about the lack of government assistance for atvr projects. They were tried on charges of violence and acts of violence against adema staff and sentenced to terms of imprisonment of one to two months. Witnesses at the trial stated that the atvr members had not used any violence. All 20 appeared to be prisoners of conscience.
Government forces and those assisting them were reported to have extrajudicially executed members of the Tuareg community. In May, seven Tuaregs of the Daoussak clan were said to have been extrajudicially executed by an army patrol when they were found camping near an old Tuareg rebel base. The victims' bodies were subsequently burned.
Other politically motivated killings were committed by the Mouvement patriotique malien Ghanda Koy (Ghanda Koy), Malian Patriotic Movement - Masters of the Land, a black vigilante group set up by former government soldiers, some of whose members were also members of the armed forces. In April they attacked the Tuareg village of Faguibine in Goundam and deliberately killed five civilians, including two women and two children. In October, two refugees from Niger were reportedly killed by the Ghanda Koy.
One man, Boubacar Dembelé, the former head of the National Tobacco and Match Company, was sentenced to death in March. He had been convicted on corruption charges. Former President Moussa Traoré and three former government officials remained under sentence of death (see Amnesty International Report 1995), and were apparently awaiting trial on further embezzlement charges. A fifth man remained under sentence of death for attempted murder. There were no reports of executions.
Armed opposition groups committed human rights abuses, including the deliberate and arbitrary killing of civilians. In April members of the Armée révolutionnaire de libération de l'Azawad, Revolutionary Army for the Liberation of Azawad, attacked and killed two villagers belonging to the Bella ethnic group near Gossi.
In May the Front islamique arabe de l'Azawad (fiaa), Arab Islamic Front of Azawad, released hostages held since 1994. The fiaa acknowledged that one of the hostages had died while held.
