ISRAEL AND THE OCCUPIED TERRITORIES
(including areas under the jurisdiction
of the palestinian authority)
Thousands of Palestinians were detained on security grounds; hundreds were tried before military courts. More than 210 Palestinians were held in administrative detention without charge or trial at the end of the year. Approximately 750 Palestinian prisoners, almost all of whom were
ISRAEL AND THE OCCUPIED TERRITORIES/ITALY
political prisoners, were released in the context of agreements between Israel and the Palestinian Authority. Prisoners of conscience included conscientious objectors to military service. Palestinians continued to be systematically tortured or ill-treated during interrogation. One detainee died in custody as a result of torture. Israeli forces killed 49 Palestinians, some in circumstances suggesting extrajudicial executions. The Palestinian Authority's security forces detained more than 1,000 Palestinians on political grounds. More than 40 were brought to trial before a newly established State Security Court which did not meet international fair trial standards. Torture of detainees was reported and five Palestinians died in custody. One person was sentenced to death. Members of the Palestinian Authority's security forces, or armed groups allied to them, deliberately and arbitrarily killed at least four people. Palestinian armed opposition groups committed deliberate and arbitrary killings of civilians.
In September the Israeli Government and the Palestinian Authority signed an agreement for a phased withdrawal of the Israeli armed forces and civil administration from the West Bank. By the end of the year Israeli forces had withdrawn from all major cities in the Occupied Territories, apart from Hebron and East Jerusalem.
On 4 November Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin was assassinated by a member of a Jewish opposition group. He was succeeded as Prime Minister by Shimon Peres.
In the Occupied Territories the Israeli authorities made extensive use of border closures confining Palestinians to the
Gaza Strip and denying West Bank Palestinians access to Jerusalem. Attacks by armed Israeli settlers and armed Palestinians against Palestinian and Jewish civilians continued.
In luly a committee set up to incorporate the un Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment into Israeli law proposed an amendment to Article 277 of the Penal Law which, by defining torture as "pain and suffering except for pain or suffering inherent in interrogation procedures or punishment according to the law", would effectively legalize torture. The Knesset (parliament) had not voted on the amendment by the end of the year.
Thousands of Palestinians were arrested on security grounds in Israel and the Occupied Territories under direct Israeli administration. Many were released without charge.
More than 600 renewable administrative detention orders of up to six months were imposed on Palestinians. During appeals, which usually took place several weeks after arrest, detainees and their lawyers were not provided with important information about the reasons for their detention. In February the maximum length of administrative detention orders was increased to one year. Administrative detainees included 'Abd al-Naser Isma'il al-Qaysi, a student, who was arrested in Bethlehem in September and served with a three-month detention order. Ahmad Qatamesh, allegedly a senior official of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (pflp), who was arrested in September 1992, remained administratively detained (see Amnesty International Reports 1993 to 2995). Two administrative detention orders were served on lews. Shmuel Cytrin, a resident of Qiryat Arba settlement in Hebron, was served with a three-month administrative detention order in December.
Prisoners of conscience included at least three Israeli conscientious objectors to military service. For example, Sergeiy Sandler, a pacifist, was arrested in january and sentenced to 28 days' imprisonment by a military court for refusing to perform military service.
More than 70 Lebanese and foreign nationals, some of whom had been abducted in Lebanon between 1985 and 1994, continued to be held in Israeli prisons under administrative detention orders. At least
ISRAEL AND THE OCCUPIED TERRITORIES/ITALY
17 who had been tried were held after completion of their sentences. Others remained in detention without trial, including Mustafa al-Dirani, who was abducted from Lebanon in May 1994, and Shaykh "Abd al-Karim 'Ubayd, who was abducted in July 1989.
Over 200 detainees were held without charge or trial at the Khiam detention centre in an area of South Lebanon controlled by Israel and the South Lebanon Army (see Lebanon entry). In September the International Committee of the Red Cross gained access to detainees for the first time since the detention centre was opened in 1985.
Hundreds of Palestinian political detainees were tried by Israeli military courts on charges such as incitement to acts of violence or membership of banned organizations. Detainees were frequently denied access to lawyers for up to 30 days and to relatives for up to 140 days, Confessions obtained under duress were often the main source of evidence against detainees.
Over 750 detainees were released in the context of the peace agreements between Israel and the Palestinian Authority. About 4,000 remained in prison for security offences at the end of the year, including 70 Israeli Palestinians not covered by the agreements. Some women who should have been released according to the agreement remained in detention.
Palestinian detainees continued to be systematically tortured or ill-treated during interrogation by the General Security Service (gss), often while held incommunicado. Methods that were routinely used included hooding; prolonged sleep deprivation, usually while standing or sitting shackled in painful positions; beating; shaking; and confinement to cupboard-sized rooms. Khaled Farraj, a student arrested in March and accused of supporting the pflp, stated that he was hooded, denied sleep for long periods while tied in painful positions, beaten, kicked, violently shaken, exposed to cold air, and informed, falsely, that his mother had died. He was interrogated by teams of interrogators in Ramallah Prison during the week and in the Moscobiyyah Detention Centre in Jerusalem at weekends. He saw his lawyer for the first time after 31 days. He was released without charge in May after 56 days' interrogation.
One detainee died in custody. 'Abd al-Samad Harizat, a computer expert arrested in Hebron in April on suspicion of being a leader of Hamas, the Islamic Resistance Movement, fell into a coma in the Moscobiyyah Detention Centre 20 hours after his arrest and died three days later. The autopsy concluded that he died as a result of violent shaking. An investigation by the Department for Investigations of Police found that he had been sheiken 12 times over a period of 12 hours. However, the report, which was not made public, concluded that the interrogators were not criminally responsible for the death.
The "exceptional dispensation" to ess interrogators allowing them to use increased physical pressure (see Amnesty International Report 1995] was renewed for periods of up to three months throughout 1995 by the. ministerial committee which oversees the gss. In August the same committee allowed the shaking of detainees to continue with the authorization of the head of the ess.
Mordechai Vanunu remained in solitary confinement for the ninth consecutive year (see Amnesty International Reports 1988 to 1995). Amnesty International asked for his release as redress for past violations of his human rights. In June the Beersheba District Court ordered that his conditions of detention be improved. Avraham Klingberg, a 77-ye£ir-old physician and university professor held since 1983 on spying charges (see Amnesty International Reports 1994 and 1995), remained seriously ill.
At least 49 Palestinians were shot dead by Israeli forces. Some were shot during armed clashes but others were shot in circumstances suggesting that they had been extrajudicially executed. In January a 14-year-old schoolboy. Muhammad Muhammad Taha, was killed outside his school by an Israeli soldier who reportedly descended from a passing jeep and shot into a group of children. Witnesses stated that no warning was given before the shot was fired. The Defence Ministry stated that it was investigating the incident, but the outcome was not known by the end of the year. In October Fathi Shqaqi, the leader of Islamic Jihad, which had claimed responsibility for a number of suicide bomb attacks, was shot dead by unknown attackers in Malta. The Israeli Government did not accept or deny responsibility for the killing.
ISRAEL AND THE OCCUPIED TERRITORIES/ITALY
Those responsible for past human rights violations continued to enjoy virtual impunity. An Israeli colonel who shot dead a 14-year-old girl, Ra'eda al-Qarra, in March 1993 was found guilty by a military court in March 1995 of causing her death through failure to exercise proper caution, He received a six-month suspended prison sentence.
A military appeals court reversed the conviction of Sa'id Badarneh who had been sentenced to death in November 1994 on charges of plotting a suicide bus-bombing (see Amnesty International Report 1995]. The appeal court stated that mistakes had been made by the lower court and ordered a retrial which had not taken place by the end of the year.
The Israeli authorities carried out punitive destruction of houses after suspects believed to be hiding there had been captured or killed. In June rockets were used against a house in Halhoul where Hamed Yaghmur, suspected of membership of the 'Izz al-Din al-Qassam brigades, the military wing of Hamas, was in hiding. After Hamed Yaghmur was killed, the house and two neighbouring houses were destroyed by a bulldozer.
In June the Palestinian Authority issued a Press Law which restricted freedom of the press.
The Palestinian Authority's security forces arrested more than 1,000 people, including human rights activists, journalists and Palestinian members of Islamist or leftist groups opposed to the peace agreement with Israel. Most political detainees were released without charge after a few hours or days; some were held without charge or trial throughout the year. Many were prisoners of conscience, including Raji Sourani, director of the Gaza Centre for Rights and Law, who was arrested and held for 16 hours in February; lyad Sarraf, director of the Palestinian Independent Commission for Citizens' Rights, who was detained for nine hours in December; and Maher al-Alami, editor of the newspaper Ql-Quds, who was detained for six days after he printed an interview with Yasser Arafat, Chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization (plo) and head of the Palestinian Authority, on the eighth instead of the first page.
In February Chairman Arafat issued a decree establishing the State Security Court. Over 40 people were sentenced to
up to 25 years' imprisonment after trials before the State Security Court which were grossly unfair. Trials were held in secret, often in the middle of the night. They were presided over by military judges, prosecutors were military prosecutors, and defence lawyers, who normally worked for the security forces, were appointed by the court. Relatives were informed of charges and trials only after hearings had taken place. Sayyed Abu Musameh, editor of the newspaper al-Watan, was tried before the Gaza State Security Court less than 24 hours after his arrest. He was sentenced to three years' imprisonment on charges which included writing seditious newspaper articles and libelling the Palestinian Authority; he was a possible prisoner of conscience. He was released in December by order of Chairman Arafat.
There were reports of torture carried out by members of the Palestinian Authority's security services in Gaza and Jericho. Four people died in custody in circumstances suggesting that torture may have contributed to their deaths. A fifth person was killed when a gun was fired during interrogation. Methods of torture included severe beatings, electric shocks, prolonged standing in painful positions, burning with cigarettes and suspension from the ceiling. Salman Jalaytah, a lifeguard, was arrested in Jericho in January on suspicion of "collaborating with Israel" and participation in the murder in December 1994 of Ibrahim Yaghi. He was reportedly denied food, beaten repeatedly with cables and given electric shocks. He died three days after his arrest. No investigation into his death was known to have been carried out.
Scores of Palestinians from the West Bank outside the jurisdiction of the Palestinian Authority were taken from their homes and tortured and ill-treated by members of the Palestinian security services in Jericho. 'Azzam Muslah was reportedly arrested by members of the Preventive Security Service (pss) in 'Ain Yabrud in September and taken to the pss offices in Jericho. He was later transferred to the offices of the Palestinian General Security Services. Less than two days after his arrest his body, bruised and bloody, was handed over to the family. Chairman Arafat ordered an inquiry.
Six Palestinian security officers were arrested on charges of beating prisoners.
ISRAEL AND THE OCCUPIED TERRITORIES/ITALY
Extrajudicial punishments such as kneecapping were reportedly carried out by members of Palestinian security services such as the pss, and by members of groups allied to the plo, such as the Fatah Hawks.
At least four Palestinians from the West Bank were deliberately and arbitrarily killed, reportedly by members of the Palestinian Authority's security forces or individuals from armed groups allied to the plo. For example, in October members of the Fatah Hawks reportedly shot dead Muhammad Hawari, who was allegedly working for the Israeli police, in Qalqiliya.
Tha'er Muhammad Fares, a Palestinian police officer, was sentenced to death in May by a military court in Gaza after being convicted of shooting a fellow police officer and stealing his gun. The military court used a penal code drawn up by the plo in 1979. No executions had been carried out by the end of the year.
Palestinian armed opposition groups committed deliberate and arbitrary killings. Suicide-bombers killed at least 40 people, including 13 civilians. Hamas, Islamic lihad and HizbuUah claimed responsibility for the attacks. In July and August suicide bombs in buses in Tel Aviv and Jerusalem killed 12 people, including the bombers.
Amnesty International urged the Israeli Government to release all prisoners of conscience; to try administrative detainees promptly and fairly or to release them; to ban torture and to give free medical examinations to those who had suffered torture or ill-treatment during interrogation; and to take steps to end extrajudicial executions.
The Israeli authorities provided information on a number of cases and commented on the Amnesty Internationa! Report 1995. They stated that measures instituted were a response to "terrorist" attacks and denied that Israeli interrogation practices constituted torture.
In an oral statement to the un Commission on Human Rights in February, Amnesty International referred to its concerns in the Israeli-Occupied Territories, including South Lebanon.
Amnesty International urged the Palestinian Authority to release all prisoners of conscience, and end torture and unfair trials before the State Security Court. The head of the pss replied on an individual
case, stating that no torture had taken place.
Amnesty International condemned deliberate and arbitrary killings by Palestinian armed groups and called on them to respect the fundamental principles of humcinitarian law.
