CZECH REPUBLIC
Two conscientious objectors to military service were imprisoned; both were prisoners of conscience. One person was convicted under a law that could be used to imprison prisoners of conscience. One prisoner died in custody fix>m injuries inflicted by prison officers.
In March President Viclav Havel criticized the general lack of concern for human rights, particularly regarding the Roma minority, and called for an Ombudsman to monitor the situation. However, such an institution had not been established by the end of the year.
In September the Constitutional Court ruled it unconstitutional to convict a person more than once under Article 269 of the Criminal Code for not performing military service.
Two conscientious objectors, Martin Novak and Martin Duda, were imprisoned from March to September and June to October respectively for failing to commence military service. Both had conscientious objections to military service on religious grounds. They were refused civilian service because they had not submitted their declarations within the prescribed period. They were released following the decision by the Constitutional Court.
In March Zden6k Spalovsky was charged with insulting and defaming the president and sentenced by Krom6fi2 County Court to four months' imprisonment, suspended for one year, for calling the president "a traitor and a false prophet" in a newspaper article.
One prisoner, FrantiSek Kah^nek, died in April at Homi Slavkov prison as a result of injuries inflicted by prison officers in charge of him. Four prison officers were charged later that month with abuse of power and causing bodily harm.
However, no one was charged in connection with the death of Martin Cervefiik, a Rom who was shot by a police officer while in detention in Hor§ovsky Tyn in June 1994. In June a report by the Plzefi Public Prosecutor established that a scuffle had broken out during his interrogation, and that an "incidental shot had been fired which hit him in the head point blank". The same report revealed that Ministry of Interior instructions allowed police officers to use guns without the safety catch on and to have a bullet in the
CZECH REPUBLIC/DENMARK
chamber while conducting searches of Roma houses.
Amnesty International questioned the Ministry of Justice about the investigation into the death of Martin Cervefiak and called for the suspension of the discriminatory instructions authorizing officers to inspect Roma homes with their guns ready to fire. The organization also expressed concern to President Havel about the case of Zden§k Spdlovsky and the law on the defamation of the president which appeared to restrict the right to freedom of expression. Amnesty International also urged the government to ensure that the law on civilian service did not restrict the right of conscientious objectors to apply for such service at any time.
