SPAIN
Judicial inquiries continued into allegations of a clandestine "dirty war" in the 1980s against the armed Basque group Euskadi Ta Askatasuna (eta), Basque Homeland and Liberty. Two prisoners of conscience were imprisoned. There were further allegations of ill-treatment by law enforcement officers. Numerous trials
were held of officers charged with torture and ill-treatment in previous years, eta committed human rights abuses, including deliberate and arbitrary killings and hostage-taking.
Special legislation regarding armed groups remained in force. People suspected of belonging to or collaborating with an armed group could be held incommunicado for up to five days by judicial order, 48 hours longer than the legal limit for other suspects, and denied the right to designate lawyers of their choice.
In February Spain signed Protocol No. 2 to the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. It was ratified in June. In November the death penalty was removed by law from the Military Penal Code. The death penalty for common crimes had been abolished by the 1978 Constitution.
Investigations at the highest judicial level, including the National Court and the Supreme Court, continued into allegations of the involvement of security forces and politicians in a "dirty war" against supposed eta members. A clandestine organization, the so-called Grupos Antiterroristas de Liberación (gal), Anti-Terrorist Liberation Groups, was allegedly responsible for carrying out this illegal campaign. gal was reportedly composed of security officers cmd contract gunmen and was believed to have had links with the highest ministerial levels in Spain, including the former Minister of the Interior, José Ba-rrionuevo. Most of the incidents occurred in the Basque area of France, near the Spanish border. Between 1983 and 1987, 27 people were murdered, including 10 people with no known connections with
SPAIN
eta. In some cases people were kidnapped.
In March, two corpses were identified as eta members José Antonio Lasa and José Ignacio Zabala. They had reportedly been abducted by gal in Bayonne, France, in 1983. Both corpses showed signs of extensive beatings and torture, including loss of finger and toe nails. They were killed by blows to the skull followed by shots in the back of the head.
Two conscientious objectors to military service, imprisoned for desertion, were prisoners of conscience. Manuel Blazquez Soli's and José Antonio Escalada, who had spent three months in pre-trial detention in 1991 (see Amnesty International Reports 1992 and 1993), were imprisoned in December by order of a military tribunal which had sentenced them to 17 months' imprisonment in 1994. They were charged with desertion after leaving the navy, in which they were serving as conscripts, at the start of the Gulf conflict in 1991. They applied for conscientious objector status ahhough the law allows this only before "incorporation into the armed forces". At the end of the year they were awaiting the outcome of an appeal before the Constitutional Court.
There were further allegations of ill-treatment by law enforcement officers. In August a judicial investigation opened into the complaint of ill-treatment by the national police of Guillermo Guzmàn, a disabled man, in Vitoria. In his complaint he stated that he had gone to the police station in August to report the theft of his money and documents by a gang of youths. When he was leaving the station he remonstrated with two uniformed officers and an argument ensued, after which he claimed that the officers assaulted him with truncheons. He stated that he was repeatedly knocked to the ground. The officers left him injured on the ground outside the station until passers-by took him to hospital. Multiple injuries were diagnosed to his head and body and blood was detected in his urine.
Numerous judicial actions were pursued against prison officers and security forces on charges of ill-treatment in previous years.
Two Civil Guards and three local policemen were found guilty in March of ill-treating and causing physical and mental injuries to two tourists from Denmark
in Ibiza in 1991 (see previous Amnesty International Reports). One officer, who was given the heaviest sentence of 30 days' imprisonment, admitted to beating one of the complainants, Mohamed Hegazy, with a truncheon for approximately 15 minutes in order "to calm him down". The trial took place after lengthy delays and the personal intervention of the Attorney General to reopen the inquiry into the allegations against the officers.
In May the Provincial Court in Valencia ordered the reopening of a judicial inquiry into the alleged suicide by hanging of José Luis Iglesias Amaro in Picassent prison in 1992 (see Amnesty International Report 1995).
In October, three Civil Guards in Bilbao made statements to the court after they had been indicted on charges of torturing alleged members of the eta "Bizkaia" commando in 1992 (see Amnesty International Report 1993).
During the year officers previously convicted of torture and ill-treatment were pardoned. In March, two Civil Guard officers convicted of torturing Joaquin Olano in 1983 (see previous Amnesty International Reports) were given pardons. They had previously been pardoned after another conviction for torturing a Basque politician. However, sentences were enforced after long delays on officers found guilty of torturing Tomás Linaza in 1981 (see previous Amnesty International Reports).
Attacks by the armed Basque group eta on the security forces and civilians continued throughout the year. Fifteen people were killed and approximately 95 were injured. eta was responsible for an unsuccessful car-bomb attack on José María Aznar, the leader of the main opposition party. Partido Popular (pp). Popular Party, in April, and the murder of its spokesman in the Basque region, Gregorio Ordóñez, in January. Armed groups also continued to kidnap people for ransom.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of Manuel Blázquez Solís and José Antonio Escalada and called for legislation to provide for conscientious objection developed after joining the armed forces. Amnesty International urged the authorities to ensure that all allegations of ill-treatment were thoroughly and impartially investigated and to bring those responsible to justice. In public statements it also
SPAIN/SRI LANKA
condemned unreservedly abuses by armed opposition groups such as kidnapping, deliberate and arbitrary killings and hostage-taking as a contravention of international humanitarian standards.
