BOLIVIA
REPUBLIC OF BOLIVIA
Head of state and government: Carlos Mesa Gisbert (replaced Gonzalo Sánchez de Lozada in October) Death penalty: abolitionist for ordinary crimes UN Women's Convention and its Optional Protocol:
ratified
There were several reports of excessive use of force by law enforcement officers against demonstrators; more than 80 people were reported to have died as a result. Prison conditions fell short of international standards and there were reports of ill-treatment of detainees.
Demonstrations
The political situation was dominated by civil unrest over government economic policies. Deterioration in economic and social conditions and opposition to government plans to export national resources, including gas, triggered protests in areas of La Paz Department, the capital. La Paz, and other parts of the country.
Demonstrations and roadblocks in the El Chapare area, staged by coca leaf growers against eradication agreements signed with the US government, left five peasants dead and dozens more injured during confrontations with the security forces. Protests escalated during September and October. Human rights organizations claimed that over 80 people were killed and scores more were injured, the majority reportedly as a result of excessive use of force by the security forces. Information provided by the Ombudsman Office indicated that 59 people died while the General Attorney indicated that the number of people killed was 56. Hundreds of demonstrators were arrested; they were released in November after an amnesty was decreed. The protests resulted in the resignation of President Gonzalo Sánchez de Lozada and his replacement by the Vice-President, Carios Mesa Gisbert.
Excessive use of force
La Paz
In February more than 33 people were killed during confrontations between the army and demonstrators in La Paz. The demonstration was staged by members of the national police protesting at the government's decision to increase income tax. Those killed were members of the police and army as well as civilians. More than a hundred people were injured. The civil unrest that followed affected other cities. Investigations into the La Paz incident were initiated within the civil justice system. In October the cases of four members of the armed forces charged with the killing of two civilians were passed to the jurisdiction of the military justice system. Warisata
In September, five civilians, including an eight-year-old girl, and a soldier were shot and killed and more than
100
Amnesty International Report 2004
AMERICAS
20 people were injured during demonstrations and roadblocks in the town of Warisata, La Paz Department. The shootings occurred when a joint army and police force attempted to remove the roadblocks. The joint security forces reportedly opened fire after forcing their way into a secondary school and private houses. Highlands and La Paz
In October, thousands of demonstrators, including trade unionists, miners, peasants and indigenous people, staged demonstrations in the area of El Alto and La Paz to protest against the government's proposal to sell national gas resources. Demonstrations spread to other cities. At least 59 people were killed during clashes between demonstrators and the security forces. Investigations by civilian courts were announced, but there were reports that military courts were also involved in the investigations.
Prison conditions
Prisons conditions were harsh and failed to meet international standards; most prisons lacked basic facilities. The government failed to implement effective policies or allocate adequate resources to resolve the problems. In many prisons, prisoners were effectively in control, sometimes with the cooperation of prison guards. Prisoners were reportedly subjected to beatings and punishments both by other inmates and prison guards. Economic and social pressures meant that prisoners' relatives often lived with them inside the prison.
Q San Sebastian prison, which houses both men and women, and San Antonio prison for men - both in Cochabamba, Cochabamba Department—had a poor infrastructure and suffered from severe overcrowding. In San Antonio prison wives or partners of the inmates lived inside the prison with their children up to seven years of age, in extremely harsh conditions.
The Palmasola prison in Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz Department, did not have an adequate sewage system or clean drinking water. Improvements, including the construction of facilities for drinking water, were made by the prisoners themselves.
Intergovernmental organizations
In August the UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination expressed concern about reports that human rights defenders providing assistance to members of indigenous groups in the context of land disputes continued to be threatened and harassed by police officers. It also recommended that measures be adopted with a view to ensuring that members of the Afro-Bolivian community are able to fully enjoy their economic, social and cultural rights.
In June the government signed an impunity agreement with the USA providing that Bolivia will not surrender US nationals accused of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes to the International Criminal Court. Such agreements are in breach of states' obligations under international law. The agreement had not been ratified at the end of the year.
Al country reports/visits Reports
•	Bolivia: The rule of law must not be weakened by social conflict (A! Index; AMR 18/002/2003)
•	Bolivia: The present crisis calls for effective measures to protect human rights and the rule of law (Al Index: AMR 18/009/2003)
•	Bolivia: Open letter from Amnesty International to the Bolivian authorities regarding deaths in the town of Warisata (Al Index: AMR 18/011/2003)
•	Bolivia: Open letter to the President of the Republic of Bolivia Sr. Carlos Mesa Gisbert (Al Index: AMR 18/018/2003)
Visits
In February and November Al delegates visited Bolivia to meet government officials and representatives of non-governmental organizations and to gather information.
