URUGUAY
EASTERN REPUBLIC OF URUGUAY
Head of state and government: Jorge Batlle Ibanez Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes UN Women's Convention and its Optional Protocol:
ratified
The Peace Commission stated in its final report that 26 Uruguayans had died as a result of being tortured during military rule. Nobody was brought to justice for these grave human rights violations.
Past human rights violations
In April the Peace Commission, established by President Jorge Batlle in August 2000 to clarify the fate of Uruguayans who "disappeared" between 1973 and 1985, published its final report. The Commission concluded that 26 Uruguayans who "disappeared" during that period had died as a result of being tortured. According to the information received by the Commission from military sources, the victims were first buried in military barracks, but in 1984 their bodies were exhumed, burned and the ashes thrown in the waters of the Rio de la Plata. The Commission also concluded that five Argentine nationals were detained in Uruguay during those years and transferred to secret detention centres in Argentina. In addition the Commission stated that 182 Uruguayans were detained during the military dictatorship in Argentina.
The Commission recommended that the relatives of all those detained in Uruguay receive "integral and complete" reparation and that crimes such as forced
138
Amnesty International Report 2004
AMERICAS
disappearances and torture should be codified in Uruguay's penal code. Relatives as well as human rights organizations welcomed the progress made by the Commission towards establishing the truth about human rights violations during the period of military rule. However, they insisted that uncovering the truth was not enough and that without justice reconciliation was not possible.
Impunity
In April there were signs that the authorities wanted to extend the 1986 Expiry Law which grants exemption from punishment to police and military personnel responsible for human rights violations committed before 1 March 1985. Moves to extend the Expiry Law to cover civilians were believed to be connected with the detention of a former Minister of Foreign Affairs -charged with the unlawful imprisonment of Elena Quinteros Almeida who "disappeared" in 1976 after being forcibly taken from the Venezuelan Embassy in Uruguay were she had taken refuge. This was the first time anyone had been detained for human rights violations committed during military rule. The Minister was granted conditional release and was at liberty awaiting trial at the end of the year.
There were serious concerns that the government was interfering with the judiciary after a judge was asked to stop investigating the possibility that the bodies of "disappeared" people were buried in military compounds.
Extradition
Al-Sayid Hassan Mukhlis, an Egyptian national, was extradited to Egypt in July despite concerns that he would be at grave risk of human rights violations, including torture and unfair trial. The Egyptian authorities had sought his extradition for his alleged involvement in human rights abuses by the armed Islamist opposition group, al-Gama 'a al-Islamiya. Uruguay's Supreme Court approved Al-Sayid Hassan Mukhlis' extradition in May despite strong evidence that several alleged members of armed Islamist groups had been tortured after being forcibly returned to Egypt.
Torture and ill-treatment
There were reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees. Investigations into these allegations were initiated but none had been completed by the end of the year.
