VIETNAM
"ONCA
KINGDOM OF TONGA
Head of state: KingTaufa'ahauTupou IV Head of government: Prince'Ulukalala-Lavaka-Ata Death penalty: abolitionist in practice UN Women's Convention and its Optional Protocol: not signed
The government adopted measures to restrict media freedom and the powers of the courts to review government decisions.
Freedom of speech threatened
In February the authorities banned the Taimi '0 Tonga (Times of Tonga), a privately owned newspaper, on the grounds that it was a "foreign concern with a political agenda". The Supreme Court overturned the first ban and, when a second was issued, overturned it in May. Publisher Kalafi Moala had moved the newspaper's production to New Zealand after repeated government efforts to prevent its publication in Tonga. The ban followed awards of compensation by the Supreme Court in December 2002 to three journalists, Including Kalafi Moala and Member of Parliament 'Akilisi Pohiva, for unlawful imprisonment in 1996. They were prisoners of conscience.
In May 'Akilisi Pohiva. his son Po'oi Pohiva, and Member of Parliament 'Iselell Pulu were acquitted of sedition and forgery. The charges were brought after
SOCIALIST REPUBLICOFVIET NAM
Head of state: Tran DucLuong
Head of government: PhanVan Khai
Death penalty: retentionist
UN Women's Convention: ratified with reservations
Optional Protocol to UN Women's Convention: not signed
The civil and political rights situation did not improve in 2003. Attacks on freedom of expression and association continued throughout the year. Members of a "democracy group" faced arrest, unfair trial and lengthy prison sentences. In several cases, sentences were reduced on appeal in a rare move by the authorities, widely interpreted as a reaction to growing international criticism of Viet Nam's stifling of dissent. The number of death sentences and executions reported increased alarmingly. Trials of those accused of involvement in the 2001 Central Highlands uprising also continued throughout the year as did reports of targeted repression of members of religious denominations not sanctioned by the authorities. The Central Highlands remained undertight government control; no independent monitors were allowed access to verify the government's assertion that the situation had returned to normal.
Background
An agreement was reached in June between the UN Children's Fund (UNICEF), the UN Office for Drugs and Crimes (UNODC) and the Vietnamese authorities to bolster law enforcement and assess current anti-
194
Amnesty International Report 2004
AS I A/PACIFIC
trafficking legislation. Provision was also made to offer improved assistance to victims of trafficking and help them to reintegrate into their communities.
Government concern that widespread corruption was corroding support for the Communist Party was exemplified by the prosecution of two former ministers and the two-month show trial which began in June in Ho Chi Minh City of Nam Cam (also known as Truong Van Cam) and over 150 co-defendants, including high-level figures in thejudiciary. The group was accused of murder and bribery and being part of a vast underworld network with connections throughout the government and Party apparatus. The trial was widely publicized in Viet Nam, and Nam Cam and five others were sentenced to death. Five of the death sentences were upheld on appeal. Many others involved were given lengthy prison sentences; their appeals were still pending at the end of the year.
An amended Criminal Procedure Code was debated and approved by members of the National Assembly. Revisions to the controversial draft Land Law dealing with issues of ownership and disputes were approved by the National Assembly in November. Disputes over land management and use have been the flash-points for considerable rural unrest in recent years and have led to many arrests.
Viet Nam continued to deny access to independent human rights monitors.
Detention and trial of government critics
The trials continued of a group of vocal government critics made up of former military officers. Communist Party members, leading intellectuals and their families.
The loosely formed "democracy group" used the Internet to circulate information critical of the government and used e-mail and mobile phones to contact overseas Vietnamese groups regarded as "reactionary" by the Ha Noi authorities. Q In June, Dr Pham HongSon was sentenced 1013 years' imprisonment, reduced to five years on appeal, on charges of espionage. Q Tran Dung Tien, aged 74, was sentenced in November to 10 months' imprisonment—the length of time for which he had been held in pre-trial detention - for "abusing democratic freedoms to infringe upon the interests of the State". He was released immediately.
Q In December, Nguyen Vu Binh was sentenced to seven years' imprisonment on charges of espionage relating to his open criticism of government policies over several years.
Many of those awaiting sentence or already in prison were elderly men. AI's criticism of Viet Nam's treatment of elderly prisoners of conscience provoked a furious and defensive public response from the government. More high-profile prisoners were awaiting trial at the endofthe year.
Q Dr Nguyen Dan Que, aged 61 and in poor health, was rearrested by the authorities in March after using the Internet to criticize the lack of freedom of information in Viet Nam. Dr Que, a former prisoner of conscience and leading human rights advocate, had
previously spent 18 years in prison. He refused government offers to leave the country and go into exile on his release. He was still held in incommunicado detention at the end of the year.
Death penalty
Despite a small reduction in the number of capital offences on the statute books in recent years and the commutations by the President of several death sentences, 2003 witnessed a dramatic rise in the reported imposition of the death penalty in Viet Nam, particularly for drugs-related offences and economic crimes. Twenty-nine offences in the Criminal Code still carry the death penalty.
According to information collated from official sources. 103 people were sentenced to death in 2003; 63 were convicted of drugs-related charges and four women of fraud. There were reports that 64 were executed, many in public; the true figures were believed to be much higher.
O Two women—43-year-old Hoang Tu Lien and 30-year-old Tran Thi My Ha - were sentenced to death after a four-day trial by Quang Nam People's Court in August. They were found guilty of running a large network trafficking counterfeit money^vorth nearly US$90,000.
Q Four men and one woman were executed on 5 November in front of nearly a thousand onlookers at Thu Due execution ground on the outskirts of Ho Chi Minh City. Nguyen Ngu Dung, Nguyen Thi Loan and Nguyen Anh Tuan had been sentenced to death in July 2001 for trafficking 13,5kg of heroin. Duong HoVuand Luu Kim Hien had been sentenced to death in 2002 for murder.
Suppression of religious freedom
Unprecedented talks between the authorities and the outlawed Unified Buddhist Church of Viet Nam (UBCV) -epitomized by the televised meeting between the UBCV's senior monkThich Huyen Quang and the Prime Minister in April - reinforced earlier optimism that Viet Nam would experience greater religious freedom.
However, these hopes were dashed in October when comprehensive repression of the Buddhist church resumed. Thich Huyen Quang, who had been under house arrest almost continuously since 1977, and Thich Quang Do, his deputy, who was released early from a two-year house arrest order in June, were placed under de/acfo house arrest at different locations, along with at least 30 other senior UBCV monks.
In a move reflecting the improving relationship between Viet Nam and the Vatican, the Vietnamese authorities supported the election of a new Vietnamese Roman Catholic Cardinal in October. This positive development was tempered by the continued detention of Father Thadeus Nguyen Van Ly and the initial sentencing to long terms of imprisonment of his two nephews and niece for passing information about their uncle and religious freedom in Viet Nam to overseas Vietnamese groups. However, their sentences were reduced on appeal. His niece was released and the two nephews were due for release in February 2004. Father
195	Amnesty International Report 2004

AS I A/PACIFIC
Ly's prison sentence was also reduced from 15 to 10 years in response to international criticism of the case.
Allegations of repression, including forced renunciations of faith in village meetings, against members of unauthorized evangelical Protestant churches, particularly in the Central Highlands, continued to emerge, despite government attempts to prevent the free flow of information. Q Thich Tri Luc, a Buddhist monk recognized as a refugee by the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in Cambodia in 2002 and believed to have been abducted from Cambodia by Vietnamese agents, was finally located after one year, when his family in Ho Chi Minh City were informed by the authorities of his impending trial. He was charged under Article 91 of the Criminal Code with fleeing abroad in order to oppose the Vietnamese government. This was the first indication that he was still alive and had indeed been forcibly returned to Viet Nam. His trial date was postponed and news of his case caused an international outcry. If found guilty, he could face between three years' and life imprisonment.
Central Highlands
Arrests and trials continued of those linked to the 2001 unrest and the resulting flight of hundreds of ethnic minority (Montagnard) asylum-seekers to neighbouring Cambodia. Allegations of torture and deaths in custody were also reported by overseas Montagnard groups.
Thirty-three men were sentenced to between 18 months' and 13 years' imprisonment for their involvement in the unrest or for helping those trying to flee the country, bringing to 76 the total number of people known to have been tried since 2001. No outside monitoring was permitted of the trials, and detainees' access to family members and lawyers was limited. Not all such cases were made public and the number of those arrested and detained was believed to be much higher. Access to the Central Highlands remained strictly controlled; several groups of diplomats and journalists were permitted to visit the region under close supervision.
O Y Kuo Bya, Ye He E Ban, Y Jon Enuol and Y Bri Enuol were sentenced to between 10 and 13 years' imprisonment and between three and four years' house arrest on release by the People's Court of Dak Lak province in the Central Highlands on 16 October. They were charged with inciting unrest in 2000-2001 and "sabotaging the policy of national unity".
Al country reports/visits Reports
•	Socialist Republic of Viet Nam: The espionage case against the nephews and niece of Father Thadeus Nguyen Van Ly (Al Index: ASA 41/004/2003)
•	Socialist Republic of Viet Nam: Dr Pham Hong Son -prisoner of conscience (Al Index: ASA 41/017/2003)
•	Socialist Republic of Viet Nam: Two official Directives relating to anti-government activities (Al Index: ASA 41/018/2003)
•	Socialist Republic of Viet Nam: The death penalty-inhumane and ineffective (Al Index: ASA 41/023/2003)
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam: In place of veneration, incarceration—elderly prisoners of conscience (Al Index: ASA 41/032/2003) Socialist Republic of Viet Nam; Freedom of expression under threat in cyberspace (Al Index: ASA 41/037/2003)
196
