LATVIA
REPUBLICOF LATVIA
Head of state: Vaira Vike-Freiberga
Head of government: Einars Repse
Death penalty: abolitionist for ordinary crimes
UN Women's Convention: ratified
Optional Protocol to UN Women's Convention: not signed
There Vi/ere concerns about alleged police ill-treatment, conditions in places of detention and imprisonment, domestic violence and conscientious objection to military service.
Alleged police ill-treatment
Both the UN Human Rights Committee and the UN Committee against Torture expressed concern about allegations of police ill-treatment of detainees, which in some cases could be considered to amount to torture. The Human Rights Committee urged Latvia to take firm measures to eradicate all forms of ill-treatment, including prompt investigations, prosecution of perpetrators and the provision of effective remedies to the victims. It urged Latvia to establish an Independent body with the authority to receive and investigate all complaints of excessive use of force and other abuse of power by police officers.
The Committee against Torture additionally drew attention to alleged violations of the basic rights of detainees, including their access to a lawyer and doctor of their choice, and to existing legislation which does not provide for the right of a detainee to contact family members. Various recommendations were made to address these issues.
Prison conditions
There were persisting concerns about conditions of detention and imprisonment. Both the Human Rights Committee and Committee against Torture expressed concern about the excessive length of pre-trial detention, particulariy with regard to juvenile offenders, and the deleterious effect of overcrowding on conditions in places of detention. The Committee against Torture also expressed concern about the material conditions of detention, particularly in police stations and short-term detention isolators. Both committees recommended action to deal with these concerns.
Violence against women
Further measures were needed to combat violence against women in the home. The Human Rights Committee, while recognizing positive developments made by Latvia, remained concerned that reports of domestic violence persist, it recommended that Latvia adopt a policy and legal framework to counter domestic violence, establish advice and victim support centres and raise awareness about the issue through the media.
233	Amnesty Iflternatlonal Report 2004

EUROPE/CENTRAL ASIA
Conscientious objection
Al remained concerned about the punitive length of the civilian alternative to military service stipulated in the Law on Alternative Service, which came into effect on I July 2002. Conscientious objectors to military service in Latvia are forced to undertake an alternative service of two years, twice the length of military service.
