CUBA
Himdreds of political prisoners detained in previous years and convicted after unfair trials remained imprisoned. Many were prisoners of conscience. Scores of dissidents suffered short-term detention and harassment and several were forced into exile. There were frequent reports of ill-treatment, in some cases amounting to torture, resulting in at least one death.
cuba
Prison conditions sometimes constituted cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. At least five unarmed civilians were shot dead by law enforcement officials in disputed circumstances. No executions were reported but several men remained under sentence of death.
The government of President Fidel Castro justified suppression of political dissent on the grounds that the country continued to face hostility from the us Government, including a 35-year-old trade embargo which had been extended in 1996 by the Hehns-Burton Act (see Amnesty International Report 1997). Cubans were encouraged to sign a declaration of loyalty to the government in support of Law 80 passed in December 1996, which made it illegal for anyone in Cuba to collaborate directly or indirectly in favour of the application of the Helms-Burton Act.
Between June and October, several bomb explosions took place in tourist locations in Havana, the capital, resulting in one death and several injuries. The authorities said they had proof that people based in the usa were behind the explosions. In September a Salvadoran citizen said to be linked to Cuban exiles was detained in connection with several of the bombings and charged with offences that carried a possible death sentence. However, he had not been tried by the end of the year. In November a us citizen, Walter van der Veer, who had been detained in 1996, was tried in a military court on state security charges, including "the promotion of armed action against Cuba", and sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment.
A revised version of the penal code came into effect in August. None of the offences frequently used to stifle dissent were changed and the death penalty was maintained as the maximum pimishment for a wide range of crimes.
The govemment continued to deny the un Special Rapporteur on Cuba access to the coimtry. In November the un General Assembly again overwhelmingly condemned the us embargo. Also in November the un Committee against Torture expressed concem, inter alia, at the failure of the Cuban authorities to establish a specific crime of torture as required by the un Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment or to respond to specific torture allegations. It also expressed concem about "certain nebulous offences", such as desacato (disrespect), resistencia (resistance) and propaganda enemiga (enemy propaganda), because of the space they provide "for misuse and abuse", and criticized the absence of specific training about the Convention for law enforcement personnel and others. The Committee made a series of recommendations, including calling on the authorities to address urgently complaints of tortiue or ill-treatment and to permit human rights organizations to visit the country.
In the absence of official data and given the severe restrictions on human rights monitoring, it was difficult to estimate how many prisoners were held for political reasons. However, several hundred prisoners of conscience, as well as several hundred prisoners convicted of serious state security offences, many after unfair trials, were believed to be imprisoned.
Scores of members of unofficial groups working in the field of civil and political rights, and journalists working for independent press agencies, were detained for short periods. A few were held for several months, sometimes without access to a lawyer, before being released with threats that if they did not give up their activities or leave the coimtry, they would face long-term imprisonment. Many were also subjected to other forms of intimidation, including organized actos de repudio, acts of repudiation, during which they were verbally abused and sometimes physically assaulted by govemment supporters for being "counter-revolutionaries",
Several of those detained were brought to trial or remained in detention awaiting trial. They included the following prisoners of conscience.
Héctor Palacio Ruiz, a political activist arrested in Havana in January after criticizing President Castro in a German
cuba
television interview, was sentenced in September to 18 months' imprisonment for showing disrespect towards President Castro.
Nestor Rodriguez Lobaina and Radamés Garcia de la Vega, President and Vice-President respectively of Jóvenes por ¡a Democracia, Young People for Democracy, who in 1996 had both been subjected to sentences of "restricted liberty" and "confinement" for their advocacy of imi-versity reform (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1997], were rearrested and sentenced to custodial sentences during 1997. Nestor Rodriguez Lobaina was sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment in April for "disrespect" and "resistance" and Radamés Garcia de la Vega was sentenced to 18 months' "correctional work with internment" for "disrespect".
Dr Desi Mendoza Rivero, President of the Colegio Médico Independiente de Santiago de Cuba, Santiago de Cuba Independent Medical Association, was arrested in June in Santiago de Cuba. He had accused the authorities of covering up the extent of an epidemic of dengue fever in statements to foreign news media. He was tried in November on charges of using the mass media to spread "enemy propaganda" and sentenced to eight years' imprisonment.
In July, four members of a dissident study group were arrested after issuing a critique of a document disseminated for the Fifth Congress of the Partido Comunista de Cuba, Cuban Communist Party, which was due to be held in October. By the end of the year, the four - Félix Bonné Carcasés. René Gómez Manzano, Vladimiro Roca Antúnes and Marta Beatriz Roque Cabello - were still in detention awaiting trial.
In October several members of the unofficial Partido Pro Derechos Humanos en Cuba (ppdhc], Party for Hmnan Rights in Cuba, in Santa Clara were detained after starting a fast in protest at the arrest of fellow ppdhc member Daula Carpio Mata. She was subsequently sentenced to 16 months' "correctional work with internment" for atentado (assault), on the grounds that she had verbally intimidated an official at an earlier trial, a charge for which there was no credible evidence. Eight of the protesters were sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment or "correctional work" after being found guilty of "associating with others to commit a crime" and
"disobedience". Most of them continued their fast and some of those who were due to report for correctional work did not do so on health grounds. By the end of the year five ppdhc members, three of whom, including Daula Carpió Mata, were in prison, were reportedly very weak.
Several journalists working for independent press agencies, including Olance Nogueras (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1996] and Héctor Peraza Linares (see below), left the country after being repeatedly detained and warned they would face imprisonment if they did not leave or give up their activities. At least one political activist left the country under similar circumstances.
A few prisoners of conscience were released. They included lawyer Leonel Morejón Almagro, who was released in May (see Amnesty Intemational Reports 1996 and 1997]. At least three prisoners of conscience were released early on condition that they leave the country.
At least five convicted political prisoners, including two prisoners of conscience, were brought to trial for showing disrespect to prison officials and given additional sentences of between three months and four and a half years' imprisonment. In at least one case, the prisoner was unable to consult his lawyer before the trial.
Trials in political cases again fell far short of intemational standards of fairness. Defendants in cases heard by municipal courts, often only hours or days after arrest, sometimes had no legal representation. Detainees held under investigation on state secimty charges often had only very limited access to lawyers while in pre-trial detention and were sometimes subjected to psychological pressures. Joumalist Héctor Peraza Linares of Habana Press, who was detained in June and held for three months by State Secimty in Pinar del Rio before being released, was unable to consult his lawyer who was also denied access to his client's case dossier.
There were ft'equent reports of beatings by police at the time of arrest and by prison guards in detention centres, as well as isolated reports of tortiu'e, resulting in at least one death.
In January several prisoners in Ariza Prison, Cienfuegos, were reportedly injured when prison officials attacked them with bayonets, sticks and tear-gas after
cuba/denmark
they protested at a prisoner being beaten. After complaints by relatives, several senior prison officials were reportedly replaced.
hi September, three poUtical prisoners held in Guantánamo Provincial Prison -Nestor Rodriguez Lobaina (see above), who had recently been on hunger-strike, Jorge Luis Garcia Pérez (known as "Antúnez") (see Amnesty International Report 1994) and Francisco Diaz Echemendia — were reportedly beaten and kicked, while handcuffed, by over 20 prison guards and then held naked and in darkness in a bare rat-infested punishment cell. They had reportedly founded a political prisoners' organization in the prison, hi November the sister of "Antúnez", who was prevented from visiting her brother in October and told that he was on hunger-strike, lodged an official complaint about his ill-treatment.
Heriberto Véliz Ramos, who had been detained in March for common crimes, reportedly died as a result of severe beatings while he was held in a police station in Manzanillo, Granma province. Relatives, who claimed that his body showed signs of injuries, were informed by Interior N¿n-istry officials that he had died of a heart attack. There was no further information.
Prison conditions appeared to deteriorate and in some cases, especially in punishment cells, constituted cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Conditions were imdoubtedly exacerbated by economic pressures, including the effects of the us embargo on the availability of medicines and equipment. However, there were reports that medical attention and food were often deliberately withheld as a punishment.
At least five people died after being shot by security personnel in disputed circumstances. They included three men caught stealing from state-run farms and Reinaldo Rodríguez Puentes, who died in March. Officers of the Poiicia Nacional Revolucionaria, National Revolutionary Police, reportedly continued to fire at him and beat him while he was lying on the groimd pleading for his life after being wounded by an earlier gunshot.
There were no reports of executions during 1997 but news was received of the execution in December 1996 of Francisco Dayson Dhruyet, who had been convicted of murdering his wife. Unconfirmed re-
ports indicated that his alleged confession some four years earlier may have been obtained as the result of torture. Humberto Real Sudrez (see Amnesty International Report 1997), who had been sentenced to death in 1996, had still not had his appeal heard by the People's Supreme Court by the end of the year. The fate of at least seven other men sentenced to death in previous years remained unknown.
Throughout the year Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to release all prisoners of conscience; to grant full judicial guarantees to those facing trial for politically motivated offences; and to cease using punitive and coercive measures, including the practice of forcible exile and patterns of harassment, against those seeking to exercise peacefully thefr rights to freedom of expression, association and assembly. It called for all prisoners to be allowed nutrition, medical care and hygiene in keeping with the standards of the general population and for independent and impartial investigations into allegations of torture or ill-treatment. On the third anniversary of the sinking of a tugboat in July 1994, in which at least 35 people died (see Amnesty International Reports 1995 and 1997), the organization again called for an independent investigation. No replies were received from the authorities.
