VENEZUELA
At least 10 prisoners of conscience were detained during the year. Torture by the security forces was widespread, in some cases leading to death. Prison conditions amounted to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Scores of people, including children, were extrajudicially executed by the security forces.
In January President Rafael Caldera declared 1997 to be human rights year. However, constitutional guarantees, including the right not to be arrested without a warrant, remained suspended in areas bordering Colombia (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1997).
In October the Supreme Court annulled the Ley de Vagos y Maleantes, Law of Vagrants and Crooks, which permitted administrative detention by the police without judicial review. However, hundreds of people detained previously under that law remained in prison.
The report of the un Special Rapporteur on torture about his 1996 visit to Venezuela was presented in March (see Amnesty International Report 1997). It documented the prevalence of torture and impunity for perpetrators, and included significant recommendations. However, most perpetrators of hiunan rights violations continued to benefit from impunity. Seven officials imprisoned for the massacre of 14 fishermen by soldiers in El Amparo in 1988 were released on bail by military courts in November (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1997).
At least 10 prisoners of conscience were detained for short periods. All alleged that they had been tortured or ill-treated. In March Félix Faría Arias, a student and human rights activist, was detained by members of the Dirección de ¡os Servicios de Inteligencia y Prevención (disip), Directorate of Intelligence and Prevention Services, in Bamta, near Caracas, the capital. He was interrogated and tortured with beatings, electric shocks, bums and death threats. He was released without charge the next day, but continued to
VENEZUELA
receive threats, and was detained once more in October by members of the dish». He was again tortured for hours with electricity, beatings and death threats.
In April Wilma Rauseo, a trade union activist, was arrested without warrant in Caracas by members of the disip, who also arrested her colleagues Graciela Aguirre Garcia and Marisela Baoda Medina two days later. They were all held incommunicado for several days, interrogated and threatened with death. They were then held in military prisons. Wilma Rauseo and Marisela Baoda Medina were released without charge in August, but Graciela Aguirre Garcia remained in detention until October.
In October Yonny Orlando Mora, a trade imion and community activist, was arbitrarily detained by members of the Guardia Nacional, National Guard, in Cantón, Apure state, for having helped a human rights advocate to document gross human rights violations by the army in the region (see below). He was held incommunicado for several days and told that he and his family would be killed. He was released without charge in mid-November.
Torture by the security forces, including the army, continued to be widespread. No perpetrator was convicted of torture. Victims included children and community activists. Beatings, electric shocks, suspension from wrists or ankles for prolonged periods of time, near-asphyxiation with plastic bags and mock executions were used to extract confessions from suspects and to intimidate detainees. Confessions extracted under torture continued to be accepted as evidence by the courts. State attorneys regularly failed to act effectively on complaints of torture and official forensic doctors frequently avoided documenting cases of torture. Medical treatment for detainees who had suffered torture continued to be unavailable. Torture was widespread and systematic in the region bordering Colombia, where the Venezuelan security forces responded to incursions by Colombian armed opposition groups with widespread repression against the civilian popidation, whom they suspected of collaborating with such groups.
In June, 16-year-old Rafael Guillén Dugarte was arrested by members of the DISIP and the National Guard in Mérida, Mérida state, and tortured with beatings
and electric shocks to force him to confess to a robbery he did not commit. He was released for medical treatment for his serious injuries. Wilfredo Alvarado Baldag-gio, a community activist, was arbitrarily arrested by members of the Nation^ Guard in Barquisimeto, Lara state, in July and held incommunicado in a local state police station. He was hung frt>m the wrists and subjected to beatings, electric shocks and mock executions while being interrogated and threatened about his role in local land disputes. He was released after six days, but was forced to leave bis town following threats and harassment by local authorities. In October Yiu^ma Lara, a student activist, was arbitrarily detained by members of the Policía Municipal de Sucre, Sucre Municipal Police, in C^cas. She was transferred to local DistP headquarters, where she was interrogated, beaten and subjected to electric shocks, mock executions and threats of rape. She was released six days later and required urgent hospital treatment for her injuries.
Those who died as a result of torture included 16-year-old Jimmy Canelón Durán, who was arrested without warrant by the Metropolitan Police at his home in Caracas in April. His mother, who witnessed the arrest, was informed the next morning that he had died in a shoot-out with the poUce, despite evidence that he had been tortured. Those responsible were not brought to justice.
Prison conditions remained extremely harsh, often amounting to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Despite the government's acknowledgment of poor conditions in prisons throughout the country, they were not improved. Serious overcrowding, insanitary conditions and inadequate medical care led to dozens of protests by inmates. In March inmates in El Dorado prison. Bolivar state, staged a peaceful protest against human rights violations by warders, including torture, but no action was taken by the authorities. In August, 29 inmates were killed and at least 10 wounded in the prison, during a clash between rival gangs. Warders failed to intervene to prevent or stop the killings, despite warnings from local officials and relatives that tensions were reaching crisis point. In October hundreds of inmates in La Planta prison in Caracas went on himger-strike to demand improved conditions and an end to systematic beatings by
VENEZUEUVVET NAM
warders. In November, 16 inmates died and 32 were badly injm'ed when a fire broke out inside the seriously overcrowded prison of Sabaneta, in Maracaibo, Zulia state. Previous demands from inmates to improve the appalling conditions in that prison, including serious fire hazards which led to the tragedy, had been largely ignored by the relevant authorities.
Scores of people, including children, were extrajudicially executed by the security forces. Those responsible were rarely brought to justice, and the relatives of victims had no effective recourse before the law to seek redress and compensation. In March Rubén Darío González was arbitrarily detained in Barcelona, Anzoátegui state, by members of the Dirección de Inteligencia Militar, Military Intelligence Directorate, who forced him into a vehicle and shot him in the head in front of several witnesses, including relatives. The officials claimed he had been caught committing a crime, but witnesses disputed this. In May, 16-year-old Erick Jean Lucena was arbitrarily detained, badly beaten and shot at point-blank range in Caracas by members of the Policía Metropolitana, Metropolitan Police, who reportedly mistook him for a criminal. Witaesses prevented the police from planting a weapon on the victim, but those responsible for the killing were not brought to justice. Seventeen-year-old Jean Carlos Camacho Delgado died in similar circumstances in May, when he was shot at point-blank range by a member of the Metropolitan Police in Caracas.
In May, eight-year-old Yasser Smith Guzmán Luzón was killed by members of the Metropolitan Police who fired their weapons indiscriminately into a neighbourhood, apparently in order to intimidate petty criminals. In June Eduardo Richard Aristigueta Peña was stopped by members of the Metropolitan Police near his home in Caracas, and shot in the face in front of relatives. The police later claimed he was a criminal, despite lack of evidence.
The perpetrators of dozens of extrajudicial executions in 1996, including that of 13-year-old Lian Jonathan Cáseres Herrera, were not brought to justice (see Amnesty International Report 1997).
In October Amnesty International published a report, Venezuela: The silent cry-gross human rights violations against
children, documenting the widespread but under-reported pattern of human rights violations against children in Venezuela, and their lack of means to seek redress and compensation for such abuses. During the year. Amnesty Intemational appealed on behalf of dozens of victims of human rights violations.
