HONG KONG
On 1 July the People's Republic of China resumed sovereignty over Hong Kong after over 150 years of British colonial rule. Amid concern over revisions to civil liberties laws, peaceftil protests continued. Three court cases collapsed amid evidence of torture or ill-treatment by police. The Chinese Government announced that it would submit reports to the un on the implementation of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (iccpr) and International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (icescr) in Hong Kong.
On 1 July Hong Kong became a Special Administrative Region (hksar) of the People's Republic of China, with a Basic Law setting a legal framework for maintaining a "high degree of autonomy". As resolved by the National People's Congress (npc) in 1994 (see Amnesty International Report 1995], the existing Legislative Coimcil (Legco) elected in 1995 was disbanded and replaced by a Provisional Legislative Coimcil (plc) chosen by a selection committee of 400 appointees for which there was no provision in the Basic Law (see Amnesty International Report 1997). Meanwhile a special Reunification Ordinance provided for continuity in the civil service and judiciary, and for all incumbents eligible for office under the Basic Law to be reappointed.
Controversy over the legality of the plc continued throughout the year, with court cases unsuccessfully challenging both its validity and whether laws that it enacted violated the Basic Law. These cases raised questions about the solidity of key Basic Law principles, including guarantees for human rights. In July the Court of Appeal opined that the plc was valid and held that its own powers to interpret the Basic Law did not extend to challenging the validity of the npc's decisions.
New elections were set for May 1998 imder substantially amended electoral laws which cut the franchise by an estimated 2.5 million in "functional constituencies". In local and regional councils, government appointees were reintroduced.
In February the Standing Coromittee of the mfc resolved that sections of the exist-
hong kong
ing Bill of Rights, and of the Societies and Public Order Ordinances, contravened the Basic Law and therefore should not be adopted as laws of the hksar. The Chief Executive Designate issued a consultation document proposing major revisions to the Societies and Public Order Ordinances. These threatened civil liberties protected under the iccpr and provoked an outcry. The proposals were substantially modified, but the amendments passed by the plc on 1 July still allowed for the deregi strati on or prohibition of societies and empowered the Commissioner of Police to prohibit peaceful public gatherings or processions, "where he reasonably considers such prohibition to be necessary in the interests of national security". National security was loosely defined as "safeguarding of the territorial integrity and the independence of the People's Republic of China". Administrative guidelines for the police specified that intervention on national security grounds was appropriate if a public meeting or procession was advocating separation from the People's Republic of China, including advocacy of the independence of Taiwan and Tibet. Under the iccpr, national secirr-ity cannot be invoked to justify restrictions on freedom of expression and association except in serious cases of military or similar threat to the entire nation.
In June, during an attempt by the outgoing government to legislate on National Security offences as required under Basic Law Article 23, legislators deleted existing treasonable offences and narrowed the crime of sedition. However, by the end of the year the hksar government had not signed into operation either these changes, or a law regulating government interception of communications. In June the outgoing government also "localized" into domestic law the British Official Secrets Act. Legislators failed in their attempts to liberalize its definitions of espionage and unlawful disclosure.
Before being disbanded on 1 July, Legco also finalized much civil liberties legislation through private members' bills. Some of these were subsequently suspended and substantially repealed by the plc. Trade unionists complained to the International Labour Organisation (ilo) that the plc's repeal of amendments to employment and trade union laws violated ilo conventions on freedom of association
and the right to organize. An amendment to the Bill of Rights, stating that the Bill's guarantees applied to all pre-existing legislation, whether relied upon by the government or private individuals, remained suspended at the end of the year.
Peaceful demonstrations over these and other national and international issues continued throughout the year, Inconsistent official statements gave rise to concern about how the amended Public Order Ordinance and the new crimes introduced by the plc of desecrating the national and regional flag might be used against peaceful protesters, Demonstrators and the press complained at the designation of special protest zones and heavy-handed policing during the annual meeting of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank in September, after which five demonstrators were charged with disorderly conduct and assaulting police. Police had greatly outnumbered protesters, allegedly cordoning them off from public view and easy contact with the media. Foiu' activists, including members of the April 5th Action Group, awaited trial at the end of the year on multiple charges after demonstrations in the plc chambers in July and September over the freezing of labour laws.
In June the police set a target of the year 2000 to implement reforms in the treatment of arrested suspects in response to a 1992 report by the Law Reform Commission. Measures included clarifying powers of stop and search, stipulating limits to and review of detention without charge, and progressively introducing video recording of interviews with suspects.
Concerns about police procedures and the treatment of detainees re-emerged in November when Chan Kwok-keung was shot dead at Aberdeen Police Station by an officer who had apprehended him for failing to provide an identity card during a routine inspection. The officer was charged vrith murder. The police authorities revealed that the officer had received psychological counselling from 1994 to 1996, and began a review of the management of "health-impaired" officers.
In February, August and November, three court cases collapsed following evidence that the police had used torture or ill-treatment to extract confessions. Two cases involved members of Kowloon East
HONG KONGAiUNGARY
Regional Crime Squad; medical evidence reportedly substantiated allegations of water torture.
On 23 Jime the government withdrew in its final stages a bill intended to provide a statutory basis for the Independent Police Complaints Council, an appointed civilian body which monitors and reviews investigations by police into complaints against fellow officers. Legislators' amendments would have given the Council independent investigative powers, a reform which was specifically recommended for Hong Kong by the un Human Rights Committee in 1995.
In June, three inmates at Lai Chi Kok Reception Center were convicted of the manslaughter of a cellmate in April 1996. Remand prisoner Wong Hang-Kwok died after being beaten in an argument over cleaning duties. During the trial it was alleged that the defendants were favoured prisoners given informal supervision duties by the prison guards, and that the victim had been beaten for ignoring the defendants' orders. A guard had been alerted by his screams, but left when the defendants claimed to be playing. In September plc members expressed dissatisfaction with the results of an internal investigation which found that this was an isolated incident, where a clash of personalities had been aggravated by overcrowding; one member blamed the system of supervision, recommending that it undergo a comprehensive, independent review. Throughout the year the government acknowledged that overcrowding, particularly in remand centres and women's prisons, was a serious problem which prison redevelopment plans alone would not resolve.
In the period before 1 July, many asylum-seekers ft-om the People's Republic of China who had been permitted to remain in Hong Kong were granted asylum in third countries. Forced and voluntary repatriation of Vietnamese asylum-seekers continued throughout the year. Several groups of asylum-seekers mounted successful legal challenges against the flawed refugee determination procedure and their continuing detention. At the end of the year, 1,213 Vietnamese refugees remained in Hong Kong with little chance of resettlement overseas. In August the plc passed a motion luging the abolition of Hong Kong's port of first asylum policy; the
government was due to report on a wide-ranging policy review in 1998.
In June, as requested by the un Human Rights Committee in November 1996, the British Government tabled its last report on the implementation of the iccpr in Hong Kong. In November, after many years of uncertainty, the Chinese Government announced that it would submit reports to the un on the implementation of the iccpr and icescr in Hong Kong. The reports would be prepared by the hksar government, which stated that the established practice of public consultation would be maintained.
An Amnesty International delegation visited Hong Kong in February to discuss human rights protection and promotion following Hong Kong's return to Chinese sovereignty. A report, Hong Kong: Human rights, law and autonomy - the risks of transition, recommended that the incoming hksar government move quickly to secure the future of legal safeguards for freedom of expression and association, protect the independence of the judiciary and clarify laws governing the military garrison in Hong Kong. In April Amnesty International published its submission to the consultation process initiated by the hksar Chief Executive-Designate on proposed changes to the Bill of Rights and legislation governing public order and societies. In late June visiting Amnesty International delegates issued a list of human rights benchmarks for Hong Kong after the handover. Amnesty International's regional office in Hong Kong continued to monitor developments throughout the year and to maintain contact with the hksar authorities.
