COTE D'lVOIRE
Dozens of students were arrested and three were sentenced to terms of imprislonment; all were considered prisoners of conscience. Twenty opposition party supporters arrested in November 1995, including possible prisoners of conscience, remained in jail without trial throughout the year. There were reports of beatings by the security forces; one person died, apparently as a result. At least one person died in custody. One person was sentenced to death but there were no executions.
côte d'ivoire
In March Côte d'Ivoire acceded to the (first) Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (iccpr).
In January, three leaders of the Fédération estudiantine et scolaire de Côte d'Ivoire (fesci), Ivorian Federation of Students and School Pupils, Picas Damané, Charles Blé Goudé and Sylvanus Goré, were sentenced to two years' imprisonment; they were prisoners of conscience. They had been arrested two weeks earlier in the office of the Minister of Security where they had been invited to discuss student grievances. They were convicted of inciting violence under a law, commonly called the "anti-riot law", which allows anyone who calls or leads a gathering to be held accountable for any violence which subsequently occurs.
Dozens of fesci members were detained for short periods during the first half of the year, fesci was officially legalized again in October. In January and February at least 20 students were arrested, including Guillaume Soro Kibaforé, Secretary General of FEsa. All were considered to be prisoners of conscience imprisoned solely because of their membership of fesq, which the government claimed had been banned. All had been released by the end of February, after receiving a presidential pardon.
Twenty opposition party supporters, including possible prisoners of conscience, arrested in connection with the political unrest that followed the presidential elections in October 1995 remained in detention without trial in Gagnoa prison throughout the year (see Amnesty
International Report 1997). They were among the 100 detainees accused of looting camps belonging to the Baoulé ethnic group, of which President Herui Konan Bédié is a member, during the October 1995 election period. This period saw the development of ethnic tension between Baoulé villagers and the majority ethnic group, the Bétés, to which Laurent Gbagbo, leader of the opposition Front populaire ivoirien, Popular Ivorian Front, belongs, Most of these detainees were provisionally released, but 20 remained in detention without trial at the end of the year.
Seven officers accused of plotting a coup were released in March and expelled from the army. They had been arrested in November 1995 and held without trial in incommunicado detention for 17 months (see Amnesty International Report 1997).
There were further reports of beatings by police officers. Student activists belonging to FEsa continued to be harassed and ill-treated by the security forces. During a raid on Abobo campus in Abidjan, the capital, in January, Akpélé Akpélé Marcellin, a student, died apparently as a result of beatings by members of the security forces. The then Minister of Security refused to open an inquiry into the causes of his death. In April a FEsa meeting at the Bouaké campus was broken up by members of the security forces who beat and otherwise ill-treated the students. One of the students, Estelle Zézé, who had asthma and was suffering from the effects of tear-gas, was severely beaten on the legs by members of the secmity forces while she was lying on the ground.
Two joiunalists working for the newspaper La Voie, were beaten by members of the security forces. In February, Félix Teha Dessrait was beaten by the police when he arrived at the police station to check whether Guillaume Soro Kibaforé (see above) was detained. In May, Daniel Opeli was severely beaten by police officers after identifying himself as a journalist while covering a story on a fesci meeting in Abidjan.
At least one person died in custody, Djahi Djié Bruno died in February in the Gagnoa prison, apparently as a result of harsh prison conditions. He was the seventh detainee arrested after the October 1995 presidential elections to die in prison after months of detention without trial (see Amnesty International Report 1997).
côte d'ivoirea^roatia
One person was sentenced to death, but there were no executions. In Jime, Diomand6 Hamad ou was sentenced to death after being convicted of murder.
In March, Amnesty International called on the authorities to accede to the Second Optional Protocol to the iccpr, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty.
