AUSTRIA
There were further allegations of ill-treatment of detainees by police ofBcers.
In January it was alleged that Ewald Stattmann had been ill-treated the previous month, following his arrest in the town of Villach in southern Austria. According to reports, witnesses saw two officers beat Ewald Stattmann with rubber truncheons when they arrested him, and kick him while he was on the ground. Police sources were quoted as saying that Ewald Stattmann had attacked the arresting officers and had banged his head on the ground, and later against a wall at Villach police station, in an attempt to injure himself. Several hours after his arrest Ewald Stattmann was found unconscious
in a cell at the station and rushed to hospital, where he underwent emergency siugery. His injuries included a fractured skull, cranio-cerebral trauma, a cerebral haemorrhage and multiple bruising.
In March Kureng Akuei Pac, a Sudanese diplomat, alleged that he had been ill-treated by police officers at a Vienna police station following an identity check in the centre of the city. According to the diplomat, after arriving at the station, officers pulled him by his tie into an interview room, punching him on the chin as they went. They then proceeded to strip him of his coat, tie, shirt and shoes and, prior to conducting a body search, asked him to remove his trousers. When he was refused permission to telephone the Sudanese Embassy from the station, Kureng Akuei Pac left the station to find a public telephone. He alleged that several officers went after him and pulled him back inside the station, hitting him several times on the back and upper arms. According to medical evidence Kureng Akuei Pac suffered bruising of the right shoulder and bruising and laceration of the lower lip.
In January a Vienna court found Vio-letta Jevremovig guilty of attempting to resist stale authority and of assaulting an officer (see Amnesty International Report 1997). She was sentenced to two months' imprisonment, suspended for three years. Her conviction for assault was overturned on appeal and referred back to the court of first instance.
In February the Austrian authorities informed Amnesty International that investigators had "not been able to find any objective evidence of criminal behaviour" by the officers alleged to have ill-treated Sabine Geisberger in November 1995 (see Amnesty International Report 1997). Sabine Geisberger had alleged that a Vienna police officer dragged her by the hair into the bedroom of her apartment and threw her into the comer of the room, where he repeatedly kicked her in the genitals. An examination performed the next day by a doctor from the gynaecological department of Klagenfurt Hospital had reported bruising to the rim of the pelvis, left thigh, and genitals.
In March Peter Zwiauer was acquitted by Schwechat District Court of charges of failing to comply with a call-up order, an offence which carries a penalty of up to one year's imprisonment (see Amnesty
austria/azerbaijan
International Report 1997). Peter Zwiauer had refused to report for military duty in May 1996 after his application to perform alternative service had been rejected on the groimds that it had not been submitted within the required time period. In acquitting him of the charges, pending appeal, Schwechat District Court ruled that "the accused could not be reproached for not knowing about the particular deadline... especially since the authorities made no particular efforts to inform the public about the regulation". Amnesty International had previously informed the Austrian authorities that if Peter Zwiauer was imprisoned as a result of his refusal on grounds of conscience to perform military service, the organization would consider him to be a prisoner of conscience and would call for his immediate and unconditional release.
In February Amnesty International called upon the authorities to carry out a prompt and impartial investigation into the alleged ill-treatment of Ewald Stattmann and urged that investigators pay special heed to the principles established in international hiunan rights instruments regarding the use of force by law enforcement officials, and the medical care and supervision of detainees. In November the organization was informed that, according to the results of preliminary police inquiries, there was "no substantiated suspicion of police involvement" in the alleged ill-treatment of Ewald Stattmann.
In July Amnesty International asked the authorities for details of the reasoning behind the decision to discontinue the investigation into the alleged ill-treatment of Sabine Geisberger. The organization also expressed concern that criminal proceedings against Violetta Jevremovig appeared to have been conducted with urgency while the investigation into her complaint of ill-treatment had still not been concluded more than a year after it had been submitted. Finally, Amnesty International called for a prompt and impartial investigation into the alleged ill-treatment of Kureng Akuei Pac. Amnesty International had not received any substantive reply to its inquiries by the end of the year.
In February Amnesty International published a report, Austria: Conscientious objection to military service - a summary of current concerns.
