CONGO
(REPUBLIC OF THE)
Thousands of civilians were killed in fighting between government troops allied with armed civilian militias on the one side, and militiamen belonging to an armed opposition group on the other. Both parties were responsible for torture and deliberate and arbitrary killings. Most victims were targeted because of their ethnic identity.
Political violence erupted after two years of relative stability (see Amnesty International Reports 1996 and 1997) and led to the overthrow in October of President Pascal Lissouba's government by militias loyal to former President Denis Sassou Nguesso.
The fighting began in June, some weeks before the presidential election. President Lissouba accused his main challenger for the election, Denis Sassou Nguesso, of staging a coup. He in turn accused the President and his allies of fomenting violence to force the postponement of the election in order to stay in power.
Despite several cease-fires and draft accords put forward by an International Mediation Committee chaired by Omar Bongo, President of Gabon, negotiations failed because there was no agreement on whether or not President Lissouba's mandate, due to end in August, should be extended. The fighting ended in October,
congo (republic of the)
when Denis Sassou Nguesso took power as President with the help of Angolan soldiers. He announced a transition period leading to presidential elections and promised that opposition parties would not be excluded from the election process.
From August to October, the UN Seciu'-ity Council called several times upon all parties to ensure the safety of the civilian population and the safe and unrestricted delivery of humanitarian assistance.
Thousands of unarmed civilians were killed during the fighting, mostly in Brazzaville, the capital. Both sides used heavy weaponry, particularly multiple rocket launchers, as a result of which at least half a million people sought refuge, notably in Congo's second largest city, Pointe-Noire. The violence increased in September when President Lissouba's mandate formally came to an end. Government forces carried out helicopter bombardments just north of Brazzaville, resulting in many civilian casualties, especially among displaced people. Unidentified fighters also launched shells across the river Congo to Kinshasa, capital of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, killing more than 20 people and prompting fears that the conflict might spread beyond the country.
Most human rights abuses were committed by armed militias allied to each of the two sides. Most government troops left the army to join militias linked to their own etlmic groups. Both the militias allied to the ruling Mouvance présidentielle, Presidential Tendency (known as "Zoulous"), and those loyal to Denis Sassou Nguesso (known as "Cobras"), terrorized Brazzaville, looting and killing or expelling people not belonging to their ethnic group. For several weeks the capital was in chaos and the bodies of dead fighters and civilians were left on the streets for days.
The level of violence made it difficult for human rights organizations to carry out independent investigations or to confirm who was responsible for individual killings of civilians, many of whom were targeted on account of their ethnic origin. In Brazzaville, militiamen of both sides set up barricades and road-blocks and stopped civilians to check their identity cards. People who did not have one were asked to speak in their first language in order to find out their ethnic group. Many members of the ethnic group of the oppos-
ing side were immediately killed. Killings on ethnic grounds also took place at various railway stations between Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire. People from the north who were Mbochis, the ethnic group of Denis Sassou Nguesso, were pulled off the train by "Zoulous" militiamen and killed or taken away in trucks to unknown destinations. Most of them remained unaccounted for at the end of the year.
Among those kilted were women, children and sick people. In June "Zoulous" militiamen killed a boy who was coming back from school, apparently only because he lived in Poto Poto area, where many people from the north lived. "Zoulous" militiamen also occupied a hospital in Brazzaville in June in order to install heavy arms and to shell enemy positions. The militiamen killed some of the patients, because of their ethnic group, and expelled the rest.
Militiamen loyal to Denis Sassou Nguesso - "Cobras" - were also responsible for human rights abuses. In June men accused of being spies were given five minutes to explain themselves and were then summarily executed with a bullet in the chest or in the head. On 8 Jime "Cobras" detained 10 people, including two women. The women were tortured and the eight men were killed. On 15 June, three people were killed in Poto Poto because they were speaking in Kituba, the language of the southern part of the country, which is supposedly loyal to Pascal Lis-souba. Also in June, volunteers working for the Congolese Red Cross were killed in Ouenze, a neighbourhood of Brazzaville, because they were suspected of supporting Pascal Lissouba.
When President Nguesso took power in October, scores of people suspected of being loyal to the former president were extrajudicially executed. The victims included the father and mother of Jean Sylvestre Souka, former director general of radio and television in Congo, who were extrajudicially executed in Mfilou, Brazzaville. Jacques Robert Kimpo, former Ambassador to Egypt, was arrested with seven other people in October, one of whom was released. The remaining seven people were extrajudicially executed by "Cobras". Gabriel Matsioana, a former Minister of the Environment, and Lieutenant Mikabou were also extrajudicially executed. In Pointe-Noire, women were raped and
CONGO (REPUBLIC OF "mE)/COSTA RICA/CÔTE D'lVOIRE
people suspected of being supporters of Pascal Lissouba were tortured and killed. Angolan soldiers who supported the "Cobras" also killed civilians, including Fabrice Koubaka, a pupil at a secondary school in Pointe-Noire, who was shot dead in front of his house.
Scores of people were arrested after President S as sou Nguesso took power. Some, including Pierre Kibamba, former Director General of Customs, and Ngono, a former bank official, were released without charge after one month's detention. Others remained in detention without charge or trial at the end of the year. They included Jacques Mounda Mpassi, former Minister of Youth, who was arrested in Pointe-Noire in November while trying to leave the coimtry, and Albert Moim-goundo, an executive member of the Convention des démocrates pour ¡'union et ¡a République, Convention of Democrats for Unity and the Republic.
Amnesty International delegates visited Congo in June to interview Rwandese refugees coming from former Zaire and to investigate human rights violations in Congo. Because of the fighting, the delegates had to leave the country earlier than planned.
