TURKMENISTAN
At least three possible prisoners of conscience were serving long prison sentences. One possible prisoner of conscience was detained without charge. Eight political prisoners serving sentences imposed in previous years may have received unfair trials. Cruel, inhuman or degrading prison conditions and other ill-treatment continued to be reported. A government opponent was under threat of forcible repatriation. At least 10 people were executed and at least 35 people were under sentence of death at the end of the year.
In April President Saparmurad Niyazov pubhcly stated that Turkmenistan's courts often prosecuted "innocent people" instead of real criminals. Announcing the dismissal of the Procurator General, the President complained of widespread incompetence and cormption among law enforcement officials. Further officials were dismissed in July, including the procurator of Lebap Region, who was accused of allowing "the complete merging of law-enforcement agencies with the criminal underworld".
In June the President issued an amnesty decree reportedly covering over 2,000 prisoners. This was believed to be an attempt to address the problem of serious overcrowding and appalling conditions in the country's penitentiaries. The amnesty was reported to include commutation of 222 death sentences, the first official indication that the number of people on death row was as high as had been alleged by unofficial sources.
turkmenistan
Also in June a new Criminal Code was approved by the MajUs [parliament). It provided for the death penalty for 17 offences, including murder, genocide, various anti-state crimes and a number of drug-related crimes.
In May Turkmenistan acceded to the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and its (first) Optional Protocol, to the un Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and to the Intemational Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
At least three possible prisoners of conscience were serving long sentences, including Mukhametkuli Aymuradov and Khoshali Garayev (see Amnesty Intemational Reports 1996 and 1997). There were fears that a charge of drug-trafficking made against Ashirgeldy Syadiyev, serving a 15-or 20-year prison sentence, could have been politically motivated, and that he may be a prisoner of conscience. Taxi driver Ashirgeldy Syadiyev, a relative of a prominent dissident, was living in Ashga-bat, the capital, where he and his family were the sole focus of contact between the exiled Khalmurad Soyunov and his relatives. In March a passenger, who had reportedly deliberately chosen Ashirgeldy Syadiyev's taxi from a number of others waiting for fares, left luggage at Ashirgeldy Syadiyev's house. Police searched the house and allegedly discovered narcotics in the passenger's luggage. Ashirgeldy Syadiyev was arrested the same day. The police reportedly made no efforts to trace his passenger. In May Ashirgeldy Syadiyev was tried in Ashgabat City Court and sentenced to death for drug-trafficking after a witaess testified to having bought narcotics from him. The wimess was not prosecuted. In June the death sentence was commuted under the presidential amnesty.
Yovshan Annakurban, an independent journalist, was arrested in October at Ashgabat airport by members of the Turkmen Committee of National Security (knb), reportedly to prevent him from attending a training seminar with Radio Liberty in Prague, Czech Republic, knb officials claimed to have found materials by the imderground political opposition in his luggage. He was detained for two weeks before being released without charge following intemational pressure. Yovshan
Aimakurban had been detained for six months following an anti-govermnent demonstration in July 1995 (see Amnesty International Reports 2996 and 1997).
Reports suggested that the "Ashgabat Eight", serving prison sentences in connection with an anti-govemment demonstration in July 1995 (see Amnesty /nfemaijona/ Reports 1996 and 1997), may have received an unfair trial. Seven -Amanmyrat Amandurdyyev, Khudayberdi Amandurdyyev, Gulgeldi Annanyyazov, Charymyrat Gm^ov, Begmyrat Khojayev, Kakamyrat Nazarov and Batyr Sakhetliyev — were reported to have received prison sentences in December 1995 or January 1996 of between four and 15 years for a range of crimes, including dmg and firearms offences, "malicious hooliganism" and "preparation to commit murder". The trial appeared to have been held in secret, in violation of intemational fan trial standards. The eighth man, Charymyrat Amandm'd)^ev, was believed to have been arrested in February 1996. It was not known whether he was subsequently charged or tried, but he was reportedly still held at the end of the year.
There was concern that the "Ashgabat Eight" might have been coerced into testifying against themselves by means of ill-treatment and threats. There were widespread allegations that law enforcement officials beat participants in the 1995 demonstration both at the time of arrest and during preliminary detention (see Amnesty International Report 1996).
There was also concern for the current physical well-being of the "Ashgabat Eight". Gulgeldi Annanyyazov was reportedly deliberately held among violent criminals in order to put him at risk of assault, a practice common in the former Soviet Union, of which Turkmenistan was a part. In addition, prisoners routinely suffer overcrowding and severe food shortages, and outbreaks of diseases such as cholera have been reported.
In November former Deputy Prime Minister Nazar Soyunov was detained in Moscow, Russia, by officers of the Russian Federal Security Service and questioned for four hours about criminal charges brought against him in Tm-kmenistan. There were allegations that the charges, which related to cormption during his time in office, had been fabricated in order to punish him for an interview he had
turkmenistan/uganda
given to Radio Liberty in October which was critical of President Niyazov.
At least 10 people were reported to have been executed, although the true figure was believed to be much higher. At the end of the year at least 35 people were believed to remain under sentence of death. Three death sentences - all for alleged drug offences - passed on Gulsere Dzhumayeva, Ehmyagozel Ovezdurdyyeva and Ashirgeldy Syadiyev were corrunuted, the latter two imder the presidential amnesty in June. It was not possible to ascertain which other prisoners under sentence of death benefited from the amnesty.
In September Amnesty International expressed concern that Ashirgeldy Syadiyev may have been detained solely because he was related to Khalmurad Soyunov and maintained contact with him. The organization called for a full judicial review of the case and in particular investigation of allegations that the evidence against him was fabricated.
In November the organization urged the authorities to clarify the charges against Yovshan Annakurban and to protect him from any form of ill-treatment.
In a report issued in July, Turk-merdstan: Ttie "Ashgabat Eight" - two years on, time for the truth. Amnesty International called on the authorities to provide detailed information about the fate of ail those arrested following the July 1995 demonstration in Ashgabat and about the conduct of the trial of all those still serving sentences in connection with the demonstration. It also sought assurances that the "Ashgabat Eight" had not been tortured or ill-treated, or placed at risk of violence from fellow inmates.
In April, following the President's admission of widespread judicial error and malpractice in Turkmenistan, Amnesty International reiterated its calls for a judicial review of the criminal convictions of Mukhametkuli Aymuradov and Khoshali Garayev, and asked whether the cases of people arrested after the 1995 demonstration would be re-examined. In November the organization called on the Russian authorities not to extradite Nazar Soyunov to Turkmenistan. Amnesty International renewed calls for a moratorium on the death penalty, arguing that if some of the "innocent people" to whom the President had referred were executed, these mistakes could never be undone. There was no
response from any Turkmen official to Amnesty International's appeals and statements.
