ALBANIA
Anti-govemment demonstrations resulted in violent clashes with the police and the temporary collapse of government authority in most of the country. Demonstrators. journalists and bystanders were detained and ill-treated by police. Police were alleged to have shot demonstrators unlawfully. Most prisoners of conscience -both those detained during the year and those detained in previous years - escaped, were released or were pardoned. Political prisoners also escaped or were released. At least one death sentence was passed. No executions were reported to have been carried out.
Protests in a number of towns by people demanding the return of money they had lost in fraudulent savings schemes escalated into violent anti-gov-
ernment riots in January and February. Law and order broke down as the situation deteriorated, particularly in the south, amid widespread looting of military arms depots. As violence increased in February, nine people were killed in riots in the southern town of Vlora. Following these incidents, the government of Prime Minister Aleksander Meksi resigned and a state of emergency was declared on 2 March. On 3 March President Sali Berisha, of the Democratic Party, who had been in office since 1992, was re-elected by parliament. Opposition members boycotted the vote. As riots, demonstrations and disorder spread to the capital, Tirana, and other towns, those vocalizing their discontent demanded the resignation of the President as well as the return of lost money. International pressure led President Berisha to agree to an interim coalition government and early elections. An interim government led by opposition Socialist Party (sp) member Bashkim Fino governed imtil July.
The widespread lawlessness saw a mounting death toll from criminal killings and accidental shootings. By the end of the year some 1,600 people had been killed. Most of these deaths occurred between March and July. In response to the crisis, the un Security Council authorized the dispatch of an Italian-led multinational security force, which was deployed from April to August to oversee relief efforts and the new elections.
Amid the disorder in the first half of the year, thousands of people fled abroad. Many of them were refugees fleeing serious human rights abuses and random violence; others were fleeing the economic chaos. In March around 59 Albanians died when the tugboat in which they were fleeing collided with an Italian naval ship which was attempting to stem the arrival of refugees (see Italy entry).
Elections held in June gave a clear majority to the sp. President Berisha resigned. The parliament elected sp member Rexhep Mejdani as President. Fatos Nano, an sp member and former Prime Minister, was appointed Prime Minister in July with a coalition government including members of other former opposition parties. In July the state of emergency was formally lifted.
Some prisoners of conscience were detained in connection with the crisis in the first part of the year. These included
albania/algeria
journalist Roland Beqiraj, who was held in Korga for at least 11 days in January and February and was allegedly beaten by police. However, the growing chaos resulted in the breakout or release in March of around one thousand prisoners. These included prisoners of conscience such as Fatos Nano (see Amnesty International Reports 1995 to 1997). He and approximately 50 other prisoners had been formally pardoned by President Berisha; another 600 convicted prisoners benefited from a separate Amnesty Law. The pardons and amnesties excluded some prisoners of conscience, for example, Idajet Beqiri, leader of the National Unity Party (see Amnesty International Reports 1994 and 1997). He had, however, escaped, and by the end of the year the police had not rearrested him or many of the other prisoners who escaped or were released during the height of the lawlessness.
In April charges of involvement in political killings, bombings and robberies against political prisoner Klement Kolaneci, son-in-law of former communist ruler Enver Hoxha, were dropped (see Amnesty International Report 1997]. In October charges of "genocide" against former President Ramiz Alia were also dropped (see Amnesty International Report 1997).
As the demonstrations gathered pace in January and February there were increasing reports that imiformed and plainclothes police officers, or civilians operating in groups linked to the authorities, were beating and detaining demonstrators, suspected demonstrators or opposition supporters. There were violent attacks on independent and opposition journalists, many of which were attributed to the authorities. These attacks took place in towns such as VIora, which became the main focal point of the anti-goverament demonstrations. Herat, Fier, Korga and Tirana, as well as other towns. For example, in January B. Memushi alleged that he had been beaten by police in Vlora with a truncheon and chair leg, resulting in broken teeth and injuries to his genitals. He denied that he had even taken part in the demonstrations. In Berat, Vladimir Goxhi and others were treated in hospital after alleged beatings by police in detention. Relatives of other detainees who were held in the town were not promptly informed of their detention. In February
journalists Roland Beqiraj (see above) and Alfred Peza were beaten by police in Korga and Fier respectively.
Six people killed during the February riots in Vlora were alleged to have been unlawfully killed by the state security police, who shot into crowds.
Despite an undertaking by Albania to the Council of Em^ope in 1996 to suspend executions, some death sentences were reported. For example, in October Myrteza Gjoka was sentenced to death for killing six members of his family. No executions were reported to have been carried out.
In Febmary Amnesty International called on the authorities to maintain law and order in a manner in keeping with Albania's intemational human rights obligations; the organization expressed concem about reports of the ill-treatment of protesters and opposition supporters. It urged the release of those detained for the nonviolent exercise of their right to freedom of expression and association, and for all other political prisoners to be granted a fair trial. In March, following the introduction of the state of emergency. Amnesty International reminded the authorities of the need to uphold at all times the right to life and the right not to be subjected to torture. It also criticized provisions in the legislation which authorized security forces to open fire to disperse crowds and to shoot without warning those failing to surrender weapons.
