ZAMBIA
A newspaper journalist was a prisoner of conscience; several other journalists were detained for brief periods. More than 90 people were detained without charge or trial following an attempted coup; some were tortured and one may have died as a result of torture. There were allegations of ill-treatment, torture, shootings and un-lawiul killings by law enforcement officers. Two opposition politicians were shot and injured while driving away from police. Prison conditions remained harsh and amounted to ill-treatment. A former Rwandese cabinet minister, a refugee in Zambia, apparently "disappeared": she later reappeared in a Rwandese prison. Eight prisoners were hanged in the first executions in eight years. Around 130 prisoners remained under sentence of death.
zambia
In January Home Affairs Minister Chi-taulu Sampa reportedly ordered police to be "very brutal" in dealing with what he termed "arrogant members of the pubUc" who disobeyed police instructions to demonstrators to disperse.
In April the govemment proposed a bill which would have created a govemment-appointed media council with powers to impose fines on and imprison joiomalists who did not conform to its mles. The bill was withdrawn following criticism from civic organizations, joumalists, international human rights organizations and foreign governments.
An attempted coup took place in October. following which a three-month state of emergency was declared. Many rights guaranteed under the Constitution were suspended, allowing lengthy detention without charge or trial, and restrictions on freedom of conscience, expression, assembly and movement.
A newspaper journalist was detained as a prisoner of conscience. In Febmary the Supreme Court of Zambia sentenced The Post newspaper editor Masautso Phiri to a three-month prison term for "contempt of court" for publishing a column containing allegations that members of the Supreme Court were offered bribes amounting to US$10.8 million by President Frederick Chiluba. Masautso Phiri was released in April, but was rearrested in August while covering a demonstration (see below).
Several other joumalists were detained for brief periods. In Febmary an editor and a reporter on the independent newspaper The Chronicle were detained for two days on charges of contempt of parliament, publishing false news and criminal libel against President Chiluba. The charges were later dropped in a court settlement that reportedly included printing a retraction. Another Chronicle reporter, George Jambwa, was charged with criminal trespass in Febmary, after being arrested and held for four days in December 1996 at an army barracks in Lusaka, the capital, where he had gone to interview an army officer. Dismissing the charges in April, a magistrate noted that George Jambwa had been the victim of "a conspiracy to cover up the inefficiency of security at the gate". In January, April and August Post reporters were arrested and briefly detained.
In April a judge dismissed criminal defamation charges, pending since 1994,
against four Post joumalists who had published an article alleging an extra-marital affair by presidential press assistant Richard Sakala. In May a judge dismissed charges against three editors of The Post who had been accused of revealing a state secret when, in Febmary 1996, they published details of a cabinet plan for a referendum over the 1996 draft constitution (see Amnesty Intemational Report 199^,
Following the attempted coup in October, police and security forces indefinitely detained more than 90 suspects. Many of them were initially held incommimicado and without charge under the terms of the state of emergency. One detainee. Dean Mung'omba, President of the opposition Zambia Democratic Congress, was reportedly subjected to beatings, electric shocks, cigarette bums and sleep deprivation. Other detainees — mostly army officers — were also reportedly tortured or ill-treated by the police. One detainee allegedly died as a result of torture. Among those detained were Captain Stephen Lungu, Captain Jackson Chiti, Major Bilex Mutale. Major Musonda Kangwa and Staff Sergeant Kennedy Sinutala. All were still detained at the end of the year. None had been charged or tried.
Kenneth Kaunda, former President of Zambia and leader of the United National Independence Party (unip), who had been travelling abroad at the time of the coup, was arrested on 25 December after he retumed. He was later put under house arrest, where he remained at the end of the year. The authorities accused him of conspiring with Dean Mung'omba, leader of the opposition Liberal I^ogressive Front, Roger Chongwe, Captain Stephen Lungu, Captain Jack Chiti and Major Musonda Kangwa to overthrow the govemment. Roger Chongwe remained outside the country. Hearings on the legality of this and other related detentions continued at the end of the year.
Police beat and otherwise ill-treated participants in opposition rallies scheduled without giving notice to the police, and other demonstrators. In Febmary, for example, police fired tear-gas and used batons and whips to break up a peaceful demonstration by the uni? in Ndola. Some demonstrators were injured. In July police broke up a peaceful unip rally in Lusaka. They then surrounded the unip headquarters, entered the building and fired tear-
zambia
gas inside, in violation of international standards. Several people were injured in police beatings when they emerged from the building or later in police custody. In August police reportedly beat and kicked stall-holders who rioted after their stalls mysteriously burned down. Several stallholders were injured in the beatings, and two allegedly died of their injuries.
Unarmed suspects were injured or killed in police shootings which appeared to involve excessive or imlavirful use of force. In June, two police officers in the northern town of Kitwe allegedly shot a suspected robber in both legs after beating him vnth gun butts and tying his hands together, In a case in October police officers in Lusaka shot and killed a man who was urinating in public. The police officers later claimed that the man had grabbed for an officer's gun, but eye-witnesses dispute this. No disciplinary action was known to have been taken in either case.
In August police in Kabwe shot and wounded Kenneth Kaunda and Roger Chongwe, A bullet grazed Kenneth Kaunda's head and caused serious injury to Roger Chongwe's cheek and neck. That morning, police had used live ammimi-tion to disperse people gathering for an unsanctioned opposition rally which the two were due to address, arresting journalist Masautso Phiri and reportedly beating him and smashing his camera. Police reportedly then cornered the two politicians in an office building, allegedly opening fire when the two attempted to flee. Two senior police officers were later suspended. Police officials claimed that officers mistakenly used live ammimition to disperse the rally. The authorities denied allegations that there had been an officially sanctioned attempt to assassinate Kenneth Kaunda and Roger Chongwe, By the end of the year no official investigation into the allegations appeared to have taken place.
Prison conditions remained harsh and amounted to ill-treatment. The number of prisoners was nearly double that which could be adequately housed, and clean water, food, blankets, clothing and medicines were in short supply. Up to 100 prisoners, weakened by malnourishment, died ftx)m diseases such as tuberculosis and AIDS. In a measure believed to be aimed at addressing the problem of overcrowding.
President Chiluba pardoned 480 prisoners in May and another 300 in October.
In May, Agnes Ntamabyaliro Rutagw-era, a former Rwandese government minister who had been living in Zambia as a refugee since 1995, was abducted from her house in the northern town of Mufalira. According to reports, her abductors wore the uniform of the Zambian Immigration Service and used a vehicle bearing 2^am-bian government licence plates. She was later discovered to be in prison in Kigali, Rwanda. The Zambian Government, which denied any involvement in the incident, had apparently failed to initiate a promised investigation by the end of the year.
Eight prisoners were hanged in the first executions in eight years. There was particular concern about the secrecy surrounding the executions in January of Abraham Kasongo, Nelson Ngundano, Dennis Chisela Chembe, Robert Mulumbi, David Kapanga, John Gimibo, Joseph Ma-siti Chilanda, and Christopher Mwansa Oldfield, all of whom had been convicted of murder or aggravated robbery. The executions only came to light by March, and the government refused to confirm the names of those executed or the charges on which they had been convicted. There was concern at reports that one of the men - Nelson Ngundano - had been suffering from mental illness developed after nearly 15 years under sentence of death. Approximately 130 prisoners remained under sentence of death.
Amnesty International called for Kenneth Kaunda and the others detained in connection with the coup attempt to be charged with a recognizably criminal offence or released, and for the investigation and prosecution of those police officers responsible for the torture of detainees. The organization wrote to President Chiluba urging that an immediate, thorough and independent investigation take place into the shootings by police in June, August and October, including the incident involving Kenneth Kaunda and Roger Chongwe, as well as shootings which took place in previous years, and that the results of all such investigations be made public. Amnesty International wrote to the President calling for an immediate investigation into the circumstances surrounding Agnes Ntamabyaliro Rutagwera's "disappearance". The organization also wrote
ZAMBIA/ZIMBABWE
to the President to express its deep regret at, and condemnation of, the execution of the eight men in January.
In a report published in November, Zambia: Forcible exile to suppress dissent, Amnesty Intemational described hovtf investigations into the nationality of govem-ment critics had been used to intimidate them. The report detailed the cases of two unip politicians, William Stephen Banda and John Lyson Chinula, who had been deported in 1994 in circumstances amounting to forcible exile because of their political activities.
