SIERRA LEONE
Hundreds of suspected opponents of a military coup were arbitrarily detained. They included supporters of the ousted government, joumalists, students and human rights activists. Most, if not all, were prisoners of conscience. Many were
tortured or Hi-treated. Dozens of extrajudicial executions of political opponents were reported. Thirty-five people sentenced to death by military courts were executed. Armed opposition groups were responsible for deliberate and arbitrary killings and torture.
On 25 May President Ahmad Tejan Kabbah's government, in power since elections in 1996, was overthrown in a military coup. The Armed Forces Revolutionary Coimcil (afrc) which took power was subsequently joined by the armed opposition Revolutionary United Front (ruf) which had fought govenmient forces for five years until a peace agreement in November 1996. The afrc cited the failure to implement this agreement as one of the reasons for seizing power. The Constitution was suspended, political parties banned and demonstrations prohibited. The afrc assumed extensive powers of detention, without safeguards against arbitrary arrest or indefinite detention without charge or trial.
The afrc was headed by Lieutenant-Colonel (formerly Major) Johnny Paul Koroma who, with hundreds of other prisoners, was freed from the Central Prison, Pademba Road, in Freetovra, on the day of the coup. He had been among nine soldiers charged in December 1996 with conspiring to overthrow the government, but not yet tried (see Amnesty International Report 1997).
Almost all sectors of society opposed the coup which was also strongly condemned by the international community -including the un, the Organization of African Unity (oau), the Commonwealth and the European Union. West African (predominantly Nigerian) troops present in Sierra Leone clashed repeatedly with afrc and ruf forces. There was also fighting between a civilian militia of kamajors (traditional himters) loyal to President Tejan Kabbah and afrc and ruf forces. Nigerian forces used shelling to enforce an embargo on oil and arms imposed by the international community. Fighting and shelling resulted in hundreds of civilian casualties.
In October representatives of the afrc and five other West African countries agreed on President Tejan Kabbah's return to power by April 1998. However, implementation of this agreement, which included cessation of hostilities, disarma-
sierra leone
ment and demobilization, encountered serious set-backs. Fighting between soldiers and kamajors intensified in December and disarmament had not begun by the end of the year.
The reintegration within Sierra Leone agreed in November 1996 of hundreds of thousands of returning refugees and internally displaced people - nearly half the population — was thwarted by violence and insecurity following the coup, Thousands of civilians throughout the country were again forced to flee their homes. Many fled to other West African countries, where some encountered rejection at the frontier (see Gambia and Liberia entries), while others became internally displaced.
Following the coup, many people associated with the ousted govemment or suspected of opposing the afrc were arbitrarily detained. An accurate assessment of their number was impossible but it appeared to be several hundred.
Immediately after the coup, several members of the ousted govemment and senior military officers were detained briefly at Cockerill military headquarters in Freetown. In June at least 15 senior military officers and civilians, including Dr Sama Banya, a prominent political figure, and Abu Aiah Koroma, former Minister for Parliamentary and Political Affairs, were arrested and accused of conspiring to overthrow the afrc. Most were released in the following weeks, but Dr Sama Banya and five others remained in detention until late July and under house arrest until October.
A radio station began broadcasting in July, transmitting messages supporting the ousted government. Many people suspected of either knowing the location of the transmitter or of passing information to the radio station were arrested.
In October Mohamed B. Sesay, a former goverrunent minister, was among several people arrested and accused of subversive activities. He was held at police Criminal Investigation Department (cm) headquarters in Freetown before being released uncharged.
Those speaking out against hiunan rights violations were arbitrarily detained. Some fled Sierra Leone and threats against those who remained severely restricted their activities. The president of a human rights organization, the Civil Liberties Congress, Sulaiman Banja Tejan-Sie, was
arrested in August and forced at gimpoint to appear on television to call on students not to proceed with planned demonstrations. He was severely beaten, had his arms tied tightly and was locked in the boot of a car for several hours. He was again beaten at Cockerill military headquarters before being transferred to Pademba Road prison where he was denied food and washing facilities for several days. He was released without charge after 11 days.
In October soldiers and ruf members attempted to arrest the Secretary General of the Sierra Leonean Section of Amnesty International. Isaac Lappia, apparently suspected of opposing the afrc and passing information outside Sierra Leone, escaped arrest; however, family members and others at his house were beaten and briefly detained.
Many students were vocal in their opposition to the afrc. More than 120 people, mostly students, were arrested in August after attempting to stage a march for democracy. Most of those arrested were released after 12 days; others, however, were believed to have been held until October. Some students, including Juliet Jones, remained missing; it was unclear whether they had been arrested or had gone into hiding.
The afrc's stated commitment to press freedom on coming to power was shortlived. In July the Sierra Leone Association of Journalists condemned unprecedented harassment and intimidation of journalists. That month four members of staff of The Democrat newspaper, and three others at its premises, were arrested by soldiers searching for the clandestine radio transmitter. Although four were released a few days later, Jeff Bowley Williams, Salomon Conteh and Fatmata Kamara were held for 12 days. Two joimialists on their way to cover the students' demonstration in August were arrested with their driver and taken to Cockerill military headquarters. Kelvin Lewis, a correspondent for Radio France Internationale and Voice of America, and Winston Ojukutu Macaulay, a British Broadcasting Corporation (bbc) correspondent previously arrested in June, sustained serious injimes from beatings by soldiers who also threatened to kill them. Both joimialists and their driver were released the following day. During October and November the crack-down on the
sierra leone
press intensified; at least 20 joimialists, including Jon Z, Foray, editor of New Storm, and Jonathan Leigh, editor of the Independent Observer, were detained without charge for up to two weeks.
Before the coup, in March, three journalists of the Expo Times newspaper were arrested on charges of spying, following an article criticizing the detention of ruf leader Foday Sankoh in Nigeria (see below), Released on bail, their trial was scheduled for May but the coup intervened and in July the charges against them were effectively dropped.
At least 15 people, both soldiers and civilians, were arrested in November, accused of conspiring to overthrow the afrc and abort the return to civilian rule agreed the previous month. They included Stephen Bio, a businessman and close relation of the former Head of State who ceded power to President Tejan Kabbah, and Gibril Massaquoi, a prominent ruf member. None had been tried by the end of the year.
Following the coup, torture and ill-treatment by both soldiers and ruf members were widespread. In June Ansu Bockarie, a student leader, was reportedly beaten and cut with a razor blade by a prominent afrc member. Students arrested in August were beaten, cut with machetes or stabbed with bayonets. Some women students were reported to have been sexually assaulted while held at the residences of afrc members.
Many journalists detained during the year were tortured or ill-treated. In October Umaru Fofanah, a freelance journalist suspected of providing information to the clandestine radio station, was reportedly tortured and shot in the leg by soldiers.
Some of those arrested in Freetown were held in conditions amounting to cruel, inhimian or degrading treatment. For example, Sam Goba, arrested in September because of his close association with President Tejan Kabbah, was held with others in a freight container at Cock-erill military headquarters for several months. His health seriously deteriorated as a result and his fate was unclear at the end of the year.
There were also reports of torture and ill-treatment by soldiers and ruf members in areas of the country affected by fighting with kamajors, in particular around Ken-ema in the east and Zimmi in the south.
Villagers accused of supporting the kamajors were beaten and had their arms tied tightly behind their backs, causing serious injuries; women and girls were raped and forced into sexual slavery.
Many civilians died in the violence following the coup, some of whom were deliberately killed for political reasons by soldiers and ruf members. Soldiers searching for kamajors in Southern Province in lune were reported to have killed about 25 people in the villages of Telu Bongor and Sembehun, as well as Albert Sandy Demby, father of the ousted Vice-President and a traditional leader, who was shot dead at his home in Gerihun. Also in June more than 10 people, including women and children, were reported to have been deliberately and arbitrarily killed when armed men, believed to be ruf members, attacked the town of Moy-amba; a student, Sheku Kabbah, was reported to have had his eyes gouged out. ears cut off and throat slit. Many civilians were deliberately killed during fighting around Zimmi, Southern Province, in June. In December about 100 villagers were reportedly shot dead by soldiers posing as kamajors in the east of the country.
At least six students were shot dead in August by security forces. They included Morie Momoh, shot when soldiers entered his hostel room. In late August, six men suspected of involvement with the clandestine radio station were reportedly shot dead at Cockerill military headquarters.
Following the coup, several people were summarily executed by soldiers in Freetown following repeated afrc warnings that suspected looters would be shot on sight.
In October, November and early December, 35 people, mostly soldiers but including some civilians, were executed by firing-squad following conviction for murder and other offences by military courts. Reports suggested, however, that in some cases no trial had taken place. In late November the afrc passed retroactive legislation providing for the death penalty for looting or commandeering vehicles.
Despite the November 1996 agreement providing for immediate cessation of hostilities, unarmed civilians continued to be tortured and killed by ruf forces in the months before the coup, particularly in Tonkolili District, Northern Province. In January dozens of civilians were reported
sierra leone/singapore
to have been killed and young girls raped in ruf attacks on several villages. According to reports, when soldiers moved into forest areas in Kailahun District, an ruf stronghold in Eastern Province, in February, they found more than 100 yoimg children separated from their families, including three girls whose hands had been deliberately cut off and another child with an ear cut off. Similar atrocities by the ruf were reported dining attacks on villages, including Kalangba and Pendembu, north of Makeni, in May before the coup; dozens of civilians were killed and others mutilated by having their arms or feet cut off.
In late March ruf members abducted at least five of their own members, a Sierra Leonean diplomat and members of the Guinean security forces in Kailahun District shortly after an armouncement by prominent ruf members that Foday Sankoh had been removed as leader because he had obstructed the peace process. Foday Sankoh had been detained on arrival in Lagos, Nigeria, in early March, apparently for possession of arms and ammunition; he remained under house arrest in Nigeria at the end of the year. Two of those abducted, Fayia Musa and Ibrahim Deen-Jalloh, were ruf representatives on the Commission for the Consolidation of Peace established by the peace agreement. Although the diplomat was freed shortly after the coup, five ruf members remained held at the end of the year.
There were also reports that kamajors fighting afrc and ruf forces deliberately killed, tortured and ill-treated civilians. In September four people, including a woman, who were suspected of being soldiers or afrc supporters, were reportedly summarily executed by being beheaded when the vehicle in which they were travelling from Bo to Makeni was stopped by kamajors.
In February Amnesty Intemational received a response from the Minister of Justice to its request for clarification of the death in custody of a soldier among those arrested with Major Johnny Paul Koroma (see Amnesty International Report 1997). The reply included a post-mortem report, rejected allegations of ill-treatment during interrogation and stated that he had died after attempting to escape by jumping from a window. In March Amnesty International called for the humane treatment and release of ruf members held hostage,
Following the coup Amnesty Intemational repeatedly called for an end to arbitrary arrest and detention, torture and ill-treatment. and extrajudicial executions, and in October published a report documenting these violations, Sierra Leone: A disastrous set-back for human rights. It called on the intemational conraiunity to give priority to the protection of human rights in efforts to resolve the political crisis in Sierra Leone. Amnesty Intemational strongly condemned executions in October, November and December, called for the repeal of retroactive legislation extending the scope of the death penalty and urged that no further executions take place.
