ROMANIA
At least one prisoner of conscience was held. There were reports of torture and ill-treatment, and of shootings by police officers in disputed circumstances. Some of the victims of human rights violations were Roma.
In April the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe adopted a resolution suspending the procedure for monitoring Romania's compliance with the obligations and commitments accepted on admission to the Council of Europe in 1993. The resolution, however, urged Romania to ensure the independence of the judiciary and to amend certain provisions of the Penal Code which "seriously imperil the exercise of fundamental freedoms", especially those concerning homosexuality and provisions which interfere with the right to freedom of speech. The Parliamentary Assembly noted "deplorable conditions in Romanian prisons" and regretted that the country had made "all too few efforts to improve these conditions and to end the overcrowding of prisons". It also called on Romania to fight racism, xenophobia
and intolerance, particularly in respect of the Romani community.
The authorities failed to initiate a legislative revision of the Penal Code and to bring it into line with international human rights standards. Article 200, paragraph 1, criminalizes homosexual relations between consenting adults "if the act is committed in pubhc or has produced public scandal", and continues to permit imprisonment of adults solely for engaging in consensual homosexual relations in private. Paragraph 5, which prohibits "enticing or seducing a person to practise same-sex acts, as well as forming propaganda associations or engaging in other forms of proselytizing with the same aim", can also lead to imprisonment of individuals solely for exercising their rights to freedom of expression and freedom of peaceful assembly and association. Similarly, no amendments were proposed to provisions of the Penal Code proscribing dissemination of false news, defamation of the state or nation, "offences against the authorities" and "outrage", which impose excessive restrictions on the right to freedom of expression.
It came to light in December that Mariana Cetiner had been arrested in October 1995 and sentenced to three years' imprisonment under Article 200, paragraph 5, of the Penal Code, for attempting to seduce another woman. In January Alba Court upheld Mariana Cetiner's appeal and acquitted her. She was released from prison where she had been held since her arrest. In May, however, following an appeal by the public prosecutor. Alba lulia Appellate Court reversed the acquittal and ordered Mariana Cetiner to serve the remainder of the three-year prison sentence. Ten days later she was rearrested and held in the Tar§or penitentiary.
Although in the past the authorities occasionally disclosed information about the number of people currently imprisoned under Article 200, paragraphs 1 and 5, of the Penal Code, no information was made available on the total number of prosecutions and convictions, some of which might have resulted in criminal sanctions other than imprisonment. It has never, therefore, been possible to determine the full extent to which this law is enforced.
Reports of torture and ill-treatment were widespread. Investigations into complaints of ill-treatment continued to be
romania
prolonged, often lasting two or more years. An investigation into the ill-treatment of Virgiliu Ilie§, a 15-year-old who was arrested in Craiova in January 1994 and reportedly beaten by police officers to force him to confess to a series of thefts from cars, had still not been completed. In March he was sentenced to two and a half years' imprisonment, reportedly on the basis of the statement made at the police station.
Prompt investigations were an exception. In February in Ungiureni, Bacau coimty, the local police chief and his deputy reportedly severely beat Daniel Necu-lai Dediu during the 24 hours he was held on suspicion of biu^glary. The officers reportedly beat and kicked him in the abdomen and hit him on the back with a truncheon and a metal chair. In August, following an investigation, the officers were reportedly charged with illegal arrest and abusive conduct.
Dozens of people were beaten with truncheons and otherwise ill-treated by guards in the Jilava Penitentiary in Bucharest, the capital, following a mass hunger-strike organized by the detainees in February. A colonel in charge of security in penitentiaries was reportedly responsible for the guards' action, in the course of which tear-gas was used in enclosed spaces. In one incident, the colonel reportedly led a group of masked officers into a room where they beat detainees indiscriminately with wooden batons. An hoiu- later a number of detainees were ordered to leave the room via a corridor lined on both sides with officers, who beat them all over the body. An inquiry into the beatings was initiated by the Senate Commission for Human Rights. A representative of the Ministry of the Interior denied at a Commission hearing that police officers had participated in the incident. The results of this inquiry had not been made public by the end of the year.
Also in February, in Tárgu Mure?, two public guards (secmity officers employed by municipal authorities) beat 16-year-old Zóltan Herman and László Bemad, whom they had reportedly caught cutting telephone wires. After the police had found no groimds on which to charge them, they were held for three hours in the public guards' office and reportedly beaten with truncheons on the palms of their hands. Zóltan Herman was slapped on the face
and kicked, and forced to perform squat thrusts while counting aloud the number of repetitions performed. He was then made to dance while singing a Hungarian folk song, and to sing the Romanian national anthem.
In May, two police officers came to take loana EnujS to the police station in Berceni for an unpaid fine against which she had promptly appealed to the municipal court. Outside her house one officer reportedly grabbed her, makino her fall to the ground, and kicked her as they pulled her towards the police car. A number of villagers called on the officers to stop the beating and loana Enu|a ran into a nearby house. She complained about the ill-treatment to the appropriate authority, the Bucharest Military Prosecutor, and there were no further attempts to apprehend her.
In June a lO-year-old boy was apprehended in a closed sales kiosk in a small town on the Black Sea. He was detained for over five hours and reportedly brutally beaten by three officers who questioned him about the break-in. The boy was ordered to take his pants off and bend over, and was repeatedly beaten on the buttocks with a truncheon. He was also beaten on the palms, punched and kicked. One officer threatened to kill him and pointed a gun at his head. Following his release he was hospitalized for three days and treated for head injuries and bruising all over the body. In the com-se of an investigation the police officers, who had not been suspended, denied the allegations of torture and reportedly claimed that the boy's mother had inflicted the injiuies after his release from their custody.
Victims of ill-treatment included Roma. In July, Belmondo Cobzaru, the son of a Romani leader in Mangalia, went to the police station following an incident in which he broke into the flat of his former girlfriend. Two officers reportedly punched him in the head until his nose bled. He was then thrown to the ground and kicked. Later, a newspaper was placed on the back of his neck and he was hit with a wooden stick. Before his release he was reportedly forced to sign a statement to the effect that he had been injiued in a fight with his girl-friend's brother-in-law. A forensic medical certificate issued following three days of hospital treatment described bruising around the eyes, on the right hand, chest, and right leg.
ROMANIA/RUSSIAN FEDERATION
There were shootings by police officers in disputed circumstances. In February in Bucharest two police officers reportedly saw Laurenfiu Ciobanu, a Rom from GSneasa, take a radio-cassette player from a parked car. When the officers attempted to apprehend him he reportedly swung a screwdriver at one of the officers and started to mn; the officers called on him to stop, fired two warning shots, and then shot at him three times, bringing him to the ground. He was taken to hospital, where he reportedly underwent several operations for injuries to the Ixmgs and kidneys caused by the bullets. Investigations into similar incidents reported in the past two years have been suspended on the grounds that Law No. 26/1994 permits the use of firearms "to apprehend an offender caught in the act who is attempting to escape and does not obey orders to stop". However, in September officials of the Military Prosecutor's Office told an Amnesty Intemational representative that the officer responsible for the killing of Mircea Miuesul Mosor (see Amnesty International Report 1997) had been discharged from the police force and indicted for murder.
In March Amnesty Intemational published a report, Romania: Unlawful use of firearms by law enforcement officials. In May, July and August the organization urged the General Prosecutor to initiate investigations into seven cases of torture and ill-treatment. It subsequently called for investigations into further cases of torture and ill-treatment. Amnesty Intemational also wnrote to the Minister of Justice in August requesting information about all prosecutions and convictions which had taken place in 1995 and 1996 under Article 200, paragraph 1, of the Penal Code. In December Amnesty Intemational urged President Emil Constantinescu to release Mariana Cetiner.
In March the Ministry of the Interior published a report on cases Amnesty Intemational had raised with the authorities in 1996. In a reply Amnesty Intemational explained in detail why it considered that the reported investigations had not been carried out promptly and impartially, and requested specific information on individual cases. No response had been received from the Ministry of the Interior by the end of the year. In December the Minister of Justice informed Amnesty Intemational
that he intended to propose the abolition of Article 200, paragraph 1, and thus decriminalize consensual homosexual relations between adults.
