EL SALVADOR
Dozens of people were killed in circumstances suggesting extrajudicial executions. Death threats against human rights defenders continued. A human rights worker was the victim of an attempted abduction. There were reports of torture and ill-treatment by the police of people in custody. The death penalty was reintroduced for certain crimes.
In June, El Salvador ratified the un Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
In November, the Legislative Assembly approved a revised Penal Code which reinstated so-called extrajudicial confessions. Such confessions can be made to, among others, members of the National
Civil Police when a judge is not available, and are admissible as evidence in court. Although the confessions are subject to certain rules, their reinstatement caused concern because of their past association with the use of duress and torture.
The mandate of the un Mission for El Salvador, which monitors compliance with the 1992 peace accords, was extended to the end of 1996. Its operations, however, were reduced and in May it was renamed the un Verification Office.
In a report covering the period between May and June, the un Secretary-General reiterated calls for implementation of the recommendations made in 1994 by the Grupo Conjunto para la investigación de grupos armados ilegales con motivación política, Joint Group to Investigate Politic-edly Motivated Illegal Armed Groups, in view of new violent incidents, similar to those which characterized the period of armed conflict.
Dozens of people were killed in circumstances suggesting extrajudicial executions. There were fears that "death squads" were responsible for several killings during the latter part of the year.
In April, two youths aged 15 and 16 and a young man were killed in Agua Caliente, Quezaltepeque, department of La Libertad, by six men dressed in black uniforms, with their faces covered and carrying m-16 rifles and grenades. Brothers Jairo and Carlos Hernández Cornejo were hanged from a tree, with their hands tied behind their backs and their thumbs tied together, a method widely used by the army and paramilitary groups during the armed conflict. No one had been brought to justice for the killings by the end of the year.
In October, Francisco Antonio Manzanares Mojaraz, a member of the Frente Farabundo Marti de Liberación Nacional Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front, was shot dead in Colonia Satélite de Oriente, department of San Miguel, by eight heavily armed men wearing bulletproof jackets. Francisco Manzanares was unarmed. Eye-witnesses were later threatened by unknown persons, and feared for their safety. Francisco Manzanares had reported to the Policía Nacional Civil (pnc], National Civil Police, in late September that unidentified men were watching his house and asking about his activities. Police authorities claimed that Francisco
EL SALVADOR
Manzanares was involved in extortion and that the operation in which he was killed was part of the police investigation. An investigation by the authorities into the killings was still in progress at the end of the year.
Human rights defenders, members of non-govemmental organizations, indigenous people, journalists and political figures were victims of human rights violations.
Members of the Asociación Nacional Indígena Salvadoreña (anís), Salvadorean National Indigenous Association, received death threats on several occasions during the year. In January, five unidentified men came to the house of a member of anis in the community of Las Hojas, Sonsonete, and threatened to kill Adrián Esquino Lisco, chief of the Nahuat, Lenca and Maya indigenous community. In May, his son, Mario Cruz Crespin Esquino, escaped an attempt on his life, reportedly by members of the Batallón ¡aguar, Jaguar Battalion, a paramilitary group. An investigation into the incident by the Human Wghts Procurator's Office was continuing at the end of the year.
In June, a newly formed clandestine group calling itself Fuerza Nacionalista Roberto D'Aubuisson, Roberto D'Aubuis-son Nationalist Force, issued death threats, which were published in a national newspaper, against a group of public figures, including Monsignor Gregorio Rosa Chávez, Auxiliary Bishop of San Salvador; Francisco Elias Valencia, a newspaper editor; and Victoria Velasquez de Avilés, National Human Rights Procurator. The group issued at least two other threats.
Members of the Centra para la Promoción de los Derechos Humanos "Madeleine Lagadec", Madeleine Lagadec Human Rights Centre, also received death threats. In August, the Centre's offices in San Salvador received an anonymous note warning that they would be burgled and staff members killed. In September, Eliezar Am-belis, a himian rights worker at the Centre, received a death threat, and in October he escaped an attempted kidnapping by unidentified masked men who tried to bundle him into a car. Later the same day, threats were received by the Centre's offices in San Salvador and Santa Clara. A few days later the Santa Clara offices were burgled. These actions were believed to be in re-
sponse to the Centre's community work and its campaign against the extension of the death penalty.
In November, the Human Rights Procurator stated that she had been subjected to harassment and death threats since May 1995. On one occasion, unidentified individuals had threatened to rape and kill her four daughters. The threats had followed public statements she had made denouncing the criminal activities of clandestine armed groups acting in a manner similar to "death squads" active during the armed conflict in the 1980s.
There were many allegations of torture and ill-treatment by the pnc. In January, a young man arrested by the pnc in Soya-pango was beaten with a metal bar and threatened with a knife by a police officer. Ln February, a man detained in Jiquilisco was so severely beaten that he required hospital treatment.
In October, the Legislative Assembly approved a motion proposed by members of the ruling Alianza Republicana Nacionalista, Nationalist Republican Alliance, reintroducing the death penalty for kidnapping, aggravated homicide and rape. The death penalty had been abolished in 1983 for all but exceptional crimes in time of international war. This legislation, which comes into force only if ratified by the new assembly to be elected in March 1997, infi'inges international instruments to which El Salvador is a party, such as the American Convention on Human Rights.
Amnesty International expressed concern at the threats against members of anis, the Madeleine Lagadec Human Rights Centre, church leaders, the Human Rights Prociorator, journalists and others, and called on the government to guarantee their safety, investigate the threats and bring those responsible to justice.
In October, Amnesty International called on the government of Dr Armando Calderón Sol to carry out a thorough investigation into the killing of Francisco Manzanares. The organization also called for protection to be accorded to witnesses.
Amnesty International called on members of the Legislative Assembly to oppose the proposal to reintroduce the death penalty. Following the approval of the proposal, the organization expressed its deep regret at the decision taken by the Legislative Assembly.
