YUGOSLAVIA
(FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF)
Torture and ill-treatment by police were widespread; most victims were ethnic Albanians in Kosovo province. At least two men died apparently as a result of torture by police, and the deaths of two others appeared to be connected with police
beatings. Prisonei^ of conscience included several dozen men sentenced to up to 60 days' imprisonment for peacefully exercising their right to freedom of assembly and at least four conscientious objectors to military service. Around 60 political prisoners, ethnic Albanians, remained in prison; some were possible prisoners of conscience. At least five people were sentenced to death; no executions were reported.
Ln June, an amnesty was granted to men who in the period to December 1995 had evaded military service or deserted from the Yugoslav armed forces, with the exception of professional soldiers and commissioned officers. Press reports indicated that some 12,500 men had benefited from the amnesty, many of whom had gone abroad following the outbreak of armed conflict in the former Yugoslavia in 1991.
Following elections in Bosnia-Herze-govina, the un Security Council lifted trade sanctions against Serbia and Montenegro in October, but did not lift the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia's suspension fi-om the un General Assembly. By the end of the year there were over 560,000 refugees in the country, the great majority of them Serbs from Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina.
The ruling Socialist Party of Serbia and its allies in Serbia and Montenegro won federal elections in November. However, in the same month the opposition coalition Zajedno, Together, won control of Belgrade and other major towns in a second round of local elections in Serbia. Attempts by the authorities to overturn these results led to mass demonstrations by opposition supporters and students in Belgrade and elsewhere. In December, a fact-finding mission from the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe invited by the government concluded that Zajedno had won in Belgrade and 13 other towns, but by the end of the year the government had not conceded most of the opposition victories, and demonstrations continued.
In August, the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia opened a liaison office in Belgrade, but the authorities offered only limited cooperation. Three officers of the former Yugoslav People's Army indicted in April for war crimes and crimes against humanity committed near the Croatian tovm of Vukovar
YUGOSLAVIA
in 1991, and for whom the Tribunal had issued international arrest warrants, had not been eurested by the end of the year (see Croatia entry).
In Serbia the first trial of a defendant accused of war crimes committed in Bosnia-Herzegovina ended in July. A coiurt in áabac convicted DuSko VuCkovié, who had fought with Serbian paramilitary units, of killing 16 unarmed Muslims and wounding 20 others near Zvornik in 1992. He was also convicted of raping a Muslim woman on Serbian territory, just over the border. He was sentenced to seven years' imprisonment. In October, NebojSa Ranisavljevic was arrested in Montenegro and charged with participating in the murder of some 20 men, most of them Muslims from Montenegro, abducted in 1993 by Serbian paramilitary forces (see Amnesty International Report 1994).
In Kosovo province, ethnic Albanian political leaders continued to call for independence by peaceful means for the province, predominantly inhabited by ethnic Albanians. However, between April and October, nine Serbs, including five police officers, were shot dead and six others were wounded; an organization calling itself the Liberation Army of Kosovo, about which little was known, claimed responsibility. The attacks started in April after a young ethnic Albanian was shot dead by a Serb civilian, who was arrested and charged. The next day, five Serbs, one of them a police officer, were shot dead, and four others, two of them police officers, were wounded.
The authorities responded with mass, and often apparently indiscriminate, arrests of ethnic Albanians in the area. Many of those arrested were physically ill-treated before being released without charge. In the days following the killing of a Serb police officer in átimlje on 22 April, over 100 ethnic Albanians were detained for questioning. Most were released within hours, but some were held for up to three or four days. Some 35 people, including several children, were alleged to have been beaten by police, Among those ill-treated was Nazmi Kabashi, who was taken off a bus from Priátina as it passed through átimlje. He was reportedly so severely beaten that he required hospital treatment for internal injuries.
In early August, following explosions at police stations in Podujevo and three other
tovras in Kosovo, in which no one was injured, over 20 people reportedly sought medical treatment for injuries inflicted by police following mass arrests. Those arrested included Abdullah Murati and his 16-year-old son, Muharrem, who were detained for some hours in Podujevo police station. Police officers allegedly beat Abdullah Murati unconscious with rubber truncheons. When Abdullah Murati's son refused to beat his father, both men were further beaten.
In September, Osman Rama, Besim Rama and Avni Nura were arrested by plainclothes police. Osman Rama, who was released after six days, stated that he was forced into a car, blindfolded and taken to an unknown location, where he was questioned about the political activities of his brother, Besim, and severely beaten. Four days later he was again detained for six days and tortured. Besim Rama and Avni Nura were reportedly held incommunicado for over two weeks before being brought before an investigating judge, in violation of national law, which provides for a maximimi of three days in police custody. They were charged with terrorism, and accused of killing three police officers and one civilian. Both were in detention awaiting trial at the end of the year.
Throughout the year there were almost daily reports of incidents - unrelated to armed attacks - in which police tortinred and beat or otherwise ill-treated ethnic Albanians. The incidents often took place during house searches for arms; victims included the elderly, women and children. Many ethnic Albanians were arrested following these searches. Others were held for questioning about their political activities. Teachers who taught in privately organized schools which rejected the curricula laid down by the Serbian authorities and education in the Serbian language were also targeted. Detainees were usually held in police stations for periods ranging from a few hours to several days and were sometimes so severely tortured and ill-treated that they subsequently required medical care. In at least two cases it appeared that torture had directly caused, or contributed to, the victim's death. One case concerned Feriz Blakgori, a school teacher, who died on 10 December in hospital. The previous day he had been arrested by police who had discovered a rifle at
YUGOSLAVIA
his home in PriStina. His death certificate reportedly attributed his death to cardiorespiratory insufficiency due to severe shock caused by bruising to his head and body.
Police searches for arms continued in the Sandiak area. In July, police in Sjenica reportedly arrested and severely beat six Slav Muslims in order to force them to admit to illegal possession of weapons.
During the mass demonstrations in November and December in protest against the annulment of local election results, over 50 demonstrators were arrested in Belgrade and other towns, some of whom were beaten and otherwise ill-treated by police. For example, following his arrest on 6 December, Dejan Bulatovic was beaten by police in a Belgrade police station; he alleged that police also forced a rubber truncheon up his rectum and put a gun barrel in his mouth, threatening to shoot him. Dejan Bulatovic was later sentenced to 25 days' imprisonment for disturbing the peace.
In two incidents in Vojvodina province, beatings appear to have led to the victim's death. Djiuro Sudji, an ethnic Hungarian, died in March after throwing himself from the window of Novi Sad police station; an officer was later charged with beating and injuring him during questioning about a car theft. Two officers were arrested and chiirged after Nenad Pilipovic, a Serb, died in June. They had reportedly arrested and beaten him after he was involved in a car accident.
Prisoners of conscience included over a dozen ethnic Albanians sentenced to up to 60 days' imprisonment, usually for organizing meetings, lessons outside the official schooling system or sports matches without official permission. They included Pal Krasniqi who in June began a 60-day prison sentence imposed in 1995 for holding a meeting of a school trade union branch.
Prisoners of conscience were among over 20 demonstrators sentenced in November and December, almost all in Belgrade, to up to 30 days' imprisonment on charges of disturbing the peace; some had been convicted of making symbolic gestures of protest, such as throwing eggs at the offices of the state media.
Other prisoners of conscience included an unknown number of conscientious objectors. Under Yugoslav law conscientious
objector status must be applied for within 15 days of receiving the first summons for recruitment to military service. Conscientious objectors may do either unarmed military service or civilian service, which last 24 months - twice the length of armed service. They included at least four Jehovah's Witnesses serving prison sentences of between four and 12 months. One of them, Vladimir Lazar, was sentenced to a year's imprisonment for refusing, on religious grounds, to take up arms when called up to do reserve duties; he was not eligible for conscientious objector status because he had previously performed military service.
About 60 ethnic Albanians, most of them convicted in 1994 and 1995, after unfair trials, of seeking the secession of Kosovo province by violent means, remained in prison; some were possible prisoners of conscience. Among the 60 were Raif Qela and some of his 16 co-de-fendants (see Amnesty International Report 1995); their sentences were reduced in January to between six months and eight years' imprisonment by the Supreme Court of Serbia.
In March, six Slav Muslim political prisoners sentenced in October 1994 (see Amnesty International Report 1995) were released after the Supreme Court of Serbia ordered a retrial. Fifteen of their co-de-fendants had already been released in 1994. The retrial had not taken place by the end of the year.
The fate of some 20 Muslims from Serbia who "disappeared" after they were abducted from a bus in 1992 remained unknown (see Amnesty International Report 1993 Bosnia-Herzegovina entry).
At least five people were sentenced to death. They included Aziz Musli, sentenced by a court in ZajeCar for recidivist murder.
Amnesty International appealed to the authorities for independent and impartial investigations into all allegations of "disappearance". torture and ill-treatment and called for perpetrators of these violations to be brought to justice. It called for the immediate and unconditional release of prisoners of conscience and for other political prisoners to receive fair trials.
