EQUATORIAL GUINEA
Scores of suspected government opponents were briefly detained without charge or trial. At least 150 of them were prisoners of conscience. Many of them were tortured or Ill-treated.
President Teodoro Obiang Nguema was returned to power in elections in February. There was no secret ballot, and political opponents of the government were subjected to various restrictions and intimidation. The members of the Plataforma de Oposición Conjunta (poc). Joint Opposition Platform, boycotted the election after the government dissolved the poc and banned its presidential candidate, Amando Gabriel Nse.
In April, the un Commission on Himian Rights examined the report of the un Special Rapporteur on Equatorial Guinea, who had visited the country In 1995 (see Amnesty International Report 1996], and called upon the government to end arbitrary arrests and torture. The Special Rapporteur. whose mandate was extended for another year, visited Equatorial Guinea again in December and was due to present a further report in 1997.
At least 150 prisoners of conscience were detained during the year because of their peaceful political activities or beliefs. They were held for short periods without charge or trial; most were tortured or ill-treated and denied medical treatment for their Injuries. At least 60 were arrested dinring the pre-election period. They Included Genoveva Nchama, information
secretary of the Unión Popular, Popular Union, who was arrested in January for criticizing irregularities in the electoral roll such as omitting names of people in areas where the opposition was strong, She was reportedly beaten and held in a cell with 10 men. Vitorino Bolekia, the first democratically elected Mayor of Malabo, the capital, and a member of the Alianza Democrática Progresista, Progressive Democratic Alliance, was arrested in February. Santiago Obama and Celestino Bacale, the President and the Foreign Relations Secretary of the Convergencia para la Democracia Social (cpds). Convergence for Social Democracy, were also detained along with two other councillors. All five were severely beaten with electric cables, including on the soles of the feet.
A Roman Catholic priest, Father José Luis Engono, was arrested and ill-treated in late January in Mbini, a town in the mainland region of Rio Muni. At about the same time, three Roman Catholic seminarists and a catechist were detained briefly in Bata, the Rio Muni regional capital, and at least one, seminarist José Carlos Esono, was tortured. The authorities apparently suspected them of involvement in opposition political activities.
cpds members were frequent targets for arrest. Amancio Gabriel Nse and Pedro Ndong Mbale were arrested in March at a road-block outside Niefang, Rio Mimi region. They were carrying a letter written by Celestino Bacale concerning party strategy. They were transferred to a police station in Bata, where Pedro Ndong Mbale was released without charge shortly after arrival. Amancio Gabriel Nse was held for several more days and tortured.
Celestino Bacale was rearrested in April, held for a few days in Malabo and questioned about the letter. He was then held in Bata for three days in a police station before being released imcharged. In November, he was detained for five days and charged with insulting President Obiang Nguema. He was forbidden to leave Malabo pending trial by a military court. By the end of the year the trial had not begun.
Benita Nchama was arrested in Acure-nam, Rio Muni region, early in May and detained in Bata for about six weeks for possessing a copy of the Cpds newspaper, La Verdad, before being released without charge.
EQUATORIAL GUINEA/ERITREA
Francisca Nzang Ebasi was detained for a few days with her 10-day-old baby in Nkimi, Rio Muni region, in May, after her husband, Alberto Ngomo Mfumu, the first democratically elected Mayor of Nkimi and a member of the Partido del Progreso (pp). Progress Party, went to complain to the central government authorities in Malabo about interference in council affairs by the local government representative. Alberto Ngoino Mfumu had himself been briefly detained on at least two occasions earlier in the year.
Norberto Esono, a pp member and Niefang town councillor, was detained for 12 days at Niefang police station in May and accused of holding illegal meetings. While held he was severely beaten on the head and body and sustained a broken leg. Basilio Ava Eworo, Vice-President of the pp, was held for a few days in Malabo in September and accused of holding an unauthorized meeting. All three were released without charge.
In November, 11 soldiers were sentenced to prison terms ranging from four to 13 years in Malabo after an unfair trial. They reportedly faced charges of attempting to overthrow the government. They were tried before a military court which uses summary procedures that curtail the rights of the defence. There is no right of appeal against conviction or sentence imposed by military court. Few details about the proceedings in this case were available.
Amnesty International repeatedly expressed concern to the government about the detention and torture of political prisoners and called for the release of prisoners of conscience. The organization sought further information about the trial of 11 soldiers in November. The government did not respond.
