IRELAND
Some people arrested in connection with the killing of a police ofRcer alleged that they were ill-treated in police custody.
It was reported that 18 people were arrested in Limerick as part of a police investigation into the killing of Garda (police) Detective Jerry McCabe on 7 June; three of them were charged. Jeremiah Sheehy was arrested on 9 June and subsequently charged with membership of the Irish Republican Army (ira) and firearms possession. It was reported that when Jeremiah Sheehy was transferred to prison after being charged, the prison guards noted his injuries and insisted that he first be taken to a hospital to record these. It was subsequently reported that the file of the police investigation into the alleged ill-treatment had been submitted to the Director of Public Prosecutions.
John Quinn was arrested on 9 June and subsequently charged with ira membership and possession of ammunition. At the court hearing on 12 June his lawyer stated that John Quinn had received a number of injuries to the head and body while in custody at Henry Street Garda Station in Limerick and that he was suffering from periods of unconsciousness and memory loss as a result. John Quinn had been taken to hospital four times between 9 and 12 June.
Some of those who were released without charge also complained that they had been subjected to physical and psychological ill-treatment while in police custody, A human rights researcher reported that she was threatened with arrest while interviewing some of these people.
IRELAND/ISRAEL AND THE OCCUPIED TERRITORIES
In October, Amnesty International urged the government to carry out a full and independent inquiry into all these allegations, and to make public the findings of the inquiry. The organization also expressed concern about the apparent lack of adequate safeguards to prevent the ill-treatment of people held in police custody and during interrogation, including the recording of such interviews and the presence of lawyers during interrogations.
The lack of effective safeguards to prevent the ill-treatment of people held in police custody was also highlighted in a letter Amnesty International wrote to the government in March. The government replied that it was reviewing the provisions regulating detainees' rights to legal assistance and that the electronic recording of interrogations was being pilot-tested at four police stations. In response to Amnesty International's concerns about the effectiveness of the police complaints procedure, the government replied that it was satisfied that the Garda Siochdna Complaints Board was operating satisfactorily but was reviewing the composition and the operation of the Board in line with recommendations made by the Eiuopean Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment in its report published in 1995.
