GUYANA
Two men were hanged in the first executions for more than five years. More than 15 people remained under sentence of death. At least one new death sentence was imposed. There were reports of torture and ill-treatment by police and of police shootings of suspects in disputed circimistances. A former soldier in the Guyanese army was charged with the 1980 murder of a leading opposition fig-lu'e. Inquests were still pending in the cases of three men who died in police custody in 1993 and 1994.
Two men were hanged in the first executions since 1990. Ajoibe Khan, sentenced to death for murder in 1991, was hanged in February. Rockliffe Ross, sentenced to death for min-der in 1992, was hanged in Jime, while an application - alleging that his rights under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights had been violated - was still pending before the un Human Rights Committee in Geneva. The day before the execution, the Committee had faxed the government asking it not to carry out the execution while the application was under examination. Following the execution, the Attorney General said that the government had not received the Committee's request in time.
In\lay, the Court of Appeal confirmed the death sentences on Abdool Yasseen and Noel Thomas. The Court dismissed a constitutional motion which claimed that their protracted detention on death row awaiting execution amounted to cruel and inhinnan punishment. In the same month.
they were granted a stay of execution pending a further appeal to the same Court.
At least one new death sentence was imposed,
There were reports of torture and ill-treatment by police and of police shootings of criminal suspects in disputed circumstances. Eye-witnesses stated that Jermaine Wilkinson, a suspect in a burglary case, who died in May in a Georgetown hospital, had been beaten on the head and body with the butt of a gun by a police officer, who then shot him and dragged him to a police vehicle. An initial manslaughter charge against the officer was later changed to one of murder. An appeal by the officer against the murder charge was believed to be pending at the end of the year.
In August, Kamal Khan was reportedly shot in the penis by two detectives while detained in New Amsterdam police station. The officers were later reported to have been charged in connection with the incident.
In June, Gregory Smith, a former soldier in the Guyana Defence Force, was charged with the 1980 murder of Walter Rodney, leader of the opposition Working People's Alliance. An application for Gregory Smith's extradition from French Guiana was still pending at the end of the year,
Inquests had reportedly still not taken place into the deaths in custody of Ricky Samaroo, Joseph Persaud and Shivnarine Dalchand (see Amnesty International Reports 1994 to 1996], although the government had stated in 1995 that the necessary documents had been submitted to the Coroner's court.
Amnesty International wrote to the Guyana authorities expressing deep regret at the executions of Ayube Khan and Rockliffe Ross and appealing for commutation of all death sentences. An Amnesty International observer attended the hearing of the constitutional motion in the cases of Abdool Yasseen and Noel Thomas.
In October, Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Home Affairs to express concern at increasing reports of police shootings and torture or ill-treatment of people held in custody. The letter cited, among other cases, those of Jermaine Wilkinson and Kamal Khan, and referred to a list of more than 50 cases of
GUYANA/HAITI
alleged torture or ill-treatment by the police, police shootings and deaths in custody during 1995 and early 1996, which had been presented to the Police Commissioner by the Guyana Human Rights Association in June. Amnesty International urged that all reports of killings by police in disputed circiunstances, deaths in custody and complaints of torture or ill-treat-ment be fully and impartially investigated with the results made public. It also called for police guidelines on the use of force and firearms to be brought into line with international standards.
