NEPAL
Nineteen prisoners of conscience, including members of Amnesty International, were detained for several days. More than 1,350 people, including possible prisoners of conscience, were detained on suspicion of being members or sympathizers of an armed opposition group; 600 of them were in detention awaiting trial at the end of the year. There were widespread reports of torture and ill-treatment by police, in at least five cases resulting in death. At least 50 people were killed by police in disputed circumstances. An armed opposition group was responsible for serious human rights abuses, including deliberate and arbitrary killings.
In February, the Communist Party of Nepal (cpn) (Maoist) and its political wing, the Samyukta Jana Morcha (sjm) (Bhat-tarai), United People's Front, declared a "people's war" after the government failed to meet 40 demands they had submitted to Prime Minister Sher Bahadur Deuba. The demands included the abolition of royal privileges, the promulgation of a republican constitution and the abrogation of several treaties with India. In the following months, there were reports of cpn attacks on police stations, banks, offices of Village Development Committees, and against local landlords and politicians, particularly in the Mid-Western Region.
The un High Commissioner for Human Rights visited the country in February and held talks with officials about human rights protection. In August, a law came into force providing for compensation of
victims of torture. In October, legislation was passed to set up a National Human Rights Commission, but its members had not been appointed by the end of the year.
Nineteen prisoners of conscience were detained for several days. On 17 March, three members of Amnesty International were arrested by police in Kathmandu while collecting signatures and distributing materials about the organization's human rights concerns in China. The following day more than 100 others, including members of Amnesty Intemational and Tibetans, were detained in Kathmandu at the start of a peaceful demonstration against human rights violations in China. Most were released the same day. Five Amnesty International members were held without charge until 21 March and 14 Tibetans until 24 March.
Twenty-nine blind people were arrested in July, during peaceful demonstrations demanding improvements in the national policy for disabled people, and held for several hours. Binod Rai. a board member of the Nepal Blind Association, was tortured for two hours while detained at Mahendra Police Club. He was reportedly kicked in the face and chest and beaten with lathis (canes).
Scores of possible prisoners of conscience were detained on suspicion of being members or sympathizers of the cpn (Maoist) or sjm. They included people holding office in the local administration, teachers, journalists and human rights activists based in the Mid-Western Region. Rajendra Dhakal, a human rights activist, lawyer and volunteer worker for the Fo-nnn for the Protection of Hvunan Rights, a national human rights organization, was arrested in Gorkha in late February. The court ordered his release but the police rearrested him at least five times. There were also reports of arrests of relatives, including children, of suspected Maoist activists. By the end of November, 1,358 people had been arrested. Approximately 600 remained in detention awaiting trial at the end of the year.
Reports of torture and ill-treatment by police were widespread. Many of those arrested in the context of the "people's war" complained of tortme, including rape, and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment by police. They particularly complained of falanga (beatings on the soles of the feet) and belana (rolling a weighted
NEPAL/NICARAGUA
bamboo cane over the thighs of the prisoner). In Khubinde, Sindhupalchok district. several children were reportedly beaten during interrogation by poUce in February after they had chased away a police officer who had come to arrest a teacher. The pohce officer had drowned when he ran into a river. The head teacher, Dil Prasad Sapkota, was allegedly beaten while being himg upside down. In February, Jhakku Prasad Subedi, Chairman of the District Development Committee of Rolpa, had difficulty walking for several days after police officers kneed him repeatedly on his thighs while he was in their custody.
Several women complained of sexual abuse and rape in police custody. Three young women, including a 14-year-old, were reportedly ordered to strip naked and then raped by police in Leka, Rukum district, in February. No independent investigations took place into these incidents.
There were at least five cases of deaths in police custody reportedly as a result of torture. In one such case, Deepak Parajuli, a tailor from Tusal, Kathmandu, died, allegedly as a result of beatings, at Hanu-mandhoka police station between 5 and 18 September. His relatives were allegedly forced by police officers to sign a document saying that Deepak Parajuli was a drug addict.
At least 50 people were killed by police in disputed circumstances. Several of these incidents involved Maoist activists who were, according to the authorities, killed in armed confrontations with the police. Evidence suggested that they may have been extrajudicially executed.
At least 13 civilians were reported to have been killed by armed Maoist activists. The victims included members of mainstream political parties, former members of the sjM and suspected informants. Members of the cpn (Maoist) were also responsible for attacks on civilians, using weapons including hammers, khukuris (traditional Nepali curved knives) and other tools, which often resulted in severe injuries.
In August and late November to early December, Amnesty International delegates visited Nepal to discuss with government officials the organization's concerns about arbitrary arrest and detention, torture and extrajudicial executions in the context of the "people's war". In Novem-
ber, the delegates visited Rukiun and Sind-huli districts.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience arrested in connection with the organization's campaign against human rights violations in China. It also called for investigations into reports of torture, deaths in custody and alleged extrajudicial executions, and for those found responsible to be brought to justice.
