ITALY
There were further allegations of ill-treatment by law enforcement officers, and numerous prison officers were involved in criminal proceedings relating to alleged torture and ill-treatment of prison inmates in previous years.
Reform of existing legislation governing conscientious objection to compulsory military service, under consideration by successive legislatives since 1988 (see Amnesty International Reports 1989 to 1996), had still not received final parliamentary approval by the end of the year. The bill before parliament in 1996, substantially similar to the texts of previous bills, included proposals to broaden the grounds on which conscientious objector status might be granted but did not recognize the right to claim conscientious objector status during military service.
There were further allegations of ill-treatment by law enforcement officers; many concerned people of non-European ethnic origin and were often accompanied by reports of racist insults. In February, Grace Patrick Akpan, a medical student of Nigerian origin, lodged a complaint alleging that two police officers who stopped
her for an identity check in Catanzaro, Calabria, verbally abused and physically ill-treated her on the street, in their car and in a police station, where her requests for medical assistance were refused. She stated that when she informed them that she was an Italian citizen married to a caraÒJ/iiere officer and that her identity papers could be retrieved from her nearby apartment, they told her that a black woman could not be an Italian citizen and radioed the police station to say they were bringing in a prostitute. She was released from custody after a police inspector from the Foreigners' Bureau, a relative, confirmed her identity. Within hours she was admitted to hospital where she remained for two weeks receiving treatment for a neck injury and various cuts and bruises. The police accused her of refusing to identify herself and of striking and scratching one of the officers. In December, the police officers were committed for trial on charges of threatening and causing serious bodily harm to Grace Patrick Akpan, while she was ordered to stand trial for refusing to identify herself to a public official, for insulting and resisting police officers and for causing one of them bodily harm.
Some official investigations into alleged ill-treatment appeared to lack thoroughness. In March, Edward Adjei Loundens, a Ghanaian citizen normally resident in Denmark, alleged that he had been detained overnight and subjected to an unprovoked physical assault by around seven police officers at Leonardo da Vinci international airport, near Rome, while in transit between Denmark and Ghana in December 1995. In a written account of the incident, which he lodged with Italian diplomatic authorities, he stated that one
ITALY
police officer head-butted him and others beat him, some using their guns, in the stomach and on his side. He claimed that other travellers witnessed the assault but were threatened with a gun when they tried to intervene. He suffered various injuries, including the dislocation of a facial bone, which resulted in disfigurement and reduced hearing in his right ear, affecting his career as a professional musician. His allegations were supported by a medical certificate issued in Ghana in January and by photographs, showing marked facial swelling, apparently taken at Leonardo da Vinci airport by a Polish traveller who had witnessed the assault.
In June, the Public Security Department of the Ministry of the Interior stated that, as his name was very similar to that of a Ghanaian citizen who was the subject of an expulsion order from Italy, the police had detained Edward Adjei Loundens in order to carry out a full identity check. This confirmed that he possessed a valid transit visa. The Department said that the attitude of the police had been "marked by the utmost institutional propriety, thus necessarily ruling out any racial prejudice or violent and oppressive behaviour". However, the Department failed to explain how it had investigated the allegations of ill-treatment and gave no indication that any steps had been taken to obtain evidence from the Polish traveller, whose name and address were available, or from friends who travelled with Edward Adjei Loundens and saw him immediately before and after his detention, or to obtain further forensic evidence from doctors who examined him in Ghana and Denmark.
There were developments in some criminal proceedings relating to cases of alleged ill-treatment by law enforcement officers in previous years.
Voghera's Public Prosecutor asked the competent judge to dismiss Ben Moghrem Abdelwahab's complaint that carabinieri officers had ill-treated and racially insulted him, and forced him to sign an unread statement at gunpoint in September 1995 (see Amnesty International Report 1996). Ben Moghrem Abdelwahab contested the Prosecutor's request and asked the judge to order further relevant inquiries, including interviews with friends and hospital doctors who saw him immediately after his release from custody.
However, in September, the judge endorsed the Prosecutor's request and dismissed the complaint.
A judicial investigation into the complaint of ill-treatment lodged by Salva-tore Rossello against carabinieri officers in Barcellona Pozzo di Gotto, Sicily, in June 1995 (see Amnesty International Report 1996), had not concluded by the end of the year. In the course of the investigation the carabinieri accused him of insulting them at the time of arrest. However, in August the judicial authorities apparently ruled that there were no groimds for bringing such a charge and dismissed the cara-binieri's complaint.
A number of criminal proceedings relating to alleged torture and ill-treatment by prison officers, dating back as far as 1992 and subject to many delays, were still open. There was concern that the investigation into the alleged ill-treatment of Marcello Alessi in December 1992 had not been conducted either promptly or impartially. The trial hearing of a San Michele prison officer charged with causing him bodily harm did not open until October -almost four years after the complaint had been lodged. Marcello Alessi was ordered to appear as a defendant at the same hearing to answer a charge of insulting the officer during the December 1992 incident. However, in May 1994 he had already been tried and sentenced to six months' imprisonment for insulting the officer and using violence against him during the December 1992 incident. The 1994 trial, which apparently failed to call witnesses on Marcello Alessi's behalf or take into account all available evidence, was the result of a complaint lodged by the prison officer some 24 hours after Marcello Alessi had lodged his own. The hearing of Marcello Alessi's appeal against the 1994 sentence was postponed from November to January 1997.
In March, some 65 prison officers and the former prison director went on trial in connection with the alleged systematic ill-treatment of inmates of Secondigliano prison (see Amnesty International Reports 1994 to 1996). The resuU was not known at the end of the year. The opening of the court hearing in the trial of six other Secondigliano prison officers, indicted on various additional charges in connection with the alleged ill-treatment, was apparently delayed owing to the enormous
ITALY/JAMAICA/JAPAN
backlog of cases pending before the Naples Tribunal. There was still no news concerning the outcome of a judicial investigation opened into the alleged ill-treatment of inmates of Pianosa Island prison in 1992 (see Amnesty International Reports 1993 to 1996].
Amnesty International sought information from the authorities about the progress and outcome of criminal investigations into allegations of torture and ill-treatment. Ln October, in response to the organization's inquiries about the steps taken to investigate Edward Adjei Loun-dens' allegations, the Ministry of Justice stated that it had referred the case to Rome Public Prosecutor's Office. Amnesty International also expressed concern about the conduct of judicial proceedings relating to the alleged ill-treatment of Marcello Alessi. At the opening of the scheduled court hearing in October, the judge ordered further investigation into the circumstances of the case and adjourned the hearing to December 1997.
