LAOS
Three prisoners of conscience continued to be held. Three political prisoners continued to serve sentences of life imprisonment imposed in 1992 after an unfair trial.
The ruling Lao People's Revolutionary Party held its Sixth Congress in March. The National Assembly approved a reshuffle of President Nouhak Phoumsa-van's government in April. Censorship of the news media, restrictions on freedom of expression and lack of official information continued to make it difficult to obtain information about human rights violations.
Three prisoners of conscience continued to be held in "Re-education" Camp 7 in a remote area of the northern province of Houa Phanh. Thongsouk Say-sangkhi, Latsami Khamphoui and Feng Sakchittaphong had been sentenced to
14 years' imprisonment in 1992 after a grossly unfair trial. Although officially charged with "making preparations to stage a rebellion and for conducting propaganda against [the Lao Government], gathering groups of people to create disturbances and carry out slanderous charges against other people, and creating disorder in prison", they were believed to have been detained for peacefully criticizing the country's political and economic systems and for holding meetings advocating a multi-party system (see Amnesty International Report 1993). Conditions in Camp 7 were harsh and no medical facilities were provided. All three men were believed to be suffering from ill-health which required medical treatment.
Three political prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment after an unfair trial in 1992 continued to be held. They had been convicted of crimes committed in 1963 and 1975 while they held minor official positions. Pangtong Chokbengboun, Bounlu Nammathao and Sing Chanthak-oummane had previously been detained for 17 years without charge or trial (see Amnesty International Report 1993). Early in 1996, all three men were transferred from their previous place of detention at Sop Pan camp in Houa Phanh province to "Re-education" Camp 7.
In November, Amnesty International published a report, Lao People's Democratic Republic: Prisoners of conscience suffering in isolation. This report called for the immediate and unconditional release of Thongsouk Saysangkhi, Latsami Khamphoui and Feng Sakchittaphong and urged that while they remained in prison they be treated in accordance with internationally recognized standards for the treatment of prisoners, particularly with regard to provision of medical treatment. The organization also continued to call for the fair trial, or release from detention or restriction, of other long-term political prisoners. By the end of the year, no responses had been received from the authorities.
