INDIA
Thousands of political prisoners were held without charge or trial. Torture, including rape, and ill-treatment were endemic throughout the country, leading or contributing to at least 200 deaths in custody. Prison conditions amounting to ill-treatment were common. "Disappearances" continued. Hundreds of people were reportedly extrajudicially executed by the security forces; human rights defenders continued to be targeted. At least two people were judicially executed and at least 30 were on death row. Armed op-position groups committed grave human rights abuses, including deliberate and arbitrary killings of civilians and hostage-taking.
In June, the United Front, a coalition of regional and national parties led by Prime Minister H.D. Deve Gowda, formed a government with the support of the Congress Party, following the brief tenure of a Bharatiya Janata Party (bjp) government, led by A.B. Vajpayee after general elections in April and May. The new government committed itself to ratifying the un
INDIA
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. In September, state assembly elections were held in Jammu and Kashmir, ending nine years of central rule. The successful National Conference Party promised to establish a hiunan rights commission to investigate allegations of human rights violations committed in the previous seven years and a committee to review the cases of political detainees.
The government continued to face violent attacks by armed opposition groups in Jammu and Kashmir, throughout the northeastern states and in some other parts of the country, including Andhra Pradesh. In some areas former members of armed opposition groups - so-called "renegades" - apparently acting with the connivance of the security forces, reportedly carried out killings, abductions and rapes.
Preventive detention provisions remained in force in national legislation, including the National Security Act, and in state-specific legislation, including the Jammu and Kashmir Public Safety Act and the Tamil Nadu Goondas Act. The Criminal Law Amendment Bill, proposed in 1995 as a replacement to the lapsed Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act (tada), was not enacted and hundreds remained in detention imder the tada (see Amnesty International Report 1996). Other special legislation remained in force, including the Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act - which gives the security forces the right to shoot to kill with virtual impunity - and the Disturbed Areas Act. Judicial review of these statutes had been pending in the Supreme Court of India since 1980.
Such legislation was criticized by the National Human Rights Commission (nhrc), established in 1993, which continued initiatives to raise public awareness of human rights and reported on human rights violations in several states, although its recommendations were not binding. Despite giving discretionary powers such as awarding compensation, the mandate of the nhrc remained limited in relation to human rights violations committed by the armed forces, effectively excluding the areas where there was violent opposition activity.
Thousands of political prisoners were detained without charge or trial under special legislation - such as the tada, the
Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act and the Disturbed Areas Act - which lacked vital legal safeguards.
In March, the government disclosed that more than 42,000 people were detained pending trial under the tada. However, following a Supreme Court directive ordering the release on bail of various categories of detainee, the government revised the figure in December to 2,000. The National Security Act was used in July to detain Narayan Reddy during a protest in Gopalpur, Orissa State, against the decision to build a steel plant in the area. It was used throughout the year to detain people suspected of involvement in armed opposition in the northeastern states.
A number of reports were received about the use of false charges to quell dissent. In October, 16 women, including three juveniles, protesting against the Miss World Contest in Bangalore were detained for 17 days, after reportedly being beaten in police custody, on a false, non-bailable charge of causing damage by fire.
At least 1,500 Nepali-speaking people from southern Bhutan living in refugee camps in eastern Nepal, were arrested in West Bengal between January and April during a series of peaceful marches in the border region aimed at presenting a petition to the King of Bhutan (see Bhutan entry). Of these, 791 remained detained for over two months, before being released without charge in July.
Refugees arriving in India from Afghanistan, Myanmar and Sri Lanka were detained imder the Foreigners Act, which regulates the entry of aliens into India but makes no provision for refugees,
Torture, including rape, and ill-treatment were endemic throughout the country. Victims included suspected political activists, criminal suspects, people from underprivileged sections of society and those defending their economic and social rights. Torture was used to extract information from common criminal suspects and to humiliate and degrade detainees.
Firoz Ahmed Ganai, a suspected member of an armed opposition group, was arrested in November 1995 in Sonawar, Jammu and Kashmir, and tortured while in the custody of the Border Security Force. He subsequently suffered kidney failure and had to have his leg amputated. In January, the government claimed that his leg became gangrenous after he fell and
INDIA
fractured it in heavy snow. Despite medical reports stating that the kidney failure may have been a result of torture, no investigation was carried out.
Husband and wife Parkash Singh and Nirmal Kaur from Nabha, Patiala, were taken into custody by the Punjab police in April on suspicion of possessing drugs. They were both stripped and beaten with fists and sticks. Wooden rollers were rolled over the muscles in their thighs. They were released on bail and filed a complaint of tortiure with the Punjab and Haryana High Court. It had not been heard by the end of the year.
In May, Rajesh, a 14-year-old rag-picker from Kerala, was illegally detained and tortured by police who denied that he was in their custody. Pins were reportedly inserted under his nails, his head was banged against the wall and he was beaten on the soles of his feet. No inquiry appeared to have been ordered into his torture and illegal detention. In July, police entered a village in Uttar Pradesh inhabited predominantly by dalits (members of a socially and economically disadvantaged group determined by caste hierarchies) at midnight in search of a suspect. A female relative of the suspect was beaten, stripped and pinned to the ground by a police officer in front of the villagers. Police later threatened to rape her if she attempted to lodge a complaint.
Villagers, including women, were beaten by police in June in Mithini and Khairi villages in Uttar Pradesh. They had been arrested during a protest to defend their land from being bulldozed as part of the expansion of a thermal power project funded by the World Bank.
At least 200 people were reported to have died in the custody of police, security forces and prison officials, many following torture. The figure may be higher; the nhrc recorded 159 deaths in custody in the first three months of 1996. For example, in August, Gopalappa, an unemployed man, died in police custody in Karnataka. A post-mortem report found that his spleen had ruptured as a result of a blow tft the stomach.
Although the number of cases of torture and death in custody in which compensation was awarded increased - in a number of cases on the recommendation of the NHRC - there were few convictions. In a rare example, two police officers were
fined and sentenced in August to one year's imprisonment for the torture of Archana Guha in Calcutta in 1974, after a 20-year legal battle by her brother. Both officers appealed to the High Court, but the outcome was not known at the end of the year.
Both the nhrc and the Supreme Court spoke of the harsh conditions in which most prisoners were kept. The nhrc proposed changes to the India Prisons Act, re-, porting that some prisoners were kept in shackles for long periods. The Supreme Court called on the prison authorities to end torture and overcrowding,
"Disappearances" continued and the fate of hundreds of people who "disappeared" in previous years remained unknown, In Manipur, Laishram Bijoykumar - whose brothers had reportedly been members of an armed opposition group -was taken from his house late at night in June, reportedly by soldiers in civilian clothes. Reports suggested that he was being held in an army camp in Manipur. A habeas corpus writ was filed in the High Court in Guwahati and there were widespread demonstrations against his "disappearance". However, the army continued to deny that he was in their custody, and his whereabouts remained unknown at the end of the year
In August, the Central Bureau of Investigation submitted an interim report into allegations that police in Punjab had extrajudicially executed hundreds of young men and disposed of their bodies. The report found that at one site alone 934 unidentified bodies - presumed by human rights groups to be those of "disappeared" young men - had been cremated between 1990 and 1995. The Bureau completed its inquiry into the abduction of Jaswant Singh Khalra, a lawyer and human rights activist from Punjab who "disappeared" after filing a petition in the Supreme Court about the cremation grounds (see Amnesty International Report 1996). The inquiry concluded that he had been taken by the police, His whereabouts were unknown.
Hundreds of people were reportedly extrajudicially executed by members of the security forces. In March, the tied and mutilated body of Jalil Andrabi, Chairman of the Kashmir Commission of Jurists, was found in the Jhelum river, near Srinagar, in Jammu and Kashmir. Three weeks earlier he had been detained by members of
INDIA/INDONESIA AND EAST TIMOR
the Rashtriya Rifles who were accompanied by unidentified armed men. Investigations into his abduction and death continued in the High Court in Jammu and Kashmir.
In September, in the State of Andhra Pradesh, Dr Ameda Narayana, a doctor practising in an area where the government faces armed opposition, was reportedly shot dead by members of the police.
Reports were received that harassment, abduction, rape and deliberate and arbitrary killings perpetrated by so-called "renegades" in Jammu and Kashmir, and by other such groups, in Assam and other states, were carried out with the support of the security forces. Parag Kumar Das was killed by suspected former members of the armed opposition group United Liberation Front of Assam (ulfa), known as sulfa (surrendered ulfa), acting on behalf of the state authorities. Parag Das's son, Rohan Das, aged eight, was injured in the shooting.
At least two people were judicially executed and at least 30 were sentenced to death or remained on death row.
Armed opposition groups committed grave human rights abuses, including torture, deliberate and arbitrary killings of civilians, and hostage-taking. In May, following public threats that anyone participating in the elections would be killed, armed opposition groups in Jammu and Kashmir killed several election candidates. The victims included a Congress leader, his wife and two children who were killed in Rajauri, and election officials who were blown up in a bus in Dada.
In January, Amnesty International expressed concern at the quashing of the Srikrishna Enquiry, a judicial inquiry into allegations of police killings during the riots in Bombay in 1992 and 1993 (see Amnesty International Reports 1993 and 1994]. The inquiry was subsequently reinstated in May 1996 during the brief tenure of the Bjp government. In February, Amnesty International published a report, India: Harjit Singh - in continuing pursuit of justice, which documented the virtual immunity from prosecution for human rights violations afforded by the operation of the legal process.
In March, a report. Amnesty International and India, provided a detailed summary of the organization's concerns in
India, particularly in relation to legislation and the legal process.
In April, Amnesty International sent an open letter to all political parties on the occasion of the general elections, setting out its human rights concerns. The organization issued a number of appeals to the security forces and armed opposition groups in Jammu and Kashmir, calling for human rights to be respected in the election period. Concerns were raised about attacks on political leaders and their detention under house arrest, death threats against civilian electoral officials and harassment of journalists and human rights defenders.
In July and August, Amnesty International delegates were granted access to India to conduct research for the second time in 16 years and held talks with government officials, members of the nhrc and numerous human rights activists. In September, the organization published a report, India: Human rights abuses in the election period in jammu and Kashmir, which had been submitted to the Indian Government during the visit. The report detailed abuses by the security forces, "renegade" and armed opposition groups, and recommended, among other things, the disarming and disbanding of "renegade" groups. The government dismissed the report as containing "baseless and absurd allegations", while acknowledging inquiries instituted into the killing of Jalil Andrabi and Ghulam Rasool Sheikh.
In July, Amnesty International called for the release of the five foreign hostages held since July 1995 in Jammu and Kashmir (see Amnesty International Report 1996].
