RUSSIAN FEDERATION
Conscientious objectors continued to be imprisoned. Two other prisoners of conscience were held. There were numerous allegations of torture and ill-treatment in detention. Prisoners awaiting trial were held in conditions which amounted to cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment, sometimes resulting in deaths. Human rights violations by government forces took place in the context of the conflict in the Chechen Republic, including indiscriminate killings of civilians, detention without trial, torture and ill-treatment, and extrajudicial executions. At least 140 people were reported to have been judicially executed despite a promise to institute a moratorium. Between 500 and 600 prisoners were believed to be held on death row. Reports of inadequate legal protection for refugees and asylum-seekers continued. Human rights abuses by Chechen armed opposition groups were reported, including deliberate and arbitrary killings, torture and ill-treat-ment of prisoners and hostage-taking.
In January, Sergey Kovalyov resigned as Chairman of the Presidential Commission on Human Rights, followed by most other members of the Commission. In February, the Commission released its report on human rights in the Russian Federation for 1994 and 1995, which criticized government policies and practices. Later that month, the Russian Federation became a member of the Council of Europe and signed the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. In May, a new Criminal Code was adopted by parliament, effective from January 1997.
In November, the UN Committee against Torture examined the second periodic report of the Russian Federation on implementation of the provisions of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. The Committee expressed
concerns about allegations of systematic and widespread torture and ill-treatment in Russia, including violations during the conflict in the Chechen Republic, and made extensive recommendations to remedy these violations.
In July, President Boris Yeltsin won a majority of votes in the second round of the presidential elections. In August, a peace agreement ended the hostilities in the armed conflict in the Chechen Republic.
There was still no law on a civilian alternative to military service, which placed all conscientious objectors imder the threat of imprisonment.
In December 1995, Vadim Hesse submitted his appeal to perform alternative civilian service to the Military Recruitment Office of Noginsk district, Moscow Region, He was arrested in January 1996 and charged with "evading the regular draft to active military service" under Article 80 of the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation. He was released from detention in March. Vadim Hesse was subsequently acquitted by Noginsk City Court in May, and by Moscow Regional Court in June.
In February, Aleksandr Nikitin, a retired Russian naval officer who had worked on a report on the dangers of nuclear waste in the Northern Fleet for the Norwegian non-govemmental group the Bellona Foundation, was arrested by the Federal Security Services in St Petersburg. He was charged with treason for revealing state secrets, despite the fact that all the information he used had been taken from public sources. Aleksandr Nikitin faced a possible death sentence if convicted. In December, he was released from detention and awaiting trial. He was a prisoner of conscience.
Yury Shadrin, a human rights advocate and public defender, was arrested in November in the Siberian city of Omsk on the orders of the Regional Procurator. He was charged with violating "the rules of traffic safety and operation of fransport vehicles", making "a threat of physical force to person or property" and "defamation of judges and people's assessors in the process of their judicial activities". Yury Shadrin declared a hunger-strike to protest against his arrest and against the charges on which he was held. In December, he was released pending trial - allegedly on the personal initiative of Anatoly Chubais,
RUSSIAN FEDERATION/RWANDA
head of the Presidential Administration -but was not allowed to leave Omsk. Yury Shadrin appeared to have been arrested solely for his human rights activities as a public defender and for the peaceful expression of his conscientiously held beliefs. He was a prisoner of conscience.
There were numerous allegations of torture and ill-treatment in detention, both in criminal cases and in the context of the conflict in the Chechen Republic; most did not appear to receive prompt and impartial investigation. Ethnic minorities were particularly vulnerable. Sultan Kurbanov, a Chechen resident in Moscow, was arrested in January by two policemen who came to his apartment claiming he was wanted for questioning at police headquarters and would be released after two hours. Instead he was driven to a warehouse depot in the Kuntsevsky district of Moscow and beaten with truncheons and sticks by about 10 police officers who emerged from a bus parked nearby. He said he was hit repeatedly, including on his legs, head and face, by what he described as metal implements. Later that evening, a woman found Sultan Kurbanov lying "wounded and half dead" in a street in Kuntsevsky district. The local police refused to help her but they allowed her to telephone his family. He was then taken to Moscow City Hospital No. 1 by a relative, who claimed he overheard nurses saying there had been a directive from the head of the hospital that no one of Chechen origin was to receive medical treatment. The relative told them that Sultan Kmbanov was an Ossetian, and he received treatment.
The conditions in pre-trial prisons continued to amount to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. In October, it was reported that 280 people died in pre-trial detention centres in Moscow dxuing the first nine months of the year.
Human rights violations carried out by government forces in the context of the armed conflict in the Chechen Republic included indiscriminate killings, detention without trial, torture and ill-treatment, and extrajudicial executions.
In early March, Russian forces bombarded the town of Semovodsk, without any apparent concern for the safety of the trapped civilian population, after claiming that armed Chechen groups had set up in the town. Between 10,000 and 16,000 people were believed to have fled Ser-
novodsk at this time, but some 7,000 civilians remained. Many of those who stayed in the town were people displaced by the conflict from elsewhere in the Chechen Republic. Hundreds were killed and injured by the Russian federal forces. During the attack, representatives of the Intemational Committee of the Red Cross were denied access to the town. Russian troops who entered Semovodsk were also reported to have carried out extrajudicial executions. One eye-witness stated that a young woman was arrested in the street by several soldiers and taken to a nearby house. Her dead body was later found there. Indiscriminate attacks by the Russian federal forces were also carried out in March, April and August against civilians in the Chechen villages of Samashki, Shali, Kom-somolskoye and the capital, Grozny.
There were numerous reports of torture and ill-treatment of civilians in the so-called "filtration points", detention camps set up by the Russian army during the conflict in the Chechen Republic. None of these reports was known to have been promptly or impartially investigated. In March, during the Russian military attack on Semovodsk, men between the ages of 16 and 55 were moved to "filtration points". All the men were believed to have been freed when the camps were closed down.
The Russian Federation made a formal commitment to suspend all executions, pending the full abolition of the death penalty within three years, when it acceded to the Council of Europe in February. Nevertheless, executions in Russia continued and no effective steps were taken to impose the moratorium on executions. In November, Anatoly Pristavkin, Chairman of the Presidential Clemency Commission, reported that 140 executions had been carried out during the year, 103 of them after Russia joined the Council of Europe. Ln September, Valéry Borschev, a member of parliament and representative of the Chamber of Human Rights under the President, referred to a study carried out in Russia which claimed that judicial errors had been made in 30 per cent of death penalty cases.
An estimated 500 to 600 prisoners remained on death row. A draft law on the moratorium on executions, prepared by two Duma deputies, was under discussion at the end of the year.
RUSSIAN FEDERATION/RWANDA
Reports indicated that legal provisions for refugees and asylum-seekers were inadequate. In March, Elgudzha Khutaye-vich Meskhia, an opponent of the Georgian Government, sought political asylum in Russia. He was arrested at the request of the Georgian Government and forcibly repatriated to Georgia, where he was at risk of torture and ill-treatment. In April, Rahim Qaziyev, the former Minister of Defence of Azerbaijan, was forcibly returned to that country, where he faced ill-treat-ment and the death penalty. In November, reports claimed that he was being kept in detention in Azerbaijan and had not been able to see his lawyers since August. His family had been allowed to see him only once since his return.
Forces loyal to Chechen President Dzhokhar Dudayev, who was reportedly killed in April by the Russian army, were responsible for human rights abuses, including torture and ill-treatment, hostage-taking and deliberate and arbitrary killings. In January, an armed group of Chechens calling itself "Lone Wolf entered the southern Russian town of Kizlyar in Dagestan and took over the central hospital and adjoining maternity home. Civilians from apartment blocks surrounding the medical complex were forced into the hospital. The group's leader, Salman Raduyev, said the hostages would be shot if Russian troops did not withdraw from the Chechen Republic. At the same time, hostages were taken by armed Chechens at an electrical plant near Grozny. The hostages from Kizlyar were taken to the village of Pervomaiskoye. The Russian army launched heavy artillery and Grad-rocket attacks on the village in an apparently indiscriminate attack, without regard for the lives of the civilians in the village or the hostages themselves. The Russian army reportedly secured the freedom of 82 hostages from Pervomaiskoye; the remaining hostages were later freed by their Chechen captors.
In an open letter to the presidential candidates during the June presidential elections. Amnesty International urged the future president to consider as a first priority the improvement of the country's human rights situation.
Amnesty International urged the government to release any conscientious objectors held as prisoners of conscience, and to introduce a civilian alternative to
military service for conscientious objectors, The organization called for the immediate and unconditional release of Aleksandr Nikitin and Yury Shadrin.
In a report published in October, flus-sian Federation: Comments on the Second Periodic Report submitted to the United Nations Committee against Torture, the organization urged the authorities to initiate thorough and impartial investigations into all allegations of torture and ill-treatment in detention, to make the results public, and to bring those responsible to justice.
Amnesty International urged the Russian authorities to hold a comprehensive and impartial investigation into the deliberate and indiscriminate killings of civilians during the conflict in the Chechen Republic and to take steps to protect non-combatants in accordance with international humanitarian law,
During the year. Amnesty International continued to urge the Russian President to commute all death sentences and to introduce a moratorium on executions. It also called on the authorities to ensure that no asylum-seekers were retiu-ned to countries where they could face human rights violations, and to take steps to ensure effective protection of refugees and asylum-seekers.
Amnesty International urged the command of the Chechen forces to ensure that all detainees were treated humanely. It condemned hostage-taking by the Chechen forces as unacceptable in any circumstances and called for the release of all hostages.
