ISRAEL
(STATE OF)
AND THE OCCUPIED TERRITORIES
At least 1,600 Palestinians were arrested on security grounds by the Israeli authorities. At least 600 Palestinians and five Jewish Israelis were administratively detained during the year. Prisoners of conscience included at least three con-scientious objectors. Other political prisoners included at least 65 Lebanese nationals - including 22 who were held without charge or trial, or after the expiry of their sentences. At least 1,000 Palestinians received trials before Israeli military courts, whose procedures did not meet international fair trial standards. A total of
1,155 Palestinian prisoners were fi^ed in the context of peace agreements, but more than 3,500 others, including 2,000 sentenced to prison terms in previous years, remained held at the end of the year. Torture and ill-treatment of Palestinians during interrogation continued to be systematic and officially sanctioned. At least 80 Palestinians, including 60 civilians were killed by Israeli forces, some in circumstances suggesting extrajudicial executions or other unlawful killings. At least seven houses were destroyed as pimishment. Palestinian groups opposed to the peace process carried out deliberate and arbitrary killings of at least 56 Israeli civilians.
The Israeli Government amended a draft bill which might have legalized torture (see Amnesty International Report 1996) and in February withdrew for further consideration a bill which offered impunity to the General Seciuity Service (gss). In March, an international summit conference was called in Sharm al-Shaikh to oppose "terrorism" following attacks by Palestinian suicide bombers in February and March (see below).
In April, the Israeli Government under Prime Minister Shimon Peres launched a military operation on Lebanon named "Grapes of Wrath" during which Israeli forces unlawfully killed Lebanese civilians (see Lebanon entry).
In May, Binyamin Netanyahu, leader of the Likud Party, was elected Prime Minister. He formed a government in June in the newly-elected Knesset (parliament) based on an alliance between Likud and religious parties.
IRELAND/ISRAEL AND THE OCCUPIED TERRITORIES
The implementation of the next stage of the peace accord (the 1995 Oslo ii accord) between the Palestinian Authority and Israel, which was to involve Israeli withdrawal from part of Hebron, was delayed after suicide bombings and again delayed after the new government was formed.
The Israeli authorities continued to make extensive use of border closures, confining Palestinians to the Gaza Strip and to Areas A and B of the West Bank (areas over which the Palestinian Authority had joint or exclusive jurisdiction according to the Oslo II accord). Palestinians living in Area B in the West Bank were liable to arrest and detention by both the Israeli and Palestinian security services. Under the new government, existing Israeli settlements in the West Bank were expanded. Attacks continued to be carried out on Palestinians by armed Israeli settlers and on settlers by armed Palestinians.
At least 1,600 Palestinians were arrested on security grounds, including more than 1,000 people arrested after the suicide bombings in February and March.
Renewable administrative detention orders of up to one year were served on more than 600 Palestinians, including prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience. Administrative detainees were held without charge or trial. Appeals, which took place several weeks after detention and in which the evidence against the detainee was consistently concealed, were frequently boycotted by detainees. Prisoners of conscience included Wissam Rafidi, a journalist, who was arrested in August 1994. Ahmed Qatamesh, said to be a senior official of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, also remained detained throughout the year; at the end of the year he was serving his seventh administrative detention order, having been continuously detained since 1992 (see previous Amnesty International Reports). Five Jewish Israelis from Israeli settlements in the Occupied Territories were also administratively detained for up to two months. They included Aryeh Friedman, accused of being a danger to state security, who was arrested in January and released in March.
Prisoners of conscience included at least three conscientious objectors to military service. For example, Eran Avizkar, a pacifist, was arrested in October and sentenced to 45 days' imprisonment.
Other political detainees held during the year included more than 65 Lebanese nationals imprisoned in Israel. At least 12 Lebanese nationals taken prisoner in South Lebanon during the year were transferred to Israel. They included three Lebanese nationals and one person with dual Israeli and Lebanese nationality abducted in South Lebanon in February and secretly detained in Israel until they were brought to trial in Haifa in October on charges which included conspiring with the enemy. Twenty Lebanese nationals, who had been taken from Lebanon and held in Israel for up to nine years without trial or held beyond expiry of their sentences, continued to be detained. Shaykh 'Abd al-Karim 'Ubayd and Mustafa al-Dirani, abducted from Lebanon in 1989 and 1994, respectively, were held incommunicado, without access to the International Committee of the Red Cross, in an unknown place of detention. In February, the then Israeli Deputy Minister of Defence told Amnesty International that they were being held pending information as to the whereabouts of Ron Arad, an Israeli airman missing in Lebanon since 1986 (see Amnesty International Reports 1994 to 1996 and Lebanon entry).
At least 130 prisoners remained held without charge or trial at the Khiam detention centre in an area of South Lebanon controlled by Israel and the South Lebanon Army (see Lebanon entry).
At least 1,000 Palestinians were brought to trial before military courts on charges such as stone-throwing or membership of illegal organizations, and moved to Israel or Area C of the West Bank (areas over which Israel retained sole jurisdiction under the Oslo n accord). These trials, which accepted confessions allegedly extracted by torture or ill-treatment as the main evidence for a conviction, did not meet international standards for fair trial.
A total of 1,155 Palestinian prisoners were released by Israel in January in the context of peace accords between Israeli and the Palestinian Authority. However, more than 3,500 Palestinians, including about 260 administrative detainees and 2,000 people sentenced to prison terms in previous years, remained in prison for se-ciu:ity offences at the end of the year.
Torture and ill-treatment of Palestinians continued to be systematic and officially sanctioned by secret guidelines
IRELAND/ISRAEL AND THE OCCUPIED TERRITORIES
allowing the ess to use "moderate" physical and psychological pressure. The ministerial committee charged with overseeing the GSS continued to give three-month dispensations allowing the use of "increased physical pressure", the meaning of which remained secret. Violent shaking [tiltul] was also allowed with the authorization of the head of the ess (see Amnesty International Reports 1995 and 1996].
A number of High Court decisions allowed the use of physical force against detainees suspected of having information about armed attacks. 'Abd al-Halim Bel-baysi said he was subjected to violent shaking, sleep deprivation for up to three days while handcuffed, hooding with dirty sacks, and was made to jump up and down from a crouching position. In January, after he confessed to helping suicide bombers who had caused the death of 21 Israeli nationals in 1995, the High Court of Justice overturned an injunction imposed in December 1995 forbidding the use of physical force. In November, similar injunctions were overturned in two other cases, including that of Muhammad 'Abd al-'Aziz Hamdan, who said he had been hooded with a filthy sack, deprived of sleep for long periods and violently shaken three times.
In June, the Ministry of Justice announced that an interrogator who had shaken 'Abd al-Samad Harizat, who died as a result of violent shaking in April 1995 (see Amnesty International Report 1996), had been acquitted on most counts by a disciplinary court and returned to his post. He was said to have been convicted of "not carrying out his duty", but no information was given as to what this entailed.
Mordechai Vanunu remained held in solitary confinement for his 10th successive year (see previous Amnesty International Reports). Avraham Klingberg, a 78-year-old physician held since 1983 on charges of spying for the former Soviet Union, was refused a reduction of his 20-year sentence on health grounds (see Amnesty International Reports 1994 to 1996).
At least 80 Palestinians, including 60 civilians, were shot dead by Israeli forces. Some were shot in armed clashes; others were killed in circumstances suggesting extrajudicial executions or other unlawful use of lethal force. Yahya 'Ayyash, an engineer said to have made suicide bombs.
was killed with a booby-trapped mobile telephone in January. The killing was said to have been carried out by the GSS; the Israeli Government neither accepted responsibility nor denied involvement. In September, 65 Palestinians (including 37 members of the Palestinian secvuity forces). 16 Israelis (all members of the security forces) and one Egyptian national were killed when Israeli security forces opened fire on demonstrators and some members of the Palestinian Seciu-ity forces returned fire. The Israeli forces used helicopter gunshlps which on some occasions reportedly shot at crowds. Palestinians imlawfully killed Included 'Ayman al-Dakaydak, Ibrahim Ghanem and Jawad Bazalamlt, who were shot with rubber bullets or live ammunition outside the al-Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem in circumstances where the lives of the security forces were not in danger.
The security forces continued to enjoy virtual impunity for past human rights violations. In November, four members of an undercover unit of the Israeli Defence Force were each fined one agora (about half a US cent) for "negligently causing the death" in 1993 of lyad Amali, a passenger in a car which had stopped at a checkpoint.
In March, the Israeli army carried out the punitive destruction of at least seven houses of Palestinians accused of involvement in suicide bombings. Among them was the house in Rafat village of the wife of Yahya 'Ayyash; he had been killed in January. Other houses were sealed.
Palestinian groups opposed to the peace process carried out deliberate and arbitrary killings. Armed attacks by such groups resulted in the deaths of at least 70 Israeli nationals, including at least 56 civilians. A total of 59 people were killed in Jerusalem and Tel Aviv and outside Ashkelon in February and March by four suicide bombers belonging to Hamas and Islamic Jihad (see Palestinian Authority entry).
In February, an Amnesty International delegation met members of the Israeli Government, including the Minister of Justice and the Deputy Minister of Defence. Throughout the year. Amnesty International condemned human rights violations, including torture and unlawful killings, and called for the release or fair trial of administrative detainees. In July,
ISFiAEL AND THE OCCUPIED TERRITORIES/ITALY
Amnesty International published a report. Israel/Lebanon: Unlawful killings during operation "Grapes of Wrath"-, in August it published, "Under constant medical supervision": Torture, ill-treatment and the health professions in Israel and the Occupied Territories, which expressed concern about the role of medical professionals in interrogation centres where detainees suffer torture.
In an oral statement to the UN Commission on Human Rights in March, Amnesty International stressed that sustained peace and secvurity could only be built on the basis of respect for human rights. In November, the UN Committee against Torture invited Israel to submit a special report on the implications of the High Court of Justice decision the same month allowing the use of physical force.
Amnesty International condemned the deliberate and arbitrary killing of civilians by armed opposition groups and called on such groups to respect fundamental principles of humanitarian law.
