SWITZERLAND
There were new allegations of ill-treatment of detainees by police officers.
In February, the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture, established under the Emopean Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, carried out its second periodic visit to follow up the criticisms and recommendations it made after its 1991 visit (see Amnesty International Report 1994] and to examine the treatment of people held in various places of detention in the cantons of Bern, Geneva, Ticino, Valais, Vaud and Zurich. The government indicated that it would allow publication of the European Committee's report on its visit, together with its own response, in March 1997.
In October, the un Human Rights Committee considered Switzerland's initial report on its implementation of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The Committee expressed concern about several specific issues, including "numerous" allegations of ill-treatment, particularly of foreign nationals, at the time of arrest and during initial police custody; unsatisfactory investigations into complaints of ill-treatment; and failure to impose appropriate penalties on those responsible for such treatment.
The Committee reconunended that Switzerland intensify discussions aimed at harmonizing the 26 cantonal codes of
SWITZERLAND
penal procedure, particularly concerning the provision of fundamental guarantees for detainees. The Committee stressed the need for all cantons to introduce a legal right for criminal suspects to have access to a lawyer and relatives from the moment of arrest and to be examined by an independent doctor upon arrest, after questioning and before appearing before a magistrate or being released. It also recommended that independent, publicly accountable, mechanisms be established in all cantons, to examine complaints of police ill-treatment.
Legislation providing, for the first time, a genuine civilian alternative to compulsory military service came into force in October. The service, one and a half times the length of ordinary military service, was available to conscripts able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of a civilian commission their inability to reconcile military service with their conscience.
Until October, refusal of military service remained a criminal offence, punishable by sentences of imprisonment or of work in the public interest. However, reports of prison sentences being imposed on, or served by, conscientious objectors were rare, as criminal proceedings already under way against such conscripts could be suspended to give them an opportunity to apply for civilian service and, pending its introduction, deferments were available to those ordered to report for military service dining the year.
Allegations of police ill-treatment often concerned foreign nationals. An investigation was opened into a formal complaint lodged in January by A.S., an asylum-seeker from the Kosovo province of Yugoslavia. He alleged that five police officers slapped, kicked and punched him and banged his head against a desk in a Lugano police station after his arrest for theft in December 1995. He said he was denied medical treatment during his 30-hom- detention but within an hour of his release he was examined at a local hospital, where doctors recorded heavy bruising to one leg, bruising and swelling to his right arm, extensive injuries to his right eye and blood in his urine. He claimed that, after questioning him, police officers ordered him to sign two documents written in Italian. He said he initially refused because he did not understand the language, but signed the first after being
slapped across the face and the second after being told it would permit his release. However, the second document apparently informed the Federal Office for Refugees that he was withdrawing his asylum application.
There was confirmation that the Ticino Procurator General had opened an investigation into the complaint of police ill-treatment lodged by Ali Doymaz and Abuzer Tastan in June 1995 (see Amnesty International Report 1996). The investigation was still open at the end of the year; the men had not been questioned about their allegations.
There appeared to be delays in several judicial proceedings relating to alleged police ill-treatment. There was an interval of two and a half years between a complaint lodged by M.F., an Iranian political refugee, in December 1993, and the trial in June of three Zurich municipal police officers accused of abusing their authority and causing him bodily harm during a drugs search. The man required hospital treatment after being released without charge. A judge attached to Zurich District Court concluded that one or more of the police officers had used unwarranted and excessive force by kicking the man, but acquitted all three on the grounds that it had been impossible to establish which ofFicer(s) had kicked him.
In a definitive sentence issued in March, the Zurich High Court concluded that all the injuries sustained by Hassan L. in February 1995 (see Amnesty International Report 1996) could be attributed to a violent struggle with police at the time of his arrest in the street and to a fall in his police cell, resulting from his drunken and poor physical state. The Court was unable to exclude entirely the possibility that he might have been ill-freated inside the police station but found no reliable evidence to support his allegations and convict any police officer.
In April. Geneva's cantonal parliament approved legislative reforms which would strengthen existing safeguards against ill-treatment for detainees in police custody and serve to protect police officers from unfounded allegations of ill-treatment. They were expected to be put to a cantonal referendum in 1997. New allegations of ill-treatment by Geneva police were reported during the year. Marc Guerrero was chased and arrested by Geneva police in February,
SWITZERLAND/SYRIA
after carrying out a bag-snatch. In March, he lodged a formal complaint with the Chief of Police and the Procurator General claiming that, after he had surrendered to the police, a police dog had been deliberately set on him, causing serious injuries to his left leg and shoulder, the latter requiring a surgical operation, and that police officers had ill-treated him, one hitting his head with a gun. He claimed they also deliberately deprived him of medical treatment for several hours, although they had been informed he was a diabetic, and a doctor, called in at his request after he had been in custody for over an hour, had recommended his urgent hospitalization. His complaint was accompanied by a medical certificate, issued by the cantonal hospital to which he was eventually transferred, stating that his injuries were consistent with his allegations of being struck with a gun and attacked by a dog.
In October, the Chief of Police stated that a judicial investigation was under way and commented that the accused officers strongly contested the allegations and that there was nothing "a priori to indicate that the use of the police dog contravened the principle of proportionality".
Amnesty International welcomed the availability of a genuine civilian alternative to compulsory military service and monitored its implementation. The organization expressed concern about allegations of ill-treatment and sought information on the progress and outcome of relevant investigations. In October, the government told the un Human Rights Committee that concerns about allegations of police ill-treatment raised by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and by non-governmental organizations, including Amnesty International, would be addressed in its response to the European Committee's report.
