Sierra Leone (the Republic of)
The State of Emergency declared on 1 February 1977 remained in force throughout 1977, and in March 1978 President Siaka Stevens signed an order extending the Public Emergency Regulations for a further year. These regulations give the Government in the person of the Minister of Defence (who throughout the period under consideration was President Stevens himself), the power to detain people without trial "in order to prevent such persons from acting in any manner prejudicial to public safety". The regulations also permit the authorities to censor newspapers and to interfere with private letters, to expel people from Sierra Leone, to ban public processions and meetings and to stop and search people and vehicles.
In the aftermath of the general election of May 1977, supporters of the rival political parties, the ruling All People's Congress (APC) and the opposition Sierra Leone People's Party (SLPP) continued to clash; this created an atmosphere of violence almost unprecedented in Sierra Leone. During this period there were reports that members of the Internal Security Unit had subjected members of the SLPP to brutal treatment and had several times assaulted people. At the election on 6 May, the SLPP won 15 seats and the APC 62 seats out of the total of 85 election seats. The elections for the remaining eight seats in Bo district were postponed until September, when eight APC representatives were returned unopposed. Following the APC's election victory, which was bolstered by the appointment of 12 A PC-supporting Paramount Chiefs and three members nominated by the President to give the APC a total of 82 seats in the 97-member House of Representatives, President Siaka Stevens suggested that Sierra Leone should become an official one-party state.
The creation of a one-party state was announced in May 1978, when a Bill changing the Constitution was brought before the House of Representatives. Under the new Constitution, the ruling APC became the only legal political party in Sierra Leone, and all opposition Members of Parliament had to join it within 24 days of the enactment of the new Constitution or else lose their seats. The Bill introducing the new Constitution was passed by the necessary two-thirds majority in the House of Representatives, and was approved only a few weeks later in a national referendum. All the SLPP Members of Parliament eventually declared for the APC in order to retain their seats, and President Stevens was sworn in for a new seven-year term as the first President under
74
the new one-party Constitution. The office of Prime Minister was abolished, and the former Prime Minister, C.A. Kamara-Taylor, became Second Vice-President, while the former Vice-President, S.I. Koroma, became First Vice-President.
Throughout 1977, the Government continued to detain members of the opposition and others it claimed to suspect of violent activities. Detention orders for a total of 662 people were signed during 1977, and in the early months of 1978 more than 50 people were officially detained. Some former detainees alleged that they were subjected to cruel and degrading treatment, especially by members of the Internal Security Unit, and that they were beaten during interrogations. Conditions at the headquarters of the Criminal Investigation Department near Makeni were reported to be particularly harsh — cells were allegedly so crowded that detainees had to remain standing all the time, and there were no toilet facilities. Most detainees who were formally held under the Public Emergency Regulations were transferred to Pademba Road Prison in Freetown, where conditions are reported to be cramped and overcrowded. Here some cells are too small to stand up in, and detainees have no facilities for washing. Only small amounts of food are supplied, consequently most detainees are underweight and suffering from various illnesses by the time they are released. By March 1978 the Government of Sierra Leone had still not announced the release of over 200 people detained during 1977, in addition to more than 50 whose detention was announced in 1978.
Many of those detained during 1977 were leading members of the SLPP. The most prominent detainees were three SLPP Members of Parliament who had been elected in the May 1977 elections - Charles Margai (nephew of Sierra Leone's first Prime Minister in 1961, Sir Milton Margai, and son of former SLPP Prime Minister, Sir Albert Margai), Dominic Ngombu, and Dauda Sandy. Charles Margai was charged with riotous conduct and arson when his case was brought before a Freetown magistrate's court in July 1977, but he was first discharged for "want of prosecution" and later for lack of evidence and the case was dismissed. However, he was not released, but remained in detention at Pademba Road Prison. The other two Members of Parliament were not brought before the courts, although Dominic Ngombu, for example, had originally been accused of attempted murder and had voluntarily given himself up to the police. In January 1978, after the three had been in detention for more than seven months, they were deprived of their seats by the Speaker of the House of Representatives for having not attended the sittings of the House for 30 consecutive days. A fourth SLPP Member of Parliament, Mana Kpaka, narrowly missed losing his seat under the same 30 Days Rule, but he was released from detention in January 1978.
In February 1978, the "vacant" seats thus created were filled by APC members who were elected unopposed. In early March, the three former SLPP Members were released. Apparently, the only reason for their continued detention had been to deprive them of their parliamentary seats. All three had been taken up by Amnesty International as investigation cases. Charles Margai was the subject of urgent appeals from Amnesty International to members of the Sierra Leone Government in August 1977, when he was reported to be seriously ill. Appeals were also sent concerning two other prominent members of the SLPP, Dr Hadj
75
Conteh, who, although suffering from high blood pressure, had been removed from the prison hospital to solitary confinement, and Mrs Regina James, who after being assaulted at Bonthe and taken to hospital, was also removed to prison and placed in solitary confinement. Dr Conteh and Mrs James were both released soon afterwards. By May 1978, when the Government had still not announced the release of more than a hundred detainees in its official Gazette, Amnesty International undertook a number of group investigation cases. These concerned people who had been detained from four to fourteen months. Later in May, the Sierra Leone authorities announced that there were in fact only 12 people still in detention: this claim could not immediately be confirmed since the Government had not officially published details of the releases.
Amnesty International addressed several appeals to the President, Dr Siaka Stevens, and to the Minister of Justice (who was also the Attorney General), Francis Mischek Minah, concerning detentions and allegations of the maltreatment of detainees. At the end of April 1978, when Sierra Leone was celebrating three different anniversaries — the 17th anniversary of independence in 1961, the 7th anniversary of Sierra Leone's becoming a Republic in 1971, and the 10th anniversary of A PC rule and the leadership of the country by Dr Siaka Stevens — Amnesty International addressed a letter to the President expressing its concern about the continuing State of Emergency in Sierra Leone, and the large number of people detained without trial. The Secretary General of Amnesty International asked the President to order the release of all political detainees.
