China (the People's Republic of)
In the People's Republic of China (PRC), the past year (1977-78) was marked by continuing purges and arrests of cadres accused of being supporters of the purged "gang of four" radical leaders, by the rehabilitation of people said to have been detained or "persecuted" under the influence of purged leaders, and by the adoption in March 1978 of a new Constitution.
The Fifth National People's Congress (NPC) of the PRC met in Peking in February and March 1978 to approve changes in the Government and in the country's Constitution. Like the Constitutions of 1954 and 1975, the 1978 Constitution includes a chapter on the "Fundamental Rights and Duties of Citizens" which guarantees a number of fundamental rights, such as "freedom of speech, correspondence, the press, assembly, association, procession, demonstration, the freedom to strike". The new Constitution re-establishes the "right to defence" which had been removed from the 1975 Constitution. However, the 1978 Constitution also includes provisions limiting civil liberties and provides for imprisonment on political grounds. For instance, Article 18 states:
"The State safeguards the socialist system, suppresses all treasonable and counter-revolutionary activities, punishes all traitors and counter-revolutionaries, and punishes new-born bourgeois elements and other bad elements.
The State deprives of political rights, as prescribed by law, those landlords, rich peasants and reactionary capitalists who have not yet reformed, and at the same time it provides them with the opportunity to earn a living so that they may be reformed through labour and become law-abiding
155
citizens supporting themselves by their own labour." (New China News Agency, 7 March 1978)
According to the report on the revision of the Constitution presented to the Fifth NPC by Vice-Chairman Ye Jianying, the punishment for "new-born bourgeois elements"-provided for in Article 18-had been "added in conformity with the present situation of the class struggle in our country". The same report specifies that "new-born bourgeois elements" are "those newly emerged elements who resist socialist construction [sic], gravely undermine socialist public ownership, appropriate social property or violate the criminal law". In other words, it refers mainly to people accused of political or "economic" offences.
Vice-Chairman Ye Jianying's report indicates that this new category of "class enemies" is the primary target of the present "class struggle" in China. It is likely, therefore, that many people-particularly young cadres who came to power at the end of the Cultural Revolution-have been stigmatized as "new-born bourgeois elements" in the course of the campaign against the "gang of four" and been punished in various ways, including imprisonment. The national campaign to criticize the "gang of four" and their followers, which was launched at the end of 1976, is still going on in 1978. Commentaries on the implementation of the campaign in the official press show that anyone suspected of the slightest sympathy with the ideology of the "gang of four" has to be thoroughly "investigated" and that those suspected of having had close connections with the "gang of four" must be "dealt with in accordance with the law".
Arrests of "counter-revolutionary" followers of the "gang of four" were mentioned by official sources during the past year, but, apart from some "major culprits", names are rarely mentioned. Most of those officially named are local leaders who are accused of scheming to seize power, of corruption and other malpractices, or of unlawful use of power which resulted in the persecution of other people. Among the arrests mentioned by other sources, three members of the Standing Committee of Guangdong Provincial Revolutionary Committee, Lui Junyi, Tian Huagui and Liang Qintang, were reported to have been detained in 1977. The three are former Red Guards, now in their thirties, who were appointed to the Revolutionary Committee in 1968. According to the Far Eastern Economic Review of 9 September 1977, they were alleged to have been detained for investigation into their connection with one member of the "gang of four". Amnesty International is investigating these cases. In April 1978, Agence France Presse in Peking also reported that a dozen former Red Guard leaders had been arrested in the city, including Kuai Dafu, Nie Yuanzi and Tan Houlan. The three are famous for their role during the Cultural Revolution (1966-68). They were appointed to official positions at the end of the Cultural Revolution, but seem to have fallen into disgrace in the early 1970s. Amnesty International inquired about these arrests in a cable to Chairman Hua Guofeng on 28 April, urging that information about them be made public. At the time of writing, no more information was available.
While purges and arrests of alleged followers of the "gang of four" continued, a process of rehabilitation was undertaken during the past year. It concerned intellectuals, cadres and other people who had been detained or dismissed from office or punished in other ways during the previous decade (1966-76). The
156
official press, for instance, announced on 13 March 1978 that since 1976 more than 10,000 "victims of the gang of four" had been rehabilitated in Shanghai, some posthumously. Many examples of individual cases of rehabilitation were given by official sources. In May, it was also announced that thousands of people who had been labelled as "rightists" since 1957 would be rehabilitated. This decision was adopted by the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference -a united front institution-and announced in a document from the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party. Amnesty International welcomed this decision in a letter to Vice-Premier Deng Xiaoping in May and at the same time raised particular cases known to it, such as those of Lin Xiling and Wang Mingdao. They were both arrested in 1957 during the "anti-rightists" campaign and were said to be still imprisoned in the mid 1970s (see Amnesty International Report 1977). At the time of writing, details about the terms of this rehabilitation measure are not yet available.
In the period 1977-78 Amnesty International sent several appeals to the Government of the PRC to reprieve various categories of offenders sentenced to death. Among the executions reported in early 1978 were those of eight people said to have been executed in January in Hangzhou, the capital of Zhejiang province: the information comes from official Public Security posters seen by travellers in various places in Hangzhou. According to report, the posters, dated 30 January 1978, said that 13 "counter-revolutionary groups" had been disbanded in the city and 8 of their leaders executed. The groups had a total of 32 members. One group was accused of organizing "counter-revolutionary activities with political plans" and trying to spread "propaganda aimed at undermining the socialist system". The posters stated that the leader of this particular group came from a "counter-revolutionary family". Similar charges were made against another group, which was also accused of having got hold of arms and forced people to supply it with provisions by armed threat.
A political offender named He Chunshu was executed in Canton on 18 February 1978, according to a notice from Guangdong province High People's Court, posted publicly in the city in February. The notice said that He Chunshu, a teacher aged forty-five, had been sentenced to death with immediate execution for writing and distributing a "counter-revolutionary leaflet of more than 200,000 words" in which he attacked Party leaders and the "dictatorship of the proletariat" and spread his "counter-revolutionary ideas". The notice stated that, after his arrest, He Chunshu "persistently refused to admit his crimes" and had provoked the "great anger of the people". According to the notice, the death sentence was approved by the Supreme People's Court and it was decided that, on 18 February, He Chunshu would be "taken bound to the place of execution to be shot".
In these and other cases of death sentences and executions, Amnesty International sent urgent appeals to the authorities of the PRC to commute all death sentences on humanitarian grounds. In late 1977 and early 1978, the Chinese official press called for moderation in the use of the death penalty, but said at the same time that the "death penalty could not yet be abandoned in China". This was stressed in particular by the Deputy Director of the Law Institute of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences in an interview published by the New China News Agency on 21 February 1978.
It is still difficult to obtain information about individual cases of prisoners of
157
conscience in the PRC. Due to restricted access to information and to the lack of official statistics, their number cannot be estimated. During the past year, Amnesty International has taken up new cases and Amnesty International groups continued to make inquiries and appeals on behalf of prisoners whose cases were taken up for adoption or investigation in 1977. Among them is Li Zhengtian, one of the three authors of a wall poster, signed Li Yizhe, displayed in Canton in 1974; he was sent to work "under surveillance" in a mine in Guangdong province in early 1975 (see Amnesty International Report 1977). In July 1977, a traveller to Canton claimed to have seen a court notice announcing that Li had been sentenced to life imprisonment, but he gave no indication of whether the other two authors of the "Li Yizhe" poster, Chen Yiyang and Wang Xizhe, were sentenced at the same time. Amnesty International expressed concern at this report in a letter to Chairman Hua Guofeng in July 1977, urging that the three young men be released without restriction as soon as possible. It was later alleged that more than 10 people were sentenced in connection with the "Li Yizhe" case. However, these reports are still unconfirmed and the present fate of Li Zhengtian, Chen Yiyang and Wang Xizhe is unknown. Unconfirmed reports mention that two of them were sent to labour camps in Guangdong province and the third to Yunnan province. Until the end of 1976, Li Zhengtian was known to be held in a mine in Shaoguan district, in the north of Guangdong province.
New cases were taken up during the past year for adoption or investigation by Amnesty International groups. These included a group of Trotskyists arrested between December 1952 and January 1953, about whom nothing is known since their arrest. Among them is Zheng Chaolin, a political theorist and linguist, who joined the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) in the early 1920s and was expelled from it as a Trotskyist in 1929. He was arrested by the Nationalist Government in 1931 and imprisoned for seven years. After his release, he went on with his political work and historical studies, and stayed in China when the People's Republic was established in 1949. He was arrested in Shanghai in December 1952, reportedly for refusing to compromise with the CCP. An article in the British newspaper the Guardian of 9 November 1977 said that Zheng Chaolin was still imprisoned in Shanghai in 1974. If he is still alive, he is now about 78 years old.
Amnesty International is also investigating the cases of people reported to have been arrested on political grounds after the Cultural Revolution. One of them is Wang Renzhou, a peasant now in his late forties, who was arrested in 1969 in Bahe county, Hubei province, on the charge of being a "current counter-revolutionary". In 1962 he had been sent to study in the Foreign Languages School in Peking but he was labelled a "rightist" shortly afterwards and sent back to his village to work "under the supervision of the masses". During the Cultural Revolution, he was, according to report, actively involved in promoting reforms in the countryside and in organizing the peasants of his village. In 1967 he was kept in detention for a few months in Wuhan (the capital of Hubei province), during incidents in which there were violent clashes between various factions and army units in the city. His re-arrest in 1969 is believed to have been due to his active involvement in the Cultural Revolution. Wang is said to have been sentenced, but no details of his trial were ever made public. He is believed to have been sentenced to long-term imprisonment because he was labelled a "rightist" in 1962. Nothing has been heard of him since his arrest in 1969 and his present fate is unknown.
158
All approaches made by Amnesty International to the authorities of the People's Republic of China about death sentences and individual cases of prisoners of conscience have so far remained unanswered.
By mid 1978, the People's Republic of China had not yet signed any of the United Nations international treaties for the protection of human rights.
