Iraq (the Republic of)
Iraq continues to be ruled, as it has been since 1968, by a civilian government dominated by the Baath Party, although the real power is firmly in the hands of the twenty-two-member Revolutionary Command Council. The situation in Iraq has continued to cause Amnesty International acute concern: during 1977-78 detention without trial has increased, and the number of executions has been alarmingly high.
Most of the reports of violations of human rights in the following review concern the Kurdish community in Iraq. This is not to say that Amnesty International believes the Kurds to be the only, or even the most significant, category of people subjected to arrest, imprisonment, torture and execution but rather that information on the Kurds is more readily available. In general, information, especially well-substantiated information, is difficult to obtain because of the secrecy which normally surrounds arrests, detention, trials and even executions. Only occasionally does the Iraqi press cover such events, and the authorities sometimes refuse to inform families and friends immediately of the whereabouts and circumstances of someone who is believed to have been arrested.
Allegations of violations of human rights which Amnesty International has over the past year brought to the Government's attention have mostly been denied outright. In March 1978, the Iraqi Government commented on the section on Iraq in the Amnesty International Report 1975-76. All the violations of human rights described in that report were discounted as untrue, but nothing has been done to show that the allegations were unfounded: there has been no
258
indication that the Government has set up an independent commission of inquiry into reports of torture; neither have observers been allowed to attend trials by the revolutionary court; and Amnesty International has still been unable to get permission to send a high-level delegation to Iraq to discuss these issues with the authorities.
Among the cases dealt with by Amnesty International groups this year are a group of about 14 elderly Iraqi professional men, who were arrested between February 1973 and November 1974, allegedly for their previous activities as Freemasons. Aged between 59 and 72, they include retired businessmen, academics, civil servants and doctors. Five of them had been sentenced to death in November 1974 on charges of treason, in accordance with Law No. 141 of 1974, but these sentences were later commuted to life imprisonment. The five are held in the General Detention Prison, a special wing of Abu Ghraib prison, near Baghdad. The others, charged with forming an illegal party, were, in accordance with Article 204-1 (a), sentenced to up to 15 years' imprisonment. All reports received suggest that they are relatively well treated in prison and are allowed visits from their families.
Work also continues for 15 Iraqi Shii Muslims who were arrested in February 1977, following disturbances in the holy Shii towns of Najaf and Kerbala, and sentenced to life imprisonment. Their arrest, trial on 23 February and sentences of death or life imprisonment were reported in the Iraqi press but no information from any quarter has been received about these prisoners since their cases were taken up by Amnesty International.
By far the largest number of reported arrests this year have involved members of the Kurdish community in Iraq. Amnesty International has collected the names and, in many cases, details of over 760 Kurds who are reported to be in prison or in detention at the time of writing.
About 160 of the 760 are alleged by Kurdish opposition sources to have been arrested at some time since March 1975, either for belonging to one of the illegal Kurdish parties or for supporting or sympathizing with the Kurdish opposition. In none of the cases does Amnesty International know the official charge or the legislation under which they have been tried. They include students, civil servants, teachers, farmers and labourers, and are held variously in Abu Ghraib, Kirkuk, Mosul, Fadhiliya and Suleimaniya prisons. About 45 are known to have been tried and sentenced to between 3 and 20 years' imprisonment. Fifty-eight of the 160 are being worked for individually by Amnesty International groups. The others are being worked for collectively and formed the basis of a group-level campaign in June 1978.
Another category consists of relatives of members of the Kurdish armed forces (Pesh Mergas) and includes old people, women, a number of whom were pregnant at the time of arrest, and children, some of them only one or two years old. Since the renewal of hostilities between the Kurds and the Iraqi authorities in May 1976, the Iraqi forces are reported to have been rounding up the families of Pesh Mergas whom they cannot find and detaining them instead. None has been charged or tried. The exact numbers held are not known, but Amnesty International has collected the names of over 600 men, women and children arrested in this way. The Chairman of the Executive Council for the (Kurdish) Autonomous Region, Hashim Akrawi, told Amnesty International in March 1978 that these were all
259
families who had been moved from their villages and housed in temporary accommodation while their new homes were being built. Kurdish sources, however, maintain that this is not so; and while most of the information about these cases has come from organized Kurdish opposition sources, a number of first-hand reports of individual cases has been received by Amnesty International from relatives and friends of detained families. One such case concerns the family of Husain Ramadhan Suleiman, from the village of Saiqa Waihan in Zakho province. Husain decided to join the Kurdish armed forces in February 1977, 19 months after he and his family were deported to the district of Simnel. In the following May, his father, aged 75, his mother, aged 65, his wife and his three children aged four, three and one were arrested and detained in the Sports Stadium in the town of Diwaniya. Reports say that there are 14 prisons and detention centers at present being used for this category of detainee in the towns of Amara, Baghdad, Hawiga, Kut, Mosul, Nasiriya, Ranya, Rumaitha, Samawa, Shatra, Suleimaniya, Sumail, Ramadi, Hit, Falluja, Hilla (where one of the two prisons is specifically for women only) and Diwaniya (where there are five prisons and detention centers).
In a letter to President A1 Bakr on 31 October 1977, Amnesty International urged the Government to "take immediate steps to investigate these cases and ensure the early release from prison of all children and other persons who have committed no offence under the law". This was also the subject of a press release on 3 November 1977, and Amnesty International groups wrote to the Iraqi Government, urging the release of all these detainees. Amnesty International has since learnt that a number of families from Hilla prison have been released.
In April 1978 there were rumours that a number of prominent Baath Party members had either been arrested or placed under virtual house arrest. Among them were reported to be several Iraqi ambassadors who had been recalled from their posts, including Abdul Karim A1 Sheikhly, formerly Iraqi Foreign Minister and more recently Iraq's Permanent Representative at the United Nations. It was later reported that only Abdul Karim A1 Sheikhly had been arrested, and that he had been sentenced to a period of imprisonment. The precise reason for his arrest is not known but unofficial sources claim that it was because of disagreement between him and the Iraqi leadership.
Torture allegations are frequent and almost all those who are arrested are reported to be tortured, either for information or in order to obtain a confession. The bodies of those who are executed, when returned to their families, frequently bear marks of torture, and deaths under torture are also reported. One such case, which was the subject of an Urgent Action campaign in October 1977, was that of Sayyid Muhammad Ismail, an 80-year-old Kurd who was reported to have been arrested in May 1977 in connection with his son's alleged involvement in the blowing up in Arbil of a car belonging to the secret police. He is reported to have died soon after being taken into custody, and his body, when it was returned to his family, was reported to bear the marks of torture.
A first-hand report of torture was received this year from an Assyrian Christian who was arrested by the secret police on three occasions during 1975. They interrogated him about his connections with the Kurdish Revolution and tried to put pressure upon him to become an informer against the Kurds. He stated that he was punched in the back and stomach, beaten on the back, head and stomach with a rope of thick plastic-covered wire, and subjected to electric shock treatment.
260
Iraqi Government officials have frequently told Amnesty International representatives that in Iraq the death sentence is passed on "saboteurs" and "persons endangering national security". The Iraqi Government, in its comments on the Amnesty International Report 1975-76, stated that the death penalty in Iraq is "strictly limited". From information available, however, it is apparent that leaders and prominent members of Kurdish and other illegal parties are liable to execution, as well as those who are militarily involved in the Kurdish Revolution and those who engage in acts of sabotage.
Most of the reported executions have been of Kurds. During 1977-78 Amnesty International received the names of over 200 Kurds who had been executed since January 1976, mostly in Mosul Prison. No charges are known, though opposition sources claim that some were charged with being members of, or in sympathy with, the illegal Kurdish Democratic Party. This list of over 200 formed the basis of a campaign in May 1978 when Amnesty International groups wrote to the Iraqi authorities to express concern at the high number of executions reported over the past 17 months, and at the apparent inadequacy of basic legal safeguards.
One report received by Amnesty International this year from a very reliable source was that 53 Kurds were executed on the same night in Mosul Prison, at the end of June or the beginning of July 1977. Only one name is known, that of Sabri Chaban, a twenty-seven-year-old peasant farmer from the village of Didishki, married, with two children. He was reported to have been charged with belonging to the provisional leadership of the illegal Kurdish Democratic Party.
During the year there have been two occasions when members of the armed forces have been executed for illegal political activities within the Army (that is, forming secret communist cells). Although a number of political parties in Iraq have been legitimized (namely, the pro-Soviet Iraqi Communist Party, a splinter group of the Kurdish Democratic Party and the Revolutionary Kurdistan Democratic Party), political activity within the armed forces is an offence which can be punishable by death. In June 1977 seven officers were reported to have been sentenced to death by a military court for illegal political activity, and these cases were included in a group-level campaign in September 1977. And at the end of May 1978 it was officially reported that 21 members of the armed forces, including officers, had been executed for similar offences. These executions formed the basis of an Amnesty International campaign at national section level in June 1978.
On 24 September 1977, according to official Iraqi sources, a Jordanian student from Basra University, Ra'id Butrus Az Zawayidah, was hanged in Iraq for espionage. He had been arrested on 14 May 1977, tried and sentenced, allegedly on the basis of a signed confession. According to Jordanian official sources, members of his family had been able to visit him in Abu Ghraib prison on 22 September; it was not until October that they were informed that he had been sentenced to death and executed.
There are also serious doubts as to whether those condemned to death receive a fair and open trial. There is no information available to show that any of those who were executed over the past 17 months had access to a lawyer of their choosing before their trials; or that their trials were held in open session; or that the condemned were able to take their cases to a higher court of appeal. The commutation of a death sentence, or the release of a prisoner, whenever this has occurred, has been the result of intervention by someone of influence.
261
The International Secretariat of Amnesty International and its national sections have continued to have contact with Iraqi embassies and visiting Iraqi officials. Amnesty International's request to send a high-level delegation to Iraq, however, was refused by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on the grounds that "acceptance of sending such a mission would be tantamount to admission of the allegations made by well-known quarters against Iraq". In his letter to Amnesty International of 28 June 1977, the Iraqi Director General of Public Relations said that "... the Iraqi authorities, while being anxious to maintain contact with your organization, regret they are unable to accept the idea of sending the mission ... or any similar mission of an investigative nature by any quarter." Amnesty International is none the less continuing to press for permission to send a delegation to Iraq.
