Venezuela
Since Carlos Andres Perez was elected President in 1974 (he was the Accion Democratica candidate), the Government has taken steps to promote human rights regionally and internationally by strongly supporting the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. In July 1977, the Venezuelan Executive signed the American Convention on Human Rights, which was later ratified by the legislature in early 1978. Nevertheless, there is cause for concern as regards human rights in Venezuela itself, and frequent press reports and other information on human rights issues are sent to Amnesty International from Venezuela.
The organization has for several years been disturbed by the application of martial law (the Military Code of Justice) to civilians charged before the military courts with crimes against the security of the state. Although Amnesty International has publicized this situation since 1974, the situation does not appear to have improved. There are estimated to be 85 civilians now in detention who have
145
been indicted by military courts, but many have been awaiting trial for up to seven years—most of them having now been held for over four years without trial. The authorities claim that they are all in process of being tried (procesados). However, according to Amnesty International's information, pre-trial detention in military cases is lengthy or lasts indefinitely, and many people held by the army assert that they have been severely tortured during interrogation by army intelligence personnel.
It should be borne in mind, however, that most of these prisoners were arrested over four years ago. Amnesty International has taken up for investigation several recent cases of detention by military courts. The member of Congress, Diego Salom Mesa, sixty-year-old leader of the Movimento Electoral del Pueblo Party, has been held since July 1976. He was charged under the Military Code of Justice with "Rebellion" (Article 476), for alleged involvement in the kidnapping of businessman William Frank Niehous in 1976, and has been the subject of appeals by every major opposition party and by Roman Catholic bishops who have called for his immediate release. Monseigneur Mariano Parra Leon, Bishop of Cumana, was reported in the Venezuelan Roman Catholic journal La Columna to have stated that the detention of Diego Salom Mesa ". . . is infamous . . . Pity the luckless Venezuelan who falls into the hands of Military Justice". In early 1978, the military prosecutor in the case charged Diego Salom Mesa also with "Slander of the Armed Forces" (Ultraje a la Fuerza Armada, Section IV, Article 505, Military Code of Justice).
Another prisoner before the military courts whose case is being investigated by Amnesty International is Doris Francia, Editor of the left-wing journal Ruptura. She was arrested on 11 October 1977 and has been indicted for "incitement to rebellion" on the basis of an article published in Ruptura on 30 September 1977, reporting the escape of several political prisoners.
