Namibia
Namibia experienced a further upsurge of political violence during the period 1977-78 as negotiations over the country's independence continued throughout the year between the South African Government and the South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO), with the five Western member-nations of the United Nations Security Council acting as intermediaries. These Western countries - Canada, France, the United Kingdom, the United States of America and the Federal Republic of Germany — intervened in earnest in April 1977 after the conclusion of the Turnehalle Conference in Windhoek.
This Conference, attended by representatives of each of Namibia's ethnic groups, but not by political organizations such as SWAPO, had agreed that Namibia should become independent at the end of 1978 and had prepared a draft constitution. The Western countries attempted to find a compromise between the positions taken by South Africa and SWAPO, which the United Nations regards as the sole legitimate representative of the Namibian people. They pressed South Africa to withdraw its political administration and most of its military forces from Namibia, to repeal discriminatory laws and release political prisoners in preparation for free elections to determine the future government of Namibia. These proposals, slightly amended, were conditionally accepted by South Africa in April 1978. However, following a major attack on a SWAPO base at Cassinga in southern Angola a few days later, in which several hundred SWAPO supporters
63
and Namibian refugees were killed, SWAPO temporarily broke off negotiations. It had still not agreed to the Western proposals by the end of June 1978.
While negotiations continued at an international level, a number of significant developments occurred within Namibia itself. Two political coalitions were formed to rival SWAPO's influence, the generally pro-South African Democratic Turnehalle Alliance (DTA), made up of several Turnehalle delegations and led by Chief Clemens Kapuuo, and the more independent Namibia National Front (NNF), consisting of a number of small political organizations. In August, the South African Government appointed an Administrator-General, the former Orange Free State Supreme Court Judge, Marthinus Steyn, to administer Namibia until free elections could be held for a constituent assembly which would draw up an independence constitution. Before the appointment of Judge Steyn, the South African Parliament passed the South West Africa Constitution Amendment Act, which empowers the State President of South Africa to make laws by proclamation or repeal existing legislation in Namibia. At the end of August, Proclamation 202 was issued to provide for the Walvis Bay enclave to once again be administered as an integral part of South Africa, rather than from Windhoek. Subsequently, the status of Walvis Bay became a major stumbling-block in the international negotiations about Namibia's future. SWAPO claims that Walvis Bay, the only deep-water port along Namibia's coastline, should still be a part of the country at independence.
Shortly after he took office on 1 September 1977, Administrator-General Steyn took action to repeal several South African laws which were applicable in Namibia. The Immorality and Mixed Marriages Act was abolished on 14 October. A week later, the notorious pass laws were withdrawn, except in the diamond control area along Namibia's southern coast, the curfew zone along the Angolan border, and other areas where military operations are in progress. At the end of the month, authority over Namibia's prisons was transferred from South Africa's Minister of Prisons to Administrator-General Steyn. However, the State President of South Africa retained control over the granting of pardons and reprieves. Then, on 11 November, the Administrator-General repealed the emergency regulations which had been in force in Ovamboland under the provisions of Proclamation R.17 since February 1972, and in Kavango and Eastern Caprivi under the provisions of Proclamation R.89 since May 1976. As a result, the authorities' powers of detention without trial appeared, on the surface at least, to have been drastically curtailed. Whereas Proclamation R.17 of 1972 had provided for the detention incommunicado without trial of anyone for an indefinite period, the law which replaced it, known as AG.9, set a limit of 96 hours for the period during which anyone might be detained incommunicado and without charge. However, events soon showed that the repeal of Proclamation R.17 had little more than a cosmetic effect, as the security police made increased use of Section 6 of South Africa's Terrorism Act, which continues to be applied in Namibia and which, like Proclamation R.17 of 1972, provides for indefinite detention incommunicado without trial.
The way in which the detention laws are used was clearly illustrated in early December 1977, when several SWAPO officials, including the organization's Chairman in Namibia, Daniel Tjongarero, were arrested while travelling from Windhoek to attend a church seminar in Ovamboland. All but one of those
64
arrested were held under the provisions of AG.9 and were released before the end of the 96-hour period of detention permitted under this law. However, one of those held, Bernardus Petrus, was detained under Section 6 of the Terrorism Act and was not released until mid February. He was not charged with an offence. While he was in detention in December, Bernardus Petrus's father brought an action in the Windhoek Supreme Court in an attempt to obtain an injunction to prevent the security police at Oshakati, where Bernardus Petrus was held, from interrogating him unlawfully or from torturing him. In support of his case, Franciscus Petrus produced in court sworn statements made by ten people who claimed to have been tortured by South African security policy at Oshakati detention center and an affidavit signed by one person who had seen Bernardus Petrus in detention and who alleged that he showed signs of assault. Despite this weight of evidence, the judge refused to grant the injunction, on the grounds that the case was not an urgent one. Bernardus Petrus could not be brought before the court to speak for himself because the courts have no jurisdiction over Section 6 of the Terrorism Act.
The affidavits used in the Petrus case were published in booklet form in January 1978 by two White members of the clergy in Namibia, Heinz Hunke and Justin Ellis. In an introduction to the report, which was entitled Torture — A Cancer in our Society, Father Bunke described attempts by the churches in Namibia to persuade the South African authorities to take effective action against those in the security police responsible for the torture of Namibian detainees. He referred to a series of representations made by the churches to the Prime Minister, John Vorster, and other South African officials in 1966, 1971, 1973, 1974 and 1976, all of which had evoked no significant response. He then went on to describe how, in 1977, he had personally taken up the question of torture in Namibia with the newly-appointed Administrator-General, Marthinus Steyn, only to receive the reply that there was no substance to any of the allegations which he mentioned. The South African Government's response to the report was to ban it actually before publication, even though the torture affidavits contained in it had already been used in open court. No investigation appears to have taken place to gauge the authenticity of the allegations, nor does any action appear to have been taken against those members of the security police named in the report as having been personally involved in the torture of detainees. Indeed, recent information from former detainees indicates that the security police officers concerned are still actively employed in Namibia.
On 26 January, shortly after the banning of the report by Hunke and Ellis, Amnesty International appealed to Administrator-General Steyn to establish an urgent and independent inquiry into the use of torture in Namibia. It said that the statements contained in the report were fully consistent with other information about the use of torture in Namibia which had been received over a period of years and which was still being received. The evidence suggested that the use of torture had become more widespread and systematic than ever before. Amnesty International also urged the Foreign Ministers of the five Western nations involved in negotiations about Namibia's future to endorse the call for an inquiry, and said that there could be little hope of reconciliation and peaceful settlement in Namibia unless some way could be found of curbing the excesses committed daily by the South African security police and military forces against
65
the country's inhabitants. Subsequently, it was reported in the Windhoek press that Judge Steyn had declined to initiate an inquiry into the use of torture.
Torture allegations were also made during the course of a number of political trials. In August 1977, Naboth Imene, a Lutheran Church pastor from Ovambo-land, was convicted under the Terrorism Act and sentenced to 5 years' imprisonment by the Windhoek Supreme Court on charges of providing material assistance to SWAPO guerillas. At his trial, he alleged that he had been severely tortured during interrogation at Oshakati in January 1977 and forced to sign a false confession. He alleged that he had been blindfolded and subjected to electric shocks for two days before he agreed to sign the statement.
During the trial of Victor Nkandi in November 1977, two state witnesses called to give evidence against him testified in court that they too had been tortured during interrogation and forced to sign false statements implicating the defendant. Probably as a result of these testimonies, the state decided not to introduce as evidence an alleged confession signed by Victor Nkandi, which would also have been challenged on the grounds that it had been made under extreme duress. When the case came to trial in November 1977, Nkandi had already been in prison continuously for more than two years. He had been arrested in August 1975 after the assassination of Chief Filemon Elifas, the Chief Minister of the Ovamboland "bantustan", and had been detained without trial until the end of February 1976. He was then called as a state witness in the Swakopmund Terrorism Act trial. He refused to testify, claiming that he had been ill-treated in detention. He was treated as a recalcitrant witness by the trial judge, and sentenced to one year's imprisonment for contempt of court. After serving this sentence in Windhoek Prison, he was immediately re-detained by the security police and taken to Oshakati interrogation center in Ovamboland. He was again held without charge or trial for several months before being charged with participation in the killing of Chief Elifas. Nkandi's trial began in November 1977 and was adjourned in mid December. When the trial resumed at the beginning of May 1978, he was acquitted on all charges and finally released. He had by then been in prison continuously for more than two and a half years. He had been adopted as a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty International. An Amnesty International observer, Gregory J. Wallance of the New York State Bar, attended part of the trial proceedings in early December. While in Namibia, Gregory Wallance also discussed the situation of several political detainees with officials from the Administrator-General's office.
Axel Johannes, SWAPO's Administrative Secretary in Namibia, was imprisoned for a lengthy period with Nkandi. Like Nkandi, he had been detained in August 1975 and jailed for one year in March 1976 when he refused to testify at the Swakopmund trial. He, too, was re-detained under Section 6 of the Terrorism Act in April 1978. He was still detained incommunicado and without charge at the end of May 1978.
Further action was taken against SWAPO's internal organization in Namibia in January 1978, when Peter Manning, a white South African working in SWAPO's publicity department, was first detained incommunicado for several weeks and then charged with offences under the South African Official Secrets Act and Terrorism Act. He had been engaged in compiling information about military interrogation centers and the treatment of Namibian civilians by the
66
South African Defence Force based in northern Namibia. However, all charges against Manning were dropped when his case was due to come to trial in April 1978. He was immediately deported on a South African exit permit.
At the end of March 1978, almost the entire internal leadership of SWAPO was detained following the assassination, in Windhoek's Katutura township on 27 March, of Chief Clemens Kapuuo, President of the DTA and the most prominent Black political opponent of SWAPO in Namibia. After the killing, and after clashes between Kapuuo's adherents and SWAPO supporters in Katutura, Administrator-General Steyn introduced Law AG.26 on 18 April to provide for the use of preventive detention. Almost immediately, this law was used to detain at least 10 SWAPO leaders, including Festus Naholo, the organization's Foreign Relations Secretary, and Skinny Hilundwa, SWAPO Regional Chairman. Subsequently, in May, two supporters of the DTA were also put in preventive detention. Under the provisions of Law AG.26, the Administrator-General is empowered to order the detention without charge of anyone he considers to be involved in committing or promoting any act of violence or intimidation. Detainees held under this Law are held incommunicado and denied access to their families or to legal representatives. Detainees must be visited by a medical practitioner at least once every three days and by a magistrate at least once a fortnight. No limit is placed upon the length of time a person may be detained. Provision was made for the establishment of a review committee to consider the grounds for the imposition of each detention order. However, this committee meets in camera and the identities of its members have not been disclosed. The Administrator-General is in no way bound to give effect to the committee's recommendations, and therefore has absolute discretion over deciding how long an individual detainee may be held.
Amnesty International expressed concern to Administrator-General Steyn about his assumption of new emergency powers providing for arbitrary arrest and preventive detention, and urged him, as an immediate measure, to publish a full list of those detained and to permit them to have visits from their families and lawyers. Following his reply, in which he claimed that the emergency powers had been made necessary by a "grave threat" to the peaceful political process, which could not be countered by "normal legal procedures", Amnesty International reiterated its view that the introduction of such legislation would increase the difficulties of achieving peace and reconciliation in Namibia. The organization also told the Administrator-General that, with so many South African security laws such as the Terrorism Act still applicable in Namibia, it was difficult to understand how the normal legal procedures he described could be inadequate. The new emergency-style powers would generally be seen internationally as an attempt by the South African administration in Namibia to undermine and discredit the internal SWAPO organization and to hold SWAPO leaders responsible for political violence in Namibia while simultaneously denying them an opportunity to refute such allegations. Amnesty International called once again for the repeal of Law AG.26 and the release of those detained.
