Spain (the Spanish State)
The Spanish Government, under the centrist administration of Señor Adolfo Suarez, has continued during 1977 - 78 with the very ambitious program of constitutional and legal reform outlined when Señor Suarez took office. The new draft Constitution was published on 5 January 1978. This laid down that Spain should be a parliamentary monarchy with complete religious freedom, and recognized the right to autonomy of the different nationalities and regions under the Crown. In accordance with this scheme, statutes of pre-autonomy have been granted in differing degrees to the provinces and regions.
In October 1977, an all-party agreement known as the Pacts of the Moncloa was signed. By this it was agreed that the parties should cooperate with the Government over passing Bills which would bring about political, economic and social reforms. Under the Pacts of the Moncloa, the Government has promised to extend the rights of freedom of association as defined by the May 1976 Law, to regularize the legalization of political parties and to reorganize the police forces completely.
A further amnesty was granted by Law 46/1977 in October 1977. This was a comprehensive amnesty for political prisoners and refugees, military personnel and those citizens deprived of their rights because of their association, before the establishment of Generalísimo Franco's Government, with banned or disbanded organizations. The amnesty did not cover those convicted or sought in connection with common crimes. Under it, all prisoners for whom Amnesty International was working at the time were set free.
However, the release of political prisoners and the moves towards giving the regions autonomy, as well as the legalizing of political parties and unions, has not meant that the armed conflict between groups such as Euzkadi ta Askatasuna (ETA) - Basque Homeland and Liberty - and Grupos de Resistencia Antifascista Primero de Octubre (GRAPO) on the one hand and the public order forces on the other has ceased. On the contrary, it has remained intense, especially in the provinces of the Basque country.
After the assassination of Señor Augusto Unceta Barrenechea, President of the provincial delegation in Vizcaya, and his two bodyguards, in Guernica in October 1977, the Government was finally convinced of the need to introduce an antiterrorism bill. It received the support in principle of virtually all parties but the severity of the measures proposed has greatly alarmed many of those politicians who had given their consent in principle. The Bill, which at the time of writing is still being debated in the Cortes (Parliament), would provide for the establishment of a special anti-terrorist police squad, with authority to arrest people without warrant and hold them in preventive detention, and with increased powers to tap telephones and open post, as well as censor, to some extent, the reporting of the effects of these powers.
Continuing with the policy of reform, the Ministry of Justice has announced a massive program of legal reform, including items relating to a new code covering prisons, a reform of the law relating to judicial powers and a reform of the procedural codes of the civil and penal law.
In addition, in May 1978, the Cabinet announced that a Bill would be proposed to reform the military code of justice in order to limit military jurisdiction to exclusively military offences.
231
The extent of military jurisdiction is especially relevant in view of the trial in February 1978 of the members of the theatrical mime company called Els Joglars.
In September 1977, Albert Boadella, the director of the company, received official approval from the Ministry of Culture to stage a mime based on the trial and execution in March 1974 of a stateless Pole called Heinz Chez who was court-martialled for murdering a policeman while robbing a bar.
The mime was performed with no opposition from the authorities, civil or military, until, in December 1977, Albert Boadella was interrogated by the military authorities. He and the performers were subsequently charged with insulting the military (Articles 315 and 317 of the code of military justice). Lieutenant General Francisco Coloma Gallegos, now Captain General of the military region where Boadella was arrested, had been responsible in 1974 for confirming the sentence passed on Heinz Chez of death by garotting.
The prosecution asked for a sentence of four-and-a-half years in prison for Albert Boadella and three years each for the others, on the grounds that the mime was insulting to the honour of the military officers who had tried Heinz Chez and that a handbill distributed before the performance had been defamatory.
The day before the trial was due to begin, Albert Boadella and one other defendant escaped to France. Amnesty International sent Maitre Georges Pinet, a lawyer from Paris, to Barcelona to observe the trial. After trying to prevent lawyers and members of the public from entering the courtroom, the military authorities postponed the trial when it was known that two of the defendants had fled. The trial was reconvened a week later, and the remaining four defendants were sentenced to two years in gaol. The sentences have been confirmed and all the prisoners have been adopted by Amnesty International.
The Els Joglars case is a good example of the power which the military still have to intervene in the affairs of civilians, even in a state which, in so many other respects, has altered its laws to protect human rights.
The situation of conscientious objectors in Spain has improved slightly over the period 1977 — 78 but until the Spanish Government drafts a law which permits alternative service and conscientious objector status on other than purely religious or ethical grounds, the position of conscientious objectors will remain equivocal. In the period under review, according to Amnesty International's information, the military authorities have turned a "blind eye" to cases where conscripts have claimed conscientious objector status on grounds not admitted in law, but there have been exceptions. For example, in October 1977, Amnesty International protested to the military authorities over the treatment of 10 conscientious objectors adopted by the organization who were being held in the Castillo de San Fernando in Figueras for refusing to obey orders. They were not allowed to receive visits from their lawyers, contrary to Article 14 of the United Nations International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, ratified by Spain in April 1977. They were subsequently released without being tried, under the October 1977 amnesty.
In the period under review, as in previous years, there have been frequent allegations of inhuman and degrading treatment in all kinds of Spanish prisons. There have also been isolated instances of torture — for example, the case of Agustín Rueda, a member of the Confederación Nacional de Trabajo (CNT), who was beaten to death in the Carabanchel prison in April 1978, following the
232
discovery of an escape tunnel. The director of the prison was dismissed and placed under arrest and the guards responsible have been suspended pending an inquiry.
The Spanish Government has made serious efforts to reform the prison system - for instance, by appointing Señor Carlos Garcia Valdés as Director General of the Prison Service; he succeeded Señor Jesús Haddad, assassinated by GRAPO guerillas, reportedly in revenge for Rueda's death. Señor Haddad had been in the process of drawing up a comprehensive reform plan for the entire prison system at the time of his death and Señor Garcia Valdés has declared that he intends to press ahead with this project.
Amnesty International continues to receive - and to be perturbed by - periodic reports of maltreatment of suspects and demonstrators by police and public order forces. However, they are fewer than in previous years and cannot be considered to suggest that torture is used systematically.
In April 1978, the Government announced its intention to present a draft Bill to abolish the death penalty. However, welcome though this is, Amnesty International is concerned at the harshness of the proposed penalties that would replace execution. Forty years' imprisonment would be the sentence for capital crimes and the Bill will stipulate that the prisoner could not be pardoned or amnestied until a minimum of 20 years of that sentence had been served.
