Libya (the Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriyaj
During 1977-78, Libya continued to be governed by a five-member General Secretariat of the General People's Congress, headed by Colonel Mu'ammar A1 Gaddafi. Principles of Islamic law were introduced when the interim Constitution of 1969 was replaced by the Qur'an. The work of the judiciary has, however, not been greatly affected by this change and the system of Shari'a (Islamic) Courts has not been introduced.
During the past year, work continued for the one hundred or so prisoners adopted by Amnesty International groups. These included people charged with membership of illegal political parties and also people arrested after taking part in demonstrations, many of them sentenced to life imprisonment.
At the end of December 1977, Amnesty International learned of the release from prison of a group of about ten Libyans, mostly former employees of the Occidental Petroleum Company, who had been arrested in September 1975 and never charged or tried. It also learned of the release during 1977 of two diplomats whose cases it had also taken up.
After a large number of executions took place during the first half of 1977-believed to be the first in the country for 23 years—no more appear to have been carried out. It is a matter of concern to Amnesty International, however, that two men who were charged with membership of illegal Marxist political parties and sentenced to death in February of 1977, Abdul Ghani Khanfar and A1 Mabrouk Abdul Mawla A1 Zoul, have not had their sentences commuted, nor have five people who had death sentences passed on them in 1969.
In August 1977, Amnesty International sent a report to Colonel Mu'ammar A1 Gaddafi, based on the findings of a mission to Libya in October 1976 and drawing attention to the large number of people being held for political reasons, often for lengthy periods before being brought to trial. It also expressed concern at the inadequacy of legal safeguards, at the use of the death penalty, and at reports of torture.
In December 1977, answer came from the Secretariat of Foreign Affairs, stating that "there are currently no political detainees on any charge in its [Libya's] prisons" and that the authorities "guarantee the prisoners all the necessary means of defence and safeguards of justice adequate to the principles contained in the Declaration of Human Rights. They also allow the accused to contact their lawyers and families as soon as possible with respect to the exigencies of interrogation." The reply also stated that the Qur'an is "the law of society" which "takes into consideration the interest of man".
In its reply in May 1978, Amnesty International reiterated the matters of concern to it in Libya. It stressed that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which the Libyan Government has ratified, guarantee the right to freedom of opinion and expression, as well as the right to a fair and public trial by an independent and impartial tribunal without undue delay, and added that these principles are also consistent with the principles of Islamic Law which the Libyan Jamahiriya is currently applying.
267
Amnesty International pointed out that there were a considerable number of prisoners of conscience in Libya, who had been "arrested, imprisoned, and in some cases actually charged with belonging to a political party which had been declared illegal in the country or for holding or expressing views which oppose those of the government".
In its letter, Amnesty International drew attention to the inadequacy of basic legal safeguards in the country, giving as an instance the case of a group of Libyans held for over two years without charge or trial before they were released. Other prisoners have been held without trial for periods ranging from fourteen months to four years, and in one case a group of 39 people arrested in April 1973 continued to be held in detention for two years after a court had acquitted them. Amnesty International also expressed concern that prisoners were not allowed immediate access to their lawyers and families, as "it is our experience that the ill-treatment of prisoners is more liable to happen in situations where detention procedures are such that a person can be detained without charge or trial for long periods of time and where families and lawyers do not have immediate access to a prisoner."
Amnesty International again expressed concern that a number of political detainees were tried by a People's Court which did not fulfil the standards set by Article 10 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and Article 14 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, since:
(1)	its tribunal is composed of representatives of the Government and not of the judiciary;
(2)	a court cannot be said to be independent when its decisions can be overridden by administrative decision;
(3)	the trials were held in secret;
(4)	no appeals were permitted.
Finally, Amnesty International asked for an assurance that the five death sentences passed in 1969 and the two passed in 1977 would be commuted.
At the time of writing, Amnesty International has received no response from the Libyan authorities to this communication, sent in May 1978.
