Chad (the Republic of)
The political situation in Chad was dominated throughout 1977 and the first half of 1978 by the continuing war between the central Government, led by President Félix Malloum, and the Front de Libération Nationale du Tchad (FROLINAT). The conflict, which began in 1966, intensified considerably during the past year, especially after the reintegration of FROLINAT's various factions into a more unified force under the leadership of Goukouni Oueddei, who had formerly been the leader only of FROLINAT's Second Army in northern Chad. One of FROLINAT's factions, led by Hissène Habré, came to an independent agreement with President Malloum in early February 1978.
By early 1978, Government troops were losing control of many important towns in northern and eastern Chad. In early February FROLINAT forces captured Fada, and on the 17 February 1978 they occupied Faya Largeau, the capital of Chad's northern region (Borkou-Ennedi-Tibesti). More than 1,500 Government soldiers are reported to have been captured when Faya Largeau fell. In February 1978 President Malloum's Government made several attempts to come to terms with the rebels. The first move was to make peace with Hissène Habré. After this, the military Government agreed to an amnesty, announced on 7 February, under which 147 political detainees were released. At the end of February, shortly after the fall of Faya Largeau, the heads of state of Chad, Libya and Niger, together with the Vice-President of Sudan, met at the southern Libyan oasis of Sebha to discuss a possible settlement in Chad and to try to bring about a cease-fire. Following this meeting, a cease-fire was announced in March. However, under the terms of the Sebha agreement, both sides in the conflict were to expel any foreign military personnel working for them, and the cease-fire soon broke down when the Chad Government refused to order the French troops which were supporting it to leave the country. In April, FROLINAT troops resumed their advance into southern Chad and towards the capital, N'Djamena, and by the end of April a considerable French military presence had built up in Chad in support of the central Government.
Preventive detention has been widely used by the central Government to suppress political opposition, and although 147 detainees were released in
42
February 1978, at least 1,000 other prisoners are reported to be still in detention. Some of the detainees released in February had been in prison since the former Government of President Tombalbaye was overthrown in 1975. Among those still detained are believed to be many FRO LI NAT supporters, but it is difficult to determine how many of these are prisoners of war captured by Government forces, and how many were detained because they were thought to be supporters of FROLINAT.
In October 1977, Amnesty International took up the case of Robert Kadjangaba, a known critic of the military Government, who, until 1975, had agitated for the release of political prisoners held by President Tombalbaye's administration (among whom was General Malloum himself). Robert Kadjangaba was arrested in June 1977 and charged with using false documents. He was released in March 1978.
