Togo (the Togolese Republic)
The Government of Togo has continued to be headed by President Gnassingbe Eyadema, who has ruled the country for more than 11 years, since he led a military coup against the former civilian Government. President Eyadema rules the country with the aid of his ministers and members of the political bureau
89
of his political party (the only one permitted in Togo), the Rassemblement du Peuple Togalais (RPT). His control of the country was only briefly shaken in 1977 when a group of foreign mercenaries made attempts to assassinate him. Their first attempt failed, and they were prevented from entering Togo for a second attempt in October 1977.
Following claims in the British press in February 1977 by Togo's Minister of Information, Monsieur Kwaovi Benyi Johnson, that there were no political prisoners in Togo, Amnesty International was invited to send an official mission to the country. Although a number of prisoners whose cases had been adopted by Amnesty International were released in April 1977, before the mission to Togo took place, Amnesty International learnt of the arrest of some 20 academics who were believed to be detained for producing tracts criticizing the Government. Amnesty International also knew of the cases of a number of longer-term detainees, none of whom had received any kind of trial. Amnesty International's representative, Maitre Marie-Claire Picard, visited Togo at the end of September 1977 and held discussions with the Togolese authorities.
Maitre Picard met members of the Togolese Government, including the Minister of Information and the Minister of the Interior, M. Kpotivi Laclé, and discussed with the President of the Supreme Court the laws under which political prisoners may be convicted. It appears that political prisoners can be charged with the common law offence of "propagation of false news", and that a special Court of State Security exists to try offences against the state, although this has not been used recently. However, most political prisoners are never brought before the courts but are detained indefinitely without trial by the security forces. This practice was justified to Maitre Picard by the fact that Togo is a developing country whose difficulties are different from those of a developed country. Maitre Picard met the President also and explained to him the aims and objectives of Amnesty International.
In October 1977, shortly after the mission to Togo, the Togolese authorities announced the release of 12 of the academics detained the previous April. Several months later, in January 1978, Amnesty International learnt of the release of one of Togo's longest held political prisoners, Abou Boukari Karim, who had been detained continuously without trial since 1971, reportedly for refusing to join the RPT. At the same time, Amnesty International also learnt that a student, whose case it was investigating, had been released in September 1977. He was Paul Kokou Kaledzi, who had been detained in September 1976 after the discovery of a letter which he had written to his brother, in which he criticized the Government. However, by June 1978, Amnesty International had still not heard whether another student, Tcharié Kpemsi, arrested in April 1976 and detained without trial ever since, had been released. His case was taken up for investigation in November 1977.
During the first half of 1978 Amnesty International learnt of the cases of a number of people in Togo who had been detained without charge or trial, apparently for political reasons. In June 1978 the organization was once more in contact with the Togolese authorities about these reports.
