Nicaragua
Despite the ending of four years of martial law and the restoration of constitutional safeguards on 19 September 1977, the human rights situation in Nicaragua deteriorated significantly after the 10 January 1978 "death squad" killing of Dr Pedro Joaquin Chamorro, the Director of Nicaragua's leading independent newspaper, La Prensa and Chairman of the coalition of opposition parties, Union Democrática de Liberación (UDEL).
Amnesty International has focused its attention during the past year on cases of arbitrary detention without charge and of alleged torture, as well as on numerous instances of the detention, disappearance and violent death of peasant farmers in isolated rural areas.
In October 1977 the organization wrote to the President of the Republic, General Anastasio Somoza Debayle, acknowledging the repeal of emergency measures, but pointing out that its report, The Republic of Nicaragua (published in June 1977) had emphasized human rights violations which were only indirectly related to the special measures and would not automatically be brought to an end by the repeal of those measures. Subsequent further allegations of torture, arbitrary detention and abuse of the Police Court system would suggest that the situation actually improved only inasmuch as trials of civilians by military courts and censorship of the press have ended (radio and television censorship continues under the Broadcasting Law).
In a statement dated 21 December 1977—a notarized copy of which was received by Amnesty International-René Espinosa Pineda, a civilian employed
132
by the Nicaraguan Office of National Security, told of his personal contact with several prisoners considered to have disappeared after their unacknowledged detentions in rural areas. He named five prisoners held in a secret cell under the guard post at the Military Academy in Managua. One of them was Juan Francisco Tijerino Membreno, who has been the subject of many appeals since his arrest and disappearance in January 1977. Also named were 10 prisoners held in a cell in the Armed Forces section of Managua's international airport and three in a former Managua police post. He stated that he had seen prisoners in basement cells in the Office of the National Communications Corps and in the installations of the Office of National Security on the rim of the volcano Loma de Tiscapa, which overlooks Managua. Sr Espinosa gave the following details about rural detention centers:
"In Chilamete, Zelaya, there is a sort of corral, closed with wire mesh on top and completely covered with canvas on the top and the sides . . . This enclosure is about 20 metres long, and there are about 50 men held there . . . I personally witnessed the opening of a huge grave like the ones they dug for the victims of the Managua earthquake, by a mechanical digger like the ones DENACAL [a construction agency] uses to dig ditches. The grave was about 50 metres long, and innumerable campesinos are buried there."
Church and diplomatic sources confirmed the death (or release) of some of the 350 and more campesinos known to Amnesty International who were arrested and disappeared in 1976 and 1977. It was confirmed that 18 campesinos who were the subject of Amnesty International appeals were released after over two years' detention in rural camps and in secret detention centers in Managua. Following an appeal in Amnesty International's Newsletter (September 1977) on behalf of the detainee Solomon Perez Lopez and five members of his family, church members wrote that:
". . . his community found him among others in a mass grave close to the chapel where he was a Delegate of the Word of God [a catechist and community religious leader] . . . perhaps some day justice will be done. Very probably the members of Solomon's family are with him
Nicaraguan church sources estimate that up to 3,000 campesinos have disappeared after arrest or been killed outright during National Guard counter-insurgency operations since 1974.
On 11 January 1978, following a Government statement that the inquiry into the murder of the opposition leader Dr Pedro Joaquin Chamorro would be carried out exclusively by the National Guard, Amnesty International cabled President Somoza Debayle, saying that it "condemns all judicial or extra-judicial executions by governmental agencies or others", including "murders for the purpose of political coercion tolerated by governments". The cable expressed concern that world opinion would not accept the findings of a closed inquiry and urged the presence of international representatives. At the time of writing, international participation in the inquiry has not been accepted and findings have been inconclusive.
The murder of Dr Chamorro was immediately followed by massive, and in some cases violent, protests in which President Somoza was accused of direct
133
responsibility for the murder and his resignation was demanded. Riots in Managua and elsewhere led to the burning of many of the industrial and commercial firms in which the Somoza family is a principal shareholder. In unprecedented cooperation between trade unions and private businesses, a twenty-day general strike crippled the commerce of most of the country in January and February 1978, in protest at the murder. Similar sporadic strikes, mass demonstrations, and acts of violence by the organization called the Sandinist Front for National Liberation (it is significant that this now receives support from both far left and conservative elements) have continued until the time of writing, and the National Guard has responded with steadily increasing violence.
Amnesty International at present has 96 cases under investigation or adoption in Nicaragua, most of them involving campesinos whose detention has not yet been acknowledged. Frequent interventions have been made on behalf of political and trade union activists held incommunicado, as there are still regular reports of torture.
