Rhodesia/Zimbab we
Despite the release of some 700 political detainees in April and May 1978, there were increasingly ominous signs throughout the year that progress towards African majority rule and an independent Zimbabwe would not be achieved without further bloodshed and perhaps even a civil war between rival nationalist organizations. After the internal settlement agreement between the White minority Government and three Black political leaders — Bishop Abel Muzorewa, the Reverend Ndabaningi Sithole and Chief Jeremiah Chirau — in March 1978, the split within the nationalist movement deepened. From then on, Bishop Muzorewa's United African National Council (UANC) and the Reverend Ndabaningi Sithole's section of the Zimbabwe African National Union (ZANU) were aligned with Ian Smith's Rhodesian Front (RF) in trying to obtain acceptance, both within Rhodesia and internationally, for progress towards majority rule within the framework of the internal settlement proposals. In contrast, the Patriotic Front (PF) led by Joshua Nkomo and Robert Mugabe, which was not a party to the internal settlement agreement, continued to increase its armed struggle, not only against the Smith régime, but also against those Black political organizations that had become associated with it.
69
Following the conclusion of the internal settlement agreement, an interim Government was established under an Executive Council consisting of four members - the Prime Minister, Ian Smith, Bishop Muzorewa, the Reverend Ndabaningi Sithole and Chief Chirau. An 18-member Council of Ministers was also established, comprising nine Whites appointed by Ian Smith and nine Blacks appointed, three each, by the three black members of the Executive Council. Two ministers - one Black and one White - were appointed with joint responsibility for each of the nine ministries.
The internal settlement agreement was concluded in Salisbury only after a series of protracted negotiations involving the British and American Governments, the five "Front-line" states and the South African Government, as well as the Rhodesian Front and African nationalist organizations. In September 1977, the British and American Governments put forward joint proposals for a settlement in Rhodesia which, if accepted, would have led to the formation of a transitional Government under British administration to take Rhodesia to independence at the end of 1978. However, the proposals were not acceptable either to the Prime Minister or to the Patriotic Front.
One of the first actions of the interim Government was to announce the release of political detainees as an attempt to win popular support within Rhodesia and to convince the African population that real progress to majority rule could be made under the internal settlement. During April and May 1978, some 700 political detainees were released out of a total of 950, on condition that they agreed not to engage in activities described as unlawful or subversive, but which were not actually defined. In addition, the new Government revoked more than 250 restriction orders which had been issued against former detainees, but no moves had been made by the end of June 1978 to release the country's convicted political prisoners, then estimated to number more than a thousand. Bishop Muzorewa and the Reverend Ndabaningi Sithole also let it be known that they would refuse to sign warrants for the execution of prisoners sentenced to death for political offences. However, it was not made clear whether such political prisoners were to be granted an indefinite stay of execution or whether their sentences had been formally commuted to terms of imprisonment. Certainly, death sentences were still being passed by Rhodesia's courts on individuals convicted of political offences involving violence even after the formation of the interim Government.
Most of the detainees who were released in April and May 1978 had been adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International. Those freed included many long-term detainees - people such as Boniface Mhaurwa Gumbo and Amos Mkwananzi, both of whom had been detained without trial continuously for more than 14 years. The 250 or so detainees who were not released at that time were transferred from various prisons throughout Rhodesia to Wha Wha Detention Camp, near Gwelo. Among them were the Reverend Canaan Banana, Vice-President of the African National Council at the time of the Pearce Commission's visit to Rhodesia in 1971-72, who, in early 1977, founded the People's Movement, a political organization aligned with the Patriotic Front. Those still in detention also include many long-standing supporters of the Zimbabwe African People's Union (ZAPU) - one of the organizations making up the Patriotic Front - who had been detained for several years in the 1960s and
70
early 1970s, released at the end of 1974, and then re-detained during a wave of arrests of ZAPU supporters in July 1977.
Although no new restriction orders were issued against the detainees who had been released, many of them were sent to live in the so-called "protected villages" scattered throughout north-eastern, eastern and south-eastern areas of Rhodesia. Information reaching Amnesty International indicated that the situation of such ex-detainees was a perilous one. Many claim that they were effectively confined within individual "protected villages", where they could find no employment and had to rely on relatives for their subsistence. Many allege also that they were subject to threats and intimidation by Rhodesian security forces and it was commonly reported that ex-detainees arrived home to find that their property had been destroyed, their cattle killed and crops burnt, yet they received no compensation. Wherever possible, ex-detainees stayed in or tried to return to the towns where they were not so obviously at risk from the security forces or from nationalist guerillas from rival political organizations.
Conditions generally in the "protected villages" and "consolidated villages" were reported to be unsatisfactory by both African and expatriate European sources. At the end of May 1978, there were an estimated 500,000 African civilians living in such villages in the so-called "operational" areas, where Rhodesian security forces have powers analogous to martial law. In these areas, most aspects of daily life are controlled by the Rhodesian authorities, who may, at their discretion, impose collective punishments, impound all foodstuffs, crops and cattle and limit all movement. Typical of the conditions experienced by African civilians in the operational areas were those imposed in the Maranke Tribal Trust Land (TTL) and the Mukuni African Purchase Area (APA), southwest of Umtali, in January 1978. In a document issued in both English and Shona, the local inhabitants were warned that from dawn on 20 January 1978 they and their livestock would be subject to an 18-hour curfew each day, while children under 16 could not leave the kraal area at any time. Those who broke the curfew, they were warned, like anyone who went to or near high ground, would be shot on sight. All schools, stores and grinding mills were closed, and the use of vehicles within the TTL and APA was prohibited. The authorities stated that these conditions were being imposed because the people of Maranke and Mukuni had continued to feed, shelter and assist nationalist guerillas, and had disregarded previous Government warnings "of the bitter times" that they would suffer as a result. The document concluded: "Only if you co-operate and assist the security forces in eliminating the communist terrorists will any consideration be given to lifting some or all of the above restrictions."
When these conditions were imposed in Maranke and Mukuni, the negotiations which led to the internal settlement agreement were also in progress in Salisbury. The conclusion of that agreement in March appears to have done nothing to alleviate the situation in Maranke and other operational areas. Indeed, information reaching Amnesty International indicated that new "protected villages" were being constructed, and similar punitive actions were being taken against African civilians by Rhodesian security forces, even after Bishop Muzorewa and the Reverend Ndabaningi Sithole joined the Government. Likewise, by the end of May 1978, there was no sign of a reduction in the number of people shot dead by the security forces, allegedly because they were "curfew breakers" or had helped or accompanied
71
nationalist guerillas. In May 1978, for example, the Rhodesian authorities announced that 50 African civilians had been killed in "cross-fire" between security forces and guerillas in the Gutu area, north-east of Fort Victoria. According to eyewitness accounts, however, at least 94 people were killed when security forces opened fire on a crowd of African civilians who were listening to a speech by one nationalist guerilla. Bishop Muzorewa claimed that the number killed was at least 105. The Reverend Ndabaningi Sithole called for an immediate commission of inquiry into the incident. This call was endorsed by Amnesty International but no such action was taken by the Executive Council, of which Ndabaningi Sithole is, of course, a member.
Throughout the year, there have been many reports of killings of African and White civilians, including a number of foreign missionaries and two Red Cross representatives, by nationalist guerillas belonging to the Patriotic Front.
During the year, the Rhodesian Government took measures to prevent detailed information about the situation in the operational areas reaching the outside world. A number of press correspondents were summarily deported because of their reporting of events, and stricter censorship was introduced to ensure that all journalists' reports about the war situation were first submitted for approval to the Rhodesian Department of Information before publication. Severe action was taken also against the Catholic Commission for Justice and Peace in Rhodesia, a church organization which in previous years had gained a reputation for investigating and publicizing alleged torture, atrocities and killings by the security forces. An American nun, Sister Janice McLaughlin, who worked in the Commission's Salisbury headquarters, was arrested and charged with compiling and disseminating reports about the activities of the security forces. She was charged under the Law and Order (Maintenance) Act but, shortly before her trial was due to begin, was declared a prohibited immigrant and immediately deported.
Three other members of the Commission, including its Chairman, John Deary, were charged under the Official Secrets Act and with contravening financial control regulations when bringing funds into Rhodesia for the work of the Commission. After a short time in detention, they were each granted bail. However, before their cases could come to court, the charges against them were dropped in May 1978. The files of the Commission, which are reported to contain detailed complaints from African civilians concerning ill-treatment by security forces, were impounded by the security police.
In September 1977, Amnesty International made public three detailed statements by political detainees alleging torture by Rhodesian security police. In all three cases, the detainees claimed that they had been subjected to severe beatings and electric shock torture, and that they had signed false confessions under duress, in which they admitted recruiting nationalist guerillas. This offence, under the notorious Law and Order (Maintenance) Act has, since November 1974, carried a mandatory death penalty. In all three cases, the individuals concerned had been discharged before their cases came to court because of the lack of evidence against them, but they had not been released. Instead, they had been served with detention orders of indefinite duration, signed by the Minister for Law and Order.
More information about torture and ill-treatment was published in November
72
1977 by Ross Baughman, a photographer working for the Associated Press news agency, who accompanied a Greys Scouts unit of the security forces on a three-day operation in the Lupane area of south-west Rhodesia. Ross Baughman claimed to have witnessed the torture during interrogation of a number of African civilians who were suspected of possessing information about the movements of nationalist guerillas. He produced photographs which showed Africans being interrogated at gun-point, with nooses tied around their necks. He alleged that at least one civilian died under interrogation. In response to the international publicity surrounding Ross Baughman's revelations, the Rhodesian authorities announced that there would be an official inquiry and that until it had completed its work the matter would remain sub judice. Subsequently, they claimed that Baughman had misrepresented the facts and exaggerated reports, and stated that it would be necessary for him to return to Rhodesia to attend a court martial of those members of the security forces involved. He refused to return on the grounds that his safety could not be guaranteed, with the result that no court martial took place.
During the year, Amnesty International groups helped some 600 prisoners of conscience in Rhodesia. In addition, substantial relief was made available by the organization, both to the families of political prisoners and for legal assistance.
