Somalia (the Somali Democratic Republic)
Amnesty International's concerns in Somalia are the indefinite detention without trial under harsh conditions of opponents of the Government's policies, unfair trials by the National Security Court for offences which are, in some cases, political, and the use of the death penalty.
Somalia is ruled by the Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party, which was established by President Siyad Barre in 1976 to replace the predominantly military Revolutionary Council. During 1977, the country gave increased support to the Western Somalia Liberation Front, fighting for control of the Somali-populated areas of the Ogaden in Ethiopia, and in February 1978 officially committed regular troops to the fight. The expulsion of Soviet and Cuban military officials from Somalia and the renunciation in November 1977 of the USSR-Somalia Declaration of Friendship, did not lead to these ties being replaced by similar ones with the West. Somali army and guerilla forces suffered a major defeat in the Ogaden by the Cuban-reinforced Ethiopian army, although the feared invasion of Somalia by Ethiopian troops did not take place.
On 9 April 1978 there was an unsuccessful coup attempt by a section of the armed forces. The Somali Government stated that 20 people were killed and 24 others wounded. The alleged plotters were arrested and President Barre said that they would be brought to trial. An unknown number of arrests took place immediately after this incident.
Amnesty International groups went on working on behalf of 22 prisoners in Somalia about whom there was information. Most of them had been held in Lanta Bur prison but in mid 1977 were transferred to Labatan Jirow military camp
76
near Baidowa, where conditions were slightly better. They are reported to be still incommunicado and family visits are forbidden. Medical treatment appears to have improved, and some correspondence may be permitted. They have been held for periods ranging from one to five years. Amnesty International is not able to estimate the total number of political prisoners in Somalia, but there are said to be at least several hundred. Amnesty International received an unconfirmed report that many political prisoners who were members of the armed forces had been freed on condition that they fought in the Ogaden conflict, but otherwise Amnesty International has heard of the release of only two of its adopted prisoners in 1977-78, Yusuf Hersi, a medical doctor who was detained in May 1976 and freed in April 1978, and Abdulghani Sheikh Ahmed, former Minister of Justice and Religious Affairs, detained for the second time in 1975 and freed in May 1978.
Amnesty International's 13 adopted prisoners of conscience in Somalia include: Mohamed Abshir Musse, former Police General, Amnesty International prisoner of the month in August 1977, detained since 1973 and previously under house arrest; Mohamed Ibrahim Egal, former Prime Minister, detained in 1976, a few months after he had been released after six years''imprisonment; Mohamed Farah Bashane, former Attorney General, also previously detained from 1971 to 1973; Abdallahi Farah Holif, former Police General and Ambassador to Sudan, detained in 1975; Hassan Aden Wadadin, former Ambassador to Saudi Arabia, detained from 1970 to 1973 and again since 1973; Farah Musse Matan, a United Nations employee detained in 1976. Amnesty International is still investigating nine other cases of people detained or sentenced by security courts, who may be political prisoners.
The Government of Somalia has not signed the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
