Nepal (the Kingdom of)
Despite the release of some prominent political prisoners in 1977, Amnesty International remains concerned at the substantial number of political prisoners still held in Nepal, most of them without trial. It estimates that there are at least 120 such prisoners: some opposition sources put the number at between 300 and
177
400. Most of them are held on specific charges of a political nature under the Raj Kaj Act-the Treason (Crime and Punishment) Act-although the Nepalese Government does not classify them as political prisoners. But political prisoners are often charged with sedition under the Act, which, as defined, includes bringing "into hatred or contempt or [exciting] disaffection towards His Majesty or members of the royal family". Among the cases taken up by Amnesty International are two political prisoners who have been held under the Raj Kaj Act without trial since 1974.
On 17 September 1977, Nepal's new Prime Minister, Kirtinidhi Bista (who succeeded Dr Tulsi Giri when the latter resigned) announced that "His Majesty's Government will not keep in detention persons who have no specific charges against them": only prisoners charged with specific criminal offences would be kept in jail. Amnesty International cabled King Birendra on 22 September 1977 welcoming the new Government's announcement and urging him to consider reviewing the cases of political prisoners held for years without trial under the Raj Kaj Act.
After the September 1977 announcement, there was an official statement that 39 political prisoners had been released. They included Krishna Prasad Bhattarai, former Secretary General of the Nepali Congress Party. He had spent a total of 14 years in detention without trial since 1960. Amnesty International was able to confirm that 11 prisoners held under the Security Act whose cases it had taken up, had been released.
On 21 September 1977, King Birendra declared an amnesty for 15 workers of the banned Nepali Congress Party charged with anti-national activities, and remitted the sentences of imprisonment imposed on them.
The trial of B.P. Koirala, a former Prime Minister and leader of the banned Nepali Congress Party, continued before a one-man Special Tribunal sitting in camera. Mr Koirala had been arrested in December 1976 on his return to Nepal from India (see Amnesty International Report 1977). On 8 June 1977, King Birendra gave him special - permission to go abroad on parole for medical treatment, after his doctors had reported that he was seriously ill. However, on his return to Nepal on 8 November, he was re-arrested and again brought before the Special Tribunal. His lawyers complained strongly that they were denied access to the court proceedings during his trial. On 25 November 1977, Amnesty International cabled the Prime Minister, Kirtinidhi Bista, urging that Mr Koirala immediately be allowed full consultation with his lawyers and that his case be transferred to an open court, operating according to ordinary procedures of law.
It was later reported that Mr Koirala had again become seriously ill, coughing blood and fainting. In January 1978, Amnesty International members took part in an Urgent Action, appealing for his immediate release on medical grounds. After reports that restrictions were placed on lawyers visiting him, on 13 February Amnesty International again wrote to the Prime Minister, urging that Mr Koirala be allowed to conduct interviews with his lawyers out of the hearing of prison officials.
Mr Koirala was released on parole for medical treatment abroad on 23 February 1978, when the Special Tribunal acquitted him of four of the seven charges against him. In a letter to King Birendra dated 3 March 1978, Amnesty International, while welcoming the release, again called for the case to be transferred
178
to an ordinary court of law. On the same day, the Special Tribunal acquitted Mr Koirala of one of the three remaining charges, but stated that the two pending charges would be taken up again after his return from abroad.
Ganesh Man Singh, a former Cabinet Minister and a colleague of Mr Koirala, remained in prison in spite of a court order of 3 March, acquitting him of the sole charge against him. He had been arrested in December 1976 and brought to trial with Mr Koirala before the Special Tribunal under the Raj Kaj Act. Amnesty International appealed in May 1978 for Mr Singh's immediate release so that he could obtain medical treatment: there were reports that his health was deteriorating because of a kidney disorder.
Although the last execution in Nepal took place in 1962, Amnesty International is still concerned that two political prisoners, Yagya Bahadur Thapa and Bhim Narayan Shrestha, go on waiting for a final decision on their clemency appeal, after their conviction on treason charges in November 1975, when they were sentenced to death. It is particularly concerned at reports that, during their trial, no lawyers were allowed to defend them. Lawyers were allowed at the appeal stage, but were given very little time to prepare the defence. The sentences were confirmed by the Supreme Court in February 1977, and a later appeal to the Judicial Committee, the only authority that can recommend that the King review the sentence of death, was rejected. The clemency petition is, as far as Amnesty International is aware, still awaiting final decision. In December 1977 Amnesty International members took part in an Urgent Action, appealing to King Birendra to show the two men clemency. Amnesty International members had already urged King Birendra to do so on two previous occasions, stating the organization's unreserved opposition to the death penalty.
