Grenada
Although Grenada has a mandatory death sentence for murder, no executions had
123
taken place on the island since May 1962 until 17 November 1977, when four men convicted of murder were executed.
On 22 September 1977, Amnesty International had appealed to the Governor General, Sir Leo de Gale, to commute the death sentence for murder passed on Charles Ferguson. He was due to have been executed on 29 September. He was not executed, but to Amnesty International's knowledge is still under sentence of death. After the November executions, Amnesty International wrote again to the Governor General and to the Prime Minister, Eric Gairy, to express its regret and to urge them to do everything possible to prevent further executions.
On 10 January 1978, Amnesty International addressed another letter to Mr Gairy, urging him to investigate allegations that Kennedy Budhlall, arrested for the murder of Innocent Belmar (acting Minister of Agriculture and a former police officer) had been severely ill-treated immediately after his arrest. Innocent Belmar had been retired from the Grenada Police Force after having been described by the Duffus Commission of Inquiry into police brutality in Grenada as "totally unfitted for any position of authority" (see Amnesty International Annual Report 1975/76). In June 1978, the trial of Kennedy Budhlall and Lauriston Wilson, on charges of having murdered Innocent Belmar, was observed on behalf of Amnesty International by Herbert Semmel, an American lawyer. Amnesty International's interest in the trial was determined by the political background to the case.*
♦On 25 July 1978 the two men were acquitted. Guatemala
On 13 March 1978, the Guatemalan Congress confirmed that General Romeo Lucas Garcia, Partido Institucional Democratico candidate, had won the March 1978 presidential elections. The announced results of the poll were initially contested by the opposing candidates, both army officers. General Lucas Garcia will take office on 1 July 1978, at the end of General Kjell Laugerud Garcia's four-year term.
No prisoners of conscience were adopted by Amnesty International during the period covered by this report (July 1977 to June 1978), but the organization recorded over 300 cases of people who had "disappeared" after being abducted by official or semi-official para-military groups—death squads. Most were murdered within a short time of their detention.
More than 20,000 Guatemalans have died since 1966 at the hands of death squads originally formed to deal with left-wing guerilla activities. They act with complete impunity. An apparent decline in the number of killings early in 1977 had ended by mid summer, when violence increased significantly: 61 death-squad-style killings, in both towns and countryside, were reported in the Guatemala City press in August 1977 alone.
While these death squads consist largely of civilians, they also include members of legally established security forces. Groups such as the so-called Policia Regional are believed to be composed entirely of serving members of the National Police. In addition, groups in the countryside have a quasi-legal status as security forces, as many are attached to administrative districts which are, in fact, large private farms. Civilians appointed as agents of the armed forces—the comisionados
124
militares—dXso have public order powers in town and countryside and may appoint any number of armed assistants. In the more remote areas, especially where left-wing guerrillas are known to operate, illegal detentions, "disappearances" and murder are, as a matter of routine, attributed by local people to uniformed members of the Guatemalan army.
Death squads generally abduct, torture and interrogate their victims before murdering them. Victims' bodies are also frequently mutilated: found headless Lor with hands or limbs severed-in part, to prevent their identification. Often, corpses are found hundreds of kilometres from the place of abduction. There are never ransom demands for those abducted by death squads, and there is rarely evidence that the victims have been robbed.
During the past year, Amnesty International has made frequent interventions when people have been reported detained by death squads, and when there was a chance of their being released. While those who have disappeared in the countryside have generally been found dead within a few days of their detention, prisoners in towns have sometimes been freed weeks after they vanished. Their release is attributed by the press and the prisoners themselves either to the fact that they were abducted in the first place in mistake for someone else, or to public pressure. While Amnesty International knows of no long-term prisoners of conscience in Guatemala, there have been numerous cases of short-term detention followed by murder, or, occasionally, by release.
Nineteen-year-old José Luis Perdomo Orellana, a student at the University of San Carlos in Guatemala City, disappeared on 31 July 1977. He was a former President of the Association of Students of Commerce and a member of its executive committee. He was the subject of Amnesty International appeals; so were other members of the same committee following their disappearance in June 1977, Robin Mayro Garcia and Anibal Leonel Caballeros. The mutilated bodies of both were found later: they had evidently been tortured to death. Amnesty International was informed by the Guatemalan Foreign Ministry in November 1977 that Perdomo Orellana had sought asylum in the Mexican Embassy and had been given safe conduct to Mexico, where he was granted asylum. Although the Guatemalan authorities have not acknowledged that he had been in the custody of any legal police force, Amnesty International believes that his detention, and the disappearance and murder of other students and officials at the University of San Carlos, cannot have occurred without the knowledge and complicity of certain members of the security forces and of the Government.
A teacher at the School of Commerce (part of the Law Faculty), abducted on 12 August, later told the press that he had been taken by masked assailants to a remote country house and told he would be "executed" for his left-wing teaching at the University. A tape-recording of one of his lectures was played, and he was questioned about his relations with student leaders at the School of Commerce, including Perdomo Orellana. He was finally told that he would be reprieved, provided that he stopped teaching and left the country within 60 days. He was then taken blindfolded to Guatemala City, where he was released. Dr Mario Lopez Larrave, ex-Dean of the San Carlos Law Faculty and Guatemala's leading labour lawyer, was machine-gunned to death on 8 June 1977.
Cases of abduction and disappearance in the countryside continued to be the main subject of Amnesty International appeals. As in 1975 and 1976, such cases
125
have been concentrated in the provinces of El Quiche and Alta Verapaz, where the discovery of petroleum and the construction of a new highway are raising land values. A peasant, Antonio Ordonez, was removed forcibly from his home in the village of San Juan Cotzal in El Quiche on 2 June 1977 and has not been seen since. Witnesses claim that he was arrested by the army. Amnesty International has heard that at least 60 other peasants, mostly members of agricultural co-operatives, were abducted and disappeared during 1977 in the Cotzal region of El Quiche-at the behest, it is said, of large landowners in the area who are expropriating lands which traditionally belonged to the peasants.
On 22 February 1978, Amnesty International published an account of 113 death squad killings and disappearances which occurred in the last 3 months of 1977. This document described only typical cases and was not an exhaustive survey. Most of the victims were peasants and members of the urban poor, the killing of whom was apparently tacitly condoned by local and national authorities. The document cites the absence of official comment on the killings and abductions as evidence that "the authorities are with a few exceptions indifferent to the almost daily reports of mutilated corpses of victims of abduction found in and around the capital city, and in the countryside".
A submission was made by Amnesty International on 20 May to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States, including accounts of 240 cases of death squad killings and disappearances occurring from September 1977 until and including March 1978.
