Colombia
A State of Siege has been in force in Colombia since 7 October 1976 under which civilians have been subject to trial under martial law for certain offences. The arrests and short-term detention of up to 1,000 trade unionists under martial law provisions were reported after a general strike on 14 September 1977. Violence in the course of the strike led to at least 37 deaths.
The Liberal Party candidate, Julio Cesar Turbay Ayala, was elected to the Presidency in the June 1978 elections. He succeeds President Alfonso Lopez Michelsen, elected as the candidate of the Liberal Party in 1974.
The cases of 16 members of the union of Indian peasants, Consejo Regional Indigena del Cauca (Regional Council of Indians of the Cauca) who were detained
112
on 21 December 1977 after a dispute over land tenure were taken up by Amnesty International for investigation; all 16 are now at liberty. The organization made several inquiries into alleged cases of torture, including those of two bacteriologists, Mauricio Trujillo and Omaira Montoya Hernao. Mauricio Trujillo has made detailed allegations that he and Omaira Montoya were detained together and then tortured by the National Police. He was subsequently brought before a court, but Omaira Montoya disappeared. No information about her fate has been forthcoming, and the authorities deny that she was ever in custody.
During the period covered by this Report non-governmental groups were responsible for numerous acts of violence. Such groups include the left-wing Ejercito de Liberación Nacional (National Liberation Army), the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia) and "M-19", as well as right-wing assassination squads responsible for the killing of peasant leaders in the countryside. In September 1977, a right-wing group posted death threats to 21 newspapermen, informing them that they would be executed for "encouraging subversive violence". In a cable of 15 February 1978 to President Michelsen, Amnesty International urged investigation at the highest level into the killing in his home of a former adopted prisoner of conscience, Wenceslao Lozano, by unidentified gunmen in the last week of January 1978. He was a leader of the peasant organization Asociación Nacional de Usuarios Compesinos (National Peasant Farmers Association).
