Taiwan (the Republic of China)
During the period 1977-78, Amnesty International continued to be concerned about the arrest and detention of suspected political opponents in Taiwan, about the holding of trials by military tribunals and about allegations that some detainees have been maltreated during interrogation.
Taiwan continues to be ruled under martial law more than 29 years after a State of Siege was imposed on the island by the Nationalist Government. Under martial law, people convicted on political grounds—officially of "sedition"—are tried, usually in camera, by military tribunals where the rights to defence are limited. In a statement made in June 1977, the Premier, Chiang Ching-kuo (who was subsequently elected President in March 1978) declared the Government's intention to "safeguard human rights" in Taiwan and commented on the military court's procedures:
190
"The trial proceedings of the military court are open to the public and the defendant is allowed to retain counsel. If the defendant does not accept the judgment of the court at first instance, he is entitled to appeal. If the judgment is upheld upon appeal, the defendant may seek a retrial or an extraordinary trial."
However, according to Amnesty International's information, most trials by military courts are not open and political defendants are seldom granted a retrial. Some rare instances in which selected members of the public were admitted to political trials have been widely publicized by official sources, but even here only some of the court hearings were open and attendance had to be authorized by the authorities.
In his statement, the Prime Minister justified also the continued existence of martial law in Taiwan by the need to "prevent the infiltration and subversion of [sz'c] communist agents" and to "assure the security of the nation and society". According to some observers, the arrests made in 1976 and 1977 are believed to be an attempt by the military authorities to prove the existence of a "communist conspiracy" in the country.
During the past year, several groups of people accused of "pro-communist activities" were convicted on charges of "sedition" in Taiwan. One of them, Tai Yin-wu, a sixty-six-year-old teacher of English from Miaoli (south-west of the capital, Taipei) was sentenced to five years' imprisonment in July 1977 for "attempting to overthrow the government" and "treachery". Arrested in April 1976, he has been adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience. Other arrests made in connection with this case apparently involved more than ten people. According to information received by Amnesty International, Tai Yin-wu was held incommunicado for six months before an indictment was drawn up against him.
During his trial (March-July 1977), Tai Yin-wu was accused of having joined the Communist Party in 1929 in mainland China and of meeting, in 1963, in Hong Kong, a certain Chou Yui-yin, allegedly "a one-time communist", in order to discuss underground activities in Taiwan. No other evidence of his "attempt to overthrow the Government" was apparently brought at the trial. All the evidence of his alleged communist connections was based on the statements of several of those accused with him in the trial, and on his own confession, reportedly extracted from him under torture during pre-trial detention, which he later retracted. In August 1977, Amnesty International sent urgent appeals to the authorities to review Tai Yin-wu's case, urging that he be granted a retrial in an open court. However, his own appeal was rejected in September 1977; in October new appeals were made by Amnesty International for his retrial. At the time of writing this report, however, the authorities have not yet reviewed his case.
In another case adopted by Amnesty International, Tseng Cheng-chin, a wealthy watch dealer from Taipei, was convicted by a military court in July 1977 of engaging in "subversive activities against the Government since 1965 as a communist agent" and sentenced to twelve years' imprisonment, six years' deprivation of civil rights and confiscation of all his properties. As in Tai Yin-wu's case, it is reported that the evidence against Tseng Cheng-chin was based on a confession extracted from him under duress and on his co-defendants' testimonies, and that
191
the court ignored discrepancies between the various statements. In March 1978, Amnesty International learned from official sources that the Ministry of National Defence had ordered a retrial of Tseng Cheng-chin's case because "some evidence against him needed corroboration". At the time of writing this report, the result of the retrial was not known.
Amnesty International was also concerned about the trial of six young men accused of having formed a "People's Liberation Front" (PLF): in January 1978 they were sentenced by a military court to terms ranging from three years of "reformatory education" to life imprisonment. The six were charged with various degrees of involvement in "subversive activities". The alleged leader of the group, Tai Hua-kuang (who was sentenced to life imprisonment) was accused of having set up the PLF, of sending threatening letters to foreign businessmen in January 1977 (to force them to leave Taiwan and stop trading with it), and of planning to manufacture bombs to blow up public buildings. A number of foreign journalists and observers were admitted to two of the trial's last hearings in January 1978 but were unable to check on evidence presented during previous hearings. The defendants pleaded guilty when confronted with their confessions in pre-trial preliminary hearings. However, sources close to Taiwanese exiles abroad have alleged that the public hearings had been rehearsed and the defendants made to confess under duress. According to some reports, the young men were merely political activists who had taken part in the election campaign of an opposition candidate in November 1977. Amnesty International is concerned by these allegations, by the circumstances of the trial by military court and by the fact that evidence has not been made fully public. These six cases are being investigated by Amnesty International groups.
During the period 1977-78, Amnesty International groups have continued to work for 130 prisoners under adoption or investigation. In September 1977, the organization appealed to President Yen Chia-kan to grant an amnesty to political prisoners who have been imprisoned for more than 20 years for alleged pro-communist activities. Most of them are said to be detained in the prison on Green Island, off the south-east coast of Taiwan. Amnesty International groups in various countries made similar appeals to the authorities on behalf of more than 40 individual prisoners who are known to have been imprisoned since the early 1950s. However, these appeals, as well as previous inquiries made by Amnesty International groups about individual cases of long-term prisoners, have generally been ignored by the authorities in Taiwan. In only one instance has Amnesty International learned from official sources of the release of a long-term prisoner: Kuo Chun-hsun was released in 1977, but his whereabouts were not disclosed.
In 1977, Amnesty International also learned of the release of prisoners who had been arrested in the 1960s or early 1970s. They included Hsieh Ts'ung-min, a Taiwanese editor imprisoned for the second time in 1971 (see Amnesty International Report 1977), who was released in August 1977; Ts'ai Ts'ai-yuan, imprisoned since 1962 for involvement in the Taiwan independence movement, was said to have been released in June 1977; Li Yi-ping, arrested in 1969 for organizing a group to assert the rights of native hill-people in Taiwan, was reported to have been released in August 1976. The release of the writer Kuo Yi-tung (pseudonym Po Yang) was confirmed in 1977, as well as the releases of a few other prisoners who had been adopted by Amnesty International.
192
In November 1977, Amnesty International made urgent appeals to the authorities about the health of Yang Chin-hai, a forty-four-year-old Taiwanese businessman serving a sentence of life imprisonment on Green Island for "subversive activities". He claimed during his trial in July 1976 that he had been tortured during investigation, and was subsequently reported to have chest and abdomen trouble. Amnesty International urged the authorities to allow him to return to Taipei for a medical examination by a doctor of his own choice. No response was received to this appeal.
After the presidential elections in March 1978, Amnesty International cabled the Prime Minister, Chiang Ching-kuo, who was due to take office as President in May, urging him on that occasion to grant an amnesty to all prisoners held on political grounds in Taiwan. Amnesty International referred to the Prime Minister's past statements about the respect for human rights in Taiwan and raised in particular the cases of people who have been in detention for political reasons since the early 1950s, as well as of others arrested more recently. Similar appeals were made by Amnesty International groups in various countries. At the time of writing this report, no information had been received about whether President Chiang Ching-kuo intends to declare an amnesty.
