Laos (the People's Democratic Republic of)
The major human rights issue in the People's Democratic Republic of Laos during the period 1977-78 remained the large-scale detention in "re-education" camps of officials and civil servants from the former administration and of people suspected of opposing the present Government.
Two and a half years after the establishment of the People's Democratic Republic of Laos in December 1975, the country has not yet adopted a new constitution and little is known about its laws and judicial institutions. According to a radio broadcast from the capital, Vientiane, on 27 November 1976, the Director of the Office of the Justice Ministry had said at a ceremony two days earlier that, under the new régime, the Justice Ministry had changed its working system and procedures "in accordance with the direction of the Party and Government" and had adopted "draft provisions on the arrest, investigation and judgment of guilty persons"; it had also "worked out regulations on the setting up of people's courts". These draft provisions and regulations, however, have not been made public. In rare cases, sentences passed by people's courts have been officially announced: most of them concerned people accused of attempting to overthrow the Government and involved the death penalty.
This was so in the trial of 49 people which was concluded at the end of April 1978. The official newspaper Sieng Prasasone announced on 2 May 1978 that they had all been arrested on 16 November 1977 and were convicted of "being traitors" and of "intending to destroy the people's democratic administration". Of the 49, eight were sentenced to death, including Khambou Sihalath, identified as the alleged leader of the attempt. The others were sentenced to terms ranging from five years' to life imprisonment. Of the eight sentenced to death, five were tried in absentia and three were present. The sentences were passed by the people's court of Vientiane municipality. In a cable to President Souphanouvong on 4 May 1978, Amnesty International stated its opposition to the death penalty and urged
173
the President to commute these death sentences on humanitarian grounds. At the time of writing this report, no further information was available about the people involved in this case.
During the past year, Amnesty International groups have made inquiries and appeals to the authorities about people arrested on political grounds since 1975. Some of them have been reported missing since their arrest, while others are known to have been sent to "re-education" camps although, in many cases, their present fate is unknown. In December 1977, Amnesty International wrote to the Prime Minister, Kaysone Phonvihane, to inquire about seven medical students who were reported to be missing since they had been sent to a "political seminar" in October 1976. Before their arrest they had been studying medicine at Chinaimo military camp in Vientiane and no news of them has been received since 1976. These cases, as well as those of ex-officials, civil servants and professionals of the former "Vientiane" administration, are being investigated by Amnesty International groups. Among them there are, for instance, three former high-level civil servants from the Ministry of Health, Dr Phoui Phouthasak, Dr Champathong-phet Chantrysak, Dr Thao Phoxay; senior doctors from various hospitals in Laos, including Dr Keo Viengkhot, Dr Pheng Visayphon and Dr Khamlay; as well as many ex-officials and civil servants from the Ministries of Education, Foreign Affairs, the Interior, Public Works, the Economy and Finance, from the Planning Commission and from other similar bodies. Most of them were sent to re-education camps in 1975 and were still reported to be detained or missing in early 1978.
According to various sources, former army officers appear to have been sent for re-education mainly in May and June 1975, while members of the former administration were sent at various times between May 1975 and early 1976. On 14 June 1975, for instance, a group of about 100 officials and civil servants from the police departments under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of the Interior were summoned for a "political seminar" at Done Tiou, near Vientiane, and were apparently led to believe that their "re-education" program would last two months. However, on 24 June, it was announced that they were going to be transferred to another "re-education center" near Viengsay (Sam Neua province, in the north-east); in some 20 cases known to Amnesty International, they were still missing more than two years later. Members of the medical profession and officials from the Ministry of Health are reported to have been sent to "re-education" in October and November 1975. In another case, members of the former National Coalition Consultative Council were called for a meeting at Viengsay at the end of November 1975, but were subsequently kept there for "re-education" after the coalition government was abolished in early December 1975. Although it was announced in May 1976 that a few members of the Council had been allowed to return to Vientiane, there seem to have been very few releases in the past year. The "return" of a group of 101 former officials was officially publicized in January 1977, but a large number of people sent to "re-education" in 1975 were still detained by the end of 1977.
According to foreign observers, the camp population was estimated in 1977-78 at between 40,000 and 50,000. This includes petty offenders, hooligans and drug-addicts who are known to be held in camps near Vientiane. Most ex-officials and civil servants of the former administration are in camps in the north and northeast of the country, in particular in Phong Saly and Sam Neua provinces, along the border with Vietnam.
174
In mid 1978, the People's Democratic Republic of Laos had not yet signed the United Nations international treaties for the protection of human rights.
