Tanzania (the Union Republic of)
There were considerable improvements in the Tanzanian human rights situation in 1977-78. The Government was preoccupied in late 1977 with efforts to control a severe cholera epidemic, and with the completion of elections at all levels of the new political party (Chama cha Mapinduzi [CCM]—"Revolutionary Party"). The formation of this joint mainland-island party on 5 February 1977 led directly to the holding of the first parliamentary elections in Zanzibar since independence, although of the new Zanzibari Members of Parliament to sit in the Tanzanian Parliament, only 15 were elected: 30 were nominated by the Zanzibar Revolutionary Council and others were to be nominated by President Nyerere. The gradual political integration of Zanzibar with the mainland continued — which has meant a degree of liberalization.
Amnesty International's concern as regards Zanzibar has focused on the 1973-74 treason trial (see Amnesty International Reports for 1974-77) — and on the use of torture to obtain "confessions" which were the basis of the evidence on which defendants were convicted of conspiring to assassinate Vice-President Abeid Karume and overthrow the Zanzibar Revolutionary Council; the denial of legal representation except by the prosecuting Attorney General; the imposition of 34 death penalties; the passing of harsh prison sentences of up to 35 years; the detention of 13 people on the mainland, sentenced in Zanzibar in absentia; the unsatisfactory nature of judicial procedures through the political party council and harsh prison conditions.
In August 1977, 12 prisoners were freed after serving their sentences, with remission. On 30 March 1978, the Chairman of the Zanzibar Revolutionary
87
Council, Aboud Jumbe, commuted the three remaining death sentences in Zanzibar. The 13 Zanzibaris held in administrative detention on the mainland since 1972, in connection with the same treason trial, were freed by President Nyerere on 26 April to mark the 14th anniversary of the Union of Tanganyika and Zanzibar into the Union Republic of Tanzania. (Their sentences in absentia in Zanzibar, which included four death sentences, were not, however, lifted.) On Labour Day, 1 May, eight prisoners in Zanzibar, serving sentences of up to 15 years were freed (two others had been freed a little earlier), and 14 others serving sentences of from 30 years to life had their sentences cut to 10 years, starting from the date on which they were arrested in 1972. An amnesty for other prisoners was announced in Zanzibar at the same time, under which 154 criminal prisoners were released.
A number of detainees on the Tanzanian mainland were set free during 1977-78. On 5 February 1978, the first anniversary of the foundation of the CCM, President Nyerere ordered the release of 7,000 petty criminals and 22 detainees. The latter included two prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International - Otini and Mattiya Kambona - who had been held almost continuously since 1967, and two Amnesty International investigation cases.
Among the Zanzibari detainees freed on 26 April was Abdulrahman Mohamed Babu, who had been Amnesty International's prisoner of the month in October 1977. His adoption group in the United Kingdom had organized a petition for his release among academics and prominent Britons, who had earlier appealed to the Tanzanian Government to release him so that he could take up the offer of a university fellowship in the United Kingdom.
The Government also appeared to be taking steps to abolish the use of torture on the mainland by, in November 1976, bringing to trial four "railway detectives" on charges of torturing James Magoti (a bank manager accused of fraud but detained instead of being charged and tried in court). Evidence was given in court by police officers, and corroborated by Mr Magoti himself (who was brought from detention in Ukonga prison to give evidence in this case), that he had been taken from Ilala police station in Dar es Salaam and severely beaten on the legs, ankles and genital organs by these officers. This trial, which has not yet ended at the time of writing, is the first torture trial in Tanzania. Amnesty International believes that the torture suffered by James Magoti and other detainees (one of whom gave evidence to Amnesty International) is inflicted by security officers as a fairly routine measure against those suspected of a serious criminal offence. Political detainees, however, are not, to Amnesty International's knowledge, subjected to this treatment.
Amnesty International groups campaigned from November to January to free political prisoners in Tanzania, especially the Zanzibari cases. Some groups had worked on these cases for several years without any response from the Tanzanian Government, although some received a circular letter from the Minister of Health, dated 25 February 1978, stating that all detainees had an adequate diet and regular visits from doctors, with specialists brought in to deal with any illness. The Minister criticized Amnesty International which, he said, had been "supplied with false and malicious information by persons whose aim is to damage our country in any way possible". According to Amnesty International's information, prison diet and medical attention are far from satisfactory.
88
Amnesty International cabled President Nyerere and Vice-President Jumbe, welcoming the releases and the steps taken by the Government to improve the human rights situation.
Amnesty International is still concerned about the Zanzibar treason trial prisoners still in prison, and about the use of administrative detention. Of the small number of detainees known to Amnesty International, only Gray Mattaka (cousin of Otini and Mattiya Kambona) and Kasella Bantu (a former Member of Parliament, detained for the fourth time in December 1976) - both cases adopted by Amnesty International - can be categorized as political prisoners. Most of the others have been detained for alleged criminal offences but not charged or tried. They are held in harsh conditions and several have allegedly been tortured. Amnesty International is investigating a number of these cases. Indefinite detention without trial continues to be the means favoured by the Government to deal with any alleged offence (including corruption) when it fears that it has insufficient evidence for a trial, although some such people are, in fact, charged and tried in court. Tanzania's Preventive Detention Act does not incorporate in the detention orders the legal safeguards which are included in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (which Tanzania has ratified). The number of detainees in Tanzania (mostly alleged criminal offenders) probably runs to some hundreds, but because the Government does not publish information on detentions, a reliable estimate cannot be made.
On 25 May (African Liberation Day - the 15th anniversary of the foundation of the Organization of African Unity), President Nyerere released 20 members of various southern African liberation movements detained in Tanzania under the Refugee Control Act, on behalf of their respective movements. They included Andreas Shipanga, former Information Secretary of SWAPO (South West African People's Organization), Andreas Nuukwawo, former SWAPO Youth League activist, who had earlier been detained and flogged in Namibia, and nine other SWAPO members arrested in Zambia in April 1976 and later transferred to detention in Tanzania. Others released were members of the African National Council (ANC of South Africa), the Zimbabwe African National Union (ZANU), the Pan Africanist Council of Azania (PAC), and SWAPO who had been in detention in Tanzania for periods ranging from one to seven years. On 26 May Amnesty International cabled President Nyerere, congratulating him on his important step. It also cabled the South African Prime Minister, John Vorster, reminding him of his undertaking after the Vienna talks with the United States Vice-President, Walter Mondale, in May 1977, that if SWAPO detainees in Tanzania were freed, he would seriously consider releasing Namibian political prisoners. Amnesty International urged him to fulfil this undertaking and free all Namibian political prisoners in Robben Island maximum security prison in South Africa, and in Namibia itself. No reply was received.
