Uganda (the Republic of)
Since 1971 there has been in Uganda, under President Idi Amin's military
90
Government, a consistent pattern of gross human rights violations. Amnesty International's concerns in Uganda during 1977-78 were: the systematic use of torture, large-scale arrests and killings by the security forces, indefinite detention without trial, unfair trial of prisoners of conscience, and the use of the death penalty. The mass killings of early 1977 which followed the murder of Archbishop Janani Luwum were not repeated, but gross violations of basic human rights persisted. In January 1978, on the 7th anniversary of his coup d'état, President Idi Amin declared 1978 a year of "peace, love and reconciliation". This did not, however, benefit the hundreds of unknown victims of the security forces who have "disappeared" or been openly killed since then. Killing and looting by the security forces continued.
In March 1978 the United Nations Commission on Human Rights, which had had confidential discussions on human rights in Uganda, announced that it would take "measures" on human rights violations there and in eight other countries. (In May 1977 Amnesty International had submitted a communication to the Commission concerning Uganda.) On 3 April 1978 President Amin announced that he was establishing a Human Rights Committee inside Uganda, whose task it would be to "monitor all contacts between the UN Commission and the people of Uganda". The Committee would consist of "officials from the Ministry of Justice, Defence and Internal Affairs, Foreign Affairs and security organizations like the police, special branch and the State Research Bureau". Such a committee, however, could not possibly act impartially, if it included representatives of bodies alleged to have committed these violations, notably the State Research Bureau and police Public Safety Unit. The killing in March 1978 of the Chairman of the Industrial Court (see below), also indicates that Ministry of Justice officials cannot take measures to protect human rights without fear of reprisal.
As in previous years, adoption of individual prisoners has not been possible in Uganda because of fears of reprisals and also because the number of prisoners who are not murdered in detention is small and information about them difficult to obtain. Amnesty International groups in several countries began, however, to work on Uganda Country Action dossiers in July 1977 (see the Introduction to this section on Africa). Special campaigns were undertaken in connection with several incidents in 1977-78, in which groups protested to the Uganda authorities, distributed information in their own countries and sought to involve other concerned individuals and organizations in their appeals and publicity. These incidents were: the secret execution of the playwright John Male, the National Theatre Director Dan Kintu and the Ministry of Culture Under-Secretary John Sebuliba on 23 July 1977; the reported killing, on 14 September, of Robert Scanlon, a Ugandan citizen of British origin, who had been held since the time of the Commonwealth Conference; the massacre of about 350 Roman Catholics in Masaka in November 1977 -which the Government attempted to connect with the murder of a Muslim businessman; and the killing of the Chairman of the Industrial Court, Raphael Sebugwaawo Amooti, on 13 March 1978, reportedly after he had given a judgment unfavourable to an army officer.
An Urgent Action was also undertaken on 6 September 1977, appealing for the commutation of death sentences on 12 Ugandans alleged to have plotted to overthrow the régime in February of that year in collaboration with Archbishop
91
Luwum, who was murdered in February. They were tried by secret tribunal, denied legal representation and later executed in public, despite appeals from the Chairman of the Organization of African Unity, the President of Liberia, and other African leaders, as well as from Amnesty International. Those executed included Abdalla Anyuru, retired Chairman of the Uganda Public Service Commission, John Olobo, Assistant Commissioner of Labour, a businessman, Ben Ongom (known to have been severely tortured), the Chief Schools Inspector, Y. Y. Okot, five senior police and army officers, and two school headmasters. They were among the victims of the massive elimination of suspected opponents of the régime, beginning in February 1977, which led to the massacre also of several thousand members of the Acholi and Langi ethnic groups during the ensuing four months.
Also imprisoned were a number of Kenyans (most of whom were later freed, after an agreement with Kenya on the establishment of diplomatic relations following the collapse of the East African Community), some foreigners (such as Mark Elias, a Briton arrested in March 1977, and Solly May, arrested in July 1976 and freed in June 1978) and an unknown number of Ugandans, most of whom were killed. Some Kenyans who escaped from a secret detention house on Kololo Hill in September 1977 stated that 186 Ugandans were killed with hammers at the same time as Robert Scanlon.
More recently, a hundred or more Acholi and Langi were reported to have been massacred in the north in reprisal for a British Broadcasting Corporation broadcast by former President Milton Obote on a visit to London in February 1978, and in April 1978 some 54 Roman Catholics in Masaka were arrested and subsequently disappeared. The names of Ugandans killed in custody are rarely known - one exception is Siriyo Nyeko, once Uganda's representative at the now defunct East African Legislative Assembly, who was murdered shortly after arrest in July 1977. Arbitrary arrests and killings are common throughout Uganda; in Kampala dead bodies are often seen in the streets. In April 1978, numerous people in the area of the military barracks in Kampala were arrested after the officers' mess had been broken into and property damaged. Young and old people of both sexes were arrested and released only on payment of large sums of money in supposed compensation for the damage. The security forces frequently break into homes, demand alcohol and other goods, rape women and kill those who resist. There is little evidence that any serious attempt is made to discipline the security forces or bring to justice any officers alleged to have ill-treated or killed civilians. In April and May 1978, there were several transfers and demotions of senior officials on the grounds that they had committed criminal offences or mistreated civilians, but no prosecutions before any independent judicial body are expected to take place. Similar arrests followed an inquiry in 1975 into cases of disappearances, but the report was suppressed and the officers who were tried by a military tribunal (consisting of their colleagues) were all acquitted.
Amnesty International also took action in 1977-78 to assist some Ugandan refugees, in Kenya in particular. Following rumours that some Ugandans might be subject to refoulement (repatriation) against their will, the organization asked the Kenya Government not to force any Ugandan refugee to return to Uganda. The Government gave an assurance that no bona fide refugee would be repatriated.
92
The situation of some 10,000 or more Ugandan refugees in Kenya continued to give cause for concern.
On 16 June 1978, the United States Section of Amnesty International presented a testimony on human rights violations in Uganda to the United States House of Representatives International Committee on Trade and Economic Policy. The report, prepared by the Research Department in the International Secretariat of Amnesty International and released internationally, describes in detail the overthrow of the rule of law in Uganda, widespread murder by the security forces, the institutionalized use of torture, and the régime's constant disregard for the extreme concern expressed internationally. It concluded that "there is good reason to fear that unless international pressure about the human rights situation in Uganda increases, human rights violations of this nature and on this scale could continue in Uganda for a long time to come."
