Congo (the People's Republic of)
The aftermath of the assassination of President Marien Ngouabi on 18 March 1977 has continued to influence events in the Congo, and in early 1978 a further group of people were tried and convicted for complicity in his assassination. Soon after the death of President Ngouabi, the governing central committee of the country's only legal political party, the Congolese Workers' Party (Parti Congolais du Travail — PCT) handed over power to a special Military Committee of the Party, which since then has been the main decision-making body in the Government. In April 1977 the Military Committee appointed Colonel (now General) Joachim Yhombi Opango as the new Head of State. He announced that he would continue to pursue the objectives of the Congolese revolution and the policies of the late President Ngouabi, but in practice President Yhombi Opango has used institutions such as the Party, the militia and the army to impose his own brand of firm military rule on the country. As well as establishing close ties with Cuba, he has maintained Congo's traditional links with France.
In late 1977 Amnesty International groups took up for investigation the cases of a number of prisoners who had been accused of complicity in the assassination of President Ngouabi. In the aftermath of the assassination, more than 20 people are known to have appeared before a court martial, and at least 30 others were detained without trial. Among those brought before the court martial was a former head of state, Alphonse Massamba-Debat, who was found guilty and immediately executed. Several members of the security forces also were immediately executed; others were sentenced to terms of imprisonment.
Detainees brought before the military tribunal were not given any chance to defend themselves, nor were they allowed to appeal against their sentences. On 28 March 1977, four civilians received life sentences from the tribunal for their alleged complicity in President Ngouabi's assassination. They included Professor Pascal Lissouba, former Prime Minister of the Congo (from 1963 until 1966), and Claude-Ernest Ndalla, former First Secretary of the PCT. In the ensuing months, Professor Lissouba, who is a well-known geneticist, is reported to have been subjected to particularly harsh treatment, and although he suffers from a kidney
45
ailment he has been refused all medical treatment. In May 1977, Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to treat Professor Lissouba more humanely.
In December 1977 Amnesty International took up for investigation the cases of three people sentenced to life imprisonment in March 1977, as well as nine others believed to have been detained continuously without trial since March 1977. Pascal Lissouba and Claude-Ernest Ndalla were later adopted as prisoners of conscience.
In January 1978, six of the detainees whose cases were being investigated, together with almost 40 others, were put on trial in Brazzaville, accused of complicity in the assassination of President Ngouabi the previous March. At least five people had already been executed immediately after the assassination and others had been imprisoned. However, there were persistent rumours suggesting that it was not these who were executed but members of the governing Military Committee who had really been responsible for the former President's assassination.
In January and February 1978, 45 defendants appeared before a special Revolutionary Court at which the President of the Supreme Court presided. The prosecution case was put by a Government commissar, Jacques Okoko, and although the defendants were nominally given eight defence lawyers, the latter were not permitted to intervene freely on behalf of their clients, and were apparently only informed of the official charges against the defendants on the third day of the trial. A representative of the International Association of Democratic Jurists who attended the trial stated later that he regretted the restrictions which had been placed on the defendants' right to a legal defence. The prosecution, on the other hand, was able to state its case fully. The proceedings of the month-long trial were broadcast live on Congolese television and radio, and shortly before the end of the trial, President Yhombi Opango made a broadcast in which he stated that he renounced his right as head of state to grant clemency to those condemned by the Court. Sentences were passed on 6 February 1978. Eleven men were condemned to death, one in absentia. The remaining ten were all executed by firing squad the following morning, without having any opportunity to appeal against their sentences. Prison sentences were passed on 18 other defendants: three prisoners were sentenced to life imprisonment, three to 20 years', one to 10 years' and the remaining 11 received suspended sentences. Fourteen others were acquitted. Amnesty International has taken up as investigation cases all those imprisoned as a result of this trial.
Neither the prisoners sentenced in March 1977 by a court martial, nor those convicted by the special Revolutionary Court in February 1978 were given fair trial and an adequate opportunity to defend themselves. None of those sentenced to death or to terms of imprisonment were permitted to appeal against their sentences. In addition, prisoners who had already been convicted of complicity in the assassination in March 1977 were not asked to give evidence at the 1978 trial, and the person allegedly at the heart of the whole plot, Alphonse Massamba-Debat, was executed before he could make any public statement about the case. Finally, Capitaine Kikadidi, who allegedly led the three-man assassination squad, was not present at the 1978 trial, but only one week after it ended the Congolese Government announced that he had been shot dead on 12 February while trying to evade arrest in Brazzaville.
46
On 7 February, when the prison sentences were announced, Amnesty International's Secretary General cabled President Yhombi Opango, asking him to commute the death sentences. After the news of the 10 executions, the Secretary General again wrote to the President, deploring the executions, and regretting particularly that the sentences had been carried out before the prisoners had had an opportunity to appeal against them.
In April 1978 Amnesty International made inquiries of the Congolese authorities about the situation of 300 people from the Angolan enclave of Cabinda who were reportedly detained in Congo in January 1977. No further information about these people was available at the time of writing.
Equatorial Guinea (the Republic of)
Ten years after independence, Equatorial Guinea continues to present major human rights problems. President Macias Nguema's period of rule has been characterized by arbitrary imprisonment and summary killings. The President himself is reported to spend most of his time in a heavily guarded compound at his home town, Mongomo, in the eastern part of mainland Equatorial Guinea (the province of Rio Muni). He rarely leaves this base, although in September 1977 he went abroad on an official visit to the People's Republic of China. Both mainland Rio Muni and the island of Macias Nguema (formerly Fernando Poo) are terrorized by members of the militia known as "Youth Marching with Macias". Throughout 1977 and the first half of 1978, President Macias has continued to persecute former members of the Government and intellectuals who might form a movement in opposition to his rule. Many of them have been killed, particularly members of the Bubi ethnic group from the island of Fernando Poo, whom President Macias has deprived of power in favour of his own ethnic group, the Fang.
Amnesty International received reports of both arbitrary detentions and summary executions in Equatorial Guinea during 1977. Prisoners in the country are divided into three categories: "Brigade A" consists of political opponents (or suspected opponents) of the President, and although they receive no trials, they are all considered to be under sentence of death. "Brigade B" prisoners have committed no major offences against the President, but are considered a threat and detained indefinitely. "Brigade C" prisoners are common-law criminals, many of whom are persuaded to help the prison guards beat and maltreat the Brigade A and B prisoners. One former detainee at Blabich Prison in Malabo (formerly Santa Isabel) reported that, during his four years in prison (1971 — 1975), he counted 157 prisoners beaten to death in the yard outside his cell. Other former Bata Prison inmates have claimed that all prisoners are severely assaulted when they first arrive and that they are beaten regularly during their detention. Beatings are inflicted by criminal prisoners. Amnesty International has been given the names of numerous Equatorial Guineans who have been killed while in detention, but has refrained from making them public for fear that the authorities might retaliate against their families. The total number of detainees in Equatorial Guinea's two main prisons, Bata Prison and Blabich Prison in Malabo, is not known, but despite the high death rate among prisoners, who spend their days doing forced labour, the number of Brigade A and Brigade B prisoners is believed to be very high.
47
As the rule of law appears to have become defunct in Equatorial Guinea, it is impossible to differentiate between "judicial" executions and murders carried out by the National Guard, by members of the "Youth Marching with Macias" movement and by prison guards acting on the order of President Macias. For example, in June 1977, Amnesty International received reports that the populations of two villages, Mbe and Ekokete (both in the Micomeseng region) had been murdered on 4 March 1977, and that the massacre had followed a battle between soldiers and some local people in which two soldiers had been killed.
Between August 1976 and June 1977, ten former members of the Equatorial Guinean Government are reported to have been killed — either by the harshness of prison conditions or by order of the President. At least two of those who died were former Ministers who had been arrested in November 1976 and accused of plotting to overthrow the President. On 21 May 1977, 28 people are reported to have been executed at the prison camp of Bindung, 18 kilometres inland from Bata. Those executed included Jesus Buendi Egli, a former Governor of the Central Bank of Equatorial Guinea, who was arrested during 1976, and, it is believed, Nkoo Ivasa, a former Minister of Finance and Senor Nnangale, a former Chargé d'Affaires at Equatorial Guinea's Embassy in Madrid.
Amnesty International has received other reports of summary executions and murders, although these are often several months, or even years, old: news from Equatorial Guinea takes a long time to filter out via refugees fleeing abroad to neighbouring Cameroun and Gabon. No foreign journalists have been allowed into Equatorial Guinea in recent years. According to some estimates, there are now as many as 150,000 Equatorial Guinean refugees — that is, between one-third and one-half of the country's population at independence in 1968. It is clear that a large proportion of Equatorial Guinea's population has preferred exile to remaining in their own country under the rule of President Macias Nguema. The refugees have not yet been granted official refugee status by either the Camerounian or Gabonese Governments, and sources in Cameroun and Gabon suggest that some refugees in both countries have been harassed, particularly by being prevented from finding jobs or from sending their children to school.
