German Democratic Republic (the)
Amnesty International's principal concerns in the German Democratic Republic (GDR) continue to be the existence of legislation which contravenes the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the United Nations International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ratified by the GDR), the frequent arrest and imprisonment of people for their non-violent exercise of human rights and the retention of the death penalty (see Briefing Paper on the German Democratic Republic). During the year under review (July 1977 — June 1978) there were no legislative or political changes which affected these matters.
212
At present about 200 prisoners in the GDR are under adoption or are having their cases investigated by Amnesty International groups, though this is only a fraction of the total number of prisoners of conscience. The majority of cases taken up by Amnesty International are still those of people imprisoned as a result of trying to exercise their right to leave their country — a right which is in international human rights instruments to which the GDR is party. Other cases include those of people imprisoned for publicly criticizing official policies and practices, conscientious objectors and those of a number of citizens of the Federal Republic of Germany (these are mainly investigation cases) imprisoned on charges of espionage and assisting in escapes from the GDR.
Citizens of the GDR wishing to emigrate must first obtain official permission, which is in most cases refused. Exceptions are normally made only for people above retiring age or those with very close relatives in the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG), some of whom are able to benefit under the "family reunification" scheme provided for in the Basic Treaty of 1973, governing the relations between the two Germanies. Many people at first refused permission to emigrate continue to submit applications - which, in itself, is evidently regarded by the authorities as implicit criticism of the Government - and write letters of protest to leading politicians in the GDR, affirming their right to emigrate by reference to the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (Helsinki 1975) and to the United Nations International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. A number of citizens also try to enlist the support of organizations outside the GDR in their efforts to obtain permission to emigrate.
Citizens of the country who persist in campaigning for exit visas are liable to be arrested and charged either with "incitement hostile to the state" (Article 106 of the GDR Penal Code) or "defamation of the state" (Article 220). Those who correspond with organizations outside the GDR are liable, in addition, to be charged under Article 98 of the Penal Code with "collecting of information", particularly when this contact has led to the publicizing of their situation. Article 98 makes collecting and passing on information suitable for use by organizations officially regarded as hostile to the GDR punishable by two to twelve years' imprisonment.
Typical of prisoners of conscience convicted of these offences and adopted by Amnesty International are Gustav and Margit Otte. After submitting, without success, more than 16 applications for permission to emigrate from the GDR they wrote to the Minister of Internal German Affairs in the Federal Republic of Germany and their story was publicized in the newspaper Bild Zeitung in the FRG. They were arrested on 18 August 1977 and sentenced on 23 January 1978 to five years' and four-and-a-half years' imprisonment respectively, for "incitement hostile to the state" and "collecting of information".
A number of GDR citizens, frustrated by their failure to obtain exit visas through the prescribed channels, have, during 1977 — 78, publicly demonstrated about their wish to emigrate, and have subsequently been charged under Article 214 of the GDR Penal Code with "encroachment on the social or public activity" of GDR citizens. Among such would-be emigrants were Angelika and Hans-Jurgen Gerdes, who, on 2 December 1977, demonstrated with their children in the Alexanderplatz in Berlin (capital of the GDR), carrying a banner bearing the words, "We are only four and we want to go over there, let us out, we will
213
never come back." They were arrested immediately and both sentenced on 17 February 1978 to 18 months' imprisonment on charges under Article 214 of the Penal Code. Amnesty International has published photographs of their demonstration and arrest as part of an action to achieve their release.
Because it is all but impossible for most GDR citizens to emigrate legally, a large number of people try to leave the GDR without the required permission, an offence punishable under Article 213 of the GDR Penal Code ("illegal crossing of the frontier") by up to five years' imprisonment. If they attempt to leave the country with the assistance of escape organizations or of other individuals, they are liable in addition to be charged (under Article 100 of the GDR Penal Code) with forming "contacts hostile to the state". Those assisting their escape are liable to be charged under Article 105 of the Penal Code with "anti-state trafficking in persons", regardless of whether their motives were humanitarian or mercenary. Adopted prisoners in this category include, at the time of writing, Ekhardt Goldack, Evelin Helmstedt and Jürgen Winkler.
In March 1977, Ekhardt Goldack (a citizen of the FRG) tried to smuggle his fiancée, Evelin Helmstedt, out of the country in the boot of his car with the help of a friend, Jürgen Winkler. All three were arrested at the frontier. Evelin Helmstedt was sentenced to two-and-a-half years' imprisonment for "illegal crossing of the frontier" and "contacts hostile to the state". Ekhardt Goldack and Jürgen Winkler were sentenced to three-and-a-half years' and two-and-a-half years' imprisonment respectively for "anti-state trafficking in persons".
In addition to those imprisoned for expressing opinions on the right of emigration, Amnesty International has adopted a number of people imprisoned for expressing views on other subjects. The best known such adoption is that of Rudolf Bahro, a Marxist dissident who wrote a book entitled Die Alternative (The Alternative), containing criticism of communism as practised in the GDR and expressing sympathy with the Yugoslav model of communism. On 22 August 1977 an interview with Rud-olf Bahro about his forthcoming book was published in the periodical Der Spiegel in the FRG. On 23 August, he was arrested and charged with "intelligence activity". He was tried at the end of June 1978 and sentenced to eight years' imprisonment.
All male citizens of the GDR between the ages of 18 and 24 are liable for conscription. The alternative service available for those not willing to bear arms consists of such work as building barracks, constructing roads for military purposes, etc. Early in 1978, according to the Berlin newspaper, Volksarmee (People's Army), this alternative service was widened to include civil defence. While welcoming this extension, Amnesty International is concerned that no alternative service completely removed from the country's military and defence system is available and that those who refuse on grounds of conscience to do either military service or the available alternative service remain liable to imprisonment.
Two conscientious objectors are at present Amnesty International adoptees. One of them, Michael Geisler, has for some years been active in campaigning for the recognition of conscientious objection as a right in the GDR. When his own call-up was pending, he handed the military authorities a written declaration of his intention to refuse to do military service or the alternative service provided, citing the clauses concerning the right to freedom of conscience and religion in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Final Act of the Conference
214
on Security and Cooperation in Europe. In his declaration he said that he was willing to do alternative service in a hospital or nursing home. He was arrested on 4 May 1978, shortly after receiving notification of his call-up, and sentenced to 21 months' imprisonment.
The GDR Government continues to release political prisoners to the Federal Republic of Germany in exchange for sums of money, estimated at between 30,000 and 160,000 D-marks per prisoner. It is estimated that 1,300 prisoners were released in this way in 1977.
During the year under review, Amnesty International has been concerned by a number of reports alleging maltreatment in GDR prisons and the frequent infliction of special forms of punishment on prisoners. Early in 1978, Amnesty International received from three separate sources reports of at least a temporary deterioration of conditions in Cottbus prison, where a large number of its adoptees are held. According to these reports, food was made too salty as an "educational measure", beatings by warders became more commonplace and many people were held in special detention with only one hot meal every three days. In January 1978, a number of inmates of this prison refused to work, on the grounds that work for prisoners is officially described as "voluntary". The prison authorities are alleged to have reacted by putting them on reduced rations and allowing them to wear only underclothes and socks, in which clothing they were compelled to shovel snow. Some of these prisoners were allegedly subjected to beatings which resulted in broken collar bones, broken jaws, knocked out teeth and, in one case, a ruptured kidney. Amnesty International groups working for prisoners in the GDR wrote letters to the GDR authorities, requesting an inquiry into these allegations.
Although the death penalty is retained in the GDR for a number of offences, including political ones, Amnesty International does not know of any instances of its being imposed during the year under review.
On 10 October 1977, Amnesty International published a Briefing Paper on the German Democratic Republic. Copies of this were sent to the country's leading officials and to its embassies abroad, and a campaign was organized by national sections to draw public attention to the main areas of Amnesty International concern in the GDR.
