Vietnam (the Socialist Republic of)
May 1978 marked the third anniversary of the fall of the Government of Nguyen Van Thieu and the establishment of a new Government in South Vietnam, which was subsequently reunified with North Vietnam to form the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. Large-scale political imprisonment resulting from the Government's re-education program remained Amnesty International's chief concern in 1977-78. During this time the organization and its adoption groups have made inquiries of the authorities in Hanoi about the conditions in re-education camps and when those detained may be released. In addition, the number of cases in Vietnam taken up by Amnesty International groups has been increased. Amnesty International is still gravely concerned at the continued detention of tens of thousands of people, who, so far as is known, have not been charged with any offence, more than three years since the change of Government in what was formerly South Vietnam.
It is estimated that over a million people have undergone "re-education" since 1975, the vast majority being released after short terms of detention. In February 1977 the Vietnamese Government announced that 50,000 people were still in detention in re-education camps; in April 1978 a correspondent for the French newspaper, Le Monde, who had recently visited Vietnam, estimated that the number in detention was still about the same. However a Reuter correspondent who visited Vietnam in November 1977 estimated that 150,000 people were still in detention then. Other outside observers and some recently released prisoners have put the number even higher than this-as high as 200,000.
Conditions in the camps would appear to vary enormously, depending on geographical situation, camp management and the gravity of the offences allegedly committed by the detainees. In most camps it would appear that prisoners' families have little access to them. Many of those who served in the intelligence services of the former regime or of the United States, together with officers of the marines, paratroops and police have been transferred to a special detention camp at Yen Bai, north-west of Hanoi. In late 1977, a number of officers of the former South Vietnamese army who were captured before 1973 were released from this camp.
At first, it was thought that the process of "re-education" (hoc tap) would apply only to civilian and military personnel belonging to the former Saigon administration. It has since become apparent, however, that it was applied far more widely, embracing large sections of South Vietnamese society. Among civilians who have been detained are people who left North Vietnam in 1954, people who have studied in or visited the United States, and writers and intellectuals thought to be antagonistic to the new socialist society. Also detained are members of former political parties, individuals classed as "mercantile capitalists" and others regarded as belonging to the bourgeoisie.
According to reports which have reached Amnesty International, the reeducation camps are divided into four categories: (a) detention centers in towns where the initial inquiries are held; (b) second category camps which hold both criminal and political prisoners, where detainees are encouraged to write accounts of their backgrounds; (c) third category camps where prisoners are held according to the nature of their alleged past offences and (d) camps for former senior officers and members of intelligence services who have been judged to be "ac on"
196
(wicked), which are mostly situated north of Hanoi. In category (d) camps the régime is believed to be very strict.
In some camps the detainees are forced to do manual labour, although not always. In all camps, however, intense political education would seem to be the rule. Prisoners are required to make criticisms of their own past and to write autobiographical accounts indicating their past "misdeeds". Some prisoners have refused to do this and, as a consequence, have been subjected to a tougher régime.
The Vietnamese authorities have given no precise indication of the factors that determine release but they did state in the early period of the "re-education" program that the process would not exceed three years. This time limit has not, however, been observed. On 2 September 1977, Vietnam's National Day, an amnesty was announced for certain categories of detainees who had conducted themselves "constructively", but full details of the number who qualified were not given.
In August 1977 the Government also announced that 150 senior officials of the former Thieu Government had been released from re-education and assigned to new posts in the Industrial Service of Ho Chi Minh City (Summary of World Broadcasts [British Broadcasting Corporation], 27 July 1977). In September
1977	the authorities announced the release of a further 1,613 officers and officials of the former régime from re-education camps (Hanoi Radio, 17 September 1977). However, despite the fact that representatives of the new Government had repeatedly stated in 1975 that three years was the maximum that detainees would be held for "re-education", no large-scale releases were reported in May 1978.
The cases of six Buddhist monks of the An Quang Pagoda, whose arrest in April 1977 was reported in the Amnesty International Report 1977, were taken up by Amnesty International groups in France and Sweden. The six seem to have been arrested after the authorities had tried to restrict the activities of the An Quang Pagoda, particularly its social work in schools and orphanages. In April
1978	a visiting foreign correspondent for a French journal was told that the number of pagodas under An Quang supervision had decreased from 200 to 50 since May 1975 (Le Monde Diplomatique, April 1978). The arrest of the six Buddhist leaders was a surprise to foreign observers, as before May 1975 the An Quang Pagoda had been prominent in the anti-war movement in the south. Amnesty International has asked the Vietnamese authorities on a number of occasions for further information about the cases of these monks, and was informed in May 1978 that two of them, Thich Thuyen An and Thich Thong Hue, are to be brought to trial.
In May 1978 Amnesty International learnt from the Vietnamese authorities that an adopted prisoner of conscience, Tran Van Tuyen, had recently died. The organization wrote to the Vietnamese Government to ask for details of the circumstances of his death but has so far received no further information.
During 1977-78 several new arrests have been reported and it would seem that some of them are the result of armed resistance to the authorities by soldiers of the former Thieu regime and members of the Hoa Hao sect. In February 1978 the Government announced the arrest of 40 former soldiers in the town of Ha Tien, and in March it was reported by Hanoi Radio that the authorities in Chan Thanh District, Tay Ninh Province, ". . . had smashed eight reactionary organizations and persuaded 220 reactionaries to give themselves up, arrested 36 persons
197
having connections with reactionaries abroad and sent 190 others with a record of bad actions to re-education camps." (Summary of World Broadcasts [British Broadcasting Corporation], 22 March 1978). No further details were given. Further arrests are believed to have taken place as a result of disturbances in the Chinese quarter of Ho Chi Minh City, Cholon, after a Government decree in April 1978, nationalizing all private businesses.
Amnesty International has been particularly concerned by reports about doctors and other medical workers who have been detained for "re-education" in Vietnam since May 1975. Under the former Government, most medical personnel were conscripted into the army of President Thieu. Despite the fact that they were members of the army involuntarily, they do not appear to have been exempted from the re-education process which all former army officers have had to undergo. A number of doctors who have been detained have been adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience. One such doctor, Nguyen Due Hanh, who was formerly Director of the Microbiology and Plague Services at the Pasteur Institute in Saigon, was featured by Amnesty International in its February 1978 Newsletter to mark the 30th Anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. In April the organization was informed by Dr Hoang Dinh Cau, the Vice-Minister of Health, that Dr Hanh would be freed in the near future. Amnesty International has received reports that another adopted prisoner, Dr Tran Xuan Ninh, formerly a paediatrician at the Children's Hospital in Saigon, has recently been released.
Amnesty International has also been concerned about the detention since May 1975 of writers and other intellectuals and has expressed this anxiety to the Vietnamese Government. Among the cases currently adopted by Amnesty International are Doan Quoc Sy (a well-known Vietnamese novelist who took part in the Viet Minh struggle against the French before 1954 and was later a professor in the Faculty of Pedagogy in the University of Saigon) and Duyen Anh (a writer of children's stories and former Editor of the weeklies, Chi Trai and Cong On). Another writer and journalist adopted by Amnesty International, Tran Ngoc Lap, a former editorial writer for the newspaper Chinh Luan, has recently been released from detention. Amnesty International is continuing to investigate reports of other writers in detention.
In November 1977 it was reported that three members of an armed resistance group who had killed a policeman in the Vinh-Son incident in February 1976 (see Amnesty International Report 1977) had had their death sentences confirmed by the Court of Appeal of Ho Chi Minh City. Amnesty International sent a cable to President Ton Due Thang, appealing for the sentences to be commuted on humanitarian grounds. There has been no further information about whether the three death sentences have been carried out.
In April 1978 Amnesty International wrote to the Vietnamese Government urging that everyone still in re-education camps should be released immediately and unconditionally, with full restoration of civil rights.
