Benin (the People's Republic of)
In August 1977, Benin adopted a new Constitution and plan for the future development of political life in the country. This "Fundamental Law" was adopted by the political party created by the present military Government — le Parti de la Révolution Populaire du Bénin - which is led by the President, Colonel Matthieu Kérékou. The Fundamental Law is intended to replace the present military Government by civilian rule based on the single political party, which has a Marxist-Leninist ideology. Although the new Constitution was adopted in August 1977, there have been some delays in actually putting it into effect, by, for example,
38
replacing the ruling military Government by a National Assembly consisting of elected representatives. The Fundamental Law proposes that the Party should choose candidates, who will then be elected by the population as a whole. The elected representatives will themselves elect the President, who is nevertheless to be nominated by the central committee of the Party.
In the period 1977-78 Amnesty International continued to work on behalf of five prisoners whose cases were adopted in February 1976 after they were convicted of engaging in subversive activities against the Government. In November 1977, nine new cases were taken up for investigation. These were of students who had been arrested in September 1976 and detained in connection with the possession of anti-Government leaflets. At least one of the detainees was believed to be a member of the banned Communist Party, the Union des Communistes du Dahomey (Benin was previously known as Dahomey). The nine students are all believed to have been released early in 1978, although these releases have not been confirmed by the Benin authorities.
In November 1977, Amnesty International also took up the case of a French national, married to a Benin citizen, Yvette Adjovi, who had been detained by the Benin authorities. Her only crime appears to have been to accompany to Cotonou Airport a student who, when he later arrived in France, denounced the repressive policies of the Benin Government. She was released later in November after appeals from friends and relatives in France. In February 1978, Amnesty International took up also the case of a Benin army officer, Lieutenant Marcellin Adjanohoun, who was arrested in 1975, accused of complicity in a plot to overthrow the Government and then, after a summary court martial in March 1975, sentenced to life imprisonment with hard labour.
