Bolivia
For seven years the military Government that took power in a violent coup in 1971 has been headed by General Hugo Banzer Suarez. In late 1977 he announced a program for return to democratic constitutional rule. Throughout 1977, however, all public and private meetings "with a political content" were banned, and all trade union and political organizations suspended.
In preparation for presidential elections in July 1978, an amnesty of political prisoners and exiles was declared on 21 December 1977. Only 33 of the 52 political prisoners were released, however, and the Government published a list of 348 political exiles who were not amnestied. The 348 were said by Government spokesmen to be guilty of acts of political terrorism. Most were former trade union and political party leaders, and their wives, many of them previously adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience. Two of those named were children under 12 years of age, and several had been dead for a number of years.
There were vigorous protests about the limited nature of the Christmas amnesty, and, on 29 December 1977, wives and children of mineworkers and others who were still in exile or detention occupied the Archbishop's palace in the capital, La Paz, and began a hunger strike. Within days, hunger strikers had occupied churches in provincial towns, the national university in La Paz, and the offices of the newspaper Presencia. They called for an unrestricted amnesty,
102
restoration of their jobs to dismissed trade unionists and the lifting of measures prohibiting trade union activities. Twenty days later, security forces broke into churches and arrested at least 100 strikers. The Roman Catholic church hierarchy threatened to excommunicate those on whose responsibility the security forces had forced entry into the churches and carried out the arrests.
On 30 January the Government yielded to the demands of the hunger strikers and ordered the extension of the amnesty to all political exiles-an estimated 19,000. Nineteen remaining political prisoners, most of them held for over two years without charge or trial, were turned over to the civil courts, which promptly ordered their release.
Amnesty International groups worked for a total of 28 individual prisoners during the period covered by this report (1 July 1977 to 30 June 1978), all of them now released, and several interventions were made on behalf of unacknowledged prisoners, who, it was feared, might be tortured. At the time of writing, there are no adopted prisoners of conscience in Bolivia.
An official Amnesty International mission was in Bolivia from 14 to 21 April 1978, headed by a specialist in Latin American law, Senator Hans Rau of the Federal Republic of Germany, who was accompanied by a member of the Research Department in the International Secretariat of Amnesty International. The mission met the Under Secretary of Justice and other officials, and visited the National Penitentiary of San Carlos in La Paz. It was not permitted to visit the cells in the Ministry of the Interior or the Department of Political Order, or to speak with responsible officials of the latter body.
Extensive talks were held with Father Julio Tumiri and Dr Luis Adolfo Siles Salinas, Secretary General and President respectively of the Bolivian Permanent Assembly for Human Rights, and other members of its National Executive Board and of its provincial branches. The Permanent Assembly is a non-partisan group dedicated to monitoring and reporting on human rights questions; it includes members from most religious denominations, from trade unions, and from political parties covering most of the Bolivian political spectrum. Meetings were held also with former prisoners.
Special emphasis in government talks was laid on the situation of several prisoners who were summarily expelled to Argentina and Chile and who subsequently "disappeared" and are presumed dead. Similarly, concern was expressed at the continued application of the Ley de Seguridad del Estado, the law under which all political prisoners detained within the past four years have been held without trial (no political prisoners were brought to trial during this period). The Ley de Seguridad del Estado provides for prisoners to remain at the disposition of the Department of Political Order "as long as proves necessary".
