Comoros (the Republic of)
In the Republic of Comoros under the régime of President Ali Soilih, Amnesty International found a number of causes for concern: the continuing detention without trial under harsh conditions of 18 people accused of attempting to murder the President and overthrow the régime in April 1976; the extensive ill-treatment or torture of opponents of Government policies; further arrests of numerous political opponents of the régime; the shooting and killing of civilians who opposed the régime's policies by the security forces.
On 12 May 1978 President Ali Soilih was overthrown and put under house arrest, as a result of a coup d'état led by foreign mercenaries in which five soldiers died. The new Government repealed various laws and abandoned policies of the Comorian "Revolution", freed all political prisoners and promised to restore fundamental liberties.
As part of its policy of implementing revolutionary changes in Comoros, the pre-coup Government had, since January 1976, reorganized the administration, given the "revolutionary youth" {jeunesse révolutionaire) and the army considerable power, and taken several radical measures to destroy "feudalism". Opposition had been strongest on Anjouan Island (the home of the ousted President Ahmed Abdallah, who returned to Comoros after the coup), and a large number of Comorians suffered arbitrary arrest and ill-treatment for a short time, or long-term detention without trial, at the instigation of the youth forces, the army or the President.
In early 1978, many others attempted to flee to Mayotte (the Comorian island which remains under French administration). There were also incidents in which villagers or would-be refugees were shot and killed by soldiers, notably the massacre of 15 people in a mosque in Iconi in March 1978. Many arrests were made after anti-Government demonstrations or after what the Government described as plots to overthrow it and murder the President. Whether such plots were a reality is difficult to determine, since the Government did not formally charge or try any of the accused, even though the statements of those arrested in April 1976 were published by the Government for use by a proposed special tribunal.
Amnesty International made its first approach to the Comorian Government
43
in May 1977 about allegations of ill-treatment by the security forces. No reply was received, and so a further letter was sent in August. It referred to the UN Declaration against Torture and urged the President to investigate the persistent reports of ill-treatment and torture which were reaching Amnesty International from sources believed to be reliable and not politically biased. Amnesty International also asked that political detainees (especially those arrested in April 1976) should be treated in accordance with the standards set out by the United Nations.
In October 1977, Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of the Interior, expressing concern about the proposed trial of some 30 Comorians by a "special tribunal" on charges of attempting to murder the President and overthrow the Government. Amnesty International asked for information about the nature of this tribunal and the proposed judicial process, and reiterated its concern about reports that those detained had been tortured or ill-treated so as to obtain "confessions" for use in court. The organization requested that an international humanitarian body be permitted to investigate their conditions of detention.
On 13 December Amnesty International received a reply from the Comorian Presidency, denying allegations of torture and ill-treatment, affirming that the April 1976 detainees were not political prisoners and stating that they would be tried in open court on criminal charges of attempted assassination. On 9 January 1978 Amnesty International cabled President Soilih, conveying its concern at reports that one detainee, Mohamed Taki, had died in custody. It asked for confirmation of this information, an examination of the conditions of detention, and the provisional release of all detainees pending trial. In their reply, the Comorian authorities denied that Mohamed Taki had died and this was later confirmed. Amnesty International subsequently learned that the detainee who had died in November was, in fact, Youssouf Mlamali. It again cabled the President, requesting information about the health and safety of all other detainees, but received no reply. Amnesty International then proceeded to take up for investigation the cases of 18 prisoners who had been in detention since the alleged April 1976 plot, believing that they could be considered prisoners of conscience. They included the former Government Ministers, Ali Mroudjae, Mohamed Taki and Omar Tamu, the former Deputies, Mohamed Said Mkandzile and Abderamane Mohamed, a former presidential political adviser, Abdou Mdahoma, businessmen, police and army officers. Amnesty International made preliminary arrangements for an international observer to attend their trial, if it took place.
Amnesty International also took up for investigation the cases of four other prisoners: those of Sheikh Ahmed, a lecturer in Arabic and Religious Studies, Ali Mohamedali Nabwa, a journalist, Abasse Youssouf, an engineer and former Deputy, and Akbar Ali Saleh, the Chief Documentalist. They had been arrested in January 1978 after another alleged plot, and publicly humiliated in Moroni, the capital. They were paraded through the town, wearing women's wraps, covered in filth, and constantly insulted and abused. However, before Amnesty International groups could begin working for these prisoners (all of whom could, the organization believed, be considered prisoners of conscience), all detainees, including these, were freed by the new Government, formed after the coup. Amnesty International immediately cabled it, asking for confirmation
44
of the releases. This was received, and Amnesty International wrote to congratulate the Government on this humanitarian measure.
In June, a member of Amnesty International's International Executive Committee met the new Joint-President, Ahmed Abdallah, to inform him of Amnesty International's concerns and of the actions it had taken over human rights violations under the Government which had been overthrown, and to discuss the new Government's attitude to human rights. Amnesty International asked for information about the death of the former President, Ali Soilih, and about the detention of some 150 people, some of whom had reportedly been ill-treated. President Abdallah upheld the Government's earlier statement that the former President had been shot dead while attempting to escape from house arrest and denied that any detainees were being ill-treated. He stated that all those held would receive a fair trial in open court, and that international observers would be permitted to attend. Amnesty International is investigating this matter further.
Neither of the Comoros Governments has ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
