Ethiopia
Ethiopia is ruled by the Provisional Military Administrative Council (Derg) which assumed power in September 1974. Consistent gross violations of fundamental human rights in Ethiopia continued during the period 1977-78, particularly from November 1977 to February 1978, as a result of the Government's "Red Terror" campaign against its suspected opponents. Of concern to Amnesty International were: widespread and arbitrary arrests, detention on political grounds, mass killings of alleged political opponents by Government security forces, systematic use of torture, and harsh detention conditions for both the long-term detainees arrested between 1974 and 1975 and those arrested more recently.
Amnesty International made several appeals and protests to the Ethiopian military Government, without any response except accusations that it had failed to recognize the benefits of the Revolution, failed to campaign for basic human rights during the rule of Emperor Haile Selassie, distorted facts and made "counterrevolutionary" propaganda against the Revolution. Amnesty International replied
48
to each of these attacks, giving details of its actions on the numerous human rights violations under the Government of Emperor Haile Selassie and reiterating its concern over violations of the right to life, the right to freedom from arbitrary detention and the right to freedom from torture or ill-treatment.
These issues frequently received less publicity and international attention than the major armed conflicts in the Ogaden and Eritrea. The Western Somali Liberation Front, backed by Somalia and later supported by Somali troops, intensified its struggle for Somali-populated areas of south-eastern Ethiopia, but, after successes at first, was heavily defeated in March 1978.
The Eritrean Liberation Front and Eritrean People's Liberation Front fought separately for the autonomy of Eritrea and, by mid 1978, held all Eritrea except for the four main towns. Smaller armed opposition movements, such as those among the Oromo and Afar peoples, and other armed groups such as the Ethiopian Democratic Union and Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Army, presented less of a military problem to the régime, but were indicative of an unrest which spread far beyond the main area of opposition (both violent and nonviolent) in the capital, Addis Ababa. Amnesty International continued to campaign for the protection of human rights in areas of Eritrea under Ethiopian Government control, as well as in the rest of the country.
Amnesty International took various forms of action in connection with Ethiopia: the publications (mentioned below) were widely distributed; Amnesty International groups in several countries started working on Ethiopia Country Action dossiers (see the Introduction to this section on Africa), making appeals to the Ethiopian authorities, contacting public figures in their own countries, and giving up-to-date information from the Research Department in the International Secretariat of Amnesty International to the press, to their own Governments, and to interested individuals. Special appeals were made to the Derg on 12 September 1977, the occasion of the third anniversary of military rule. Amnesty International cabled the Derg Chairman, Lieutenant Colonel Mengistu Haile Mariam, appealing for an amnesty for all political prisoners, immediate improvement in the conditions of political detainees, and the restoration of the rule of law. The following month Amnesty International groups protested about renewed political killings, including the deaths of 300 youths in detention. As many as 700 people may have been killed during early October.
The gravest human rights violations occurred, however, after 11 November, when the Derg Vice-Chairman, Lieutenant Colonel Atnafu Abate, was, according to an official announcement, "subjected to a revolutionary measure". He was killed without trial and later accused of various counter-revolutionary offences.
The policy of "revolutionary justice" (political killings by civilian and uniformed Government officials) had been started by the Derg in February 1977 after the execution without trial of the former Derg Chairman and Head of State, Brigadier Teferi Bante. The worst incident reported in early 1977 had been the killing of over 500 youths on 29 and 30 April. However, after the killing of Lieutenant Colonel Atnafu Abate, a new campaign of political killing was launched under the name of "Red Revolutionary Terror". This campaign of Government-initiated terror spread to all urban and rural areas of Ethiopia but was at first concentrated in Addis Ababa. The "Red Terror" was not concerned with the armed conflicts in Eritrea or the Ogaden. It was directed against internal civilian political opposition,
49
and mainly the alleged sympathizers with or members of the clandestine opposition Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Party (EPRP), which was accused of responsibility for the assassination of over 150 Government officials the previous year. This policy was implemented in an extreme and arbitrary manner, especially against children and young people of both sexes, whose ages ranged from eight to twenty. Government officials constantly justified the campaign activities as necessary "to protect the Revolution", but their claim that emphasis was on "rehabilitation" rather than "liquidation" was not borne out by the constant official reports of the "liquidation" of "counter-revolutionaries" and the constant unofficial reports of widespread political killings by Government officials, which often amounted to massacres.
The Derg's "Red Terror" campaign consisted of:
(i)	summary killing without legal process of those suspected of an actual counter-revolutionary offence - for instance, alleged implication in political assassination, possession of EPRP literature, participation in anti-Government demonstrations, or contact with imperialists;
(ii)	mass detention of those suspected of counter-revolutionary sympathies, in order to put them through harsh political instruction;
(iii)	the systematic use of torture against most of those detained in this way, in order to obtain information about other alleged counterrevolutionaries.
The number of people killed during this process, particularly by kebelle (urban neighbourhood association) guards, is very difficult to estimate. Political killings reached a peak during December 1977 and January 1978, when killings of up to a hundred were common in Addis Ababa each night, bodies were exposed in public and a reasonable estimate of deaths would be in the region of 2,500 to 3,000. The campaign extended to the rest of the country but without such large-scale killings as in Addis Ababa. By about June, the Government stopped referring to "Red Terror", but the practices associated with the campaign appeared to be continuing on a much smaller scale and without publicity.
"Red Terror" was applied at compulsory public meetings of kebelle associations or at places of study or work (factories, businesses, offices, Government departments, etc.). Confessions of counter-revolutionary sympathy were demanded, and refusal to confess was often taken as evidence of guilt. Thus, confession was preferable to further interrogation. It was much more serious for one person to be denounced by another - which could lead to interrogation and torture - than to confess "voluntarily" and undergo the rehabilitation process. Confessions and denunciations of this kind led to instances of children denouncing their parents, who were consequently killed.
The forms of torture inflicted on those thought to have counter-revolutionary (that is, EPRP) contacts reportedly included electric shocks; severe beatings on the head, shoulders, buttocks, or the soles of the feet while the prisoner was suspended from an iron bar; having a heavy weight tied to the male genital organs; rape of girls - even of girls of nine; the insertion of red-hot iron bars or bottles into girls' vaginas, causing permanent mutilation.
Amnesty International published reports on Ethiopia during this period. The principal document, Human Rights Violations in Ethiopia, released on 14 December
50
1977, is a lengthy report, describing the destruction of the rule of law, extrajudicial killings, large-scale and arbitrary arrests and detention, harsh conditions of detention, and the common use of torture under the military régime. This document was circulated widely among Amnesty International groups and contacts, academics, members of legislatures, and others concerned about human rights in Ethiopia. Another shorter account of the military Government's "Red Terror" campaign was produced at the end of March 1978. The Research Department in the International Secretariat of Amnesty International produced also short briefings on Amnesty International's work on human rights violations under the Government of Emperor Haile Selassie (August 1977), and the organization's reply to the Derg's allegations against it (August 1977). In addition, Amnesty International's Newsletter for June 1978 publicized first-hand testimony about detention and torture by a seventeen-year-old student in Addis Ababa.
Amnesty International made a submission to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR) in May 1978 about human rights violations in Ethiopia. It had made an earlier submission on the same subject in 1977. At the end of the UNCHR session in March 1978, the Commission's Chairman, Keba M'Baye, announced that the situation in Ethiopia had been studied and that the Commission had decided to take (unspecified) "measures" on Ethiopia. The Commission's proceedings and decisions were confidential.
On 20 January 1978, Amnesty International conducted an Urgent Action campaign to protest at mass political killings in the "Red Terror" campaign. Since this was apparently ineffective, a group campaign was launched in April against torture and political killings. A separate campaign by Amnesty International groups on the occasion of International Women's Day (8 March) to appeal for the release of women and girls held as political detainees merely elicited a reply from the Derg, denying that prison conditions were harsh, and repeating its previous accusations.
In some Ethiopian refugee cases, Amnesty International appealed to governments not to subject certain individuals to refoulement: the appeal applied to certain refugees in Czechoslovakia and Israel, who were subsequently allowed to go to other countries.
