South Africa (the Republic of)
International attention was focused on violations of human rights in South Africa throughout the past year (July 1977-June 1978), both as a result of developments within the country itself and because of the action taken by the United Nations in declaring 1978 International Anti-Apartheid Year. Amnesty International published a major 108-page report on Political Imprisonment in South Africa and launched a worldwide campaign for the release of prisoners of conscience, the repeal of discriminatory and repressive legislation and an end to the use of torture in South Africa. The report, released on 18 January 1978, was banned in South Africa eight days later, but no official response was forthcoming from the South African authorities until June 1978, when an officially-sponsored report entitled Amnesty for Terrorism, ostensibly published on 15 March, was distributed widely by South African embassies in Europe and North America. This report sought to discredit Amnesty International and its work for prisoners of conscience in South Africa but did not attempt to refute in detail the organization's criticism of the treatment of political prisoners. It was compiled by the South African Department of Information, which was disbanded in June 1978 after being involved in a major scandal over the misuse of funds for propaganda purposes.
77
In September 1977, the Black Consciousness leader Steve Biko died in security police detention. At first, the Minister of Justice, James Kruger, suggested that he had died in detention as a result of a five-day hunger strike, but he subsequently denied that he had ever mentioned a hunger strike and stated instead that Steve Biko might have been injured in a scuffle with security police. As events were later to show, this was precisely the explanation for Steve Biko's death given by the six-member security police interrogation team who questioned him while he was being detained incommunicado.
At the inquest into Steve Biko's death, held in Pretoria in December 1977, Major Harold Snyman and other security police officers testified that he must have suffered the head injuries from which he died when he apparently had to be restrained by his interrogators. It was also revealed during the inquest that Steve Biko, who had been detained without charge on 18 August, had been kept naked for much of his time in detention and was chained hand and foot when taken to security police headquarters for interrogation. Three medical doctors who had examined him in detention admitted at the inquest that they had subordinated his interests to those of the security police by submitting false and incorrect reports about his state of health. It was only when he became partially comatose that Steve Biko was transferred to hospital, but instead of being given treatment in Port Elizabeth, he was driven more than 700 miles in the back of a Land Rover to Pretoria, where he died a few hours after arrival.
Although so many questions were raised at the inquest about the way in which Steve Biko had been ill-treated by the security police, the presiding magistrate ruled on 2 December that his death was probably caused by injuries received during the alleged scuffle with security police officers. However, the magistrate said that his death could not be attributed to any one person, and the South African authorities subsequently made it very clear that they would not institute criminal proceedings against any of the security police officers involved.
Steve Biko's death, coming after so many other deaths in detention in recent years, had a very great effect on South Africa's Black majority population and led to outbursts of popular protest, particularly in Steve Biko's home area, the Eastern Cape. His funeral was attended by more than 15,000 people, although the authorities put difficulties in the way of many people who wished to attend, and two Black police officers were killed when they were attacked by an angry crowd returning from the funeral. Shortly afterwards, emergency regulations were introduced in the Ciskei "homeland" area of the Eastern Cape, empowering the authorities to detain any individual incommunicado and without charge or trial for 90 days. Similar emergency regulations were introduced in the Venda "homeland" in northern Transvaal in October 1977.
Five weeks after Steve Biko's death, and while the manner of his death was still unexplained, the South African Government banned the entire Black Consciousness movement. All together 17 Black Consciousness organizations were banned on 19 October, including the South African Students' Organization (SASO) and the Black People's Covention (BPC), both of which had been founded by Steve Biko. The Government also declared the anti-apartheid Christian Institute an unlawful organization and restricted under five-year banning orders its Director, Dr Beyers Naude, and four other White clergy. Two newspapers, The World and Weekend World were banned too on 19 October. The Editor of
78
The World, Percy Qoboza, and its Features Editor, Aggrey Klaaste were among some 50 or more Black South Africans detained under Section 10 of the Internal Security Act, which provides for indefinite preventive detention. Among those detained were members of the Soweto Committee of Ten, including its Chairman, Dr Nthatho Motlana, and such other Black community leaders as Kenneth Rachidi, President of the BPC, and Aubrey Mokoena, Director of the Black Community Programmes (BCP). Peter Jones, who was detained on 18 August with Steve Biko and held incommunicado under Section 6 of the Terrorism Act until after the completion of the Biko inquest in December, was subsequently transferred to Modder B Prison in Benoni and detained under the provisions of the Internal Security Act. Most of the detainees were still held at the end of May 1978, although no charges of any sort had been brought against them. However, the South African Government had made some concessions as a result of international protest and expressions of concern by allowing the detainees to be visited by representatives of the International Committee of the Red Cross, by publishing the names of those held in preventive detention and by releasing, in March, a number of the best-known detainees. Those freed included Percy Qoboza and Dr Motlana.
On 15 June 1978, the South African Government took action against another newspaper, a religious weekly called Voice. Shortly before it was banned, several Black journalists on its staff were arrested and although most were soon released, one, Juby Mayet, was also put in preventive detention under the Internal Security Act. She had earlier been charged together with another Voice journalist, Philip Mthimkulu, with theft, following their attempt to withdraw funds from the Union of Black Journalists' (UB J) bank account on the morning of 19 October 1977. The UBJ was one of the Black Consciousness organizations banned by the Government on that day and, like the other organizations involved, had its assets seized by the Government. They were acquitted because their attempt to withdraw UBJ funds was made before the publication in the Government Gazette of the order banning the UBJ and other Black Consciousness organizations.
In a general election at the end of November, the ruling National Party was returned to power with an unprecedented majority in Parliament. After the election, the Progressive Federal Party became the main parliamentary opposition party. The general election was, of course, contested only by White political parties and only White adults, who comprise little more than 10 per cent of the total population of South Africa, were eligible to vote.
In November 1977, the pass laws were amended. The Government announced that, in future, Africans would not have to carry the notorious reference books, commonly known as passes, while they were in the 87 per cent of South Africa officially designated as the White area of residence. However, Africans would still be obliged to carry official passbooks or travel documents issued by their respective African homeland authorities. The Government's aim was clearly to make it appear that very many Africans support its "homelands" policy by forcing those who wish to live or work in the "White" areas of the country to apply to, and hence appear to recognize the legitimacy of, the homeland authorities from whom the necessary travel documents are available. Despite the apparent relaxation of the pass laws, Africans who continue to live or work in the designated "White" area of South Africa — that is, approximately half the African population
79
— are still subject to the same restrictions on residence, movement and employment as they faced before November 1977. There has been no reduction in the numbers of Africans prosecuted for so-called pass law offences.
Various other legislative changes were introduced during the parliamentary session which commenced in early 1978. The Criminal Procedure Matters Amendment Act, passed in May 1978, removed the six-month limit on the length of time during which potential witnesses at Terrorism Act trials could be detained without charge by the security police, and stipulated instead that such witnesses could be held until the conclusion of the trials at which they were expected to testify. In other words, had this provision been enforced at the time, say, of the SASO/ BPC Terrorism Act trial in 1975-76, individuals regarded as potential state witnesses might have been continuously detained for more than two years, even though the authorities did not intend to bring charges against them. Thus, the new provision increased significantly the already considerable extent to which the security police can exert pressure on potential witnesses, by using the threat of almost indefinite detention, to obtain the statements they require to secure successful prosecutions.
Three other bills introduced in March 1978 appeared to be designed to place all organized forms of social and welfare work under effective Government control. Taken together, the National Welfare Bill, the Social Workers and Associated Professions Bill, and the Fund-Raising Bill provided for the Government registration of all relief organizations and made it an offence for any person to engage in social work or relief work without official approval. All fund-raising for relief purposes will in future have to be authorized by a state-appointed Director of Donation Funds, who has discretion to refuse permission for such activities and who is empowered also to investigate the financial operations of relief organizations, search their premises, and subpoena witnesses. Individuals who contravene the new regulations will be subject to substantial fines and up to three years' imprisonment, and are denied the right to appeal to the courts. The introduction of these new laws has generally been seen as an attempt by the Government to check the flow of funds into South Africa from abroad, through church and community relief agencies (such as those run by the Black Consciousness movement until it was banned) to provide legal and financial assistance to people imprisoned for political reasons.
Amnesty International's report, Political Imprisonment in South Africa, documents Amnesty International's concerns up to the end of 1977. The report describes a legal system under which detention without trial, political imprisonment and "banning" - restriction on an individual's freedom of movement, expression and association — have become commonplace. It also examines the nature of the Terrorism Act and other security laws which are used to suppress all forms of Black opposition and thus maintain White political control and social and economic privilege. Within such a legal system, Amnesty International maintains in the introduction to the report, it is inevitable that individuals will be imprisoned for exercising their freedom of conscience.
The report states that the use of torture by security police during the interrogation of political detainees has become routine and appears to have tacit approval from the Government. Although many consistent and substantial allegations of torture have been made by political detainees, defendants, and even,
80
under cross-examination, by state witnesses in political trials, the South African Government has repeatedly refused to institute a thorough and independent inquiry or to repeal laws such as the Terrorism Act which provide for indefinite detention incommunicado.
In addition to Steve Biko, at least 10 other political detainees died in detention in 1977 alone. Five of those who died were alleged by security police to have hanged themselves; two were killed by falls from upper-storey windows in security police buildings; three were said to have died from natural causes. In several of these cases, notably those of Dr Nanaoth Ntshuntsha and Dr Hoosen Haffejee, pathological and other evidence produced at the inquests suggested that the deceased might have been subject to physical assault and ill-treatment by security police before their deaths. For example, at the inquest into Dr Haffejee's death, which was observed on Amnesty International's behalf by Lord Avebury (a member of the British House of Lords) the pathologist who carried out the postmortem examination stated that he had found between 40 and 50 "abraded bruises" and other marks on the head, body, elbows, knees, ankles and feet, which had been inflicted some 4 to 12 hours before death. Dr Haffejee, who was slightly built, had been in custody for about 16 hours before he died. The two security police officers who had interrogated Dr Haffejee denied assaulting him and claimed that the injuries might have been caused when they had to force him into a police car. Photographs of Dr Haffejee's body, which showed extensive injuries, were published by Amnesty International in November 1977, three months after his death occurred. The inquest was held in March 1978.
Apart from the evidence produced at inquests, much other information concerning the use of torture was forthcoming throughout the year, both from former detainees and those involved in a series of major trials. At the trial in Pretoria of 12 alleged members of the banned African National Congress (ANC), many detainees called to testify as state witnesses claimed in court that they had been subjected to electric shocks, physical assaults and long periods of solitary confinement before they agreed to sign statements required by the security police. Six of the accused were ultimately acquitted; the others received prison sentences ranging from 7 to 18 years. In June 1978, it was announced that 13 of the 18 alleged members of the banned Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC) on trial under the Terrorism Act in Bethal were seeking damages against the Government on the grounds that they had been beaten, kicked and subjected to electric shocks while under interrogation. Earlier, in March, the South African press reported that at least 18 separate actions for damages had been initiated against the Minister of Justice, as Minister responsible for the security police, on behalf of detainees who had alleged that they had been tortured or who had died in detention.
Perhaps as a result of the frequency with which allegations of torture have been made against the South African police in recent years, the Minister of Justice, James Kruger, announced in May that two former Supreme Court judges, whom he named, were to be appointed to monitor the treatment of detainees by carrying out spot checks to investigate the conditions in which they were being held in detention. The judges are to make a confidential report of their findings to the Minister of Justice. However, the Minister declined to agree to an International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) request for access to detainees held incommunicado for interrogation, although ICRC delegates have been permitted
81
to visit those held in preventive detention under Section 10 of the Internal Security Act. Critics of the new system have referred to the fact that, in the past, such detainees have not infrequently been visited by magistrates. Many claim that the latter were not regarded as independent observers to whom the detainees might speak frankly, but merely as Government-appointed officials whose role was mainly to give a stamp of respectability to the use of detention without trial. Another criticism is that the two former judges who were appointed will have difficulty in acting effectively while the South African authorities make such extensive use of their detention powers.
During the year, a number of changes were made in the conditions under which convicted political prisoners were held. In November 1977, the Department of Prisons announced that political prisoners would, in general, no longer be permitted to study beyond matriculation level, although those at present following educational courses would be allowed to complete them. It was stated also that, in future, political prisoners would be allowed to listen to certain radio bulletins, whereas in the past an attempt had been made to isolate them from all news, and that they would be entitled to receive more family visits. However, it appears that the news they may receive will be severely censored. It is also doubtful whether many families will be able to make use of the additional facilities for visiting as, according to statistics released in April 1977, there were no more than 240 individual visits to Robben Island prisoners during 1976, at a time when there were at least 370 inmates. In March 1978, the Prisons Amendment Bill was introduced to empower the Commissioner of Prisons to withdraw arbitrarily any so-called "privileges" that are accorded to convicted prisoners. This followed a court action taken in August 1977 by Dennis Goldberg and eight other White convicted political prisoners in Pretoria local prison: they tried to force the prison authorities to allow them greater access to news, claiming that this deprivation was a "cruel, inhumane and unnecessarily harsh punishment". They asked to be treated in the same way as the convicted criminals, who form the majority of the population in Pretoria Prison. Their application was rejected but was referred to the Appeal Court in May 1978.
In another court action in August 1977, it was revealed by nine Robben Island prisoners that they had been denied access to their legal representatives by the Commissioner of Prisons when they wished to take advice following alleged assault on them earlier in the year by prison warders using guard-dogs. On that occasion, the Cape Town Supreme Court ruled that the Commissioner of Prisons had acted incorrectly, but in May 1978 the Minister of Justice took action to prohibit five well-known defence lawyers from making any further visits to Robben Island or Pretoria local prison.
The number of convicted political prisoners in South African jails increased significantly during the period 1977-78. Many of those convicted of political offences were students and young people who had been caught up in the civil disturbances which have affected South Africa since mid 1976. Those convicted of offences under the Sabotage Act and similar legislation included a number of minors, and, in June 1978, the Minister of Justice admitted in Parliament that among the prisoners on Robben Island were one boy of fourteen and five aged fifteen. Many other people of about the same age are believed to have been
82
detained incommunicado, often in solitary confinement, for many months before being charged or released by the security police.
Some convicted political prisoners were released during the year but, as in previous years, the majority were immediately restricted under banning orders of two or five years' duration. In April 1978, for example, five-year banning orders were imposed on three prisoners, Sonny Venkatrathnam, Robert Wilcox and Frank Anthony, when they were released after serving six-year sentences on Robben Island. Under the terms of their banning orders, they were prohibited from any contact with one another, even though they had been in close contact throughout their time on Robben Island. Mohamed Essop and Amina Desai, both of whom were released in January 1978 after completing five-year sentences, were also banned for five years. A new five-year banning order was also imposed on Mary Moodley at the end of March 1978 when her third successive five-year banning order expired. Banning orders were also issued against a number of other individuals well known either for their opposition to apartheid or for their work in the social and educational field. They included not only the White clergy associated with the Christian Institute who were banned on 19 October 1977, but also the Editor of the East London Daily Dispatch, Donald Woods, who subsequently left South Africa, and two officials of the SACHED educational trust in Johannesburg, which organized literacy courses for Black people.
The state took action also against a number of banned people who were alleged to have contravened the terms of their banning orders. Winnie Mandela was accused of receiving visitors at the house in Brandfort to which she was banished from her Soweto home in May 1977. She was convicted in February and sentenced to six months' imprisonment on two counts, but the sentence was suspended for four years. During the course of the proceedings against her, four women called as witnesses refused to answer questions about alleged visits to her. All four were then sentenced to jail terms ranging from four to 12 months' imprisonment. All four appealed, two successfully, but seventy-two-year old Helen Joseph, a veteran anti-apartheid campaigner and former banned person, was eventually imprisoned for 14 days. Barbara Waite went to jail for two months. Ilona Kleinschmidt, one of the two women whose sentence was quashed on appeal, was then again subpoenaed and, when she refused to give evidence, was again sentenced to three months' imprisonment.
Of the many political trials that took place during the year, one of the most notable was the so-called Goch Street trial which followed the killing of two Whites in Johannesburg in June 1977 by two alleged members of the ANC. One of the accused, Mondy Motloung, was declared unfit to stand trial due to injuries received at the time of his arrest, but the other, Solomon Mahlangu, was convicted and sentenced to death in March 1978. In June, he was refused leave to appeal. This is the first time a death sentence has been passed for a political offence in South Africa since the mid 1960s. Although the death penalty has been little used for political offences in recent years, it has continued to be imposed frequently for criminal offences. According to figures officially released in June 1978, a total of 151 executions was carried out during the previous two years. Three of those executed were White people.
Amnesty International continued its activities on behalf of prisoners of con-
83
science and torture victims in South Africa during 1977-78, and, at the end of June 1978, Amnesty International groups were working on the cases of some 150 prisoners. There was, in addition, a major international campaign from January to March 1978, following the publication of the report on Political Imprisonment in South Africa. An Amnesty International submission on the situation of political prisoners in South Africa, presented to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in August 1977, was subsequently published by the UN Center against Apartheid.
