Korea (the Republic of) [South Korea]
During the period covered by this Report (July 1977-June 1978), the administration of President Park Chung-hee has continued to use the emergency powers provided by the Constitution promulgated by the President under martial law in 1972. The Presidential power to rule by decree has been institutionalized-as a means of repressing political opposition to the Government-in Emergency Regulation Number 9, which was promulgated on 13 May 1975 and continues to be enforced. This decree outlaws all forms of criticism of the 1972 Constitution, prohibits criticism of members of the Government and of government departments, bans all political meetings and demonstrations, and allows the Government to remove offenders from their jobs and to deny them the right to practise their profession.
The Government has used its draconian power under this decree to arrest and imprison non-violent political dissidents. Among those who are still in detention is the opposition leader, Kim Dae-jung. Adopted by Amnesty International, in December 1977 he was removed from prison to a civilian hospital for medical treatment under strict surveillance.
In March 1976, more than 20 prominent South Koreans, including Kim Dae-jung, had issued the Myong Dong Declaration, calling for the restoration of basic freedoms and the repeal of the 1972 Constitution. The Government had reacted by arresting large numbers of people associated with that demand, and although most of them were released, others who repeated the demand in the spring of 1977 were arrested (set Amnesty International Report 1977).
There have been increased student demonstrations in the past year in support of the call for restoration of basic freedoms, and these have resulted in arrests. At present, Amnesty International groups are working on more than 30 cases of imprisoned students.
171
Demonstrations on university campuses have continued. Major demonstrations took place in October 1977, when more than 300 students were arrested and seven were charged with violation of Emergency Regulation Number 9. In February 1978, these seven were sentenced to terms of imprisonment ranging from one to five years. Again, in November 1977, 120 demonstrators were arrested, and 11 were subsequently given prison sentences ranging from 14 months to three years. Still more demonstrations in November led to the sentencing of seven more students to prison for terms of between two and four years. In the spring of 1978, student demonstrations occurred again, demanding the restoration of democratic rights and the release of political prisoners; they were dispersed by police using tear-gas. It is not known to date how many students were arrested in the demonstrations.
Although some prisoners have been released in South Korea, it should be noted that they are described by the Government as "temporarily released", and the people affected are liable to re-arrest and imprisonment without undergoing a new trial. A recent example involved one of those associated with the Myong Dong Declaration, the Reverend Lee Moon Young, who was released in 1977, re-arrested and again released in 1978. Another example of the Government's arbitrary power over the release of political prisoners is the case of Soh Joon-shik, sentenced in 1971 to seven years' imprisonment for alleged involvement in a "campus spy-ring". He had been arrested with 50 others, including his elder brother, Soh Sung, who was sentenced to life imprisonment. Information available to Amnesty International indicated that the real purpose of the Government in the trials was to imprison those whom it regarded as troublesome on university campuses. On 27 May 1978, when Soh Joon-shik had completed his seven-year sentence, he was taken from one prison and transferred to another in a different province, where he is held without trial under the Public Security Act, a law which allows the detention of political prisoners to be extended without limit.
Others who have been arrested included South Korean workers who have pressed for trade union rights. Seventeen have been imprisoned since December 1977; at least 13 Of them are still in prison. The authorities also raided the offices of the country's leading Protestant organization, the Urban Industrial Mission in Seoul. They seized papers, including a list of the names of workers connected with the Mission, and charged the Reverend In Myung-jin under Emergency Regulation Number 9 for preaching a sermon in which he allegedly criticized the Government. Other members of the Mission have been detained for questioning.
Five people are in prison because of what they have written or published, among them the famous Korean poet, Kim Chi Ha, who is serving a life sentence. His main offence was that he had criticized the Government for sentencing to death and executing a number of political prisoners in 1975. Kim had publicly stated that the charges against those prisoners had been fabricated. Another poet in prison is Yang Sung-u, who published a poem entitled "Diary of a Slave" in a Japanese magazine in 1977. He, too, was charged under Emergency Decree Number 9 for writing criticisms of the Government and was sentenced to three years' imprisonment. Another poet, Chang Ki-pyo, was sentenced in January 1978 to three years' imprisonment under the same Decree for a poem he wrote in 1974, allegedly criticizing the Government, and for other critical articles which he had written.
172
The most recent trial of writers was on 19 May 1978, when two men were sentenced to prison for translating foreign works deemed to be against the interests of the State. Lee Yong-hui, assistant professor at Hanyang University, and a member of the governing board of the Amnesty International Korea Committee, was sentenced to three years' imprisonment for editing a book of articles in translation on the People's Republic of China (including one by the American economist, John Kenneth Galbraith) which allegedly contained passages in praise of China. Lee was also alleged to have praised North Korea and Mao Tse-tung in his book entitled Idolatry and Reason, published in 1970. Lee's publisher, Paik Nak-chong, a former university professor, was sentenced with him to one year's imprisonment for having published the volume of articles.
During the past year, Amnesty International groups have worked actively for more than one hundred South Korean cases.
In addition, Amnesty International mounted an Urgent Action campaign in March 1978 for six prisoners in South Korea who had been sentenced to death. These six people, of Korean origin but living in Japan, were arrested while they were in South Korea to conduct business or to continue their studies. They were accused of being spies for North Korea and sentenced to death, despite the fact that evidence in their defence was not given proper consideration at their trials.
