Malaysia (the Federation of)
Malaysia is ruled by the National Front coalition, in which the leading party is the United Malays National Organization (UMNO) of the Prime Minister, Datuk Hussein Onn.
The Amnesty International Report 1977 recorded a "progressive erosion of many fundamental liberties and human rights in Malaysia": this has not been halted in the period under review now—July 1977-June 1978. Arrests on a large scale took place in Malaysia in late 1977 and early 1978, including the arrests of people alleged to be involved in the guerilla activities of the illegal Communist Party of Malaya (CPM). No formal charges are made and political prisoners are not brought to trial. They are held under the Internal Security Act, which allows for detention without trial, in the first instance for two years. In virtually every one of the 50 cases taken up by Amnesty International the detention order has been renewed and some detainees have consequently spent more than 10 years in detention without trial.
In an interview with The Australian on 20 February 1978, the Prime Minister put the number of political detainees in prison at that time at a "few thousand". Other observers have estimated that there are at least 1,500 people imprisoned without trial. The Inspector General of Police, Tan Sri Mohammed Haniff Omar, recently stated that 1,002 people had been arrested in 1977 alone (New Straits Times, 23 February 1978), although it was not clear whether some of them had been released after questioning.
Under internal security laws, derived essentially from the previous British colonial legislation, the Government of Malaysia is invested with sweeping powers of arbitrary arrest and detention. The exact number of people at present detained without trial for political reasons is not known, as lists of detainees are no longer published in the parliamentary records. Political detainees have no effective recourse to the judiciary. Their detention orders are subject to review by an advisory board which, although some of its members are former judges, is, in fact, a non-judicial body with powers to make recommendations only. Final decisions on detention and release rest with the Government.
The Government alleges that those detained are members of or sympathizers with the illegal CPM. However, because detainees can be imprisoned indefinitely without trial under the Internal Security Act, no formal charges are made against them and there is no opportunity for the Government's allegations to be tested fairly in a court of law, according to generally recognized legal standards.
The two main detention camps in Peninsular (West) Malaysia are the Batu Gajah Special Detention Camp and the Kamunting Detention Camp, both in the state of Perak. Apart from being held in these two camps, detainees are often held, without formal charges and for periods of as long as six months, in local police stations. In August 1977, of the 100 men detained at the Batu Gajah Camp, half had spent seven years or more in detention without trial. Many prisoners have now been held for periods of more than 10 years and at least one for 14 years.
One long-term detainee in Batu Gajah is Yeo Moung Peng, formerly the Secretary
175
of a local branch of the Labour Party of Malaya, who has been imprisoned since August 1968. He was one of many detained in 1968 after demonstrations against the execution of 11 Chinese for collaborating with armed Indonesians during the "confrontation" between Malaysia and Indonesia in 1964. The reason given for Yeo Moung Peng's detention is that he "knowingly, consistently and willingly acted in a manner prejudicial to the security of Malaysia by indulging in and promoting subversive and pro-communist activities to further the communist aim of overthrowing the existing Government of Malaysia through unconstitutional and revolutionary means". However, the Government has not accused him of using violence, no formal charges have been laid against him and there has been no opportunity to test these allegations in open court.
On 10 March 1977 the Minister of Home Affairs, Tan Sri Ghazali Shafie, announced that he had amended the regulations governing conditions in special detention camps, including the Batu Gajah Special Detention Camp. As a result, many of the rights and privileges formerly enjoyed by political detainees have been severely curtailed. For example, in the past detainees in the Batu Gajah camp were allowed to associate with each other for most of the day, but the amended regulations now specify that detainees shall be "confined in a cell (not being a punishment cell) either individually or together with any one or more other detained persons". Information available at present indicates that in fact the detainees are being kept in cells individually.
In accordance with the amended regulations, it is possible for some detainees to be allowed out of their cells (for the purposes of exercise, bathing, washing clothes, etc.) for as little as three hours in every twenty-four. The period for which each detainee is allowed out is at the discretion of the Superintendent of the camp.
Previous regulations provided for detainees to be held in solitary confinement (for a total of not more than 90 days in one year) as punishment for certain infringements of camp rules, but the amended regulations specify that detainees may be kept in individual'cells as a normal practice. Although the cell is defined as "not... a punishment cell", being kept in individual cells indefinitely amounts, for most of the detainees in the Batu Gajah Camp, to solitary confinement. This is regarded by the detainees and their families as a punitive measure.
The new regulations have also greatly curtailed other long-standing privileges formerly enjoyed by detainees, including their right to send and receive letters and to receive supplementary food and medicines from their families. Family visits have also been reduced. Amnesty International has urged the Malaysian Government to repeal the arbitrary restrictions introduced on 10 March 1977 and to restore in full all the rights and privileges enjoyed by the detainees before that date.
In April 1978 the leader of the opposition Democratic Action Party (DAP), Lim Kit Siang, one of the most outspoken critics of the Internal Security Act and himself a former political detainees, was arrested and charged with violating the Official Secrets Act. Also arrested was P. Patto, National Secretary of the DAP. Both were released on bail and Amnesty International is at present investigating the nature of the charges against the two men. Two other prominent members of the DAP, Chian Heng Kai, a member of the Malaysian Parliament, and Chan Kok Kai, Assistant Treasurer of the Party, have been detained since November 1976
176
without charge or trial under the Internal Security Act. Their cases have been taken up by Amnesty International.
Among other cases which Amnesty International groups have continued to work on are those of Syed Hussein Ali, one of Malaysia's most prominent social scientists, imprisoned without trial since December 1974; Samad Ismail, former Managing Editor of the New Straits Times, arrested in June 1976; and two former Deputy Ministers in the Government, Datuk Abdullah Ahmad and Datuk Abdullah Majid, who have both been held without trial since November 1976. Another prisoner for whom Amnesty International has been working is Kong Hoi, a former Secretary of the Perak Division of the opposition Labour Party of Malaya, who has been detained without trial since November 1964 in the Batu Gajah Special Detention Camp.
Amnesty International has consistently urged the Malaysian Government either to bring formal charges against detainees in a court of law or to release them immediately and unconditionally.
In 1975 an amendment to the Internal Security Act made the death sentence mandatory in cases involving the illegal possession of firearms. It is estimated that, since then, 50 people have been sentenced to death for firearms offences-although none has so far been executed—pending appeal. In March 1978 the Government announced that it would also amend existing drugs laws, to impose a mandatory death sentence for drug trafficking. The full implications of the 1975 amendment to the Internal Security Act, which applies also to minors, were revealed in August 1977, when a fourteen-year-old boy was sentenced to death for possession of a pistol and ammunition. The court was not presented with any evidence of his intent to use the firearm but, under the Act, mere possession of the weapon incurs the death penalty.
On 26 August 1977 Amnesty International sent a cable to the Malaysian Government, urging that the boy be reprieved. On 5 October the then Law Minister and Attorney General, Tan Sri Kadir Yusof, announced that he would recommend commutation of the sentence. On 11 October Amnesty International again wrote to Tan Sri Kadir Yusof, supporting his recommendation and urging that the death sentences passed on the 50 other people should also be commuted.
The death sentence passed on the fourteen-year-old boy provoked much public debate in Malaysia about the Internal Security Act. In October 1977 the Bar Council of Malaysia passed a motion advising members to refuse to handle cases tried under the Act as amended in 1975. The boycott, which has been observed by most lawyers, is still in force. The Bar Council has also criticized the practice of re-arresting those who have already been acquitted by the courts. In January 1978, in an effort to circumvent the boycott, the Government introduced a Bill to allow foreign lawyers to handle cases under the Act. It also disqualified members of the Malaysian Parliament and officials of trade unions and political parties from holding office on the Bar Council.
