Greece (the Hellenic Republic)
Amnesty International's major concerns in Greece are imprisoned conscientious objectors and the retention of the death penalty. The organization's only adopted prisoners in the country are 50 Jehovah's Witnesses, imprisoned because of their refusal to carry out military service.
In October 1977, the law regulating conscription in Greece was amended to allow religious objectors to military service to perform unarmed military service. This alternative service was to be for a term of four years, twice as long as armed military service. All imprisoned conscientious objectors were released at that time, but those who had served less than four years' imprisonment were immediately recalled to the army, and, when they refused to accept the alternative of unarmed military service, they were imprisoned again. Four men who had served well over four years in prison remained free until April 1978 when they were again sentenced to terms of imprisonment, but as the sentences were either short or suspended, they were released within one or two months. On 18 April 1978, Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Justice, George Stamatis, asking for clarification of Law 731/77, which had previously been thought to limit the imprisonment of conscientious objectors to a single term of four years. If the
218
law continues to be interpreted as allowing repeated sentences and not setting any limit to the total period of imprisonment to be served, the position of the Jehovah's Witnesses will not have been in any way improved by the new legislation.
On 6 February and 18 April 1978, Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Defence, Evangelos Averoff, asking for an investigation into allegations that Jehovah's Witnesses at Avion Military Prison were being ill-treated because of their refusal to join in military exercises while in prison. The Jehovah's Witnesses reported to Amnesty International that their heads had been forcibly shaved; that they were sworn at and insulted; that they had been put into damp, underground cells; that family visits had been stopped, and correspondence destroyed or interfered with.
On 20 July 1977, Amnesty International called upon Constantine Stephanakis, the then Minister of Justice, to investigate allegations made by seven anarchists that they had been ill-treated by the police at the time of their arrest (on charges of insulting police officers and profaning the name of God) and later in a police station. One of the seven spent two days in hospital for treatment of injuries allegedly inflicted by the police.
In May 1978, the Greek Parliament approved in principle a draft Bill for the suppression of terrorism, which provided for the imposition of a mandatory death sentence for acts of terrorism resulting in loss of life. In a letter addressed to the Prime Minister, Constantine Karamanlis, on 2 May 1978, Amnesty International expressed concern about this extension of the death penalty and pointed out that it was against the spirit of Resolution 32/61, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on 8 December 1977, which called for progressive restriction of the number of offences for which the death penalty may be imposed.
