Nigeria (the Federal Republic of)
The Nigerian Federal Military Government moved towards the planned second stage of its gradual handover to civilian rule, due in October 1979, by holding elections to the Constituent Assembly and discussions about a new Constitution. The ban on political activities and associations is due to be lifted in October 1978 for the final stage of this process.
After the student riots, which began on 10 April 1978 over a large increase in student fees and led to the deaths of about six students, a number of student leaders were detained by national security officers. Numerous appeals for their release were made within Nigeria, and Amnesty International cabled the Nigerian Federal Attorney General on 30 April, expressing concern at the continuing detention without charge of Segun Okeowo, a student representative in the National Assembly. Amnesty International asked for information about why he was being detained, about the terms of the detention order, and about others also being held following the student disturbances. No reply was received, but Segun Okeowo was released from Ikoyi prison on 13 June as a result of a High
68
Court order. His lawyer, Chief Gani Fewehinmi, had been arrested on other charges, but was acquitted in court.
Amnesty International wrote to the Nigerian Head of State, Lieutenant-General Olusegun Obasanjo, on 30 January 1978 about reported ill-treatment by national security officers of some people arrested on currency charges in the first half of 1977 and later held under the Exchange Control (Anti-Sabotage) Decree of 5 August 1977. Some of those held were said to be ill and not receiving adequate medical treatment. Access was also generally denied to family, lawyers and foreign diplomatic representatives. The Decree, which was retroactive, increased penalties and established special tribunals to try exchange control offences. Amnesty International urged the Head of State to establish an independent inquiry into the treatment of such people, and asked that review of sentence should await the result of such an inquiry. No reply was received.
In August 1977, it was announced that 608 people were under sentence of death (mostly for armed robbery), although the hearing of judicial appeals and clemency appeals could take up to two years. There were a number of public executions during 1977 and the first half of 1978.
In October 1977, Amnesty International attended a seminar organized by the All Africa Conference of Churches in Ibadan, Nigeria, on "The Death Penalty in Africa". It was attended by delegates from a number of African countries and affirmed "the desirability of the total abolition of capital punishment". During the seminar, the Amnesty International delegate learnt of an imminent public execution, due to take place on the final day of the seminar. The Chairman of Amnesty International, Thomas Hammarberg, cabled the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Brigadier Joseph Garba, requesting that the person to be executed be granted clemency. Amnesty International later learnt from the Nigerian press that the execution did not take place.
The Nigerian Government has not signed the International Convention on Civil and Political Rights.
