Sudan (Sudan Democratic Republic)
Until the national reconciliation policy in Sudan (see below), Amnesty International's concerns in the country were: long-term detention without trial of political prisoners; the unfair trial by state security courts of some political prisoners; the use of torture after the July 1976 coup attempt; poor conditions of detention; the use of the death penalty. However, the Sudan Government completed the release of all political detainees and all sentenced political prisoners in April 1978.
The major political events of 1977-78 in Sudan were President Nimeiri's reconciliation with the opposition and the elections in February 1978 to the National Assembly and Southern Regional Assembly. In July 1977, the President met secretly in Port Sudan with Sadiq el-Mahdi, leader of the clandestine Sudanese National Front opposition coalition, who had been given safe-conduct, despite the death penalty imposed on him in absentia in 1976 for his admitted part in the July 1976 coup attempt. The meeting led to a program of national reconciliation announced on 18 July, "in the interests of national unity", and including an amnesty for all political prisoners and exiles, and talks on a political settlement with opposition groups. The General Amnesty Law was promulgated on 7 August 1977, allowing the President to grant an amnesty to all political detainees or those sentenced or on trial in connection with political activities or mutiny since 1969. The Law also allowed those prisoners to apply to the President for release. The provision was that such people had to agree to abide by the Constitution, to work for national unity and the solidarity of the "popular forces".
The first releases under the amnesty took place in July 1977, when some of those sentenced in absentia or living in voluntary exile returned to Sudan without reprisal. However, a few days before the amnesty, death penalties were imposed by a state security court and carried out on six people connected with the July 1976 coup attempt. They had not been tried earlier because they were recovering from wounds sustained in the fighting at the time of the attempted coup. Fourteen other defendants were sentenced to long-term imprisonment at the same trial. An Amnesty International Urgent Action campaign appealed unsuccessfully for the commutation of the death penalties on humanitarian grounds. Ninety-eight people (unnamed) had been executed after trials before military tribunals in August 1976, but it is claimed that other unannounced executions also took place about that time.
The number of prisoners benefiting from the amnesty is not certain: Government press reports mentioned "over 1,000", but no names were published. However, the Government figure is generally regarded as reasonably correct.
84
The total included people detained and people sentenced to prison terms, principally in connection with the July 1976 coup attempt, but the amnesty was, in fact, retroactive to the beginning of the military régime in 1969; it applied, for example, to people detained or sentenced in connection with earlier coup attempts or mutinies by the armed forces. Those released or allowed to return safely from voluntary exile were almost exclusively members of the Sudan National Front opposition coalition of the Umma Party (the Ansari sect or Mahdists), the Islamic Charter Front (Muslim Brotherhood) and the National Unionist Party. Among those freed were Mudawi Muhammad Ahmed, the sixty-year-old National Unionist Party leader, sentenced to eight years' imprisonment by a national security court for his political activities, and his colleague, Hassan Hamed, both of them former members of parliament; Farouq Al-Berair, a lawyer, and Al-Haj Nuqdallah, a civil servant, both prominent Umma Party members, and both detained without trial since July 1976 in connection with the distribution of some political pamphlets criticizing Government policy; Dr Hassan Al-Tourabi, a former professor of law and the leader of the Islamic Charter Front, detained without trial in 1975 for the third time, and a political colleague, Abdullah Badri, an accountant, who was tortured and sentenced to two years' imprisonment in October 1976.
The Sudan Communist Party claimed that some 130 communists and trade unionists had not benefited from the amnesty. Two such detainees were, in fact, reported to have died in detention in the period after the amnesty announcement: Abdul Majeed el-Nur Shakkak reportedly died in prison on 8 September 1977; Hassan Gasmalla, an Agricultural Bank official, died in prison in December 1977. Both were reported to have received inadequate medical treatment for illnesses which had been exacerbated by the conditions in which they were detained. Amnesty International cabled President Nimeiri, expressing concern about these deaths and urging that proper medical attention be provided for all detainees to prevent similar occurrences in the future.
In April 1978, the Government decided to release all remaining detainees, some of whom had been held since 1974. They included Gasim Amin, a trade unionist, detained in 1974 and Amnesty International Prisoner of the Month in February 1978, and Dr Muhammad Suleman, a lecturer at the Institute of Higher Education, also detained since 1974.
A case which was also of concern to Amnesty International was that of a number of Southerners arrested at various times during 1976-77 and put on trial in mid 1977. Charges included "causing disaffection in the South". Some leading Southern politicians, such as Clement Mboro, Benjamin Bol, and Joseph Oduho, had been detained in October 1976; others were arrested just before or immediately after a mutiny in Juba on 2 February 1977, while others were accused of seeking to disrupt the anniversary celebrations on 23 February. It is not clear whether the trial was completed, but on 25 August 1977 it was announced that all 110 defendants in this trial, of whom about 100 were Southerners, had been freed under the amnesty measure.
The reconciliation thus finally embraced all political opposition groups. Political discussions following this key preliminary measure continued, and several released detainees took part in the elections as Sudan Socialist Union candidates. Some were elected and given office in the National Assembly and the ruling Sudanese
85
Socialist Union. An indication of the degree of reconciliation achieved may be found in the appointment of Clement Mboro to be Speaker of the Southern Regional Assembly, and of Dr Hassan Al-Tourabi to the political bureau of the Sudan Socialist Union.
After each phase of releases, Amnesty International cabled President Nimeiri, congratulating his Government on the amnesty measure. Until the final group of releases, Amnesty International also added an appeal for the extension of the amnesty to all political prisoners, and asked for assurances from the Government that all those still in prison were receiving adequate medical treatment. Prison conditions in Sudan are poor: family visits are rarely allowed or else they are made difficult by the frequent transfer of prisoners to remote areas. Allegations of ill-treatment and torture relate to periods of intense political crisis, such as that immediately following the July 1976 coup attempt, when torture was extensively used.
The Sudan Government has not signed the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
