Angola (the People's Republic of)
In the period 1977-78 President Agostinho Neto's Government was confronted with problems on a number of fronts as it persisted in its efforts to assert effective control over the country as a whole. In the south, the Government had to cope with a continuing high level of guerilla activity on the part of Jonas Savimbi's UNIT A (National Union for the Total Independence of Angola), one of the nationalist organizations defeated by President Neto's MP LA (People's Movement for the Liberation of Angola) in the civil war which followed independence in November 1975. The situation was aggravated by the cross-border conflict between the Namibian nationalist movement, SWAPO (South West Africa People's Organization), which is allowed to operate from southern Angola, and the South African Defence Force occupying northern Namibia. This conflict went on simultaneously with that between UN IT A and MPLA, with the result that throughout the year there was a two-way flow of refugees across the Namibia/ Angola border.
In the north of the country, the Neto Government had also to contend with sporadic attacks by guerillas of the FN LA (National Front for the Liberation of Angola), based in Zaire, and in the Cabinda enclave with FLEC (Front for the Liberation of the Enclave of Cabinda) guerillas. Relations with Zaire were also
37
severely strained because of attacks into Shaba province in May 1977 and May 1978 by General Mbumba's FLNC (Front for the Liberation of the National Congo), which is allowed to operate from north-eastern Angola.
It was difficult to tell how far these developments affected the human rights situation in Angola. No details were forthcoming about prisoners captured by the opposing sides in the conflict - neither how many were held nor under what conditions. However, the pressure exerted by continuing guerilla activity and militant opposition clearly affected the Neto Government's response to the internal crises which occurred as a result of the attempted coup d'état of 27 May 1977.
Although the coup attempt, led by a former Interior Minister, Nito Alves, and a former political prisoner under the Portuguese, José van Dunem, was unsuccessful, it was a major crisis for the ruling M PL A. According to an official report issued in July 1977, Alves' supporters included individuals who held key positions throughout the party structure, in the military wing, FAPLA, and in the trade union organization, UNITA. The attempted coup had also revealed considerable popular discontent, particularly in the Luanda area, with the Government's economic performance and with the presence of many mesticos (people of racially mixed parentage) in the MP LA administrative structure.
Both Nito Alves and José van Dunem had been arrested by mid July 1977, at which time the political bureau of the MPLA announced that a special military tribunal would be set up to try the conspirators. However, by the end of May 1978 there had been no public trials and Amnesty International had no information about the situation of the two coup leaders and of the several hundred other Angolans believed to have been arrested in the weeks immediately after the coup attempt. A number of Portuguese expatriates allegedly involved in the conspiracy are known to have been deported to Portugal, but these did not include Sita Vallès, also a Portuguese citizen, the wife of José van Dunem and one of the alleged ringleaders of the conspiracy. According to persistent but unconfirmed rumours, she, her husband, Nito Alves and other leading supporters of the conspiracy were summarily executed some time in late 1977.
Amnesty International continued to collect data on political prisoners in Angola throughout 1977-78, being particularly concerned with the situation of Gentil Viana and other supporters of the Active Revolt faction of the MPLA who were detained without trial in April 1976. They are reportedly held at Sâo Paulo Prison in Luanda and at the Sâo Nicolau detention camp near Moçamedes.
