Brazil
Amnesty Intemational continued to work on behalf of six prisoners of conscience, all of whom were priests or joumalists sentenced under the Lei de Seguranqa Nacional ( LSN), National Security Law, for peacefully exercising their right to freedom of opinion and expression. LSN proceedings take place before military courts and are often protracted. In some cases defendants were kept in pre-trial detention for long periods and were denied access to their lawyers. In December 1983, following amendments to the LSN, all but one of the six prisoners of conscience were released. The organization also received disturbing reports of the arbitrary killing of peasant union officials and Indian leaders in mral areas.
In October 1983 Amnesty Intemational sent an observer to attend the second appeal of two French priests. Fathers François Gouriou and Aristide Camio, and 13 peasants \>QÏore\ht Superior Tribunal Militar (STM), Superior Military Tribunal, in Brasilia. The 15 were arrested in August 1981 after the peasants had allegedly ambushed a government patrol and killed one man.
Amnesty Intemational had sent observers to all the earlier stages of the legal proceedings. In June 1982 Father Gouriou and Father Camio were sentenced to prison terms of 10 and 15 years respectively. In December 1981 their sentences were slightly reduced on appeal. The peasants received sentences of between eight and nine years' imprisonment. In a second appeal in October 1983 the STM upheld the conviction and the sentences. After the hearing Amnesty Intemational cabled President Joào Figueiredo urging the immediate and unconditional release of the two priests on the grounds that they had been imprisoned for their conscientiously held beliefs and for carrying out their pastoral obligations. Amnesty Intemational was concemed about a number of irregularities in the police investigation and about
132
allegations that the testimony in which some of the peasants had incriminated the priests was obtained under duress. In December 1983 both the priests and the peasants benefited from amendments to the LSN which considerably reduced the penalties for their crimes, and all were released after their sentences were reduced At the end of the year the priests annoimced that they intended to make a final appeal before the Supreme Federal Tribund in an attempt to have their conviction overturned
In November 1983 Amnesty International appealed on behalf of the prisoner of conscience Juvéncio Mazzarollo, when he went on a hunger-strike for two weeks to protest against an increase in his prison sentence. In September 1982 Juvéncio Mazzarollo, ajoumalist, was given a two-year prison sentence under the LSN for writing articles critical of the govemment A year later the court of appeal, the STM, ruled that, as he had a previous conviction, his prison sentence should be increased from two to four years. In December 1983 he was the only remaining LSN prisoner being detained
In December 1983 the Brazilian Congress approved amendments to the LSN which reduced both the number of offences and their penalties. The new law defined violations of national security more narrowly and reduced the number of crimes from 40 to 22. Cases involving the abuse of press freedom and the defamation of goverrunent officials would no longer be tried under the LSN but would be heard in civil courts.
The new law also modified court procedures and reduced the severity of prison sentences. The period of pre-trial detention was reduced from 30 to 15 days, and the amount of time a detainee could be held incommunicado was reduced from eight to five days. However, the Communist Party of Brazil remained prohibited under the amended LSN.
Amnesty International continued to be alarmed by reports of the arbitrary killing of members of the rural trade union movement. Fifteen peasants linked to the movement were reportedly killed with the alleged acquiescence of local authorities during the year. On 12 August 1983 the trade unionist, Margarida Maria Alves, was murdered in her home in Alagoa Grande, Paraiba, by a gunman allegedly employed by a local factory owner. Following this killing a 44-year-old lawyer, Tereza Braga, who worked closely with Margarida Maria Alves in the Sindicato de Trabalhadores Rurais, Union of Rural Workers, began to receive death threats and her home was subsequently bombed by a group calling itself the Falange Patriótica, Patriotic Phalange, though she was not injured.
Amnesty International was concerned about allegations that these crimes were not subject to prompt and effective criminal investigation
133
by either the state or federal authorities.
Amnesty Intemational also received reports of the killing of leaders of the indigenous population in Brazil. Duringl983,11 Indian leaders were killed and in only one of these cases, that of the murder in March 1983 of the Pataxó Há-Há-Hai chief, Edisio, was a criminal prosecution instituted. Amnesty Intemational appealed for an mvestigation following the killing on 25 November 1983 of Marqal de Souza, a Guaraní Indian leader, while he was working alone at a health post in Campestre in the municipality of Antonio Joao in Mato Grosso do Sul, Before his death Marpal de Souza was allegedly threatened in order to make him exert his influence to relocate a neighbouring village of Kaiowá Indians. Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the apparent inaction on the part of the authorities responsible for investigating these crimes and bringing those responsible to justice.
