Japan
Amnesty International continued to urge the authorities to commute all death sentences and to abolish the deadi penalty.
An Arnnesty International mission visited Japan from 21 February to 3 March 1983 to convey the organization's concerns about the death penalty, to gather information, and to seek Japanese views on its abolition. The Amnesty International delegates met senior officials of the Ministry of Justice, including officials involved in the preparation of a bill for the revision of the penal code. They also met senior officials of the Supreme Court Secretariat, chairpersons and members of the Committees on Justice of both Houses of the Di'ef (parliament), senior officials of the Japan Federation of Bar
230
Associations and of tlie Japanese Council on Crime and Delinquency as well as religious leaders and others concemed about the use of the death penalty.
On 31 May 1983, Amnesty Intemational sent a memorandum to the Government of Japan containing the delegates' fmdings and recommending that no further executions be carried out and that the death penalty be abolished for all offences. There was no official response to Ae memorandum.
Amnesty International's concem that the death penalty is irreversible and can be inflicted on the innocent was highlighted by the retrials in several capital cases. On 15 July 1983, a court found Sakae Menda, who had been sentenced to death in March 1950, not guilty of the crime for which he had been convicted at that time. He was released after more than 33 years under sentence of death during which time he had applied for retrial six times before his application was accepted. The retrial of Shigeyoshi Taniguchi, sentenced in 1952 for murder, continued. The first court hearing in the retrial of Yukio Saito, granted in December 1979, took place in July 1983. Yukio Saito had been convicted of murder and arson in October 1957.
In 1983, four death sentences were confirmed by high courts and five imposed by district courts. One of the latter became final when the prisoner waived his right of appeal. One death sentence was commuted by a high court. In another case, the Supreme Court reversed a high court decision to commute a death sentence. Amnesty Intemational leamed that one prisoner was executed on 29 November 1983.
According to information available to Amnesty Intemational, there were more than 60 prisoners under sentence of death at the end of 1983, including 15 who had exhausted all appeals to higher courts. During their visit the Amnesty Intemational delegates tried to confirm details of individuals believed to be under sentence of death, but the authorities refused to verify the information on the grounds that it was official policy not to disclose to the public whether a particular prisoner was still alive or had been executed.
