Niger
81
Amnesty International was concerned about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, some of whom had been detained without trial or restricted under house arrest for almost 10 years, and the detention without trial of oÂer suspected opponents of the government There were allegations of ill-treatment of detainees, at least one of whom died in custody, and prison conditions were reportedly poor.
The former President, Hamani Diori, and Djibo Bakary, the former leader of the Sawaba (Freedom) Party, continued to be restricted under house arrest in Niamey throughout the year. They had both been placed under house arrest in April 1980 when they were released from several years' detention without trial in remote military camps, and both were adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International.
Seven other people related to Hamani Diori or closely associated with his administration, which was overthrown in April 1974, remained in detention throughout 1983. They included Ibrahim Issa, formerly a senior government official, and two relatives of the former President, Ganda Diori and Boubacar Moussa Diori. They were all arrested in April 1974 and detained without trial since then, mostly in Tillabery and Agades prisons. Amnesty International repeatedly called on the government to bring them to trial or release them and was concerned about their continued detention in view of the intemationally-recognized right to trial within a reasonable time.
At the beginning of May, there was a nationwide strike by university students and school pupils in protest against the closure by the authorities of the Ecole supérieure d'agronomie. School of Higher Studies in Agronomy, after a dispute between staff and students over the method of evaluating students' performance. On 3 May, security forces entered the university campus in Niamey and arrested some 300 students who were taken to the nearby Tondibia military barracks. Many of those arrested were reportedly beaten with rifle-butts, truncheons or sticks and some appeared to have been seriously injured. One of the detained students, Amadou Boubacar, died in custody in the days following his arrest on 3 May, apparently as a result of ill-treatment His body was returned by the authorities to his family.
Following reports that no official investigation into the circumstances of Amadou Boubacar's death had been instituted. Amnesty International wrote to president Seyni Kountche and several senior government officials in August 1983 calling for such an investigation urgentiy to take place. The organization also called on the authorities to initiate
82
appropriate legal action against anyone who might be found responsible for his death. No response was received from the authorities and by the end of the year it appeared that there had been no inquest or official investigation into Amadou Boubacar's death. In 1983 the organization had still not received any response from the authorities to appeals it had sent to them in 1982 to establish an official inquiry into two other deaths in detention that year.
All but 14 of those arrested in connection with the May strike were released uncharged after several days in custody. The authorities announced that the remaining detainees would be charged with committing violence and inciting others to do so, but none of them had been brought to trial by the end of the year. They included Ali Chekou, Saidou Moussa and Harouna Abass, all of whom apparently had been leading members of the student bodies involved in the strike. A lecturer at the university in Niamey was also reportedly among those detained. Their cases were taken up for investigation by Amnesty Intemational.
In June, several more arrests were made, apparendy in connection with the strike. Those detained included two students and several university teachers. The authorities did not reveal where they and the other 14 detainees were held but unconfirmed reports suggested that they were detained at a remote military outpost in the desert at Bilma.
An unsuccessful attempt to overthrow the government of President Seyni Kountche took place on 7 October. In the aftermath, at least 26 people were detained on suspicion of involvement in the plot, including two former government ministers, senior civil servants and army officers. However, no charges were reported to have been brought against them and none had been brought to trial by the end of the year.
The conditions in which detainees were being held in Agades and Tillabery, the main centres for long-term political detention, were understood to be poor. The quality of food provided by the authorities was reported to be very inadequate, as was the standard of sanitation. Medical facilities were understood to be grossly inadequate. Political detainees held in these centres were reportedly only rarely allowed visits or letters from friends and relatives.
83
