Lesotho
Amnesty International was concerned about the detention without trial of political detainees and the death in detention of one such political detainee. The organization remained concerned about the government's failure to reveal the cause of death of another political detainee who died in custody in late 1981 and to investigate thoroughly alleged extrajudicial executions committed in September 1981.
There was a continuing high level of tension between the governments of Lesotho and South Africa throughout the year, following a South African military incursion into Lesotho in December 1982 which resulted in more than 40 deaths. The Lesotho Government alleged on several occasions that new attacks had been made or were about to be launched from South Africa, and in mid-1983 the coimtry was for some weeks imder a virtual blockade as South African authorities imposed stringent controls at the borders.
As a result of South African pressure on the government, many South African refugees were obliged to leave Lesotho. More than 100 were reportedly air-lifted to Mozambique in January and others left later in the year. In August, the Lesotho Government appealed for international assistance with the resettlement outside Lesotho of South African refugees still resident there.
There were also further acts of sabotage attributed to the Lesotho Liberation Army (LLA), the military wing of one faction of the Basutoland Congress Party (BCP). In March, there was an apparent assassination attempt on the Minister of Agriculture and the government alleged on two occasions, in June and in August, that opposition forces had attempted to assassinate the Prime Minister. In December, the government announced that a new plot had been uncovered and that several people had been detained for questioning.
Amnesty International learned of several new detentions during 1983, but received insufficient information to be able to estimate how many people were detained for political reasons. Most of those held were believed to have been detained under the Internal Security (General) Act which empowers all members of the police to detain people whom they suspect of subversive activity and to hold them incommunicado for 14 days. Thereafter, the Commissioner of Police may authorize detention for another two weeks, following which the government minister responsible for security matters may sanction detention for a further 14 days, thereby permitting a maximum 42 days' detention.
61
Amnesty Intemational received information whicii suggested that several political detainees had been kept in custody beyond the legally permitted period. Thakane Mohapi, a 30-year-old pregnant mother of two who was reportedly arrested on 13 April, was held in incommunicado detention and not released until 1 Jime. Amnesty Intemational inquired in early May into the reasons for her detention incommunicado and subsequently received confirmation of her release from the government Other imcharged detainees were allegedly held incommunicado for three months or more.
On 16 April, the authorities announced that Henry Khahlanyetso Masheane, a political detainee, had been found dead in custody three days earlier. They said that he had been detained for four days before his death for questioning about an act of sabotage committed in February near his workplace. They stated that he had been found hanged with a belt around his neck in his cell at Maseru Central Prison. An inquest into his death began in December and had not been completed by the end of the year. At the inquest it was alleged by the pathologist who carried out a post-mortem examination that Henry Khahlanyetso Masheane could not have committed suicide by hanging given the position in which his body had been found. It appeared therefore that his death by hanging may have been faked to simulate suicide.
Amnesty Intemational remained concemed about the govemment's failure to disclose the circumstances in which another political detainee, Setipa Mathaba, had died in custody in November 1981. A postmortem examination was reportedly carried out after his death but its findings were never disclosed and no formal inquest was known to have been held to determine the cause of death. At the time of Setipa Mathaba's death. Amnesty Intemational received substantial information about the torture and cmel, inhuman or degrading treatment of political detainees being held under security legislation. The organization brought these reports to the attention of the Prime Minister, but the goverrunent did not respond substantively to Amnesty International's communication.
In December, Amnesty Intemational learned that an inquest would be held early in 1984 into the killing of Edgar Motuba, a prominent newspaper editor, and two others in September 1981. Following the deaths, an Amnesty Intemational mission had visited Lesotho to inquire into allegations that the killings had been politically motivated and had been carried out by a pro-govemment "death squad" known as Koeeoko. No investigation was known to have been initiated into the case of Benjamin Masilo, a leading cleric and, like Edgar Motuba, a well-known critic of the government who had been the victim of an attack by armed men within days of the other killings in 1981. His grandson had been killed in the attack but he escaped and subsequently
62
alleged that those responsible for it had been members of the paramilitary Police Mobile Unit, some of whose personnel were allegedly connected with Koeeoko. No inquest was known to have been held into the death of his grandson, a young child.
