Cuba
Amnesty Intemational's main concems were the continued detention of long-term political prisoners after their sentences had expired, the conditions in which long-term political prisoners were held, and reports of the imposition of the death penalty.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concerned about the govemment's practice of not releasing long-term political prisoners who had completed their sentences. During 1983,30 long-term political prisoners
146
who had been held under such circumstances (see^mweíív Intemational Report 1983) were released. One such prisoner, Raúl del Valle Vilardel reportedly spent 17 months in prison after his original 20-year sentence expired in November 1981. However, eight of the political prisoners referred to in Úie Amnesty Intemational Report 1983 were believed to be still in detention at the end of August 1983. Amnesty Intemational also received information that at least 11 other long-term political prisoners, whose sentences expired during the course of 1983, had not been released by the end of the year. The organization expressed its concem to the government about the apparently arbitrary prolongation of these- prisoners' sentences. Several of them had already spent 20 years in detention.
Amnesty Intemational remained concerned about reports that a number of political prisoners in the maximum security wing of Boniato Prison in eastem Cuba had been denied visits from their families, correspondence rights, and open-air recreation and exercise periods since March 1981. There were also unconfirmed reports that two prisoners, Silvino Rodríguez Barrientes and Guillermo Casasüs Toledo, had been ill-treated by security police when they were removed from their cells in Boniato Prison for questioning.
A number of individual arrests in 1983 were said to have been politically motivated, but Amnesty Intemational was unable to estimate the number of political prisoners being held in the country. Difficulties in obtaining information regarding the circumstances of individual arrests were compounded by the government's refusal to respond to the organization's inquiries about human rights issues and it was often difficult to establish whether the cases fell within the organization's mandate.
Amnesty Intemational took up the case of one person whom it believed to be a prisoner of conscience. Dr Ricardo Bofill Pagés, who was known for his dissident political views, was arrested on 24 September in Havana. Amnesty Intemational believed his arrest was provoked by a meeting he held with two French journalists on 21 September. Since being released in April 1982 after a previous sentence, Dr Bofill had been awaiting permission to join his wife who lived in the United States. She claimed that Dr Bofill had repeatedly been denied permission to emigrate. No official explanation was given as to the reasons for his arrest, the charges against him, or the date of his trial by the end of 1983. Friends had reportedly not been allowed to visit him.
Reports of the imposition of death sentences continued to reach the organization. On 4 Febmary it sent a cable to Vice-President Carlos Rafael Rodriguez expressing concem over death sentences reportedly given in January to five people: Ezequiel Diaz Rodríguez, José Luis
147
Díaz Romero, Carlos García Díaz, Benito García Olivera and Angel Donato Martínez Garaa. Amnesty International stressed that its appeal was based on the organization's unconditional opposition to the death penalty. In the absence of a reply from the government, and in the light of growing public concern over the fate of the five prisoners, the organization launched intemational appeals on behalf of the five individuals on 15 March. At the beginning of May, Vice-President Rodriguez and Roberto Veiga, the Secretario General de la Confederación de Trabqjadores de Cuba, Secretary General of the Cuban Workers' Confederation, stated that none of the five prisoners had been sentenced to death and denied earlier allegations that the sentences had been passed on account of their trade union activities. According to Roberto Veiga, they had received heavy sentences for their involvement in criminal activities, such as the buming of crops and factories, together with 33 others.
Although Amnesty Intemational was unable to clarify the events which led to the arrests, the organization received reports that on 9 April 1983 the Tribunal Supremo Popular, People's Supreme Court, commuted the death sentences passed on the five by a lower court to 30 years' imprisonment
The organization investigated allegations concerning other prisoners that a number of executions had taken place, but was unable to confirm them by the end of the year.
On 13 May 1983 Amnesty Intemational sent a cable to the authorities requesting information on the reported arrest of the lawyers Aramis Taboada, Francisco Moura, Israel Tamayo and Rubén Armenteros Fraga, and of a judge, Nicasio Hernández de Armas. According to unconfirmed reports they were arrested for their role in publicizing the death sentences reportedly passed in January on the five people mentioned above. No reply was received from the Cuban authorities either to the cable or to further formal requests made by Amnesty Intemational for information. In July, a Ministry of Foreign Affairs representative declared that a group of lawyers had been arrested for "violating the constitution". No further information reached Amnesty Intemational concerning these cases and the organization was continuing to investigate them at the end of 1983.
148
