Morocco
Amnesty Intemational continued to work on behalf of more than 200 actual or possible prisoners of conscience and was also concemed about extended periods of detention without trial and of incommunicado detention; the ill-treatment of detainees; "disappearances"; and the possibility of the execution of prisoners under sentence of death.
Amnesty Intemational called for the release of 116 prisoners of conscience, and investigated the cases of a further 90 prisoners. One hundred and five of the adopted prisoners of conscience had been tried and sentenced to long prison terms in 1973 and 1977, for alleged membership of various Marxist-Leninist groups. During the year three such prisoners were released when their terms expired and another, Jamal ed-Din Benomar, was released before his 10-year sentence expired.
Among those prisoners whose cases Amnesty Intemational continued to investigate were more than 80 Saharans who "disappeared" as long ago as 1976 after having been taken into custody by Moroccan security forces. The Moroccan authorities have never officially acknowledged their detention despite repeated inquiries from Amnesty Intemational.
355
Amnesty Intemational also investigated the cases of individuals who were tried and convicted in 198 3 in connection with an altercation that took place in May 1983 between members of two factions of the major opposition party, the Union socialiste des forces populaires (USFP), the Socialist Union of Popular Forces. Four USFP members, three of whom also belonged to the Association marocainedes droits de rhomme (AMDH), Moroccan Association of Human Rights, were sentenced to three years' imprisonment Abderrahman Ben Amar, a lawyer and a member of the administrative committees of both the AMDH and of the USFP; the joumalist El-Yazid Barakat; Muhammad Filahi and Muhammad Bougrine. A fifth, sentenced to three years' imprisonment was released for treatment of a serious ilbiess.
Amnesty Intemational feared that these prisoners may in fact have been tried, convicted and sentenced for their non-violent political views rather than for offences allegedly committed during the altercation. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about a number of aspects of their arrest and trial. These included the following:
1)	basic procedural requirements set out in Moroccan law relating to arrest ondgarde a vue, incommunicado detention by the police, were not adhered to;
2)	police interrogations were reported to have focused largely on the political views of the suspects;
3)	allegations of ill-treatment during interrogation were made to the court but were not examined by it
4)	serious questions challenging the faithfulness of the police record of interrogations were not given a proper hearing in court;
5)	during the trial, requests by the defence were systematically rejected - requests to have the court hear additional witnesses and requests to seek medical expertise on the treatment meted out to the detainees and handwriting expertise to determine whether signatures to the police interrogation records had been falsified.
In another case. Amnesty Intemational issued an urgent appeal on behalf of a number of secondary-school students, including Mustapha Sabir, Fouad Abdelmoumni, Abdelkarim Marir and Abdellatif Chaiboub, who were arrested in Casablanca in January and Febmary 1983 and were reportedly held incommunicado in police detention centres for months, during which time there were fears that they were being ill-treated. Their fate reportedly remained unknown at the end of the year despite inquiries to the authorities in Casablanca from Amnesty Intemational and their families.
During the year, hundreds of amnesties were handed down to mark national holidays, but they did not benefit political prisoners. A separate amnesty took place on 5 May 1983, reportedly to enable the affected individuals to participate in elections plarmed for June. Among the 22
356
persons amnestied on this occasion were three officials of the Confédération démocratique du travail (CDT), the Democratic Confederation of Labour, and one official of the USFP, each of whom had been in preventive detention since June 1981 and had been adopted by Amnesty Intemational as prisoners of conscience. Following their release, Amnesty International telexed messages to King Hassan II, to the Prime Minister and to the Minister of Justice welcoming the releases and requesting that the amnesties be extended to include all prisoners of conscience. In November, the two remaining prisoners in this group, also adopted by Amnesty Intemational as prisoners of conscience, Noubir Amaoui and Mustapha Karchaoui, respectively Secretary General of the CDT and editor-in-chief of the suppressed USFP newspaper, al-Muharrir, were also released from preventive detention
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports of ill-treatment occurring either at the hands of the Moroccan police or, in some cases, in Moroccan prisons. The lawyer Ben Amar was allegedly ill-treated during and after his arrest in connection with the altercation between factions of the USFP (see above), and the secondary-school students referred to above were also said to have been ill-treated. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about the conditions which may have led to a prolonged hunger-strike begun on 5 Febmary 1983 by five USFP militants who had been sentenced to four years' imprisonment followingunrestin June 1981 in Casablanca and other Moroccan cities. In cables to King Hassan II, as well as to the Prime Minister and the Ministers of Justice and Health, Amnesty Intemational's Secretary General urged that all appropriate medical care be provided for these prisoners.
On 2/3 December 1983, many poUtical prisoners in Kenitra Central Prison undertook a 48-hour hunger-strike to draw attention to the serious psychiatric problems and continuing imprisonment of two prisoners of conscience, Hassan el Bou and Miloud Achdini, both of whom had been the subject of repeated appeals over the years from Amnesty Intemational to the Moroccan authorities. Amnesty International remained seriously concemed at reports that their mental health was continuing to deteriorate.
Amnesty Intemational was also seriously concemed about the refusal of the Moroccan authorities to clarify the fate of approximately 100 military prisoners arrested following attempts to assassinate King Hassan II in 1971 and 1972 or to acknowledge where they were held. Reports indicated that these individuals have been held since 1973 in appalling conditions - windowless, filthy and unventilated cells, extremes of temperature, solitary confinement, arbitrary punishments and beatings, inadequate food, and the complete lack of any medical care. Some continued to be held long after their sentences had expired.
357
Amnesty Intemational received reports that approximately 20 of these prisoners may already have died, many at least in part because of the very bad conditions. Despite repeated appeals from Amnesty International and other sources, the Moroccan authorities continued to refuse to comment on the fate of these prisoners.
Amnesty Intemational did not leam of any death sentences having been carried out during 1983. However the organization received information during the year that at least 58 people were being held in Kenitra Central Prison under sentence of death. One of them, Ahmed el-Khiari, had been under sentence of death since 1972 for a political murder, and was being held in a special section of Kenitra Central Prison in extremely unhealthy conditions: his small exercise area was reportedly deep under ground, receiving little natural light, and he appeared to be suffering from the cold and humidity in winter. He was also being permitted only limited contact with other prisoners. On 13 October 1983, Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Moroccan Minister of Justice requesting confirmation of the number of prisoners threatened with execution and submitted a list of names for verification, but as of the end of 1983 had received no reply.
Finally, Amnesty Intemational received several reports that civilians had been arrested in El Aayoun in the context of the war in the Westem Sahara and had been tortured, although the organization was unable to verify them. Amnesty Intemational also continued to be concemed about Polisario Front members reportedly held as prisoners by the Polisario Front since 1975 for having criticized the Front's policies. Amnesty Intemational issued a statement on the subject in 1981, but was subsequently unable to obtain any information about their conditioa
