Nicaragua
Amnesty Intemational's concems included trials of political prisoners which fell short of internationally accepted standards; the detention of prisoners of conscience; the detention of political prisoners after their sentences had expired; and the prolonged incommunicado detention of political prisoners in the custody of the Dirección General de Seguridad del Estado (DGSE), Department of State Security. Amnesty Intemational welcomed the release in a December 1983 amnesty of most of the Miskito and Sumo Indian prisoners known to the organization, some of whom it had believed were prisoners of conscience.
An estimated 2,500 prisoners - most of them former National Guards - were held as a result of having been convicted of crimes committed under the authority of the government which was overthrown in July 1979. Most of these prisoners had been convicted by Tribunales Especiales, Special Tribunals, set up by the new government; about 70 had been tried by ordinary courts after the disbanding of the Special Tribunals in Febmary 1981. Amnesty International criticized trial procedures used in these cases. The organization urged that a systematic review of the cases be carried out and expressed concern that some of these prisoners were kept in custody for up to three months after their sentences had elapsed, under the provisions of a state of emergency which had been in force since March 1982.
Most of the political prisoners held in connection with crimes allegedly committed since July 1979, some of whom Amnesty Intemational believed might be prisoners of conscience, were held under the Law for the Maintenance of Public Order and Security (or Public Order Law), which was first published in July 1979 and was applicable in 1983 in the amended form promulgated by Decree 1074 of 6 June 1982. Although arrests could be made without charge under the state of
179
emergency, most political arrests were made on the basis of suspected offences under the Public Order Law, and prisoners were generally formally charged or released. However, many supporters of legal political parties, trade union organizations, and other bodies opposing government policies were detained for questioning for periods ranging from several hours to over one month in incommunicado detention, before being released without charge. Amnesty Intemational believed that a pattern of harassment emerged from the detention of trade union members and other suspected opponents of the government for short periods of questioning. Many such detainees subsequently reported being threatened that they would be detained again for prolonged periods under the Public Order Law if they did not assist the security forces or resign from certain lawful organizations.
Amnesty Intemational appealed to the authorities for clarification of the legal status of five detained members of the Urban Transport Drivers' Union (SIMOTUR); all were bus drivers for the state-owned transport system ENABUS in Managua, the capital, and were detained between 7 and 14 November. They were arrested in the context of an inter-union dispute between SIMOTUR - which is an affiliate of the Christian Democratic Central de Trabajadores de Nicaragua, Nica-raguan Workers' Centre, and unions affiliated with the governing party Frente Sandinista de Liberación Nacional, Sandinist National Liberation Front.
The government replied that two of the five, Orlando Mendoza and Napoleón Molina Aguilar, had been detained under Articles 1 and 2 of the Public Order Law on charges of forming part of "a terrorist network financed and directed by the C.I. A. intending to carry out Sabotage and destmction of Centers for electric power and agricultural production". Bismark Antonio Garcia Estrada was said to have been charged with having been aware of the criminal activity of the network and having failed to report it to the authorities. Manuel Antonio Zeledon Cano and Roberto Mauricio Rosales Aviles were said to have been detained under the Public Order Law for unspecified reasons. Garcia Estrada, Zeledon Cano and Rosales Aviles were released when charges were dropped in late December; but Amnesty Intemational continued to investigate the basis for the charges against Mendoza and Molina.
While certain trade union activities, including strikes and stoppages, were banned under the prevailing state of emergency and punishable under the Public Order Law, Amnesty Intemational was unaware of any trade unionists having been detained or prosecuted under these provisions. Charges were generally reported to have been based on allegations of collaboration with violent opposition groups, or involvement in specific acts of sabotage or terrorism within the terms of the Public Order Law. While most of the trade union members detained
180
under the Public Order Law were apparently released after charges were dropped, some were subjected to repeated periods of short-term detention. Amnesty Intemational issued appeals on behalf of Denis Maltes Lugo and Alejandro Amuero, both leaders of the Stevedores' Union at the port of Corinto, who were detained on 7 November 1982; released on 15 November 1982 and 14 January 1983, respectively; and rearrested with six other stevedores on 9 June 1983 after conflicts between their union and other unions. All were at liberty by December 1983.
Leaders of political opposition parties were also arrested under the Public Order Law. Amnesty Intemational made inquiries following the detention on 9 June of Maria Haydée Trana, aged 65, a leading member of the Conservative Party. She was detained for questioning, apparently without charge, after returning from a visit to Costa Rica, and was subsequently confirmed to have been released within a week of her detention. Other leaders of opposition parties who were possible prisoners of conscience remained in detention for considerable periods in 1983, sentenced with offences under the Public Order Law.
They included three leaders of Partido Social Cristiano, Social Christian Party, who were detained in May and June 1982, and were the object of Amnesty Intemational appeals. Francisco Rodriguez, the Secretary General of the party's youth branch, was detained on 2 June while distributing leaflets and subsequently held incommunicado for questioning for over a month at "El Chipote", the top-security jail at the Managua headquarters of the Department of State Security service. He was reportedly interrogated solely on political matters. He was subsequently sentenced to two years' imprisonment on a dmgs charge but was released on 18 November 1983. Feliciano Polanco, a local Social Christian party leader, was detained on 14 June 1982 and sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment on charges of collaboration with armed opposition groups; his release was confirmed, however, in December 1983.
Although ordinary courts previously had jurisdiction for trials of persons accused of Public Order Law offences, a decree of April 1983 created a system of special courts, the Tribunales Populares Anti-somocistas. Popular Antisomocist Tribunals, to try those accused of "crimes of war and against humanity", as defined in Articles 1 and 2 of the Public Order Law. The courts consist of three magistrates: a lawyer, serving as president, and two others appointed from nominations by "popular organizations" supporting the government Procedures in the new courts are similar to those applied in the Special Tribunals created immediately after the fall of the Somoza government Prisoners are given two days after formal notification of the charge to prepare their defence, and a period of eight days, which may be lengthened to 12, is
181
permitted for consideration of evidence by the court Sentences must be delivered within a further three days. The right to defence has reportedly been severely curtailed by limitations on the time allowed for the preparation and presentation of defence arguments. Like the former Special Tribunals, the new courts include both first instance courts and appeal courts - with no further appeals possible to the ordinary courts or the Supreme Court of Justice. In 1983,185 people were known to have been convicted by these new courts under the Public Order Law, the sentences handed down ranging from three to 30 years.
While most of the political prisoners and possible prisoners of conscience detained in 1983 were held on Public Order Law charges, some local supporters of lawful opposition groups and independent community organizations were imprisoned without trial for six months or more after being sentenced for alleged petty offences by police magistrates. Hearings in such cases occur outside the judicial process, and appeals are possible only through an administrative procedure, through the Legal Department of the National Police. One prisoner sentenced by such procedures whose case was being investigated by Amnesty Intemational was Vicente Márquez Alemán, who was detained on 24 October 1983 after taking part in a neighbourhood meeting which was attacked and broken up by members of a pro-govemment political organization. Although not formally charged, he was apparendy arrested for trying to defend participants in the meeting. He was taken to the Department of State Security headquarters in Managua and held in the "El Chipote" jail for 24 days. He was then sentenced by a police magistrate to six months' imprisonment, reportedly without having been present at a hearing, without having had access to a lawyer, and without having been formally informed of the precise charges against him.
Amnesty Intemational received few specific allegations of ill-treatment of prisoners in 1983. Some detainees in isolated areas were reportedly beaten at the time of their arrest and some allegations of beatings in urban detention centres were made. However, there was evidence that allegations of ill-treatment had been investigated by the authorities, and that some members of the civil and military security services had been prosecuted. At least one case of criminal prosecution was known to be in progress in 1983, involving police personnel who were charged with ill-treating prisoners in León.
While Amnesty Intemational welcomed government responses to allegations of the abuse of authority, it was concemed that the findings of investigations into similar abuses reported previously had not been made public. These included serious abuses alleged to have occurred in the 1981/1982 period in the Atlantic Coast area, and in particular
182
during an offensive by Honduran-based forces along the Coco River in December 1981.
Of particular concem to Amnesty Intemational was an incident at the Coco River hamlet Leimus on 23 December 1981, when at least seven people, and possibly many more, were reportedly killed by govemment forces at the time of an attack on Leimus from Honduras. Although Amnesty Intemational was informed in 198 3 that the incident was being investigated by the government-supported National Commission for the Protection and Promotion of Human Rights, and that arrests of security personnel had been carried out after the incident, no reports of the findings of the inquiry were made public, and the names of security personnel involved were not made known.
Amnesty Intemational was also concerned about evidence, including statements to the news media by their leaders, that armed groups based in neighbouring countries regularly carried out the execution-style killing of individuals captured in Nicaragua. The victims included foreign medical personnel and members of Miskito Indian and other rural communities which refused support to such armed groups. In some cases prisoners were reportedly tortured and mutilated before being killed. Amnesty Intemational condemns the torture and killing of individuals detained by anyone, including opposition groups.
A total of 307 Nicaraguans of Miskito and Sumo Indian origin who had been held at different times since mid-1981 under the Public Order Law, were released on 1 December as a result of an amnesty law applying "to those Nicaraguan citizens of Miskito origin, who may have committed crimes against public order and security or any other related crime from 1 December 1981 to the present." The decree granted amnesty both to people in detention and to those at liberty inside Nicaragua or abroad who may have faced charges during the period, and also applied to Nicaraguans not of Miskito origin who had been detained in connection with the conflict along the Coco River frontier with Honduras in December 1981. In a telex on 7 December Amnesty International welcomed the releases, and sought confirmation that 45 prisoners being held in the Atlantic coast port of Bluefields as of 3 December would be included in the amnesty. To Amnesty International's knowledge eight prisoners apparently qualifying for the amnesty remained in custody on the Atlantic Coast at the end of the year. Eighteen Miskito and Sumo Indian prisoners who had been held since 1982 were released in an earlier amnesty in October, including Higinio Frank López, a Sumo Indian initially sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment for allegedly collaborating with violent opposition groups. He had been the object of Amnesty Intemational appeals as a possible prisoner of conscience.
At the end of 1983 an estimated 930 political prisoners continued to
183
be held either awaiting trial or having been convicted under the Public Order Law. Amnesty International worked on behalf of 30 possible prisoners of conscience, 21 of whom were released in the course of the year when charges were dropped or pardons were granted.
