Iraq
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the widespread arbitrary arrest of political suspects and their prolonged detention in the custody of the state security forces without charge or trial. Amnesty Intemational remained concemed about "disappearances" and the continued detention of civilians in prisoner of war camps apparently on account of their ethnic origin and without legal proceedings. Other major concems included the routine torture of detainees during interrogation and the ill-treatment and detention of members of their families allegedly to exert pressure on detainees to cooperate during interrogation, and the large number of executions, most of which were for political crimes.
An Amnesty Intemational mission visited Iraq in January 1983 and discussed with various govemment ministers and members of the judiciary allegations of the routine and widespread torture of political detainees, the disregard of arrest and detention procedures for political suspects as laid down in the Code of Criminal Procedure, the lack of basic legal safeguards in the Revolutionary Court that tries most political detainees and the large number of executions for political offences. The delegates also inquired about the detention of people suspected of opposing the govemment.
On 6 May 1983 Amnesty Intemational submitted a memorandum to the govemment, based on the mission's findings, which included detailed recommendations for measures to protect human rights. Amnesty Intemational concluded that torture was routine and widespread in Iraq, that the functioning of the Revolutionary Court amounted to a breach of domestic and intemational law and that the
337
long list of criminal and political offences for which the death penalty is provided and the numerous executions carried out each year in Iraq could not be reconciled with Iraq's obligations under international law. The organization urged that President Saddam Hussain issue a personal statement prohibiting torture, and that rules consistent with international standards be drawn up concerning: access to prisoners, interrogation methods, supervision of interrogators and prison warders, medical treatment and documentation, the admissibility in evidence of statements made by prisoners under interrogation, investigation of complaints of torture and the prosecution of the culprits. It also urged the government to give immediate consideration to abolishing all special courts and the death penalty.
On 28 June 1983 the government responded to the Amnesty International memorandum. It denied that gross human rights abuses had taken place in Iraq. It said that no political suspects or detainees were held and that nobody could be arrested except on a warrant issued by the court It also stated that there had been no political executions, that the allegations of torture were false and that Amnesty International's recommendations focused on legal procedures which were already in force. The government gave its assurance that the security forces had frequently been ordered "to comply with the proper procedures on investigation, with strong warnings against abuse of their powers". It stated that cases of torture, which it said happened occasionally, had been investigated and that the perpetrators had been dealt with. The government also offered to investigate allegations of torture made in a previous Amnesty International report published in April 1981, Iraq: Evidence of Torture, if the victims, who had been interviewed in exile, were identified and returned to Iraq.
On 5 October Amnesty International replied to the government and on 19 OQ\o)xTp\xh\xs\[Qà.Report and Recornmendations of an Amnesty International Mission to the Government of the Republic of Iraq 22-28 January 1983 including the government's response and Amnesty International comments. Amnesty International reiterated its concerns and recommendations and noted that it had the names and particulars of 520 political prisoners reportedly executed between 1978 and 1981. It also disclosed the names of 22 people said to have died under torture while in custody between 1976 and 1981 and called on the government to investigate these cases and the whereabouts of a further 114 people who had "disappeared" since reportedly being arrested between 1979 and 1982. In December 1983 the government replied to Amnesty International accusing it, among other things, of prejudice and stating that the names Amnesty International had submitted were fictitious.
After the mission. Amnesty International continued to receive allegations of the arrest, detention and torture of suspected opponents of
338
the government In many cases arrests appeared to be carried out arbitrarily and without warrant. Individuals were often detained without charge or trial with their families being unable to establish where they were being held, despite official assurances to Amnesty Intemational delegates in 1983 that no one could be detained wiliiout an arrest warrant issued by the court, and that suspects were detained in official police statior^ and were entitled to contact their relatives, appoint a lawyer and be seen by a doctor.
Amnesty Intemational did not have sufficient information to gauge the full extent of political imprisonment in Iraq, mainly because of the authorities' disregard for legality and their frequent refusal to acknowledge, explain or record arrests.
The organization believed, however, that at least several hundred people were detained for political reasons in 1983. In one case over 130 members of the family of Ayatollah Muhammad Bagher A1 Ha^im, the spokesperson in Iran of an Iraqi Shi'a opposition group, ranging in age from nine to 76, were reportedly arrested in the first two weeks in May and detained by the security forces in the holy city of Najaf. Sixty of those arrested were religious scholars. On 24 May Amnesty Intemational expressed its concem to the Iraqi authorities about the reported arrests and requested clarification of the legal status of those arrested. On 6 June an official at the Iraqi embassy in London confirmed that the arrests had taken place. He said that the three eldest members of the family had been released within two days of arrest and that releases were continuing - but that other members of the family were still being detained for interrogation.
In early June Amnesty Intemational leamed that at least six of those arrested were executed in prison in Baghdad on 19 May 1983 after being tortured three brothers ofMuhammad Bagher AlHakim-Sayyid Ala'uddin, Sayyid Abd A1 Sahib and Sayyid Muhammad Hussain-and three nephews of Muhammad Bagher A1 Hakim -Sayyid Kamal, Sayyid Abdul Wahab and Ahmad A1 Hakim. On 20 June Amnesty Intemational sent a telex to President Saddam Hussain and the Minister of the Interior expressing concem and seeking clarification of the reported executions. Amnesty Intemational also urged that no further executions take place. The organization had received no response by the end of 1983.
Five hundred suspected government opponents were reportedly arrested in August in the Kut province but Amnesty Intemational was unable to verify this report and remained unaware of the number of detainees who continued to be held without charge or trial.
In August Amnesty Intemational welcomed the release of 31 Ba' ath Party officials who were originally arrested in mid-July 1979 and had been tried in August 1979 by a special court in Baghdad on charges of
339
plotting against the government They had been serving sentences ranging from one to 15 years' imprisonment and Amnesty International had taken up the cases for investigation (see Amnesty International Report 1980).
A continuing concern throughout 1983 was the fate of several hundred civilians of Iranian origin including children, women and old people, who had been held in prisoner of war camps since the be ginning of the Iraq-Iran war in 1980. Amnesty International was concerned that they may have been held solely on the basis of their ethnic origin and without legal proceedings. In May 1983 the International Committee of the Red Cross stated publicly that several hundred such prisoners had been " concealed" from its delegates and that among those it visited " ill-treatment has frequently been observed".
Amnesty International continued to press the Iraqi authorities to clarify the fate of at least 114 people who "disappeared" between 1979 and 1982. In many cases there was clear evidence of the involvement of the security forces in the arrest of the victims prior to " disappearance".
Allegations of torture, sometimes resulting in death, continued. First-hand testimonies of torture received by Amnesty International during 1983 were consistent with information obtained in previous years and indicated that torture was a routine practice in interrogation centres and during pre-trial detention. A former detainee held by the security forces from 30 June 1983 to 18 October 1983 described being beaten on the soles of the feet, being given electric shocks on various parts of the body, and being threatened with having his ear cut off; he was examined after his release by an independent doctor who concluded that the results of the medical examination were consistent with the alleged torture. Former detainees who had not themselves been tortured referred to the torture of fellow detainees, many of whom had reportedly been returned to the cells after interrogation with, among other signs of torture, bruises on the body, bums, broken limbs, hematomes, swollen skin, and with their toe nails having been pulled out The wives and children of some detainees had allegedly been detained as well and held in nearby cells in order to put pressure on detainees to " cooperate during interrogation".
On 19 October Amnesty International again urged the authorities to conduct impartial inquiries into seven cases of death under torture which it had previously brought to the authorities' attention without receiving any reply. The cases documented in Amnesty International's publication. Report and Recommendations of an Amnesty International Mission to the Government of the Republic of Iraq included those of Reber Mulla Husain, Sayyid Muhammad Ismail, Haji Sayyid Ma'rouf, Hameed 'Ati, Adnan Abd Al Jabbar, Muzhir Hall Al Rachid and Ali Hama Salih.
340
During the year Amnesty Intemational recorded over 300 executions but believed that the actual figure was higher. Most of those executed were reportedly army officers, army deserters and draft resisters. Many others were executed for belonging to political parties actively opposed to the govemment. Among those reportedly executed in May 1983 were six Ayatollahs of the A1 Hakim family (see above), 12 members from the A1 Zawalem tribe from Samawa and Abdel Faraoun Hussain, a student from Basrah. Reports were also received that at least 11 named doctors were executed for their opposition to the govemment Barzan Al Takriti, the head of the Intelligence Service and a half-brother of President Saddam Hussain was reportedly arrested in mid-October for allegedly plotting against the govemment. Press reports indicated that several army officers loyal to Barzan Al Takriti were executed in November on charges of plotting against the government Amnesty Intemational was seeking confirmation of the reports at the end of the year.
Israel and the Occupied Territories
Amnesty International's concerns were the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience; the use of administrative measures, with no judicial involvement, to physically restrict individuals without charge or trial; arbitrary arrest and short-term detention without charge or trial; allegations of torture or ill-treatment of detainees and the passing of two death sentences. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed that thousands of detainees captured by the Israeli Defence Forces (IDF) after the Israeli invasion of Lebanon were denied the protection accorded to them under intemationally accepted standards.
During 1983 Amnesty Intemational worked for the release of 50 prisoners of conscience and investigated the cases of 41 possible prisoners of conscience. Fifty-four of these 91 prisoners were released during the year. Nineteen of the 91 cases were people convicted of security offences, 44 were conscientious objectors, and 28 were under restriction orders.
341
Among those for whose release Amnesty Intemational worked were six Islamic University students from Gaza who were charged under Military Order (MO) 50 with distributing copies of a political publication in the West Bank without a permit; under MO 101 with incitement against the state of Israel (based on one of the publication's articles); and under MO 378 relating to carrying out activities against public order. The latter charges were based on their having visited and publicly supported patients in Jenin hospital suffering from symptoms of poisoning, whom Palestinians alleged had been deliberately poisoned as a form of harassment, while the Israeli authorities claimed that the symptoms were faked. They were sentenced on 8 June in Jenin to six months' imprisonment In the organization's view, the respective MOs have been applied in these cases to facilitate the conviction of people for the non-violent exercise of their right to freedom of expression and association in the Occupied Territories.
Amnesty Intemational received reports that other people, mainly students and joumalists, were sentenced in 1983 to between one and four months' imprisonment for allegedly violating the same MOs.
Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about the increasing number of selective conscientious objectors imprisoned for refusing to serve in Lebanon (and in one case, in the West Bank). Although some reservists have been permitted to serve elsewhere. Amnesty Intemational received details of 81 other reservists and regulars sentenced to between 10 and 40 days' imprisonment during 1983, some of whom have served repeated prison terms. Amnesty Intemational considered these selective conscientious objectors to be prisoners of conscience and appealed for their unconditional release.
Amnesty Intemational investigated the cases of 13 people convicted of membership of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) or, in two cases, of membership of a student organization allegedly supporting the PLO. They included students, teachers and medical personnel from the West Bank and Gaza sentenced to between eight months' and five years' imprisonment Amnesty International asked the authorities whether there was any evidence that they had used or advocated violence. The authorities have maintained that membership of the PLO is "akin to advocating violence", but Amnesty Intemational does not consider that membership of the PLO alone demonstrates advocacy of violence.
The detentions by the IDF in Lebanon continued to be a cause of concem to Amnesty Intemational (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1983). Those detained included Palestinians, Lebanese and other nationalities suspected of links with the PLO (most of whom had been arrested during 1982), Lebanese who refused to cooperate with the IDF, Lebanese suspected of security violations against the IDF, and
342
Palestinian and Lebanese women most of whom were apparently detained as hostages for male suspects.
About 12,000 individuals were reportedly detained in A1 Ansar between June 1982 and November 1983 with the number held at any one time fluctuating between 4/5,000. The total number of those arrested by the IDF in Lebanon, including those held for interrogation in temporary detention centres in southern Lebanon and, in some cases, in Israel, was not knowa
Amnesty Intemational was concemed that the legal status of these detainees had not been clarified by the Israeli authorities, who declared that they were held according to "an act of state", whereby Israeli law and judicial review did not apply; and that they did not consider the detainees to be prisoners of war, although they agreed to apply provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention with respect to them. In April 1983 Amnesty Intemational expressed its concern to the authorities that detainees were still not being permitted to meet lawyers or relatives, were being denied the right to be confronted with, and refute, the evidence against them, and that they had been held for considerable periods in incommunicado detention.
In their reply of 20 June 1983 to Amnesty Intemational, the Israeli authorities stated that the Intemational Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) had daily access to A1 Ansar detainees, handled contact between detainees and their relatives and delivered letters and family parcels; and that those temporarily detained elsewhere in southern Lebanon for interrogation were seen by the ICRC "no later than 30 days after their arrest". The authorities also said that, in accordance with Article 78 of the Fourth Geneva Convention, detainees could appeal against their imprisonment to an Objections Committee, and that over 1,000 individuals had been released in this way. However, Amnesty Intemational remained concemed that the detainees' legal status had still not been clarified; that the Objections Committee does not constitute a proper judicial instance and that in any case it only makes recommendations, not decisions. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed that detainees still did not have access to lawyers and relatives, and that permitted periods of incommunicado detention were too long.
The issue of the detainees' legal status and their access to lawyers had earlier been brought to the Supreme Court by five Israeli lawyers representing 26 A1 Ansar detainees. At the first hearing on 11 May the military authorities agreed that Israeli lawyers qualified to appear before military courts would be allowed to meet A1 Ansar detainees, subject to security arrangements. The Supreme Court, in its verdict on 13 July, mled that the IDF were empowered to detain persons about whom there was a well-defined suspicion that they had acted in a hostile
343
fashion endangering the security of the IDF; and that detainees were subject to the rules laid down in Article 78 of the Fourth Geneva Convention, which includes the right of appeal.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed tíiat the ruling mentioned the applicability of only one provision of the Fourth Geneva Convention, instead of the Convention as a whole, and in particular that it did not address the applicability of Article 116 conceming family visits; and that despite the military authorities' commitment, lawyers were still not allowed access to Al Ansar detainees after the Supreme Court ruling.
On 24 November six members of the IDF held by Al Fatah (a faction of the PLO) in Lebanon were exchanged for 4,491 detainees, including 35 women, held in southern Lebanon by the IDF at Al Ansar camp and 100 Palestinians held in Israel, of whom 63 were convicted political prisoners and 37 were Palestinian detainees who had been intercepted at sea by the IDF in September 1983. However Amnesty Intemational learned that around 140 Al Ansar detainees were transferred to Israel some weeks before the prisoner exchange, and detained in Atlit prison in accordance with an emergency regulation of August 1983. They were still beingheld in incommunicado detention at the end of the year. The organization also received reports that new arrests by the IDF had occurred in southern Lebanon, most of whom were reportedly Lebanese Shi'as.
In July the authorities confirmed the existence of a graveyard in Israel where they admitted some 44 Palestinians, Syrians and others who had died in battle, or in detention in southem Lebanon, had been buried. In a letter to the authorities on 9 August, Amnesty Intemational stressed the importance of publicizing the names, details and cause of death of these people, particularly as large numbers of people from southem Lebanon, including some detainees, had gone missing since June 1982, as well as some detainees who had reportedly "disappeared" after being transferred to Israel. Amnesty Intemational had received no reply from the authorities and no list of names had been published by the end of the year.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the increasing use of restriction orders. Under Article 110 of the Defence (Emergency) Regulations (DER) of 1945 in Israel proper, and Article 86 of the Security Provisions Order 378 in the Occupied Territories, people can be confined by administrative order, with no judicial involvement, to their town or village by day and their homes by night, and can be obliged to report regularly to the local police.
In 1983 at least 90 such restriction orders were issued, affecting 76 people including teachers, students, journalists, lawyers, trade unionists and former Mayors. Orders are initially issued for six months but can be repeatedly renewed.
344
The authorities in their replies to Amnesty Intemational of 14 June and 31 October stated that restriction orders are "preventative", are used to "preserve public safety and order" and that, according to the Fourth Geneva Convention, an occupying power may take such measures for security reasons. Amnesty Intemational believed that many people were restricted for the non-violent expression of their political opinions, and it opposed the imposition of such measures in all cases since those restricted were not charged or tried and had no effective right to refute the evidence against them.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed that MO 378 gives any soldier in the Occupied Territories the power to arrest without a warrant, and allows security suspects to be held for up to 18 days without legal access before being brought before a court The organization received the names of 3 7 West B ank high school children- although the actual number was reported to be higher - who were arrested in June under MO 378 just before or just after the start of their matriculation exams. They were held incommunicado for four to six days and were not interrogated or charged, nor told the reasons for their arrest, even though the military authorities later asserted they had been suspected of throwing stones. Consequently those that missed their exams were disqualified from matriculating. In October Amnesty Intemational expressed its concem to the authorities that these school children may have been arbitrarily arrested and detained without having committed any specific offence, and asked for the reasons for each individual's arrest, including the date and nature of any alleged offence. No response had been received by the end of 1983.
Amnesty Intemational was also concemed that the possession of "illegal literature" is frequentiy used as a pretext to arrest and detain individuals, particularly students, most of whom are then released without charge or trial. It is an offence in the Occupied Territories to possess a book prohibited under Article 88 (2) of the DER or, under MO 50 as amended by MO 862, to possess a book which, although not prohibited, is considered a risk to public order and security.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive allegations of the torture or ill-treatment of security suspects detained in the Occupied Territories, either on arrest or during interrogation. In one case, a civil action for assault with grievous bodily harm was brought in June against a police staff sergeant by a Jenin schoolteacher, Walid Al Arda, who was arrested on 17 May and held in the military detention centre of Al Far'a. Wahd Al Arda alleged that when he refused to confess to incitement to the Jenin poisoning conspiracy (see above) he was beaten with a stick on the shoulders, back, hands and soles of the feet, and subjected to electric shocks and threats and that his family was verbally abused. The trial was pending at the end of the year.
345
On 28 December two Israeli Arabs were sentenced to death for the pre-meditated murder of an Israeli soldier and were seeking an appeal. Three military court judges passed the sentences contrary to a long standing practice in Israel not to impose the death penalty.
On 8 February the Kahan Commission of Enquiry, set up to determine whether the Israeli authorities had any responsibility for the Sabra and Chatila massacres in September 1982 (see Amnesty International Report 1983), published its findings. It concluded that Israeli forces (who had been in military control of the area at the time) had "absolutely no direct responsibility" for the massacre but that Israeh officials should have foreseen "from the information at their disposal and from things which were common knowledge that there was danger of a massacre" if the Phalange militia entered the camps without preventive measures being takea The commission concluded also that Israeli officials did not take "energetic and immediate" actions to restrain the members of the Lebanese militia or to put a stop to their actions. The commission recommended that measures be taken against certain named officials, including the Israeli Minister of Defence.
	
	
	
	
