Mexico
> ' /C"*	1 Amnesty Intemational's main concems
were the arbitrary arrest and prolonged incommunicado detention of political X^ "	detainees, convictions based on confes-
•	sions reportedly obtained as a result of
torture and ill-treatment, and continued reports of "disappearances". The organization was also concemed about reports of the arbitrary arrest and killing of members of mral communities and indigenous groups carried out in some cases by members of official security forces, or by armed civilians, apparently acting in concert with them. Peasants involved in land disputes with mral landowners and members of peasant organizations and mral trade unions which had been established outside the official framework of the mling Partido Revolucionario Institucional (PRI), the Institutional Revolutionary Party, were among those affected by these abuses.
During a visit to Mexico in November 1983 an Amnesty Intemational representative met an official of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Attorney General of the State of Sinaloa and held meetings with representatives of human rights groups and organizations working on behalf of "disappeared" persons, members of political parties and trade unions, lawyers, academic researchers and joumalists.
174
The Comité Nacional Pro-Defensa de Presos, Perseguidos, Desaparecidos y Exiliados Políticos (CNPDPPDEP), the National Committee for the Defence of Prisoners, the Persecuted, Disappeared Persons and Political Exiles, continued to list more than 500 people who were still missing following arrest, mainly between 1974 and 1981. There was no public investigation into allegations that the Brigada Blanca, a paramilitary unit, had been responsible for many such abductions during this period (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1983). In January 1983, however, the govemment dissolved the División de Investigaciones de la Prevención de la Delincuencia (DIPD), Division of Investigations for the Prevention of Delinquency, a plainclothes police unit from which, it was believed, the Brigada Blanca was partly recmited. Nevertheless, other police forces, in particular the state and federal judicial police and í\íq Dirección Federal de Seguridad, Federal Security Bureau, continued to be cited during 1983 as responsible for politically motivated abductions. These generally resulted in periods of incommunicado detention, after which prisoners were either remanded formally into custody and charged, or released. The whereabouts of eight people reportedly abducted in this way during 1983 had still not been officially clarified by the end of the year. In six of these cases, eye-witness accounts indicated that the abductions had been carried out by the official security forces.
In December Amnesty Intemational appealed to the Mexican authorities to acknowledge the arrest and clarify the whereabouts of five people reported to have "disappeared" following their arrest in the period between June and September. These included Candelario Campos Ramirez, a leader of a group of colonos (poor residents) in Ticomán, Mexico City, who was reportedly abducted on 20 August with a companion in the street by a group of men who subsequently identified themselves as members of the Brigada Blanca. His companion claimed after his release to have been held, blindfold for much of the time, for a period of 43 days in different places of detention, repeatedly beaten and tortured with water and electric shocks, and interrogated about his presumed political activities. No further news was received conceming the fate or whereabouts of Candelario Campos Ramirez.
During the year Amnesty Intemational took up for investigation the cases ofeight people who had"disappeared" during 1981 and 1982. Of these, Mario Jesús Alvarado Prieto, Femando Javier Chong Santiago, Maria Teresa Gutiérrez Hemández, Rubén Hemández Padrón, Marco Antonio Murillo and Roque Reyes Garda had been teachers or students at the Preparatoria Popular de Tacuba, Tacuba People's School, an independent school in Mexico City which had become known for its political radicalism. Members of the school listed 16 teachers and students who, they claimed, had remained "disappeared"
175
since January 1978 following their arrest by security forces. In September Amnesty Intemational sent an appeal to the Attomey General of the Federal District, Señora Victoria Adato de Ibarra, asking for information concerning the whereabouts and legal situation of several of these people, but no reply was received.
In May Amnesty Intemational addressed appeals to federal and state authorities asking for clarification of the charges against Santos Garcia Hemández, a 22-year-old campesino from General Lázaro Cárdenas, m Chalma, State of Veracruz. He was arrested on 26 December 1981, when his village was raided by a detachment of soldiers who, he alleged, beat and tortured him in order to force him to confess to two murders. He was later transferred to a prison in Pachuca, in the state of Hidalgo. He was a member of the Organización Independiente de Pueblos Unidos de las Huastecas de Veracruz, Hidalgo y San Luis Potosí, (OIPUH), the Independent Organization of the United Peoples of the Huasteca Region of Veracmz, Hidalgo and San Luis Potosí, an independent regional peasant organizatioa Amnesty International was concemed that his confession might have been obtained under duress in order to justify his continued detention which was itself intended to curb his activities for OIPUH. A reply was subsequently received from the office of the Attomey General of Hidalgo stating that he had been charged with the crimes of homicide and wounding and that he had confessed on both counts. No reference was made to the requests expressed in the Amnesty Intemational appeal that an investigation be carried out into the allegations of torture. The organization later received information indicating that Santos Garda Hemández' activities on behalf of poor peasants in the area had brought him into conflict with local landowners and that he had been held for 13 days incommunicado following his arrest.
In October Amnesty Intemational wrote to the state authorities of Chiapas appealing for information conceming the legal situation of 16 peasants and agricultural workers from the region of Simojóvel in northem Chiapas, who were believed to have been detained as a result of their participation in an independent mral trade union the Central Independiente de Obreros Agrícola y Campesinos {QIOKC), Independent Union of Agricultural Workers and Peasants. Many of those arrested were tied agricultural workers {peones acasillados). The majority of the prisoners, most of whom were arrested between April and August 1983, were reported to be held awaiting trial in Cerro Hueco prison, in the state capital, Tuxtla Gutiérrez. Reports issued by CIOAC alleged that in separate incidents in April, June and July, groups of armed men, acting on the orders of local landlords and police, had carried out attacks on villages in the Simojóvel area, buming crops and houses, shooting and wounding villagers and arresting peasants,
176
apparently as a reprisal against their trade union activities.
In its letters to the state authorities Amnesty International asked that assurances be given that each of the detainees would have access to a defence lawyer and that any allegations of torture or ill-treatment while in custody be immediately investigated.
In October, 10 of those for whom Amnesty International had appealed were released on \>ax\{bajo fianza). Legal proceedings against them continued. Those released included Manuel Arreóla, Victor Arreóla, Luis Lara, Joaquin de Lucía and Agustín Ruiz, peasants from the village of Cabeza de Toro, in the municipality of Tonalá, Chiapas. Amnesty International had issued an urgent appeal in June on receiving a report that they had been taken prisoner on 29 May, when police reportedly opened fire on a house where a meeting to discuss land problems was taking place. As a result of the incident one peasant, Oscar Mendoza, died of gunshot wounds.
On 2 December 1982 Arturo Albores Velasco, a prisoner of conscience who was being held on a murder charge in Cerro Hueco prison, Tuxtla Gutiérrez, Chiapas, was released. Arturo Albores Velasco was arrested in May 1981 together with two Tzotzil villagers from Venustiano Carranza who remained in detention - Victórico Hernández Martínez and Agustín de la Torre. Amnesty International believed that all three had been imprisoned because of their non-violent political activities as members of an independent peasant organization, the Coordinadora Nacional Plan de Ayala, National Coordinating Committee of the Ayala Plan (CNPA).
In July 1983 Amnesty International sent urgent appeals on behalf of Gustavo Zarate Vargas, a 29-year-old economics teacher at the Universidad Autónoma de Chiapas, Autonomous University of Chiapas, following reports of his arrest on 24 July at his home in San Cristóbal de las Casas, Chiapas. He subsequently claimed that he had been arrested without a warrant, and tortured while being held incommunicado for five days. An appeal for amparo (similar to habeas corpus) was rejected by the court, and he was formally charged with possession of firearms, explosives and marihuana. He had actively participated in a movement for university reform and in support of political demands made by local peasant groups. Amnesty International was investigating his case at the end of the year.
Amnesty International was also following the case of Jesús Vicente Vásquez, a 28-year-old student of economics and former commander of the municipal police in Juchitán, Oaxaca, who was detained in the street in Mexico City on 15 December by a group of armed men in civilian clothes, believed to be members of the Policía Judicial Federal, Federal Judicial Police. He was a leading member of the Coalición Obrero Campesino Estudiantil del Istmo (COCEI), the Coalition of
Ill
Workers, Peasants and Students of the Isthmus, a regional political organization allied with the Partido Socialista Unificado de México (PSUM), the United Socialist Party of Mexico, a legally recognized opposition party. In March 1981 the COCEI won municipal elections in the city of Juchitán, Oaxaca, but as a result of repeated clashes between COCEI supporters and local members of the PRI opposition in Juchitán, the state legislature voted, on 3 August 1983, to depose the COCEI municipal administration. Fresh municipal elections were held on 20 November which were won by the PRI candidate in a disputed vote. More than 300 local COCEI members and supporters were reportedly detained on 12 and 13 December after they had occupied town halls to protest against the election result After reportedly being held incommunicado on police premises in Mexico City for seven days, where he was severely beaten, Jesús Vicente Vásquez was transferred to a prison in Tehuantepec, Oaxaca, where he was remanded in custody to await trial.
The total number of prisonei^ of conscience in Mexico was difficult to estimate. Existing laws protected freedom of expression and political and trade union organization, but Amnesty International believed that the arrest, trial and conviction of a number of individuals on criminal charges was the result of their political, trade union or peasant activities, rather than of any criminal acts and that in such cases convictions had been obtained as a result of prolonged incommunicado detention and ill-treatment. Amnesty International was compiling information on prisoners held in remote rural areas, where lack of information had in past years presented difficulties in forming a reliable estimate of the numbers of political arrests.
Although not a party to the United Nations (UN) instruments for the protection of refugees, Mexico accepted some 40,000 Central American refugees, principally from Guatemala. In May Amnesty International appealed to the Mexican authorities to clarify the whereabouts of two Guatemalan refugees, following unconfirmed reports that they had been deported to Guatemala after their arrest in Comitàn, Chiapas, at the end of March. In March and June the Secretary General of Amnesty International cabled the Mexican authorities asking for assurances that appropriate procedures would be followed to ensure that any refugees who retumed to Guatemala did so on a purely voluntary basis. On 28 June the Mexican Foreign Ministry stated that the refugees' wishes would be taken into consideration as a basic condition of repatriation. Amnesty International also appealed to the Mexican authorities not to forcibly repatriate Salvadorian refugees to El Salvador.
Amnesty International submitted information to the UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances during 1983. In its
178
report published in January, the Working Group noted that the Mexican Government had given assurances that it would investigate all reports received from the relatives of the "disappeared" until the families were satisfied, but that the relatives had apparently not received the hoped for information. The report stated, nevertheless, that the Working Group did not propose to take any further action on the cases presented to it.
