Angola
Amnesty International was concerned about the long-term detention without trial of real or suspected opponents of the government and allegations of torture of detainees. The organization considered that a major political trial in March fell short of internationally accepted standards. The organization was concerned about the use of the death penalty and the government's continued failure to account for a number of people who "disappeared" in detention in 1977 and 1978. Amnesty International was ¿so concerned about the arbitrary detention by armed opposition groups of civilians who had not been involved in tiie armed conflict Widespread armed conflict persisted throughout the year affecting much of the country. South African forces based in Namibia occupied the southern part of Cunene province and in December launched an attack further north into Huila province, ostensibly against Namibian guerrilla fighters based in Angola. The South African forces were believed to have taken a number of prisoners, although no information was made public about them.
The government was also under increasing pressure from the Uniao Nacional para a Independencia Total de Angola (UNIT A), National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, an armed opposition group active particularly in the southeast and centre of the country. In January an attack organized by UNITA guerrillas took place on Tari detention camp in Kwanza-Sul province, where a considerable number of detainees accused of supporting the UNITA or other armed opposition groups were held About 100 of the detainees chose to accompany the guerrillas and left the camp. Tari camp was subsequently closed and some of its irmiates were transferred to another camp near
18
Negage, in Uige province; however, many of those who had not accompanied the UNITA guerrillas were released from detention during the first half of the year.
Several hundred alleged members or supporters of the UNITA were reportedly captured or detained during the year and some were put on public display at political rallies, but none of them were known to have been tried by the end of the year. In October 79 detainees appeared at a public rally in Huambo, accused of helping the UNITA. One of them was detained for allegedly receiving a letter from a UNITA guerrilla soliciting supplies and failing to inform the appropriate authorities. He and 70 others accused of minor offences were subsequently released, while the remaining eight detainees were kept in custody.
In late July, following a wave of attacks by the UNITA on towns and railways, the government introduced martial law throughout much of the country. In at least 10 of Angola's 18 provinces, Regional Military Coimcils were estabUshed to take charge of the administration and the jurisdiction of military courts was extended to include a wide range of political and"economic" offences. They were also empowered to try civilian defendants. However, no trials of political opponents of the government had taken place in military courts by the end of the year.
Alleged members of another armed opposition group, the Frente Nacional de Libertaqao de Angola (FNLA), National Front for the Liberation of Angola, which remained sporadically active in the north of the country were also arrested. However, in March several former leading members of the FNLA were permitted to return from exile in Zaire and were not imprisoned.
The authorities continued to detain without trial many alleged UNITA and FNLA supporters who had been arrested in previous years. Unofficial sources suggested that there were as many as 1,000 or more political detainees. They were said to be held in Luanda and in other provincial centres or at rural detention camps such as the one at Bentiaba, in Namibe province, which was formerly known as Sao Nicolau camp. No official figures were issued on the number of political detainees. Amnesty International did obtain information about some of the detainees, many of whom had been held without charge or trial for several years. For example, Lucas Tshisumba, an alleged UNITA supporter who was arrested in Huambo when he was 16 years old, had been detained without trial since 1979.
Other long-term political detainees included a number of asylimi-seekers. A Sao Tomean national, Antonio Trovoada, who was recognized as a refugee in Portugal, was held in custody for 12 months after he was arrested when he arrived in Luanda in November 1982. In November 1983 he was summarily repatriated to Sao Tome and
19
Principe, where he was immediately arrested and apparentiy accused of supporting a Sao Tomean opposition group.
A small number of people were detained for having criticized government policies or officials. A group of four officials and supporters of the ruling Afov/men to Popular deLibertaqáo de Angola - Partido de Trabalho (MPLA-PT), Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola - Labour Party, were arrested in December 1982 and January 1983 and accused of being involved in the production of a satirical play which had reportedly criticized the authorities. Three of those arrested were released in late January, but one, Fernando Costa Andrade ("Ndundimia"), the Secretary General of the Union of Angolan Journalists at the time of his arrest, was kept in custody. He was adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience and had not been either tried or released by the end of 1983.
Detainees who were suspected of supporting armed opposition groups were reportedly tortured during interrogation, particularly in a prison on the Catete road in Luanda where most political detainees who were arrested in the capital appeared to be held for questioning. Under the terms of a June 1980 law such detainees may be held incommunicado for questioning for three months and may be detained for a total of seven months before being charged.
Several detainees who were reportedly tortured in Sumbe, the capital of Kwanza-Sul province, in early 1982 were brought to trial at the end of March 1983. Statements allegedly made under duress were reportedly used as evidence against them. They were among 27 defendants who were tried by the People's Revolutionary Tribunal in Sumbe on charges relating to their alleged activities in support of the UNIT A. The prosecutor at this trial requested the court to sentence 12 of the defendants to death. At the end of the week-long trial, however, only one of the defendants, Tomás Pinto Vidro, was sentenced to death. He was a school teacher and official of the Congregationalist Church in Wako Kungo, where he was arrested in December 1981, shortly after UNITA guerrillas had been active in the area. He and several others arrested at the same time in Wako Kungo were reportedly tortured, and it appeared that he was convicted and sentenced to death for having been involved in clandestine activities in support of the UNITA partly on the basis of statements he allegedly made under torture.
The authorities did not publish details of the precise offences alleged to have been committed by Tomás Pinto Vidro or the 14 other defendants who were convicted at the same time. Amnesty International received no response to its requests to the court and to other officials for details of the charges against them. Three defendants were sentenced to prison terms of 26, 18 and 16 years respectively, four to 12 years and seven others to two-year prison terms.
20
Amnesty International was concerned that at this trial, as at previous trials before the People's Revolutionary Tribunal, defendants may not have been given adequate opportunities to defend themselves; at previous trials defendants had to present their defence in a written statement and often appeared to have received Uttle real assistance from legal counsel during their trials. Amnesty International was also concerned that ail but two had no right to appeal against their conviction or sentence. Sentences of death or prison terms of more than 20 years are reviewed by a special Appeals Tribimal, but it was not known what the results of any such review were. When Amnesty International leamed that Tomás Pinto Vidro had been sentenced to death, the organization appealed for his sentence to be commuted. No replies were received to these appeals and no subsequent armouncement was made to indicate whether the death sentence had been carried out
Amnesty Intemational continued to seek information from the authorities about some 20 people who were among a niunber of political prisoners who "disappeared" from detention after being arrested in 1977 and 1978. They were believed to have been executed in secret on account of their aUeged ties with the UNITA or their alleged involvement in an unsuccessful attempt to overthrow the government in May 1977, but the government consistently refused to confirm this or to accoimt for them. In September, apparently in response to Amnesty Intemational's inquiries, Angola's national press agency stated categorically that no prisoners had "disappeared" or been "shot in the middle of the night" in Angola. No information was, however, supplied about the individuals who were the subject of these inquiries.
Benin
Amnesty Intemational's main concem was the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and other political prisoners, some of whom had been detained without trial for several years, others having been sentenced to prison terms after unfair trials. There were also disturbing reports of ill-treatment of prisonere.
Amnesty Intemational continued in 1983 to seek the release of 42 untried detainees who were held for their real or suspected involvement in non-violent protests against government policies. Thirty-five of them, mainly students and teachers, had been arrested between 1979 and
21
1981 following protests against the government's education policy at the university and in schools in Benin's major towns. They remained in detention as "administrative intemees", without any right to a trial or to access to a lawyer, the authorities continued to deny them knowledge of any charges against them and of the reasons for their detention. In late December 1983, 20 of these detainees received the first official document concerning their detention, signed by the Minister of the Interior and Public Security, Lieutenant Colonel Michel AUadaye, in the form of a renewable order of "administrative internment" of six months' duration, retroactively applied from August 1983. These documents stated that the detainees were held because their activities were "liable to disrupt pubUc order and security". Twenty-six of the detainees, including Firmin Awadon, Alassane Issoufou and Leon Yelome, had been arrested between March 1979 and October 1980, in the wake of demands by students to be allowed to form an independent students' organization and to have improved educational facilities. All continued to be held throughout the year in prisons in Porto Novo and in the capital, Cotonou. Two of these long-term detainees, Sébastien Adjakpa and Mathias Dognon, were released in September and November 1983 respectively. The latter, who had reportedly suffered serious psychological disorders during his detention, had been held in a psychiatric hospital for ahnost a year prior to his release.
Amnesty International also sought the release of nine detainees, including several technical workers and teachers, who had been held without charge or trial since March 1981 when they were suspected by the authorities of distributing leaflets critical of goverrunent policy. They were reportedly held in poor conditions in Parakou military barracks.
The organization also appealed to the Benin authorities for the release of Paul Koudoukpo, a teacher who was arrested in September 1982, apparently being suspected by the authorities of distributing leaflets which called for the release of the students and teachers who were arrested between 1979 and 1981. One group of four pupils and another of two teachers, who were arrested in April and June 1982 respectively in connection with the distribution of leaflets, were released in mid-1983, shortly after they had been adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International.
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the release of five prisoners of conscience and for a review of the cases of eight other political prisoners, all of whom were arrested in 1975 and convicted in March 1975 or February 1976 ofparticipatinginorbeingincompUcity with alleged attempts to overthrow the government Their trials before an executive body, the Conseil national de la révolution (CNR), the National Council of the Revolution, did not conform to the most basic
22
international legal standards for a fair trial. The defendants were not permitted to know the charges against them, to be present at the hearings or to be represented by defence counsel. They were not permitted to bring evidence or call witnesses in their defence. The prisoners were not informed by official sources Üiat they had been convicted and sentenced, three of them being sentenced to death and the remainder to long terms of imprisorunent They were denied the right of appeal. Three of them -Grégoire Agbale, Benoît Hounsou and Abbé Alphonse Quenimi- were reported during the year to be suffering from very poor health and were a<¿nitted to hospital. The first two underwent serious operations and were then returned to prison.
Amnesty International's investigations into the cases of Claude Midahuen, Léonard Maboudou and André Oke Assogba were pursued throughout 1983. All were senior goverrmient officials when they were arrested in 1975 and 1976, apparenüy in connection with the alleged 1975 coup attempts. They continued to be held without charge or trial and the authorities reportedly continued to deny them any information as to the reasons for their detention.
Amnesty International was also investigating the cases of Colonel Alphonse Alley and Major Jean-Baptiste Hácheme, who were both sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment in early 1973, for alleged involvement in a coup attempt. Their trial, also before an executive body, was grossly unfair and displayed the same deficiencies as the political trials in March 1975 and February 1976. Another alleged plotter, Paul Kponou, was released from prison in April 1983 after serving a 10-year sentence.
In June 1983, Michel Bamenou Toko was released; he was the last senior official of the government of Hubert Maga, which was overthrown in 1972, to remain in detention. His case had been investigated by Amnesty International. At the time of his arrest he had apparently been accused of misappropriating state funds, but he was never tried and reports had suggested that the reasons for his arrest were primarily political.
In a letter sent to Amnesty International in March 1983, the government invited the organization to send a mission to Benin to undertake fact-finding into the cases of detainees and prisoners of concern to the organization and to hold discussions with goverrunent representatives. In their letter, the government also expressed the view that political detention or imprisorunent in Benin was carried out according to the laws and regulations in force in the country. In its reply to the government in April 1983, Amnesty International accepted the invitation to visit Benin and suggested dates when it might send representatives. By the end of 198 3, no reply had been received from the government.
23
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about the generally poor conditions in which political detainees were being held Crowded and insanitary conditions were reportedly common, and the available medical facilities were grossly inadequate in all places of detentioa These unacceptably low standards of cleanliness and medical care were believed to have encouraged the spread of many infectious diseases among detainees, including skin, stomach and eye complaints. Conditions in the many police stations in Cotonou where political detainees were reportedly held, and at Parakou military barracks, were believed to be particularly inadequate, due to overcrowding, lack of exercise facilities and poor food and sanitation. The authorities continued to fail to supply food to any of those political detainees arrested since 1979, thereby forcing them to rely on the generosity of their families or fellow prisoners. However, in Cotonou prison, such detainees were provided with less cramped quarters and were granted more time to meet and talk with visitors.
