Spain
301
The torture and ill-treatment of detainees, principally people detained under anti-terrorist laws, continued to be Amnesty Intemational's main concem. Prolonged incommunicado detention, which Amnesty Intemational considered to facilitate torture, was still allowed and new procedural laws on legal assistance, which came into effect at the end of the year, continued to restrict severely detainees' right of access to legal counsel. Police officers were found guilty of torturing and ill-treating detainees in a few significant court cases but the majority of accusations made against the police failed to reach a hearing. Amnesty Intemational sent observers to two trials involving freedom of expression and numerous prosecutions were pending of individuals accused of criticizing the state or its institutions.
In 1983, 691 people, mostly in the Basque country, were detained under anti-terrorist laws, many of them for alleged links with Euskadi Ta Askatasuna (ETA), Basque Homeland and Liberty, the armed Basque group allegedly responsible for many of the 43 politically motivated killings recorded during the year. Many of them were subsequently released without charge.
Detainees can be held imder the anti-terrorist laws for up to 10 days in incommunicado detention with no access to legal assistance following which they must be released or produced in court. Under the Ministry of the Interior's mies, officially authorised doctors are supposed to examine all such detainees to ensure that torture or ill-treatment does not occur. Provincial court judges also have the power to investigate the conditions under which detainees are held, but Amnesty Intemational believed these safeguards were insufficient to protect the well-being of those detainees held incommunicado and denied legal assistance during the cmcial preliminary stages of police interrogation. Two cases in particular illustrated the inadequacies of the system.
Joaquin Olano Balda, a 25-year-old mechanic ft^om Lasarte (Provincia de Guipúzcoa), was arrested by the Civil Guard at dawn on 29 July and held incommunicado under the anti-terrorist law in the Guardia Civil, Civil Guard, station in San Sebastián. The duty judge ordered the official doctor to examine the detainee after receiving a private complaint that screams and cries, accompanied by loud radio music, were coming from the building where he was held. Following the examination he was admitted on 30 July to the Red Cross Hospital in San Sebastián, under guard and still incommunicado.
302
The official medical report remained confidential at the end of 1983 but the report of the doctor at the Red Cross Hospital recorded that he was suffering from concussion, cuts on the head, multiple grazes and bruises (ecchymoses) on the back, abdomen and arms. A statement issued by the police on 30 July claimed that he had been injured following an attempt to escape and as a consequence of efforts to restrain him.
He was permitted to see a lawyer while in hospital only when Civil Guards were present in his bedroom. He made a judicial declaration that he had been tortured and on 11 August he was discharged from hospital and taken to Martutene prison in San Sebastián. He alleged that he was beaten on the head with a telephone book, hit on the body, given electric shocks, and that he was partially asphyxiated with water and plastic bags. He subsequently alleged that he had been beaten again by Civil Guards in the van during the transfer from hospital to prison. His lawyer noted the existence of new marks on his back.
On 14 August, Joaquin Olano was admitted to the Provmcial Hospital of Guipücoa for medical examinations and tests. On 18 August he was transferred back to Martutene prison, where he remained at the end of the year, not having been formally charged.
José María Olarra, the Assistant Mayor of the town of Villabona (Provincia de Guipúzcoa), was arrested by the Civil Guard on 26 October with his two brothers and two other people, all of whom were examined by the official doctor on the day of their detention. The doctor certified that none of them claimed to have been ill-treated and that there were no visible signs of such treatment In the meantime the Civil Guard unit had received permission from the Minister of the Interior to hold the five detainees in extended incommunicado detention on suspicion of having links with ETA. The National Court, which is judicially responsible for such detainees, gave its formal assent to this two days later.
According to José María Olarra's subsequent statement, ill-treatment began as soon as the doctor had left on 26 October. He alleged that the leader of a group of eight or 10 men in plain clothes kicked him in the testicles and that he was then indiscriminately punched and slapped on the head and body by the others. He described how he was subsequently secured to a device which allowed his head to be submerged in filthy water and also how he was partially asphyxiated with plastic bags.
José María Olarra's brothers were freed on 29 October and the emergency service of the local hospital certified that they had been bruised on the chest, abdomen and back. José María Olarra was hooded and taken by road with other detainees to Madrid where he was released on bail by the National Court on 2 November. An official doctor
303
examined him for a second time a week after his arrest and certified the existence of 10cm long abrasions on his chest, as well as bruising on his back and groin and grazing on the arms.
The Civil Guard refused Olarra's lawyer and a notary access to him throughout the entire period of his detention The three brothers made a formal judicial declaration of torture and ill-treatment and, after investigation, two members of the Civil Guard were detained. They were released unconditionally on 2 December by order of the Provincial Court, but the inquiry was reportedly still being pursued at the end of 1983.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about certain features of a new law severely restricting the right to legal assistance of detainees held incommunicado under the anti-terrorist law, which came into force on 28 December 1983. Under the new law detainees are unable to inform relatives that they have been detained, lawyers are not freely chosen and have no right to interview the detainee, even after the "investigation" {la practica de la diligencia).
Formal denunciations of torture or ill-treatment to the court have rarely been successful in achieving a hearing, but in 1983 there were two important cases.
On 29 March the Provincial Court in Bilbao found two police officers guilty of torturing and threatening Dr Xavier Onaindia, a detainee held in 1979 under the anti-terrorist law. He was released without charge after nine days incommunicado detention during which time he was reportedly beaten, deprived of sleep and tortured with electric shocks. The officers were sentenced to 10 months' imprisonment and 10 years' special suspension of duties.
Two police officers in Madrid were acquitted in December of responsibility for inflicting the bums and bmises revealed by the autopsy on die body of José Arregui, who had died in police custody after nine days of incommunicado detention in February 1981. The court held that the responsibility of the two officers was not proven. The police had submitted a list of 72 people who had come into contact with the deceased. The state prosecutor appealed against the judgment, but the result of this appeal was not known at the end of 1983.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the prosecution of people for the non-violent exercise of the right to freedom of expression.
In October 1983 Amnesty Intemational sent Maître David Lachat of the Geneva Bar to observe the trial in the Supreme Court of Miguel Castells de Arteche, a prominent Basque lawyer and former Senator in the Spanish parliament He was charged with having insulted the govemment by writing an article, published in July 1979, which concluded that the govemment and its forces must lie behind the killing
304
of Basque dissidents. He was sentenced to one year's imprisonment which was the subject of an appeal before the Constitutional Tribunal. The prosecution had requested a sentence of six years and one day.
Amnesty Intemational sent Dr Hans Rau of the Max Planck Institute in Hamburg to observe the trials in November 1983 before the Supreme Court in Madrid of 16 parliamentary members and town councillors who were in the Basque coalition party Herri Batasuna. They had been charged with insulting the King as head of state and raising public disorder by singing the Basque nationalist anthem during the King's visit to the Basque parliament in Guernica, {^qq Amnesty Intemational Report 1983).
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the prosecution for insulting the King and causing public disorder and the possible restriction of the right of Herri Batasuna members to express freely their political views, irrespective of protocol.
The accused were acquitted of insulting the King and found guilty of public disorder and sentenced to three months' imprisonment and a 20,000 pesetas' fine in 15 cases and five months' imprisonment and a 50,000 pesetas' fine in one case. The results of appeals against these sentences were not known at the end of 1983.
