Swaziland
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the detention without trial of suspected opponents of the government and about the introduction of a new and more severe sedition law which provided for people to be tried before an administrative tribunal viithout adequate procedural safeguards. The organization was also concemed about the executicm of eight people in July. There was also concern for the safety of South African refugees resident in Swaziland after one was shot dead by unknown assailants.
There were two major government changes. In March, Prince Mabandla Dlamini, the Prime Minister, was ousted from office following the arrest of two leading members of the Liqoqo, Supreme Coimcil of State, Prince Mfanasibili Dlamini and Chief Mfanawenkosi
101
Maseko, who were charged with sedition. Their arrest brought to a head a struggle within the government and led Queen Regent Dzeliwe, the Head of State, to dismiss the Prime Minister and release the two members of the Liqoqo. However, in August, the Queen Regent was herself deposed by the Liqoqo and replaced by Queen Ntombi, another wife of the late IGng and the mother of Prince Makhosetive, a minor, who was simultaneously named as heir to the throne.
Queen Dzehwe brou^it a court application to contest the constitutional legality of her deposition. At the hearing in mid-August before Chief Justice Charles Nathan she was represented by Douglas Lukhele, a leading lawyer and a former Attorney General and High Court judge. After both sides had argued their case, the court adjourned for a few days while the Chief Justice considered whether to allow the appUcation to proceed to the Appeal Court, which alone has jurisdiction on constitutional issues. However, before the court could resume, the government issued an extraordinary decree which excluded from the jurisdiction of the courts all matters affecting royalty and the succession. As a result, the Chief Justice withheld his ruling and Queen Dzeliwe was unable further to challenge her deposition.
After issuing the extraordinary decree, the government also took action against Queen Dzehwe's advisers. Arthur Khoza, a senior civil servant who had acted as her interpreter, was detained on 22 August The next day, Douglas Lukhele was arrested. Two members of the Royal Family, Prince Suiumlomo Dlamini and Prince Thunduluka Dlamini, were also detained. All four detainees were held under legislation which permits the Prime Minister to authorize detention without charge or trial for up to 60 days. Their detention orders were then renewed in October after the first 60 days had elapsed, and again in December. They were still being held at the end of the year. All four detainees were adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International.
In the weeks before new national elections in late October, a number of leaflets were circulated which apparently urged people to boycott them. Several people alleged to have prepared or distributed the leaflets were arrested and charged with sedition, though none had been brought to trial by the end of the year. In mid-October, two weeks before the new elections were due to be held, the government recalled parliament and introduced the Sedition and Subversive Activities (Amendment) Act, which increased the maximum penalty for sedition from three years' to 20 years' imprisonment and provided for the appointment of a special tribimal to try alleged offenders. The Amendment stipulated that the tribimal should sit in camera if the prosecution requested closed session and conferred on the tribimal the power to make its own rules of procedure.
102
There were further arrests at the time of the elections in late October and early November. Those detained included Chief Dambuza Lukhele, who had opposed the deposition of Queen Regent Dzeliwe; Susan Dlamini, the wife of Prince Sulumlomo Dlamini; and two daughters of Douglas Lukhele. Africa Mhlanga and Kislon Shongwe, two former prisoners of conscience who were adopted by Amnesty Intemational when they were detained without trial between May 1978 and May 1980, were also among those arrested. Initially, those arrested were apparently held illegally because they were neither charged nor formally detained. In early December, Kislon Shongwe applied to the courts to mle his imprisormient illegal and to order his release on a writ of habeas corpus. However, before this application could be decided he was charged with sedition and 11 others, including Chief Dambuza Lukhele, were charged with treason. By mid-December, some 15 people were known to be in custody for political reasons, in addition to the four detainees who had been held since August Several of those who were charged with treason then brought an application for bail before the High Court which discounted govemment assertions that they would pose a threat to state security and mled that they should be released pending trial. However, none of the defendants were freed on bail. They were held in custody for some days after they had been granted bail, again apparently without legal sanction, and were then served with 60-day detention orders signed by the Prime Minister. They were still being held at the end of the year. Their cases were taken up for investigation by Amnesty Intemational.
On 2 July, eight people were hanged at Matsapha Central Prison in what were believed to be the first executions for almost two years. All of those executed, seven men and a woman, Phillipa Mdluli, had been sentenced to death after being convicted of ritual murder. At least three other people were sentenced to death for similar offences during the year, but they were not believed to have been executed by the end of 1983.
In Febmary, Amnesty Intemational wrote to Prime Minister Mabandla Dlamini to express concern about the use of the death penalty, following the imposition of at least 14 death sentences during 1982. The organization called on the govenmient to recommend that the Queen Regent should extend clemency to all prisoners whose sentences might be confirmed by the Appeal Court. In July, following the executions at the beginning of the month. Amnesty Intemational made a further appeal to the govemment to discontinue the use of the death penalty. However, the organization received no response to these appeals.
There was renewed concem for the safety of South African refugees in Swaziland following the killing in November of Zwelakhe Nyanda,
103
an alleged member of the banned African National Congress (ANC) of South Africa, and a Swazi national who occupied the same house. There was no evidence to attribute responsibility for the killings but they apparently gave rise to fears in the refugee commimity that they had been committed by South African security agents. In December, Amnesty Intemational received information that a number of South African refugees, including some who had long had residence rights in Swaziland, were taken into custody and placed at Mawelawela Camp, near Mbabane. It appeared at the end of the year that some of them might be held pending resettlement in other countries.
