Syria
The main concerns of Amnesty Intemational were the imprisonment of over 250 prisoners of conscience; wide powers used by the security forces to arrest and detain thousands of political prisoners; long-term detentions without trial; summary procedures and the lack of legal safeguards in trials by military and state security courts; the routine use of torture by die security forces; "disappearances" and the death penalty. Many of these human rights violations were facilitated by provisions of the state of emergency which had been in force since 1963.
On 26 April 1983 Amnesty Intemational submitted a memorandum to the Syrian goverrmient outiining practices followed by the security forces that systematically violated human rights in Syria The organization concluded that there was urgent need for the government to take specific steps with respect to the control, supervision and monitoring of the activities of the security forces.
Among its specific conclusions Amnesty Intemational stated the view that a pattem of arbitrary arrests, without authorization or legal warrants, was being carried out by the security forces in accordance with emergency legislation introduced in 1963; that thousands of Syrians, including non-violent critics of the government, had been arrested and held without charge or trial, some for over 12 years; that detainees had usually not been informed of the reason for arrest at the time of arrest and were regularly denied their basic rights during detention; that the extent, consistency and detail of torture allegations received persistently over the years, some supported by medical evidence, had forced the organization to conclude that torture was frequently inflicted in the course of interrogation; and that documented instances of "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions required investigation and clarification by the government
362
Amnesty Intemational recommended
—	that steps be taken to enforce existing legislation which requires the production of arrest warrants and provides direct appeal machinery against wrongftil arrest;
—	that all provisions for preventive detention be revoked and current detention cases be reviewed in order to release those detained for the non-violent exercise of their human rights;
—	that names of individuals arrested or released be published and relatives be informed immediately of the arrest and place of detention of a prisoner,
—	that arrested individuals have immediate access to a lawyer and that close relatives be allowed to visit within 48 hours of arrest and regularly thereafter,
—	that current legislation and practices designed to prevent abuses by the security forces be reviewed and an impartial investigation be initiated into allegations of torture or ill-treatment with those responsible brought to trial and adequate compensation made to the victims;
—	that a full and impartial public investigation be instituted into the cases of "disappearances" or extrajudicial executions mentioned in the report, and that those responsible be punished
Amnesty Intemational expressed the hope that the memorandum and its recommendations would provide the basis for positive and constmctive discussions and stated its willingness to send a delegation to Damascus for this purpose. Following further unsuccessful attempts to elicit a response from the Syrian authorities, the memorandum was published on 16 November 1983 in the report. Report from Amnesty Intemational to the Govemment of the Syrian Arab Republic.
During 1983 Amnesty Intemational worked for the release of 265 adopted prisoners of conscience and investigated the cases of 236 possible prisoners of conscience. They included officials of previous govemments; members of the professions, including lawyers, doctors and engineers; members of banned political parties and a number of "disappeared" persons.
Amnesty Intemational continued to work on behalf of 148 members of the banned Communist Party Political Bureau (CPPB) - whom the organization had adopted as prisoners of conscience (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1982). They included Omar Kashash, former Secretary General of the Syrian Printers Union and also a member of the Executive Committee of the Syrian Trade Union Federation. After several arrests and a total of nearly six years in detention between 1958 and 1980 - during which he was reportedly tortured and ill-treated -he
363
was again arrested in October 1980 and has since been held without charge or trial at al-Qala'a prison in Damascus.
In January 1983 Amnesty International learned of the release of Michel Kilo, a member of this group. A writer, journalist and member of the Board of the Union of Arab Writers, he had been in untried detention since his arrest on 5 October 1980.
Amnesty International continued to seek the release of 18 people who had served in or were connected with the pre-1970 Syrian government As well as former president Nur al-Din al-Atassi they included Hadithe Murade, from al-Suweyda, who was a member of the Regional Command of the Ba'ath Party. They were arrested after the November 1970 coup which brought President Hafez al-Assad to power, reportedly for refusing to collaborate with the new government, and subsequently held without charge or trial in a special wing of al-Mezze military prison in Damascus.
In December 1983 Amnesty International adopted as prisoners of conscience 19 people, mainly students, who were arrested in February 1983 for their alleged membership of the illegal Party for Communist Action (PCA). Alleged members of this party were arrested at different times since the beginning of 1980 and held incommunicado without charge or trial and 50 were adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience in July and August 1982 (see Amnesty International Report 1983).
MuwafFaq al-Din al-Kozbari, a lawyer and President of the Prisoner's Care Association and First Secretary of the Syrian League for the Defence ofHuman Rights, was released in November 1983. He was among a group of 20 lawyers who were arrested in April and May 1980 following a one-day national strike by the Syrian Bar Association on31 March 1980. The Syrian Bar Association had called for an end to the state of emergency, reforms in the emergency legislation, the abolition of state security courts, a boycott of such courts by all lawyers, and the release of all untried detainees. In 1983 Amnesty International took up for investigation the cases of 94 doctors and 68 engineers also believed to have been detained because of their support for the one-day strike.
In December 1983 Amnesty International learned of the release of Ahmad Haj Sa'eed al-'Arbu, aged 49, from Malak. He was one of a group of seven Syrian Kurds who were arrested in July and August 1973 after sending a memorandum to President Hafez al-Assad protesting against the planned displacement of Syrian Kurds from their homes in northern Syria. They were subsequently separated and transferred at different times to various prisons in Damascus and Aleppo and were adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience.
364
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive a number of allegations of the torture and ill-treatment of detainees by the Syrian security forces. Although the organization was not able to fully verify these allegations they were consistent with reports received over many years which have led the organization to believe that detainees were systematically tortured by the security forces.
In July 1983 Amnesty Intemational appealed for a public inquiry into the death in custody of Amin Nassur, a third-year student at the College of Engineering in Latakiyyah University and an adopted prisoner of conscience. Amin Nassur was among 70 other detained members of the PCA who were taken in groups of four to the Latakiyyah branches of Military Intelligence {al-Mukhabamt al-'Askariyya) and Political Security {al-Amn al-Siyassi) towards the end of April 1983. There, they were reportedly tortured in order to force them into signing declarations of withdrawal from the party and support for the government following which they would be released. Amin Nassur was reportedly beaten with canes, burned all over his body and tortured with electric shocks, following which he went into a deep coma. He was then transferred under heavy guard to a hospital in Latakiyyah, but reportedly died the same night without regaining consciousness. His guards allegedly threw his body from a third floor hospital window to make his death appear to be suicide. The coffin containing his body was handed over to his family for burial with strict instmctions that it should not be opened. However, Amnesty Intemational understands that it was opened and that the body bore the marks of severe torture.
Amnesty Intemational also appealed urgently on behalf of two other members of the PCA who were reportedly being interrogated by Military Intelligence in Aleppo. The organization sought assurances that the detainees were being given access to lawyers and medical treatment, but there was no response from the Syrian authorities.
Amnesty International leamed of 15 officially confirmed executions in 1983. Thirteen involved civilians who were hanged after being convicted for criminal offences including robbery, rape, and the torture and murder of their victims. The remaining two were army deserters, Zuhair Butros who was hanged on 10 August for deserting from the Syrian army and spying for Israel, and Zuhair Ibrahim Srour, who was convicted of murder on 7 September and was executed by firing squad The latter was tried and sentenced by a Military Field Court During 1983 Amnesty Intemational addressed several cables to President Hafez al-Assad expressing concem about executions which had taken place and reiterating Amnesty Intemational's unconditional opposition to the death penalty.
365
