Gambia
The trials of over 60 prisoners charged with treason in connection with the failed coup attempt of July 1981 continued in 1983 before the Special Division of the Supreme Court. Prior to their trials, which began in late October 1982, 127 other individuals had been tried before this court since its constitution in late 1981, on charges such as treason, kidnapping, robbery, murder and rape. Of these. 111 were convicted and sentenced, 35 receiving the death sentence. In late December 1983, the court was reported to have pronounced judgment on 34 of the 60 cases on trial. One death sentence and 10 prison terms of between seven and 10 years were imposed, while 23 other defendants were reportedly acquitted and discharged. All of those on trial were defended by counsel, and no procedural irregularities or other shortcomings at the trial were reported to Amnesty International. The trials of nearly 30 others had reportedly not been concluded by the end of the year.
In August 1983, the Cambian authorities announced the release of the remaining 51 detainees who had been arrested in connection with the failed 1981 coup but against whom no prosecution was eventually brought Most were believed to have been arrested in late 1981 and, although their cases were reportedly reviewed by a semi-judicial body shortly after their arrest, none was apparently charged with an offence. One of the recommendations made in the report of Amnesty International's observer to the trials before the Specif Division of the Supreme Court in January 1982, which was submitted to the authorities in June 1982 and made public in June 1983, was that the policy of holding detainees without charge for long periods should be ended. It was recommended that the authorities should promptly charge remaining detainees or release them.
During the year eight of the 35 death sentences imposed in 1982 were confirmed on appeal, bringing to 24 the number of such appeals which were rejected. However, two appeals were reportedly successful in May 1983, one apparently on the groimds of conflicting evidence and the other on the grounds that the offence committed was not treasonable and should not carry the death sentence. The first of the two prisoners was reportedly released. In November 1983, following an appeal for clemency from Amnesty Intemational, the authorities informed the organization that the Advisory Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy, established according to law to advise the President on the use of his power of commutation, had been convened and would be making its recommendations to the President once all the trials before the Special
48
Division of the Supreme Court were concluded. None of the prisoners sentenced to death by the Special Division of the Supreme Court had been executed by the end of 1983.
In October 1983, the Gambian authorities armounced the return to the Gambia, and subsequent detention, of three individuals who had fled the country following the failed 1981 coup attempt and had reportedly been granted asylum in Cuba. Their names were reported to be Fansu Camara, Bonakieu Jod and Seed Alias Gomez. They had apparently flown from Cuba to France in mid-September 1983, where, after a 24-hour stop-over, they boarded a plane for Senegal, where they were arrested and subsequently transferred to the Gambia. At the end of 1983, Amnesty International was investigating the circumstances of the return of the three Gambians to determine whether there had been an infringement of their internationally recognized right to non-repatriation to a country where their life or freedom would be threatened on account of their politically-motivated activities. The organization was also investigating the reported arrest and detention of 12 people between late October and early November 1983, apparently following statements which the three returned individuals had made while in custody. These included Sam Sarr, a teacher, Amie Sillah, a social services employee, Halifa Sillah, a sociologist, three other civilians and six police officers. By the end of the year Amnesty International was still attempting to establish the reasons for these apparently politically-motivated detentions and the legal basis for them.
