Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
Amnesty Interna-ticmal was ccxicemed about the continued imprisonment of large numbers of prisoners of conscience, including the detention of people in psychiatric hospitals for peacefully exercising their human rights. Reports were received of the ill-treatment of prisoners of conscience in prisons, corrective labour colonies and psychiatric hospitals. Amnesty Intemational worked on behalf of approximately 400 people known or thought likely to be prisoners of conscience, but believed the actual number of prisoners of conscience to be much higher. Amnesty Intemational leamed of 24 death sentences and eight executions.
In September a new law was introduced which prescribes terms of up to five years' imprisonment for prisoners convicted of "wilfully disobeying" the administration of their prison or corrective labour colony. In December Amnesty Intemational expressed its concem at the introduction of Article 188-3 into the Russian Penal Code, pointing out that the terms of the law are open to arbitrary interpretation and that prisoners have limited opportunities for legal defence. Since January Amnesty Intemational leamed of 12 prisoners of conscience being given additional sentences while serving their original sentences. All these prisoners were ah-eady serving their terms in corrective labour colonies for criminal prisoners. The organization feared that they had been convicted in trials which fell short of intemationally-agreed standards of fairness, many having been tried in camera within the penal institutions themselves. It was not known whether they had had access to the legal coimsel of their choice. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that Article 188-3 makes prisoners of conscience increasingly vulnerable to wrongful reimprisonment
Amnesty Intemational was also concemed that the right of prisoners of conscience to unconditional release was further restricted by changes to legislation on administrative surveillance. In September the Statute on Administrative Surveillance over People Released from Imprisonment was amended to empower the local militia to impose indefinite surveillance over some former prisoners of conscience without the prior approval of the Procuracy. In October the penalties for those who violate the mles of surveillance were increased. Article 198-2 of the
312
Russian Penal Code was amended to carry a maximum prison term of three years with no previous official warning being required. Amnesty International believed that the new laws deprived released prisoners of conscience of necessary legal safeguards against harassment and made them vulnerable to arbitrary reimprisonment
In February Amnesty International published Political Abuse of Psychiatry in the USSR, detailing the cases of 110 people who had been confined to Soviet psychiatric institutions in the previous five years for peacefully exercising their human rights.
The paper analysed committal procedures facilitating the wrongful confinement of dissenters and reported specific allegations of ill-treatment received by the organization including beatings by hospital staff and the administration to patients of painful and disorienting drugs in excessive quantities and without necessary correctives. The paper also described the pressure prisoners of conscience were subject to to renounce their beliefs and the punishment they received if they refused to do so.
In 1983 Amnesty International learned of a further 28 individuals being confined to psychiatric institutions for political reasons. Most had been arrested on the charge of "circulating anti-Soviet slander" after they had written letters to newspapers or officials or had contributed information to samizdat (unofficial and uncensored) bulletins, and had subsequently been confined to ordinary psychiatric hospitals for indefinite periods under the criminal commitment procedure. None were known to have used or advocated violence in support of their views.
In February the All-Union Society of Psychiatrists and Neuropathologists - the official organization for riiembers of these professions in the USSR- resigned from the World Psychiatric Association ( WPA), five months before the seventh WPA Congress in Vienna. At its previous congress in Hawaii in 1977 the WPA had condemned the Soviet use of psychiatry for political purposes.
One hundred and seven Soviet citizens are known to have stood trial in 1983 for peacefully exercising the right to freedom of expression. Some were convicted of "circulating anti-Soviet slander" and sentenced to up to three years' imprisonment, but more than half were prosecuted on the more serious charge of "and-Soviet agitation and propaganda" and given sentences of up to 12 years' imprisonment and internal exile. Both charges are incompatible with the right to freedom of expression proclaimed in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which the USSR ratified in 1973. No person brought to trial on either charge was known to have been acquitted in 1983.
The case of Sofya Belyak illustrated how broadly the charge of "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda" has been applied by the
313
authorities. A Roman Catholic church organist from the Ukraine, she was sentenced in October by a court in Zhitomyr to five years' imprisonment and five years' internal exile, for having allegedly circulated pamphlets on the reported appearance of the Virgin Mary at Fatima in Portugal in May 1917.
Individuals who allegedly collected information regarding human rights abuses and published it abroad were imprisoned on the same charge. Sergei Grigoryants from Kaluga and Aleksei Smimov from Moscow were each sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment and internal exile for allegedly producing a fortnightly samizdat publication called Express Information Bulletin "V". Citizens from non-Russian republics, accused of writing or drawing in their own national tradition, or of dissenting from Soviet Government policies, were also reportedly charged and prosecuted for "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda". They included 14 Baits and a number of Georgians, Armenians and Ukrainians. Prominent religious activists who had consistently defended the rights of fellow believers were also sentenced to long terms of imprisonment and internal exile. They included Fathers Alfonsas Svarinskas and Sigitas Tamkevicius, two Lithuanian priests who in 1978 had formed an unofficial Catholic Committee for the Defence of Believers' Rights; and two Pentecostalists from Rostov, Galina Barats and her husband Vasily, who since 1977 had headed an unofficial Committee for the Right to Emigrate from the USSR.
The laws circumscribing freedom of expression were also applied to punish individuals who had associated together in unofficial groups whose activity, though legal, was disapproved of by the authorities. These included eight members of an unofficial "Group to Establish Trust between the USSR and the USA" founded in June 1982. In October Amnesty International published a paper on the group's nine members and supporters who had been imprisoned since its formation.
In 1983 over 100 individuals were imprisoned under two laws which punish peaceful religious activity which has not been sanctioned by the state. Unusually, five were members of unofficial yoga circles based in Sverdlovsk and Moscow, who were arrested after items such as bells and incense had been confiscated from their homes. They stood trial on charges of "violating the laws separating Church from State" and "anti-social religious activity" and were given terms of up to four years' imprisonment with confiscation of property. Most of those prosecuted under these laws, however, were "dissenting" Baptists, who reject state restrictions on their religious practices. Amnesty International adopted as prisoners of conscience a number of Pentecostalists, Jehovah's Witnesses, Roman Catholics, Russian Orthodox believers and Ukrainian Greek Catholics who were imprisoned under this legislation.
314
The authorities continued to prosecute and imprison citizens who sought to exercise their right to leave the country. Some were prosecuted after they had attempted to emigrate without official permission, including six young Estonians who tried to sail across the Baltic Sea in rubber dinghies and were arrested on a charge of "illegal exit abroad". They were sentenced to three years' imprisonment Others of Jewish, German and Russian origin were imprisoned for "circulating anti-Soviet slander" or "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda" because they had repeatedly asked for permission to emigrate. Three people were imprisoned for advocating the right of Crimean Tatars to return to their native Crimea from Soviet Central Asia where they were forcibly deported en masse in 1944. Amnesty Intemational also adopted as prisoners of conscience four would-be émigrés of long standing, who were imprisoned for refusing "call-up to military service". One of them, Semyon Shnirman, had completed two years' imprisonment on the same charge in 1980.
On 1 July the Chairperson of the Moscow group of Amnesty Intemational, Georgy Vladimov, was stripped of his Soviet citizenship while he was lecturing abroad. An intemationally-acclaimed writer, Vladimov left the USSR in May after the authorities had twice searched his home and threatened to prosecute him if he continued his involvement with the organization. In April Vladimir Albrekht, who left the group in 1981, having previously been its secretary, was arrested on a charge of "circulating anti-Soviet slander". He was accused of having sent relief to the Polish trade union Solidarity, and was later sentenced to three years' imprisonment. His prosecution was not believed to be related to his previous membership ,of Amnesty Intemational.
During the year Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the reported ill-treatment of some prisoners in prisons and corrective labour colonies. Some prisoners of conscience alleged that they had been beaten, either by officials, or with official consent Six said that they had been deliberately put in cells called "press-huts" with convicted criminals, who beat them while they were in custody awaiting trial. In October Amnesty International issued an appeal on behalf of Sergei Khodorovich, who was reportedly held in the hospital wingofButyrka investigation prison in Moscow suffering from head injuries. He was arrested in April on a charge of" circulating anti-Soviet slander" for his part in administering an unofficial charity which dispenses relief to Soviet political prisoners and their families. In July he went on an 18-day hunger strike to protest againstsystematic beatings he had received. In December he was convicted and sentenced to three years' imprisonment in a strict regime corrective labour colony.
In December Amnesty Intemational published Information on Conditions of Imprisonment in Special Regime Corrective Labour
315
Colony VS 389/36-1. The colony, which was built in Perm region in 1980, is in the harshest category of corrective labour colony, and housed 15 prisoners of conscience in 1983. Incorporating the first-hand testimony of one of these prisoners, the paper described the far-reaching powers of the colony's administration and the powerlessness of the prisoners to protect even their limited rights. Formally, for example, prisoners may receive an unrestricted quantity of letters. In practice, however, many letters are confiscated and destroyed by colony officials. The paper also described the cramped conditions in which prisoners live, work and exercise in strict isolation; their monotonous and meagre diet; and the rudimentary provisions for medical treatment Official reports indicated that at least 24 people were sentenced to death in 1983 and at least eight people were executed, but Amnesty Intemational believed the actual number of death sentences passed to be much higher. The organization appealed for the commutation of all death sentences it had knowledge of. In August it wrote to the Chief Military Procurator of the USSR asking him to initiate a review of the case of Yermak Lukyanov, who was sentenced to death by a military tribunal in Elista in July. A Belgian citizen of Kalmyk origin who left the USSR after the Second World War, he was arrested in 1968 on a charge of "treason" - in the form of "going over to the side of the enemy" while visiting the USSR as a tourist. He was then confined to a psychiatric hospital for 15 years until mled fit to stand trial. In September the Supreme Court of the USSR upheld the death sentence passed on him. By December the outcome of his petition for pardon was not known.
