Mali
Amnesty International was concerned about reports of cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment of political prisoners and others held for common law crimes at Taoudenit and Kidal prisons, both of which are situated in remote desert locations in northern Mali. Two political prisoners who had been held for many years at Taoudenit Prison died in custody, and other political prisonere due for release in September were reportedly not released at that time.
Some 28 political prisoners and an apparentiy larger number of criminal prisoners were held at Taoudenit and Kidal throughout most of the year. The political prisoners had all been tried and convicted in October 1978 in connection with an alleged plot to overthrow the government by force. Seventeen of them received five-year prison terms and were due for release in September 1983. Nine others received sentences of up to 20 years' imprisonment and two were sentenced to death.
The two prisoners sentenced to death - Lieutenant Colonel Kissima Doukara, a former Minister of Defence, Interior and Security, and Lieutenant Colonel Tiecoro Bagayoko, former Director General of the Security Services - were not executed but imprisoned for several years at Taoudenit In October, Amnesty International learned that both prisoners had died in custody, one in late August 1983 and the other in mid-September 1983. Amnesty International appealed to the authorities in October to institute an official inquiry into the reported deaths and to make public the findings of the inquiry. No reply was received from the authorities.
The majority of the 17 prisoners due for release in September 1983 were reportedly not released at that time. InNovember 1983, Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to release these prisoners, if no further charges were to be brought against them. No reply was received.
Prisoners at Taoudenit and Kidal were reportedly held in total isolation from the outside world throughout their detention and were permitted no visits. At Taoudenit, they were made to undergo forced labour under particularly harsh conditions. They were employed in salt mines several miles from the prison to which they were forced to walk baitfoot each day in temperatures up to and exceeding 50° Celsius. At both prisons, hygiene and sanitation standards appeared to be very low and prisoners received a grossly inadequate diet lacking vegetables, fish or meat At Taoudenit, in particular, a high salt content in the local water reportedly caused recurrent and serious ill-health among prisoners.
68
and medical facilities were virtually non-existent
Amnesty Intemational issued an intemational appeal to the authorities in October 1983 to express its concern about such alleged cruel, inhimian and degrading treatment of prisoners at Taoudenit and Kidal. The organization also called on the authorities urgently to improve prison conditions there and to authorize an inspection of the prisoners by an internationally recognized humanitarian organization. Amnesty Intemational appealed to the authorities to close both prisons, and to transfer the iimiates to other prisons, if the suggested improvements were not made. No response had been received from the Malian authorities by the end of the year.
