Ghana
Amnesty International was concerned about the detention without trial of real or suspected opponents of the government and by trials before the Public Tribunals which did not conform to internationally recognized standards of fairness. There were allegations that detainees, particularly those detained in military custody, had been beaten, and disturbing reports of extr^udicial executions, notably after unsuccessful attempts to overthrow the government in February and June. However, the government was known to have prosecuted people, including public officials, who were suspected of carrying out political killings. Thirty-two people were reportedly sentenced to death by Public Tribunals, 19 of them in
49
absentia. At least eight p>eople were executed as a result of their conviction by Public Tribunals.
The government, headed by Flight-Lieutenant Jerry John Rawlings, had taken power on 31 December 1981 and continued in office throughout the year, despite several attempts to overthrow it Apparentiy the most serious coup attempt occurred on 19 June when political prisoners, including people who were detained on suspicion of previous such attempts, escaped from prison in Accra and tried to overthrow the ruling Provisional National Defence Council (PNDC). Dozens of people were reportedly killed in the ensuing fighting.
The action the government took to investigate the murder of three judges and a former army officer in June 1982 remained controversial. The Special Investigation Board appointed by the government to investigate the murders issued its final report on 30 March, recommending the prosecution of 10 people on charges of murder or conspiracy to murder. The 10 included Joachim Amartey Kwei and Sergeant Alolga Akata-Pore, who were both members of the PNDC at the time of the murders, and ex-Captain Kojo Tsikata, the Head of Security and Special Advisor to the PNDC. In May, Attorney General George Aikins stated that, notwithstanding the recommendation of the Special Investigation Board, there was insufficient evidence to prosecute five of those named including Sergeant Akata-Pore and Captain Tsikata, Supporters of the government alleged that the Special Investigation Boat's final report was politically biased and that its authors were determined to implicate Captain Tsikata in particular. Opponents of the government alleged that, in refusing to prosecute Captain Tsikata and Sergeant Akata-Pore, the government was attempting to hide the guilt of some of its own members.
Throughout the year individuals and groups of people were detained on suspicion of opposing the govemment The largest such groups were of people arrested in the aftermath of alleged conspiracies or attempts to overthrow the goverrunent Afler the jailbreak and coup attempt of 19 Jime, some hundreds of people, including lawyers, soldiers and students, were detained on suspicion of involvement in the attempted coup, or because they had welcomed the apparent overthrow of the PNDC. Most were released within a few days, but Amnesty International took up for investigation the cases of others who were held for longer periods, including Tommy Thompson, John Kugblenu and Mike Adjei, respectively the managing editor, the editor and the leading journalist of the Free Press newspaper, which had fi^quently criticized the govemment The three were arrested in late June. The organization also investigated the case of Sam Okudzeto, a lawyer who was detained on 26 June. He was National President of the Association of Recognized Professional Bodies, an association of professional groups which had frequentiy
50
criticized the PNDC. All four were held under Section 4 of PNDC Law 42, which gave the government wide powere of detentioa Although the government stated that they were being investigated for possible subversion, and particularly for their alleged connection with the 19 June coup attempt, Amnesty Intemational considered that they might be prisoners of conscience. They remained uncharged at the end of the year.
Ainnesty Intemational also took up for investigation as possible prisoners of conscience over 20 prisoners who had been detained since 1982. They included former members of the govemment of Dr Hilla Limann and former officials of the People's National Party who were held without trial Among cases of people imprisoned apparently on suspicion of attempting to overthrow the govemment or of incitement to mutiny. Amnesty Intemational investigated the case of Sergeant Alolga Akata-Pore, who was detained in November 1982 but remained uncharged at the end of 1983. The organization also investigated the case of Andrews Asare Kwame Pianim who had been convicted after an unfair trial of preparing to overthrow the govemment
Amnesty Intemational investigated the cases of several members of left-wing political organizations who had been detained in 1982 apparently for criticizing or opposing the govemment Most were members of either the Movement on National Affairs (MONAS) or the June Fourth Movement (JFM). Both organizations were established in 1979 by supporters of the first govemment headed by Flight-Lieutenant Rawlings, the Armed Forces Revolutionary Coimcil (AFRC). Two members of MONAS, Kwesi Agbley and Kweku Baako Kakraba, had been held without trial since Febmary 1982, apparently because they were suspected of association with leading members of the opposition in exile. Some JFM members, including Kwame Agyeman and Vadis Kwasi Kamassah, were detained apparently because of their support for former members of the PNDC who had resigned or been dismissed, and on account of their criticism of the government's economic policy.
Several political detainees whose cases were being investigated by Amnesty Intemational were released during the year. Former President Hilla Limann and former Vice-President Joseph de Graft Johnson were released on bail by the end of the year. However, nine former ministers or former members of parliament were still being held at the end of 1983 including George Garbrah, former Deputy Minister for Defence, and Dr John Nabila, former Minister for Presidential Affairs. Two members of the JFM, Tata Ofusu and Nicholas Atampugre, were reportedly released uncharged in November after being held for a year apparently on account of their association with Sergeant Akata-Pore and their criticism of govemment policy. In August five former ministers and members of parliament who had been held without trial since January
51
1982	were released uncharged. They included J. E. Adarkwa Yiadom and Roland Atta-Kesson. On 31 December, the second anniversary of the establishment of the PNDC, the government announced the release of at least one person whose case was being investigated by Amnesty Intemational, former Minister of Fuel and Power, Franz Wulff Tagoe.
The Public Tribunals, established in August 1982 to try in particular cases of subversion, smuggling or cormption, heard a clearly political case for the first time. On 14 March, Major Seidu Musah and 21 others appeared on charges relating to an attempted coup on 23 November 1982. On 11 March, Amnesty Intemational lu^ed the authorities to ensure that the trial was fair. Although Amnesty Intemational had not at that point been able to observe the Public Tribunals at first hand, it was concemed about aspects of their structure, including the absence of intemationally recognized safeguards such as the right of appeal. This suggested that they might not be fair. Amnesty Intemational drew the authorities' attention to its previous unanswered requests for a visa for a delegate to observe sessions of the Public Tribunals. However, the organization received no reply.
The trial of Seidu Musah and others ended on 3 August when the Public Tribunal sentenced one defendant, Kwame Pianim, to 18 years' imprisonment. All the other defendants were either acquitted or were sentenced in absentia. Amnesty Intemational was especially concemed that Kwame Pianim was convicted solely on the testimony of one person who had apparently secured immunity from prosecution in connection with the 23 November coup attempt Amnesty Intemational also noted that one member of the five-member panel which heard the case against Kwame Pianim was not present during the delivery of the verdict and did not sign the judgment This panel member later claimed that the PuWic Tribunal had been directed by the political authorities to deliver a guilty verdict against Kwame Pianim.
In August an Amnesty Intemational observer was able to attend sessions of the Public Tribunals. The observer arrived in Ghana on 15 August, the day that Joachim Amartey Kwei and four others were sentenced to death after being convicted by a Public Tribunal of the murder of three judges ^d a former army officer in June 1982. Amnesty Intemational was concemed not only about the death sentences but also about the fact that Joachim Amartey Kwei and his four co-defendants were not represented by legal counsel. The observer transmitted to the authorities a letter from Amnesty Intemational expressing the organization's concem about the execution on 13 August
1983	of four people who were sentenced to death between 3 and 5 August
During his mission, from 15 to 18 August, Amnesty Intemational's delegate was able to observe sessions in cases then being heard by two
52
Public Tribunal panels. He also discussed the Public Tribunals with relevant officials including George Kwaku Agyekum, Chairman of the Board of Public Tribunals, and Kwamena Ahwoi, PNDC Coordinator for Investigations, Vetting and Tribunals. The delegate noted that, although the PNDC was empowered to review all death sentences passed by Public Tribunals, the review appeared to be extremely summary in the case of Amartey Kwei and others executed on 18 August
On 26 October, taking into account the report of its trial observer, Amnesty Intemational submitted to the authorities a memorandum on the Public Tribunals. The memorandum examined the operation and constitution of the Public Tribunals and proposed 10 specific amendments. Amnesty Intemational concluded that there should be a right of appeal and that every Public Tribunal should include at least one qualified lawyer who should have the right to decide questions of law put to the panel. Amnesty Intemational also called on the authorities to specify in any amendment to PNDC Law 24, the fundamental law governing the Public Tribunals, that proof was to be established "beyond all reasonable doubt". Amnesty Intemational received no reply to its memorandum. However, the authorities published a revised version of the law goveming the Public Tribunals in December, which had been in preparation since July. Amnesty Intemational was unable to examine the revised law by the end of the year.
In some prisons warders beat criminal inmates, although the senior prison authorities sometimes acted to prevent such ill-treatment The most severe beatings occurred at military detention centres including Burma Camp near Accra, and the military guardroom at the Castle, the government headquarters. Amnesty Intemational was particularly concemed about reports that suspected political opponents of the PNDC were beaten at the Castle with the apparent knowledge of senior members of the government Those reportedly beaten at the Castle included Kofi Ashiboe-Mensah, former PNDC Secretary for Trade.
At least 32 people were sentenced to death during 1983 for crimes including attempting to overthrow the govemment, murder, armed robbery, fraud and smuggling, all of them being convicted by Public Tribunals. Eight of the 32 were subsequently executed and one had his sentence commuted by the PNDC. Nineteen others were sentenced in absentia.
There were continuing reports of beatings and killings carried out by members of the armed forces, although the govemment condemned such actions on numerous occasions. Several members of the armed forces were prosecuted for murder or assault. However, Anmesty Intemational was also concemed about reports that suspected politick opponents of the government, including many suspected of armed
53
opposition, were extrajudicially executed following attempted coups. In February, Lance Corporal Fitih was shot by soldiers at the Air Force Station near Accra after he had been suspected of involvement in a coup attempt He later recovered from three bullet wounds. By the end of the year Amnesty Intemational also received reports that t^tween 30 and 70 people were extrajudicially executed by the security forces between 19 and 21 June, following the jailbreak and attempted coup of 19 June. They included people who had escaped from prison and had been recaptured Kwame Agyeman, a civilian, and Sergeant Matthew Aawaar, a soldier, were reportedly shot at the Border Guards' guardroom. Amnesty Intemational interviewed one civilian who was detained on 19 June and was subsequently shot without being killed at the Air Force Station guardroom. Although he reportedly had no connection with the 19 June coup attempt he was suspected of opposition to the govemment
