Laos
Amnesty International's main concem remained the continued detention in "re-education" camps of large numbers of people detained without trial smce 1975 for their political activities or positions under the former government, and the lack of legal safeguards for pecóle detained on political grounds. The number of detainees held in "re-education" camps was difficult to estimate due to releases and the closure of some camps since 1981. According to some sources, there were still between 1,000 and 3,000 people detained in various camps throughout the country. Eight years after the establishment of the Lao People's Democratic Republic, the country still had no published constitution or legislation. It was reported however that tiie drafting of a constitution was nearing completion and that some provisional relations for arrest and trial had been disseminated to local authorities in October 1978. The texts of these regulations were not available to Amnesty Intemational.
Detainees in "re-education" camps included former civil and military officials and professional people fix)m the former administration who were sent to such camps after the change of govemment which mariced the end of the "neutralist" coalition in Laos in 1975. The highest-ranking civil servants and military officers were sent to camps in the northeast of Laos, particularly Houa Phan province, but camps were also established in Phong Saly, Xiengkhouang, Savannakhet and several other provinces.
A large number of releases from such camps took place in 1980 and 1981, with those released usually being allowed to retum to their original place of residence. Since then, however, few imconditional releases appear to have taken place, although some detainees with professional skills were offered assigrunents on work sites away from the camps and othere were encouraged to settie with their families in the area where they had previously been detained. Many camps are said to have been closed down as a result of such "releases on the spot". There was evidence, however, that many people were still detained in camps or subjected to such restrictions and control that their lives were hardy different from those of detainees.
One new camp for detainees was reportedly being built in Houa Phan province in 1983 to replace two camps e stablished in the province since 1975/76 (camps 05 and 06). This followed the transfer of the administration of these camps from the military to the civilian authorities of Viengsay town. The new camp was said to be between
239
Samneua and Viengsay and to have held about about 800 people in the summer of 1983. CampOS was reported to have been closed alfer it had burned dowa The detainees were then transferred to Viengsay town or nearby work sites, working in part on building the new camp.
Amnesty Intemational continued to work on behalf of about 50 political detainees who were adopted as prisoners of conscience or whose cases were being investigated. They included Samlith Ratsaphong, a former Director General in the Ministry of Education from 1973 to 1975, who had been detained in Houa Phan province since August 1975 and was last reported to be held at Camp 05. Tenh Teso, the former Director of the Royal Institute of Law and Administration, who had been detained since the end of 1975, was among those reportedly still held in the Viengsay area, as was Phao Southy, a former Director of the Department of War Veterans in the Ministry of the Interior who had been detained since August 1975. Phao Southy, aged 55, was reported to suffer from kidney trouble and malnutrition.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports concerning detainees in poor health due to the cumulative effect of several years in detention without proper medical care, while receiving an inadequate diet and being subjected to hard manual work. It appealed in particular on behalf of Colonel Kynone, a military engineer aged 45, who was reported to be suffering from malaria, diabetes and heart disease. Detained for "re-education" since 1975, he was first held in a camp in the northeast and was later transferred to a construction site in the same area, but still worked under restrictions.
Despite such reports concerning the health of individual detainees, conditions in "re-education" camps were generally reported to have improved, particularly in respect of receiving mail, parcels and visits from relatives. Some detainees were allowed to correspond with relatives abroad and receive parcels from them for the first time in many years, and facilities were granted for family visits. In the Samneua area, for example, detainees receiving visits fi"om their wives would reportedly be given a room where they could stay together during the visit Some detainees who were considered to have a "good" attitude and were tmsted by the camp administration were reportedly given some freedom of movement, being allowed to leave the camp and go on their own to surrounding areas or villages.
Several new cases came to Amnesty Intemational's attention during 1983. They included that of Phouphet Phommachanh, a 40-year-old major in the Royal Lao Army who was arrested in August 1975 in Vientiane and sent to a "re-education" camp in Houa Phan province. Originally from Savannakhet, Phouphet Phommachanh had joined the army at the age of 18 and was appointed secretary to the Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces in Vientiane in 1971. He was still holding
240
this post in 1975. He was last reported to have been assigned to a construction brigade in Viengxay.
Amnesty Intemational was also concerned about the case of Tiao Souk Bouavong, a former parliamentarian and Vice-President of the National Assembly, whom it had adopted as a prisoner of conscience. He was reportedly arrested at his home in Vientiane in October 1975 and accused of plotting a coup against the new govemment He was then aged 71 and reportedly nearly paralysed with rheumatism. He was never formally charged or tried Following his arrest, he was sent to Samkhe prison, near Vientiane, where he was apparently held for several years. In 1983 he was reported to be detained in Houa Phan province and to be in poor health.
Among others arrested later was Souvat Boulom, a former Secretary General to the National Assembly in Vientiane between 1964 and 1974, who was arrested in 1979. According to information received by Amnesty Intemational, he retired from his position in the National Assembly in 1974 and went to farm family land near Vientiane. His arrest in 1979 is said to have been part of a group of arrests conceming people from the Sam Neua area. He was not charged with any offence and was simply sent to a "re-education" camp in the northeast where he was still reportedly being held in late 1983.
Amnesty Intemational leamed of a few individual releases during the year. In one case, a seriously ill detainee who had been transferred to Vientiane for medical treatment was subsequently allowed to stay there. It was also reported that groups of low-ranking fimctionaries were released locally and asked to settle in villages where they had previously been detained but no specific information was available to Amnesty Intemational about such releases or on the closure of camps outside Houa Phan province.
A group of about 50 govemment officials was reported to have been arrested in Vientiane in early 1983 and accused of anti-party activities and cormption. They included the Deputy Minister for Constmction, Sengkham Phinit, and the Vice-Chairman of the National Committee for Social Welfare and War Veterans, Thongvanh Phanrajsavong, who was previously Director of the Irrigation Department in the Agriculture Ministry. Some of those arrested were reportedly placed under house arrest or sent to "re-education" seminars. As of late 1983, they were not known to have been formally charged or tried
241
