Guyana
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about reports that prisoners had died of malnutrition due to an inadequate prison diet.
In June the organization wrote to the Minister of Home Affairs expressing its concem about reports that inmates of two prisons were suffering serious ilhiess caused by malnutrition and that, since August 1982, at least five prisoners had died of the same cause.
Amnesty Intemational said that within the past 10 months it had received reports that more than 40 prisonere had been transferred from Camp Street Prison to the Georgetown Public Hospital, suffering from swelling of the feet, abdominal pain, vomiting, oedema and shortness of breath, leading to death in five cases. The signs and symptoms had been described by doctors who treated the prisoners as being ¿lose of beriberi or Thiamine Deficiency Disease. Amnesty Intemational said that it had also been informed that large numbers of prisoners regularly suffered from the same symptoms in the prison infirmary. Prisoners in Mazamni Prison also reportedly suffered from serious disorders caused by mabiutrition and a very poor diet consisting ahnost exclusively of white rice and a small quantity of—often putrid—fish.
Amnesty Intemational said that the prolonged deprivation of a minimum diet necessary for the prisoners' basic health constituted "cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment" in contravention of Articles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Amnesty Intemational told the govemment that it was aware that a serious problem of malnutrition affected some of the general population of Guyana at that time. However, the organization said that the govemment had a responsibility according to intemational standards and domestic law to ensure that people in the custody of the state received humane treatment
Amnesty Intemational urged the govemment to investigate without delay the provision of food in Camp Street and Mazaruni Prisons and to take immediate steps to ensure that the prisoners received an adequate diet No reply from the govemment had been received by the end of the year.
Amnesty Intemational subsequently learned of the deaths of two more prisoners, allegedly due to malnutrition during 1983.
Criminal proceedings against three men charged with treason were dropped in Febmary, on the direction of the Director of Public Prosecution. The three, Tickaram, Krishenpaul Awdhan and Mahadeo
164
Shivpersaud, had been charged in 1980 {sqq Amnesty Intemational Report 1982,1983).
No written judgment in the case of Donald Rodney had been delivered by the end of 1983. He had been convicted in February 1982 of possession of an explosive device (sQ^Amnesty International Report 1983). Donald Rodney, who had been released pending appeal, left the country during the year.
