Cape Verde
Eleven prisoners who were convicted in March 1982 of committing offences against the security of the state and sentenced to prison terms ranging from three to 10 years were released during the year. Seven other people convicted at the same trial had already been released by the end of 1982. These civilians had all been convicted by a military court but Amnesty Intemational believed that insufficient evidence was produced at their trial to prove their guilt (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1983).
Seven of the prisoners, who had received sentences of between three and five years' imprisonment, were released as a special act of clemency on 15 January. One of them, Osvaldo Joao Oliveira Rocha, died three weeks later. Members of his family claimed that his death had been caused by ill-treatment during his imprisonment, but the authorities denied this.
Three other prisoners were released some months later after their seven and nine-year prison sentences were reviewed in Praia by a Tribunal de Execuqao de Penas, a court which examines the implementation of sentences. The last of the 11, Albino Ferreira Fortes ("Bibino"), who was serving a 10-year sentence, was reportedly released in November on the orders of the same court.
In late 1982 Amnesty Intemational had expressed concem about various aspects of the March 1982 trial to the authorities. The organization had concluded that some of the defendants had been convicted and given relatively severe sentences in part, at least, because of criticisms which they had made of government policies and because of their alleged links with an opposition political party.
The government replied by providing details of safeguards available to protect human rights and by claiming that all those convicted in March 1982 had been found guilty of committing criminal acts. In May, in reply to a further communication by Amnesty Intemational, the government provided details of the various releases which had taken place. In the same month a new law was enacted restricting the jurisdiction of military courts, which were previously empowered to try all cases involving offences against the security of the state, to specifically military offences and offences considered to have an essentially military objective.
Central African Republic
Amnesty International was concerned about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and by the long-term detention without trial of suspected opponents of the government A number of Chadian nationals who sought political asylum in the Central African Republic were among those detained. Amnesty International was also concerned that some aspects of the procedures at the trials of political prisoners did not accord with intemationally recognized standards and about allegations of harsh prison conditions. No reports of executions were received during the year but three prisoners who were convicted of political ofifences in May 1982 remained under sentence of death at the end of 1983.
The military government headed by General André Kolingba remained in power and continued to maintain the ban on political activities which it imposed when it seized power in September 1981.
At the begirming of the year there were more than 100 untried political detainees at Kassaï military camp in Bangui. Some had been arrested in 1981 following a bomb explosion in Bangui, others being arrested in March 1982 when there was an alleged attempt to overthrow the government Two opposition party leaders arrested in August 1982 and accused by a government minister of involvement in subversive activities were also in custody.
In all, some 65 of these detainees were brought to trial in 1983. Most of the others were released imcharged.
At the beginning of January five members of the banned opposition party, the Mouvement de libération du peuple centrafricain (MLPC), Central African People's Liberation Movement, were released apparently on the orders of a judge, after being held without trial for 12 months for attending a political meeting.
In February, the wife of the MLPC leader, Lucienne Patasse, who was arrested after her husband evaded arrest in March 1982, was released, together with Agnès M'Bailcoua, the wife of a Minister who had also evaded arrest, and Charlotte Fayanga, a member of the MLPC's Political Bureau.
Most of the releases, however, occurred in September, when President Kolingba annoimced a partial amnesty to celebrate the second anniversary of his military government's accession to power. Amnesty Intemational learned that 40 political prisoners were released.
29
all but four of them untried detainees. By the end of the year, only a few political detainees remained untried.
Further arrests took place of suspected opponents of the government In February, 17 people were arrested after workers in the private sector went on strike in Bangui to protest against a government directive ordering them to contribute five per cent of their salaries to a "Fund for National Recovery". Those held included Théophile Sonny-Cole, the former Secretary General of the Union générale des travailleurs centrafricains (UGTC), Central African Workers General Union, which had been dissolved on government orders in May 1981. Amnesty International appealed for the release of these detainees. They were freed, uncharged, in May.
Several asylum seekers from neighbouring Chad were also detained during the year although in most cases they were later released and permitted to leave the country. However, at least two Chadians were still being held at the end of the year. Ousmane Gam, a former close associate of Chad's President Hissène Habré, who had been detained in Chad for political reasons, escaped from prison in May and entered the Central African Republic in June. He was immediately arrested and both he and another Chadian, Baradine Adoum, were reportedly for a time at risk of forcible repatriation.
Trials involving some 65 political prisoners altogether took place in April, June, October and November before the Special Tribunal. This court, which was established shortly after a bomb explosion in July 1981, has jurisdiction over all cases of a political nature. It is composed of three judges: the court president is a civilian judge but the other two judges are army officers. Legal representation is permitted but there is no right of judicial appeal from the Special Tribimal, as there is from other criminal courts. Defendants may not even challenge the legal grounds of their conviction before the Cour de cassation, cassation court
In April, two leading members of the Front patriotique oubanguien - Partì du tra vail ( FPO-PT), Oubangui Patriotic Front - Labour Party, and the brother of one of them, went on trial in Bangui. The trial was attended by an Amnesty International observer. Abel Goumba, the FPO-PT leader, and Patrice Endjimoungou, the party's spokesperson in France, allegedly infringed the ban on political activities and were responsible for writing articles for a party publication which were critical of the government They were also accused of having contact with a foreign power after the authorities discovered a number of letters which Abel Goumba had addressed to politicians in France. Abel Goumba and Patrice Endjimoungou were both convicted and sentenced to five-year prison terms. Patrice Endjimoungou's brother was convicted on a lesser charge of insulting the head of state in a private letter and was fined and released. All three defendants had been adopted as prisoners
30
of conscience by Amnesty Intemational following their arrest in August and September 1982. Abel Goumba and Patrice Endjimoungou were freed in September when President Kolingba granted a partial amnesty to political prisoners.
Twenty-two other detainees, including several members of the MLPC, were also brought to trial in April to face charges arising from an alleged coup attempt in March 1982. At this and subsequent related trials it became clear that there had been no violent action against the govemment on 3 March 1982, but that an announcement by one government Minister, General François Bozize, who had claimed on the radio that an attempt was being made to overthrow the govemment, haditselfbeen interpreted bythe authorities as a coup attempt In all, 15 of those tried at the end of April were acquitted. Six others were convicted and imprisoned for periods of one to three years; three on charges of impeding official attempts to arrest one of the alleged ringleaders of the March 1982 coup attempt and three others for impeding an official search of the house of Ange Patasse, the MLPC leader, five months before the coup attempt, in October 1981.
A further trial occurred in June when 23 people appeared before the Special Tribunal accused of responsibility for a bomb explosion in July 1981, which had resulted in a number of deaths. In May 1982 six people had been tried on related charges of possessing explosives and five had been sentenced to death, two of them in absentia. At the trial in June 1983 one defendant admitted complicity in the bomb explosion but all the others denied involvement. Thirteen defendants were convicted. There appears to have been little evidence to connect some of those convicted with the bomb attack and Amnesty Intemational believed that some may have been convicted on account of their membership of the Mouvement centrafricain de libération nationale (MCLN), Central African Liberation Movement, whose leader, Iddi Lala, had publicly claimed responsibility for the explosion. The MCLN was banned after the explosion. Three received life sentences and the others were sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment Ten of the defendants were acquitted.
In October and November, 17 people, including former leading MLPC members, appeared before the Special Tribunal at a series of separate trials on charges of complicity in the alleged March 1982 coup attempt An Amnesty Intemational observer attended the four-day trial of four civilian MLPC members who were charged with complicity in the coup attempt. Two of them, both members of the MLPC's Political Bureau, were eventually convicted, but not on charges relating to the coup attempt Instead, they were sentenced to two-year prison terms for "advocating disobedience to the government's orders": their alleged offences had consisted of signing a letter sent to President Kolingba in
31
January 1982, in which the MLPC Political Bureau had complained about the harassment of MLPC members and had called for his resignation. Both had been adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience. The two other defendants were not convicted, but had their cases referred back to the prosecution for further inquiries. One was accused of MLPC activities after the military government banned all political activities in September 1981. He was adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience. The other was accused of provoking violence shortly after the alleged coup attempt, when members of the security forces tried to arrest one of Âe ringleaders.
Five of the other 13 defendants who were tried in October and November were acquitted. None of the remaining eight were convicted for involvement in the coup attempt However, an army officer, Michel-Paulin Bondeboli, who had been a member of the military government in March 1982, was convicted of failing to reveal his alleged prior knowledge of a plot against the government and was sentenced to three years' imprisonment He had apparently failed to report for duty when summoned by the head of state shortly after General Bozize had claimed there was an impending coup attempt Two other former members of the military government were tried on similar charges but were not convicted: the court referred their cases back for further inquiries. The cases of all three prisoners were taken up by Amnesty International for investigation.
The Amnesty International observer who attended two trials, in April and November, reported that defendants were given adequate opportunities on both occasions to present their defence. However, Amnesty International was concerned that at both trials defendants were convicted for having exercised their basic right to freedom of expression without having used or advocated violence and that neither the defendants convicted at these trials, nor any others convicted by the Special Tribunal had the right to appeal against their conviction or sentence. The organization was also concerned that at these and other trials, some defendants were convicted of relatively minor offences, but had been kept in pre-trial custody for 18 months on the grounds that they had committed serious offences against the security of the state.
Amnesty International was concerned about various aspects of the conditions in which political prisoners were held, particularly the lack of medical facilities and the infrequency of family visits. At the end of May Mathieu Gonda, a political detainee being held in pre-trial custody on suspicion of involvement in the March 1982 coup attempt, died after being denied appropriate medical attentioa He had been suffering from generalized oedema for some time. At the same time two other political
32
detainees were reported to be seriously ill after being refused medical attentioa
Political detainees at Kassai military camp, where conditions were said to be cramped and very uncomfortable, were transferred to Bangui's central Ngaragba prison in March. Although some aspects of their conditions were said to be better at Ngaragba prison, detainees continued to complain about the difficulty of obtaining medical attention or of seeing relatives, lawyers or priests. In August, President Kolingba apparently intervened to ensure that political detainees were allowed weekly family visits. Amnesty International was also concerned about reports that a number of inmates of Ngaragba prison who were accused of committing non-political offences had been severely beaten by prison guards. The 13 prisoners convicted by the Special Tribunal in June were reportedly held in particularly harsh conditions in the prison's "Birao" block, along with the three others sentenced to death in May 1982. Temperatures are particularly high inside this block. The inmates were reportedly sleeping on the floor without mats or mattresses and were not allowed any exercise in the prison courtyard, nor any visits from their families. Amnesty International was concerned that their conditions of imprisonment were being made particularly harsh as a deliberate form of punishment
