Namibia
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the detention without trial of political detainees and by allegations that some of them were tortured and ill-treated. More than 100 long-term political detainees remained in custody throughout the year at a special military detention camp in the Mariental district Courts ruled during the year that the deaths in custody of two political detainees in November 1982 and the "disappearance" of another in August 1980 were directiy attributable to unlawful acts by South African security force personnel.
Amnesty Intemational continued to press for the removal of administrative restriction orders imposed on former uncharged detainees and remained concemed about the South Afncan authorities' failure to review the cases of political prisoners convicted and sentenced to long prison terms after a trial in 1968 which did not conform to internationally recognized standards. The organization also remained concemed about the use of the death penalty and by allegations of extrajudicial executions of civilians.
There was further conflict throughout the year between South African security forces and nationalist guerrillas supporting the South West Africa People's Organization ( S WAPO). Both sides accused the other of killing civilians. In December, a major new incursion by South African military forces into Angola resulted in clashes between them and both SWAPO guerrillas and Angolan military forces.
Amnesty Intemational received many reports of detentions for political reasons, particularly in the north, but was unable to estimate
77
their number. Those detained and held without charge or trial included at least four church ministers, several lay preachers in the Evangelical Lutheran Ovambo-Kavango (ELOK) Church, the Secretary of the Catholic Justice and Peace Commission, teachers, farmers and a member of the Kavango Legislative Assembly. Most arrests occurred in Ovamboland and Kavango or in the capital, Windhoek.
Proclamation AG.9 of 1977 constituted the legal basis for most detentions and was used in areas designated as "security districts": these embrace most of the northern half of the country, the area where most of the population live. The proclamation, which was introduced by administrative decree, empowers all members of the South African security forces with the rarik of non-commissioned officer or above to detain people on suspicion and hold them incommunicado without charge or trial for an initial period of 30 days following which an unlimited period of detention can be authorized by the Administrator-General. Detainees' relatives are not informed of their arrest or of their place of detention. Proclamation AG.9 indemnifies security force personnel from civil or criminal prosecution for acts committed "in good faith".
Amnesty Intemational investigated the cases of some 60 political detainees during 1983 and called repeatedly on the authorities for all detainees to be brought to trial or released and to be safeguarded against possible torture or ill-treatment while in custody. One such detainee was Kosmos Kalat Makanga, a member both of the Namibian Christian Democratic Party (NCDP) and of the Kavango Legislative Assembly. He was arrested in late July in Kavango and held incommunicado for about three months, during which he was allegedly ill-treated. Following his release, he took up residence in Windhoek allegedly because he had been threatened with re-detention if he should retum to Kavango. In late November, security police in Windhoek again detained him under Proclamation AG.9 after he and other NCDP officials walked out of a local conference on Namibia's future. He was still believed to be held at the end of the year.
Amnesty Intemational also took up the case of the Reverend Johannes Sindano, an ELOK pastor at Rundu in Kavango. He was arrested on 19 October, taken to the local security police office, and then transported, blindfold, to a secret camp where he was imprisoned for some tiiree weeks. He was not permitted to see or be seen by any other detainee until shortly before his release. He was held for some three weeks, during which he was interrogated but not tortured, and then returned, ^lindfold, to Rundu. However, before being released he was put into a cell briefly with another detainee, Amos Shirongo, who told him that he had been in solitary confinement for almost four months and had been severely assaulted.
78
Some of those whose cases were taken up by Amnesty International were among more than 100 long-term detainees who have been held at a special military camp in the Mariental district under Proclamation AG.9 since May 1979. The had been forcibly abducted from Angola by South African military forces in May 1978 at the time of an attack on a camp for Namibian refugees at Kassinga (see Amnesty International Report 1983). The detainees at Mariental were not at Kassinga at the time of the attack but at another camp; their names were not published by the South African authorities and it was not until late 1982 that they were first permitted visits from their relatives. Amnesty International publicized the cases of the Mariental detainees in April 1983, calling for the immediate release of those who were prisoners of conscience and for the trial or release of others.
Amnesty International remained concerned about the lack of institutional safeguards against torture and ill-treatment of detainees. In late 1982, the organization had written to the South African Prime Minister calling on the South African Government to repeal legislation permitting unlimited incommunicado detention and to allow frequent and regular access to detainees. However, the organization received no reply and a press statement publicizing this appeal was banned by the government in early January. In November 1983, a commission of inquiry into security legislation was established by the Administrator-General but it had not completed its work by the end of the year.
Four separate court actions during the year emphasized the need for concent In June, the Windhoek Supreme Court ruled that a political detainee, Johannes Kakuva, who "disappeared" from security police custody in August 1980, had been killed in detentioa Several people who had been detained at the same time as Johannes Kakuva at Opuwa in the Kaokoland area had testified that they had been severely assaulted and locked up for long periods in very confined spaces. The security police had claimed that Johannes Kakuva had become their informer, and that he had been released and had subsequently disappeared. An appeal by the government against the judgment had not been heard by the end of the year. The security police officer accused of responsibility for Kakuva's death in detention reportedly remained on active service despite the court judgment
In October, an inquest was held at Rundu into the death in detention of Jona Hamukwaya, a teacher. He had been arrested on 18 November 1982 by members of Koevoet (Crowbar), a special police counter-insurgency unit under the direct authority of the South African Minister of Law and Order. He died within hours of his arrest At the inquest, his wife testified that he had been beaten with rifie butts when he was taken from his home. Members of Koevoet who had detained him claimed that he had died after he had slipped and fallen down a flight of stairs while in
79
custody. This account was not accepted by the presiding magistrate as it was contradicted by medical evidence of severe back and head injuries which were probably the result of a severe assault The magistrate ruled that Jona Hamukwaya's death had occurred as a result of an "unlawful act or omission" on the part of Koevoet personnel, but he declined to make any finding about the identities of those respKDnsible. No further action in this case was known to have been taken by the South African authorities.
The death of another detainee, Kudimo Katanga, also on 18 November 1982, resulted in the prosecution of four members of Koevoet. They were not charged with murder but with the lesser offence of culpable homicide. Their trial opened in October and concluded in November two of the defendants were acquitted; two others were convicted of assault and fined. Earlier, the court had heard that Kudimo Katanga had been forced by his captors to run in front of their vehicle for several kilometres and had been beaten with sticks while he ran until he fell exhausted and died. Kudimo Katanga was reportedly a deaf mute and would therefore have been unable to answer questions put to him by his Koevoet interrogators.
Following a new wave of detentions in Kavango in October and early November, relatives of three of the detainees - Reverend Heikki Ausiku, Gideon Nestor and Severinus Siteketa - made an urgent application before the Windhoek Supreme Court for an order restraining members of the security police or Koevoet from assaulting or ill-treating the three men. Lawyers representing the families laid before the court several sworn statements from former detainees who alleged that they had been tortured or beaten while held in solitary confinement Their statements, which referred to incidents which had occurred over a period of two years, revealed the existence of at least one secret interrogation centre where torture was apparently common.
The authorities opposed the families' application, which also sought legal and medical access to the three detainees, but pemiitted a doctor to examine them. He reported that they alleged assault and were in poor health as a result of their detention. Reverend Ausiku and the two other detainees were released on 14 December, by which time the court had still not delivered the verdict, despite the urgent nature of the application. More than 20 other detainees from Kavango were released at the same time but a number remained in incommunicado detention at the end of the year, when the Windhoek Supreme Court had still given no ruling at all on the urgent application brought before it in early November.
Further details of torture of political detainees were given at a press confereifce at Tsumeb on 4 November by Hans Röhr, leader of the NCDP, and four former detainees who had recentiy been released. The former detainees alleged that they had been held incommunicado for
80
three months and had been beaten and tortured with electric shocks. They said that before their release they had been made to sign statements while blindfold. Hans Röhr alleged that another man, Ndara Kapitango, aged 63, had been beaten and hung up over a fire when he was detained in June by two members of the security forces. He had sustained serious bums which had resulted in the amputation of his right arm. He had been left unconscious by those who tortured him who had then, according to Hans Röhr, raped his wife.
Late in 1982, Amnesty Intemational had called for an impartial inquiry into allegations of torture. In January 1983, such an inquiry was publicly rejected by a security police representative but later in the year there were several announcements about investigations by senior security force personnel into allegations made against the security forces. A few members of the security forces were reportedly prosecuted but the investigating authorities apparently held most allegations to be exaggerated.
Amnesty Intemational leamed of two executions during the year. The victims were two brothers who had been convicted of murder. In another case in December, Jonas Paulus, a member of Koevoet, was sentenced to death for murder. He and another Koevoet member were alleged to have committed acts of robbery and rape in Ovamboland. During their trial, it was submitted in evidence that ^o^voer personnel had masqueraded as SWAPO guerrillas and that they were paid bonuses according to their success in killing SWAPO guerrillas. There were a number of reports that Koevoet personnel might have been responsible for extrajudicial executions of civilians but Amnesty Intemational was unable to confirm such allegations in individual cases.
In Febmary, Amnesty Intemational submitted information on human rights violations in Namibia to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights. The organization gave further detailed information in mid-1983 to a Working Group established by the Commission.
