Albania
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, the lack of legal safeguards for people arrested and tried for political offences; allegations of ill-treatment of detainees, and harsh prison conditions. Several former senior govemment officials were alleged to have been executed.
In November 1982 the First Secretary of the Albanian Party of Labour, Enver Hoxha, announced the arrest of Fecor Shehu, Minister of the Interior imtil 1982, and of a "group of plotters" linked with him. In 1983 sources outside Albania claimed that Fecor Shehu had been executed together with Kadri Hazbiu, former Defence Minister, and two other senior officials. Fiqrete Shehu, the wife of Mehmet Shehu - a former Prime Minister officially said to have committed suicide in December 1981 - was alleged to have been sentenced to 25 years' imprisonment, as were a former Foreign Minister, Nesti Nase, and a former mayor of Durres. Two sons of Mehmet Shehu were also said to have been imprisoned. Albanian diplomatic representatives in Vienna reportedly declined to comment on these allegations but confirmed that legal proceedings against "traitors" had taken place.
During the year Anmesty Intemational received information about a number of people said to have been imprisoned in previous years as a result of having non-violently exercised Âeir basic human rights. Many such prisoners were reportedly charged under Article 55 of the criminal code with "anti-state agitation and propaganda". This article makes "Fascist, anti-democratic, religious, war-mongering or anti-socialist agitation and propaganda, as well as the preparation, dissemination or the possession for dissemination of literature of a content liable to weaken or xmdermine the state of the dictatorship of the proletariat" an
272
offence punishable by three to 10 years' imprisonment If this offence is committed in time of war or has "especially grave consequences" the penalty is 10 to 25 years' imprisonment or death.
In June an Albanian refugee who had fled to Yugoslavia reportedly stated that a man from his village had been sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment for "anti-state agitation and propaganda" after he had listened to Radio Pristina (the radio station of the capital of Kosovo province in Yugoslavia). In another case, a former prisoner stated that he had been arrested in 1978 and sentenced to four years' imprisonment on charges of "anti-state agitation and propaganda" ai^r he had expressed criticism of the authorities to foreign tourists.
Three members of Albania's Greek minority who fled to Greece m 1983 after having been amnestied in November 1982 described how they had been arrested and sentenced for expressing pro-Greek sentiments. Two received eight-year prison sentences, the tiiird a six-year sentence. In a sworn statement made in Athens in November, one of them gave the names of over 100 members of the Greek minority whom he claimed were serving sentences for political offences in Ballsh prison camp.
Other reports indicated that prisoners were serving prison sentences of up to 25 years for having exercised their right to freedom of expression or for having attempted to leave the country without official permissioa Freedom of movement is severely limited by the authorities and Article 127 of the criminal code punishes "illegal torder crossing" with up to five years' imprisonment In some circumstances, this offence may be treated as "treason" and carries a penalty of 10 to 25 years' imprisonment or death under Article 47(11).
In 1967 Albania was officially proclaimed an atheist state; all places of worship were closed. Religious officials of the Muslim, Orthodox and Roman Catholic faiths were prohibited from carrying out religious duties and many were persecuted In November 1983 the Vatican condemned religious persecution in Albania and claimed that by 1981 seven bishops, 64 diocesan priests, 33 Franciscans, 14 Jesuits, 10 seminarists and eight nuns had died in prison, and that two priests had been executed for baptising children. Among other cases referred to by emigre religious sources was that of the Roman Catholic priest, Fran Mark Gjoni, who was said to have been sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment in 1977 after it had been discovered that he possessed Bibles. However, an article in the official Albanian press in October denied that religious believers had been persecuted and said that religious faith had been opposed with arguments. It quoted a saying by Enver Hoxha that "to believe or not to believe is each person's right", but did not assert that the public practice of religious belief was permitted.
273
No official figures for the number of political prisoners were published and Amnesty Intemational believed that it had details of only a fraction of the total number. Between 2,500 and 3,000 political prisoners were believed to have been held in Ballsh and Spac camps prior to an amnesty in November 1982. According to one former prisoner there were also some 300 political prisoners detained in Burrel prison in 1982. Political prisoners were also reported to have been held in Tirane. Young people and women convicted of political offences served their sentences together with ordinary criminal prisoners in prison camps in Lezhe and Kosove (Elbasan district), respectively.
Amnesty Intemational does not know how many political prisoners benefited from the amnesty of November 1982, but according to one unofficial source some 360 prisoners were released from Spac - almost a third of the total of those held there. However, Amnesty Intemational received allegations that the arrest of senior govemment officials referred to above was accompanied by further arrests of their presumed supporters.
In addition to imprisonment, the criminal code provides for a supplementary penalty of banishment or internment for up to five years. This penalty may also be imposed administratively, without trial and for unspecified periods, on both those people considered by the authorities to represent a danger to the country's social system and on "members of the family of fugitives livmg inside or outside the state". Amnesty Intemational leamed of a nimiber of such cases during the year.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concerned about the lack of legal safeguards for people accused of political offences. Reports about trial procedures relating to recent years indicated that political detainees had been held for up to six months in solitary confinement without access to lawyers or relatives and that officials conducting investigations had frequentiy beaten suspects to obtain confessions. In June 1983 the People's Assembly introduced legislative changes which were described as strengthening the sociaUst legal order. Under these amendments the investigation of crimes, which had previously been the responsibility of a department of the Ministry of Intemal Affairs, was entrusted to an Investigation Office under the direct control of the People's Assembly and the Presidium of the People's Assembly. Amnesty Intemationd was unable to evaluate how investigation proceedings had been affected by this change.
Reports of political trials in recent years indicated that most defendants were not allowed defence counsel and were obliged to conduct their own defence. Former prisoners held in Spac, Ballsh and Burrel described conditions there as harsh, with poor food, hygiene and medical care, and the conditions under which prisoners mine copper and pyrite in Spac as often dangerous.
274
