Togo
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about tfie detention without trial of suspected opponents of the government, one of whom apparentiy "disappeared" in custody, and by the continued imprisonment of three political prisoners who were sentenced after a trial which fell short of intemationally recognized standards. There were allegations of torture of detainees and prison conditions were reported to be harsh.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports in 1983 about the detention without trial of significant numbers of individuals
106
apparently suspected by the authorities of political opposition. The reported reasons for arrest varied greatly, and were often seemingly trivial Mere suspicion of possessing leaflets critical of the government or of having made critical statements about its policies was often apparently sufficient reason for the authorities to detain individuals, sometimes for several years. In such cases, detainees had no access to the courts and no means by which they could seek redress. In the majority of the 50 or so cases reported to Amnesty Intemational during the year, the detainees had been arrested in 1982 or 1983 but, in some cases, they had reportedly been held without trial for as long as seven years. The authorities maintained a rigorous censorship on correspondence with the outside world and generally did not publicize arrests and releases. However, it was possible to confirm that seven people whose arrest appeared to be motivated at least partially by political" concerns had not been released from detention during 1983. In September and November 1983, Amnesty Intemational requested the Togolese authorities to provide information on the reasons and legal basis for these detentions. Those detained included M'ba Kabassema Hankpade, a former government minister who was arrested in April 1981 and reportedly "disappeared" shortly after his transfer from the capital, Lome, to Niamtougou, and Idrissou Antoine Meatchi, a former Vice-President of Togo, who was arrested in June 1982, officially in connection with the alleged mismanagement of public funds some 10 years earlier. No reply was received from the authorities.
Amnesty Intemational continued throughout the year to seek a judicial review with respect to the cases of Kodjovi Emmanuel de Souza, Kouao Stephan Sanvee and Kwassi Jean Savi de Tove, who were convicted by the State Security Court in August 1979 on charges of conspiracy to overthrow the government Death sentences imposed by the court against the first two were later commuted to life imprisonment Kwassi Jean Savi de Tove received a 10-year prison sentence. The report of Amnesty Intemational's observer, who attended the two-day hearings in Lome, concluded that the trial fell short of intemationally recognized standards and was unfair. In particular, the report expressed the view that the state had failed to adequately establish the guilt of the accused, who were denied access to their counsel at all stages of the judicial process. The cases of the three convicted prisoners were being investigated by Amnesty Intemational, which called on the authorities to supply information on tiie whereabouts of Kodjovi Emmanuel de Souza, whose place of detention was imknown. Amnesty Intemational also expressed concem to the authorities about the state of health of Kouao Stephan Sanvee, who was reportedly ill throughout the year. No reply was received from the Togolese authorities to Amnesty Intemational's appeals.
107
Many political detainees in Togo were reportedly tortured and ill-treated after being taken into custody. Beatings, the administering of heavy slaps to both ears causing pain and occasionally permanent damage to detainees' hearing, and electric shocks were all reported to have been used to obtain confessions at various political detention centres in Lome. Conditions of detention in the quarters of the gendarmerie known as the Petiteporte ("small doorway") and Grande porte ("big doorway") were described as harsh. The food supplied to detainees was inadequate, in both nutritive value and in quantity. The standard of sanitation was reported to be extremely low, and many detainees were reported to be iU. Medical facilities were said to be poor, and detainees were apparently denied exercise. Amnesty Litemational also received unconfirmed reports that political detainees were being held in very difficult conditions in Temedja military camp and the prison at Mango, both in northern Togo.
