Kenya
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the detention of prisoners of conscience and continued to investigate the cases of several people convicted of sedition who might be prisoners of conscience. The organization was also concerned about poor prison conditions; the "disappearance" and subsequent refoulement (involuntary repatriation) of several refugees; and the imposition of the death penalty.
Nine prisoners of conscience who had been adopted by Amnesty Intemational continued to be held at the beginning of 1983, all having been arrested in 1982 and detained without trial under the Preservation of Public Security Act which permits detention without trial for an unlimited period (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1983).
The conditions under which these detainees were held gave cause for concern. Visits from relatives were permitted only rarely and in some cases not at aU. There were fears for the health of Al-Amin Mazrui, a imiversity lecturer, and other detainees. In May Amnesty Intemational wrote to President Daniel arap Moi to express concern about the continued detention of these prisoners of conscience and renewed its appeal for their release. Anmesty Intemational also called for an investigation into the conditions under which they were held, but there was no reply from the govemment However, in October, Oginga Odinga, a former Vice-President, and three others - John Khaminwa, a lawyer, Al-Amin Mazrui and university law lecturer Willy Mutunga -were freed soon after President Moi's inauguration for a second presidential term of office, following general elections in the coimtry. The five other detainees were still held at the end of 1983.
Amnesty Intemational continued to investigate the cases of Wang'ondu wa Kariuki, a joumalist, and Maina wa Kinyatti, a university lecturer, both of whom were convicted in 1982 for possessing seditious literature and sentenced respectively to four-and-a-half and six-year prison terms.
58
In May 1983 Maina wa Kinyatti's appeal was rejected by the High
Court
Three new detention orders of indefinite duration were imposed in April, following the withdrawal of treason charges, on three people accused of involvement in an abortive attempt by members of the Kenya Air Force (KAF) to overthrow the government in August 1982. Raila Odinga, the son of Oginga Odinga, and Otieno Mak'Onyango, a newspaper editor, were still being held without charge or trial at the end of the year but Alfred Otieno, a university professor, was released in October. All three had remained in custody without official explanation after charges against them were dropped in March before their trial could begin. Amnesty Intemational had issued an intemational appeal for their trial or release.
More than 60 university students were also arrested following the attempt to overthrow the government in August 1982 for allegedly demonstrating in support of the coup attempt They were charged with sedition; however, all but six of the students were granted presidential clemency in Febmary and were freed without standing trial. The other six were all tried, convicted and sentenced to five- or six-year prison terms. Three of the trials were attended in part by an Anmesty Intemational observer, who reported that the proceedings appeared to have been conducted in accordance with intemationally recognized standards. However, as Amnesty Intemational subsequently informed President Moi, the observer expressed some doubt as to whether sufficient evidence had been produced to justify the students' conviction on charges of seditioa
The trials by courts-martial of former KAF personnel accused of involvement in the coup attempt of 1 August 1982 came to an end in March. Over seven months some 1,000 defendants were convicted of various offences and sentenced to prison terms ranging from six months to 28 years. Eleven of the defendants were sentenced to death for treason but two of these were subsequently released after the High Court quashed their convictions in late 1983. Appeals by the nine others were rejected by the High Court, which confirmed the death sentences imposed at the courts-martial. More than 550 former KAF personnel who had been arrested but not court-martialled were freed between Febmary and June. Two civilians and the former Police Commissioner Ben Gethi, who were arrested in connection with the coup attempt, were also released after several months' detention without trial.
In early November up to seven Tanzanians who had earlier fled to Kenya to seek asylum were arrested and subsequently "disappeared" from police custody. They were apparently retumed secretly to Tanzania against their will even though three of them had previously
59
been recognized as refugees by the Kenyan authorities. Another of them was a naturaUzed Kenyan citizen. At the end of the year they were reportedly still being held by the Tanzanian authorities, although this had not been officially acknowledged.
In exchange the Kenyan authorities were believed to have received at least 16 Kenyan nationals who had fled to Tanzania to seek asylimi and who were returned forcibly and secretly by the Tanzanian authorities. They were said to have included two self-confessed leaders of the August 1982 coup attempt, other former KAF personnel, two former members of parliament and some university students. At least 10 of them had reportedly been granted asylimi in Tanzania; their return and detention had not been acknowledged by the Kenyan authorities by the end of 1983. These secret exchanges ofalleged political opponents, (some of whom were recognized as refugees under the United Nations Convention and Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees), took place shortly before the meeting on 16 November between the Presidents of Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda, when they reportedly reached agreement on a number of political matters affecting all three East African states.
On 25 November Amnesty International expressed its serious concern to the Kenyan authorities about the alleged arrest and forcible return to custody in Tanzania of Tanzanian refugees in Kenya and inquired into the situation of refugees forcibly returned from Tanzania and detained in Kenya. The organization also urged President Moi's government to reaffirm its stated commitment to the protection of refugees in accordance with the United Nations Convention and Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees, which Kenya has ratified. The authorities did not reply and by the end of the year had not disclosed the legal basis for the continued detention of those returned from Tanzania.
As described above, sentences of death were confirmed on nine former KAF personnel convicted of treason after the 1982 coup attempt The death sentences had not been carried out by the end of the year. It was not known how many people were under sentence of death at the end of 198 3 after being convicted of homicide or violent robbery, or whether any executions were carried out during the year. In August Amnesty International appealed to President Moi to commute the death sentences on the nine former KAF personnel and other condemned prisoners. In May, in his capacity as Chairman of the Organization of African Unity, President Moi had appealed to Malawi's Head of State to grant clemency to Orton and Vera Chirwa after they had been sentenced to death for treason.
