France
Amnesty Intemational's major concem in 1983 was the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience who had refused to conform to the national service law. The prosecution of conscientious objectors continued despite major alterations in both the structure of tiie law and provisions for military and altemative civil service. The reimprisonment of objectors who had akeady served prison sentences continued.
On 1 January 1983 the military courts, Tribunaux permanents des forces armées (TPFA), Permanent Tribunals of the Armed Forces, which had tried conscientious objectors were abolished and replaced by civilian courts.
Amnesty Intemational requested repeatedly for the introduction of less restrictive legislation conceming conscientious objectors. On 23 May, while the Parliamentary Commission was studying a draft bill, Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Minister of Justice, stating that the grounds on which conscientious objectors could claim the right to do civil instead of military service should be less restricted and that this service should be outside the "war machine" and not of punitive length. An amnesty was requested for all prisoners sentenced under the existing laws.
The new law modifying military service (Loi 83-605 of 8 July 1983) was welcomed by Amnesty Intemational insofar as it contained greater flexibility in granting conscientious objector status and an improvement in the type of altemative civil service objectors were allowed to perform. However, the duration of altemative service remained 24 months, which is double that of the period of military service. Amnesty Intemational believed this to be punitive and continued to adopt as prisoners of conscience objectors to both military and civil service (commonly known as total objectors).
282
Amnesty Intemational worked on the cases of twelve conscientious objectors. "Die trial of one conscientious objector, Michel Fache, took place on 14 April, before the reform of the law came into effect He was sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment for refusal to carry out altemative service because of its restricted nature. On 24 October the Rouen appeal court reduced the sentence to a three months' suspended sentence, although Michel Fache remained liable for military service.
In another case Robert Loncar was sentenced to one year's imprisonment on 23 March 1983 by the new civilian court in Paris for " refusal to obey". He had informed the authorities that although he did not oppose wearing military uniform or carrying out non-armed military service, he refused to bear amis on philosophical and religious grounds. His request for recognition as a conscientious objector was not made within the permitted time limit because he claimed not to have been aware of the existence of legal provisions for the recognition of conscientious objectors. After four months' imprisonment at Fresnes he had his sentence reduced on appeal to ei^it months' imprisonment with four months' remission of sentence and was released. However, a few days later he was again called up for military service. He presented himself at the barracks and stated that he once again refused to carry arms. He was then reimprisoned. He was put on trial at Versailles on 11 October and sentenced to one year's imprisonment, which he was serving at the end of 1983.
The case of Michel Springaux, a pacifist and total objector, well illustrated Amnesty Intemational's concem over the reimprisonment of conscientious objectors. He refused to perform military service, was amnestied in April 1982, but remained liable for military service. On 15 Febmary 1983 he presented himself at the barracks and was imprisoned at Dijon on 18 Febmary. Sentenced on 13 April to four months' imprisonment, three of which were suspended, he was rearrested by the army as soon as he left the courtroom and ordered to put on military uniform. When he refused he was again imprisoned On 6 July he was put on trial and sentenced to eight months' imprisonment On 19 October he was released but yet again rearrested by the army and charged with the same offence.
283
