El Salvador
Amnesty International remained gravely concemed about the continued involvement of all branches of the security and military forces in a systematic and widespread program of torture, mutilation, "disappearance", and the individual and mass extrajudicial execution of men, women and children from all sectors of Salvadorian society. Paramilitary civilian defence squads which operated under military supervision as well as so-called "death squads" were also consistently named as having been responsible for such abuses. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed that several hundred detainees arrested under the terms of Decree 507 of December 1980 remained in untried detention, some of them for over three years.
Victims of human rights violations were killed outright or were abducted and held incommunicado in police stations, army barracks or secret detention centres, where they were frequently subjected to torture and ill-treatment While some were eventually released or were transferred to official prisons, thousands have "disappeared" over the past five years. Despite repeated requests by Amnesty Intemational the government consistently failed to initiate any inquiries to identify those responsible for such abuses and to bring them to justice.
In many cases, officials blamed abuses on right-wing paramilitary groups — the so-called "death squads" — which the govemment maintained were operating outeide official control. Amnesty Intemational believed, however, that the "death squads" consisted in most cases of security agents or members of the armed forces operating in plain clothes but acting under superior orders. According to information made public in 1983 by Salvadorian sources and United States Embassy officials, names, personal details, and sometimes photographs of those selected for kidnapping and murder were passed to army officers who then assembled "death squads" from active and reserve members of the security forces and the army.
Such human rights abuses occurred in the context of a continuing civil conflict and Amnesty Intemational received allegations that opposition forces were also carrying out individual execution-style killings. Amnesty Intemational, as a matter of principle, condemns the torture or execution of prisoners by anyone, including opposition groups. On the basis of its collection and analysis of information conceming thousands of individual cases, including data collected by an Amnesty Intemational delegation which visited El Salvador in July 1983, Amnesty Intemational concluded that the majority of the
149
reported abuses were inflicted on non-combatant civilians by forces under the authorities' control.
Amnesty International's July delegation to El Salvador included a prominent Spanish jurist, a forensic pathologist from the United States and a member of the organization's Intemational Secretariat It investigated how data on individual violent deaths was recorded and whether the relevant evidence was being pursued by official, medical, police and legal institutions. It concluded that the apparently deliberate failure to investigate violent deaths where security or military force responsibility was indicated, suggested that the authorities themselves lay behind the widespread killings.
A number of human rights groups continued their attempts to collect data on extrajudicial executions. Amnesty Intemational continued to appeal to the govemment to investigate the cases of members of such groups who had themselves suffered arbitrary arrest or torture or who had "disappeared" or been killed in circumstances suggesting extrajudicial execution in recent years, in an apparent effort to halt their work. One such case was that of América Femanda Perdomo, the Public Relations Secretary of the Comisión de Derechos Humanos de El ¿"a/varforíCDHES), the non-govemmental Salvadorian Human Rights Commission, who "disappeared" following her arrest in San Salvador in August 1982.
In March 1983, Marianella Garda Villas, the President of the CDHES, was killed in disputed circumstances. She had previously been arrested twice; the second time she was reportedly badly beatea She left the country in 1981 after being named by the Comité de Prensa de las Fuerzas Armadas (COPREFA), Armed Forces Press Committee, as a "traitor to the country", on a list widely interpreted as constituting a death threat to those named. She was killed when she returned to El Salvador reportedly to collect human rights data which she reportedly intended to submit to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights. Amnesty Intemational called on the authorities to initiate an official investigation and to permit joumalists and others to initiate independent inquiries. Instead, COP!^FA issued a series of confused and contradictory accounts conceming her death.
A forensic pathologist who was a member of Amnesty Intemational's delegation examined photographs of Marianella Garcia Villas' body. He found that the available evidence was not sufficient to make a definitive finding as to the likely cause of death, nor did it constitute proof that she had been tortured, although this possibility could not be excluded The delegation also concluded that the available evidence did not support the govemment's claim that she died while participating in or leading guerrilla actions. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that the government's failure to carry out an adequate post-mortem
150
examination meant that no definitive conclusion could be drawn as to how she had died.
Amnesty International's delegation to El Salvador also met the Comisión de Derechos Humanos (CDH), the (governmental) Human Rights Commission, which was established in December 1982 and charged with the protection, assurance and promotion of respect for human rights in El Salvador. The delegation welcomed the Commission's statement that it had located 91 of the 514 people reported to it as missing by relatives between January 1983, when it began operations, and mid-June. However, Amnesty Intemational was disturbed that the Commission did not intend to investigate the many thousands of reported abuses which had occurred before it began operating, or to act on "disappearances" other than those reported to it by relatives. The Commission also did not plan to publicize abuses reported to it, or take steps to bring the perpetrators to justice.
However, Amnesty Intemational welcomed the Commission's statement that it had undertaken an investigation of the reported extrajudicial execution of 18 unarmed Indian peasants by the Salvadorian army on 22 Febmary 1983. The Commission submitted its findings to the President of El Salvador, Alvaro Magaña, but they were not made public and Amnesty Intemational was unaware of any subsequent disciplinary action being taken against either the troops or the officer named as responsible for the raid. In June, Fermín Garda Guardado, a witness to the raid and the father of one of the victims, was himself arrested by the National Police. Amnesty Intemational received no further information as to his whereabouts or the state of any proceedings against him during 1983. The organization believed that he was arrested because he testified about the 22 February army killings, and called for his immediate release.
Several hundred detainees remained in detention under the terms of Decree 507 of December 1980 at the end of 1983. Decree 507 had substantially revised the administration of justice in El Salvador with the establishment of military courts with jurisdiction over a range of offences including crimes against security and the state. Several hundred more people were detained under its provisions during 1983, despite the lifting in December 1983 of the March 1980 state of siege. Amnesty Intemational repeatedly expressed to the authorities its concem that Decree 507 created a judicial framework, including a 15-day period of incommunicado detention, which facilitated human rights abuses including "disappearance" and torture.
In October 1983, an Amnesty Intemational doctor and a forensic pathologist examined a teachers' trade union leader, Rafael Carias Flores, who was arrested in Febmary 1981, and held without trial imder the terms of Decree 507 until his release in April 1983. They concluded
151
that clinical evidence indicated that liquid or gel had caused a " distribution of injuries not consistent with accidental or self-mutilation". Carias stated he had been tortured with sulphuric acid and in a number of other ways while being interrogated at an army barracks at the Centro de Instrucción de Telecomunicaciones de la Fuerza Armada (CITFA), the Armed Forces Telecommunications Centre, and later at National Guard headquarters, before his arrest was acknowledged after he was fortuitously seen in secret detention by representatives of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).
In July, Amnesty Intemational called on the Salvadorian authorities to investigate the death in custody of Nelson Renderos. Renderos was detained imder the terms of Decree 507 by two men in plain clothes on 31 May 1983, and his father was asked to pick up his body at a San Salvador ftmeral home on 1 June. The National Police stated that he had died when "the rope with which he was trying to hang himself in the National Police cells had broken". The police doctor's report stated that he had died of a broken neck, but a subsequent indépendent examiner found other wounds, including fractures of the fmgers of both hands and fractures of both arms. Amnesty Intemational considered that these injuries, and a number of other discrepancies and incongmities in the police doctor's finding, suggested that Renderos had died as a result of torture while undergoing interrogation at National Guard headquarters.
Other detainees held under Decree 507 during 1983 included people perceived to be in opposition to the government and their relatives, as well as those resident in or attempting to flee areas where armed conflict was taking place. Information collected by Amnesty Intemational and others indicated that teachers, trade unionists, human rights workers and those assisting with relief and medical assistance to displaced persons were particularly at risk.
Amnesty Intemational welcomed the release of a reported 533 prisoners under a partial amnesty established for 60 days by Decree 210 of May 1983. They included a mmiber of prisoners whose cases Amnesty Intemational had been investigating. The organization was concemed that detainees were not represented in the proceedings which determined whether they were to benefit from Decree 210, and that those not ft-eed had no right of appeal. Many of those released sought exile abroad, fearing extrajudicial execution if they remained in El Salvador.
Amnesty Intemational was also concemed that some 200 people who appeared to have been eligible for release under the new amnesty provisions remain in untried custody. Among them were a number of trade union leaders of the Sindicato de Trabajadores de Empresa Comisión ^ecutiva Hidroeléctrica del Rio Lempa (STECEL), Union of Electricity Workers at the Rio Lempa power station, whose cases
152
Amnesty International had been following since their arrest in August 1980, following a 24-hour strike. The military authorities had stated that the detained STECEL leaders were to be tried before a military tribunal for violating emergency legislation Decree 296 of June 1980 which had prohibited strikes or the collective abandonment of posts by officials and employees of the state and its agencies. To Amnesty International's knowledge, however, no such trials ever took place, and they remained in detention despite repeated appeals from the organization that they be brought to trial or released.
Throughout 1983 Amnesty International raised its human rights concerns in El Salvador with regional organizations and other international bodies including the United Nations (UN) Working Group on Disappearances. In its September 1983 annual report, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States reiterated its concern regarding the continuing high number of extrajudicial executions and"disappearances" which continued to be carried out by the security forces and paramilitary groups operating with apparent government support
Following a fresh visit to the country in September 1983, the UN Commission on Human Rights Special Representative cited an " alarming number of political murders of civilians committed by the armed forces, the security forces, or the extreme right-wing paramilitary 'death squads' ", whose activities had "ominously increased of late". The representative also stated that the capacity of the Salvadorian judicial system to investigate and punish grave violations of human rights was "notoriously unsatisfactor^'. The representative also expressed concern about the violation of minimum humanitarian norms in combat situations, calling attention to grave violations of the Geneva Conventions on the Protection of Victims of War of 12 August 1949, including indiscriminate attacks on civilians by the army. In December 1983, the UN General Assembly responded to the Special Representative's report with a resolution expressing its "deep concern about the continued and unbridled violations of human rights" in El Salvador and strongly urged the Salvadorian Government to "ensure that human rights and fundamental freedom were fully respected by all its agencies including the security forces".
In 1983 Amnesty International continued to express its concerns to relevant officials in the United States concerning the possible direct effect which military assistance could have on the human rights situation in El Salvador. The US President Ronald Reagan certified that El Salvador had satisfied the criteria related to human rights required by the US Congress in order that US military assistance to that country could be continued. Amnesty International subsequently made
153
public its assessment that it had observed no noticeable improvement in the human rights situation in El Salvador.
