Chile
Amnesty International was concerned about the arbitrary detention of thousands of people in connection with public protests; the large number of allegations of torture and other ill-treatment of people detained by all branches of the security forces; the banishment without trial of 127 people; the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience; the continuing enforcement of emergency legislation affecting the right to due process of law and the right of protection against arbitrary arrest and the death of political opponents of the government in disturbing circumstances. No significant progress was made by the authorities in clarifying the fate of some 650 people documented to have "disappeared" since 1973.
Human rights violations took place against a background of growing public opposition to the policies of the government led by General Augusto Pinochet and violence - including the killing of several members of the security forces - attributed to opposition groups. The opposition organized public protests, and new political groupings were formed, although political parties remained banned by law. Trade unions called for strikes. The government reacted to these expressions of public protest by making widespread arrests.
Public rallies were broken up violently by the security forces. Fifty-eight people were killed and hundreds injured by indiscriminate gunfire by members of the armed forces, uniformed police and civilians, who appeared to be operating with the full cooperation of the uniformed police. Many of tìiose killed were bystanders, including a number of children. Some of them were shot dead inside their own homes. Most of those killed were living in shanty towns, whose residents were held responsible by the authorities for the more active protests, and where the repression of the protests was most severe. Households where the banging of saucepans (used as a form of non-violent protest) could be heard were said to have been particularly at risk.
Several thousand people were reportedly detained during the year m the course of mass arrests carried out during political protests. Some 700 others were reportedly detained individually. Most of these detainees were released after a few hours or days of detention, either unconditionally or on bail pending trial, usually on charges under the Law of Internal State Security or the Arms Control Law.
Amnesty International was concerned about a number of cases in which the security forces allegedly fabricated evidence to secure the conviction of political detainees. Eye-witnesses described how agents
136
of the Central Nacional de Informaciones (CNI), secret police, planted arms and explosives before arresting political opponents who were later charged with offences under the Arms Control Law. Amnesty Intemational adopted several such people as prisoners of conscience, including Javier Ruiz Vera, a leader of the Comisión de Derechos Juveniles de Valparaiso, Valparaíso Commission for the Rights of Young People, who spent more than six months in prison on charges of arms possession, which Amnesty Intemational believed to be based both on evidence fabricated by the CNI and a confession extracted under torture. He was released on bail on 4 October.
The use of torture and other forms of ill-treatment was reportedly widespread According to the Comisión Chilena de Derechos Humanos, Chilean Commission of Human Rights, 432 individual complaints were filed in the courts. According to hundreds of testimonies examined by Amnesty Intemational, all branches of the security forces were involved. Carabineros (uniformed police), Investigaciones (plainclothes police), the CNI and the army. The methods used included severe beatings, the application of electricity to sensitive parts of the body, and mock executions. In many cases torture and ill-treatment took place in the street and in police vehicles. Individuals were reportedly made to run barefoot and sometimes naked in the street, occasionally on broken glass. They were said to have been made to extinguish fires with bare feet and hands. Medical reports consistent with such claims were available in a number of cases.
Amnesty Intemational issued many appeals throughout the year urging the government to ensure the humane treatment of prisoners and to investigate thoroughly the hundreds of complaints of torture and ill-treatment. In May the organization published its report Chile: Evidence of Torture, containing the findings and recommendations of an Amnesty Intemational mission to Chile the previous year. The report had been sent in advance to the Chilean Govemment, which retumed it to the organization without comment.
On 25 November, the govemment announced that it would introduce a law making public the location of all secret detention centres. By the end of the year, however, no such law had been introduced The aimouncement was made as a result of mounting public protest following the suicide on 10 November of Sebastián Acevedo, whose son and daughter were being held in a secret CNI detention centre in Concepción. Both alleged afterwards that they had been tortured
Prior to the govemment's announcement, there had been two unprecedented court actions concerning the CNI. In the first, a judge from Viña del Mar went to a secret CNI detention centre following a complaint lodged in the courts by relatives and confirmed that 11
137
students arrested by the CNI were being held there. After their release, all 11 alleged that they had been tortured while being held there. On 22 November the Santiago Appeals Court, when dealing with the case of an individual threatened with arrest by the CNI, ruled that Decree Law 1878, by which the CNI was created in 1977, does not give it the power to arrest people, and that, according to the 19 81 constitution, individuals could be held only in public places or prisons.
Amnesty International was concerned that, in spite of these rulings, the CNI continued to arrest, hold and torture detainees in secret detention centres.
Throughout the year there was growing public concern in Chile about torture. In January 1983, the Comisión Nacional Contra la Tortura, National Commission Against Torture, was formed by members of various sections of Chilean society. In 1983 the Commission published the testimonies of those allegedly tortured, and made frequent statements protesting against the continuing torture of detainees. In mid-December, the Catholic Bishops' Conference announced that "torturers and their accomplices, and those in a position to prevent torture who do not do so, will be excommunicated", and they called for urgent and wide-ranging reforms to be made in the CNI. The Chilean Medical Association announced in June that it was investigating allegations that several of its members had participated in torture sessions.
On 11 September the government, by means of Decree 1043, renewed the State of Danger of Disturbance to Internal Peace, which had been renewed regularly every six months since the constitution came into force in March 1981. As a result, and in accordance with Interim Provision 24 of the 1981 constitution. President Augusto Pinochet continued to exercise the power to hold people incommunicado in detention for up to 20 days without charge, and to banish them to remote parts of the country for three months without trial or right of judicial appeal The government simultaneously annoimced that the state of emergency would not be renewed The State of Danger of Disturbance to Internal Peace continued to be in force. The lifting of the state of emergency only resulted in the lifting of curfew restrictions.
Under Interim Provision 24, 127 people were banished for three months to remote villages, more than double the number who had been banished in 1982. They included a number of trade unionists, peasant leaders, students, shanty town dwellers and many suspected of encouraging the public protests.
In June, eight trade unionists were banished, among them Héctor Soli's Saavedra, President of the Cor\federación de Trabajadores de la Construcción, Confederation of Construction Workers, in the Santiago area; Valentin Osomo Badilla, leader of the Youth Section of the above;
138
and José Oróstica Palma, a leading member of the Confederación Campesina "El Surco", a peasant trade unioa They were reportedly tortured by CNI agents before being banished. Medical professionals allegedly carried out medical examinations of the victims before and after torture took place. The three leaders and others who were arrested at the time submitted formal complaints of torture to the courts.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed that the govemment continued to apply Decree 3655, whereby crimes committed against govemment officials or members of the armed forces in their official capacity are dealt with, by military war tribunals, even in peacetime. On 15 November the govemment annoimced that a Consto de Guerra, Military War Tribunal, would be held on 25 November to try five people accused of the murder on 30 August of General Carol Urzua, Santiago's Military Govemor. The Fiscal Militar, Military Prosecutor, investigating the case, requested the death penalty for three of the accused, who were reportedly tortured during interrogation, and five-year sentences for the other two. Amnesty Intemational appealed to the govemment to transfer the trial to a civil tribunal, expressed concem about the request for the death penalty, and stated its view that the legal proceedings in military war tribunals did not provide an eñ'ective guarantee of a fair trial.
The war tribunal did not take place on the scheduled date because the Supreme Court ordered the military to suspend proceedings in order that a motion filed by the defence be examined. This motion submitted that the war tribunal would violate the constitutional rights of the accused As of the end of the year the Supreme Court had not announced its decision on the question.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about a number of cases where the authorities alleged that individuals were killed in armed confrontations with security forces or in accidents, although the evidence suggested that they may have been extrajudicially executed
At the beginning of November, the Intendente de la 8" Región, Military Govemor of the 8th Region, announced in Concepción that Victor Hugo Huerta Beiza, aged 52, had died following an armed confrontation with the security forces. However, according to a formal complaint submitted to the courts by his wife, he had been detained by armed civilians several hours before the alleged confrontation took place, his body bore marks of torture, and his arm had been broken. She also stated that her husband had been followed by men in plain clothes in a taxi whose number plate was noted on the day of his death.
Amnesty Intemational continued to monitor legal developments in investigations into the fate of some 650 documented cases of prisoners who "disappeared" between 1973 and 1977. The organization was seriously concemed that official investigations into most of these cases
139
had either been closed or were virtually paralysed in the courts. Relatives of the "disappeared" continued to be arrested, mostly during demonstrations protesting at the failure of the government to clarify the whereabouts of the victims.
Amnesty International appealed for the immediate release of Maria Cecilia Rocüiguez Araya, a member of \h& Agrupación de Familiares de Detenidos-Desaparecidos, Associaticai of Relatives of the "Disappeared". She was arrested at Santiago airport on 2 February as she was about to travel to an international meeting on the "disappeared" in Madrid. She was charged with possessing anti-government propaganda and eventually sentenced to 41 days' imprisonment, the amount of time she had already spent in preventive detention before her release on bail.
In December the United Nations ( UN) General Assembly adopted a resolution on the human rights situation in Chile by a recorded vote of 89 in favour to 17 against, with 18 abstentions. The resolution, inter alia, reiterated its appeal to the Chilean authorities to respect the right of people to life and physical integrity and to put an end to intimidation and persecution, arbitrary detentions and imprisonment in secret places, and torture and other ill-treatment, which have resulted in unexplained deaths.
During the year Amnesty International made information on human rights abuses in Chile available to the UN Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in Chile and the UN Special Rapporteur on Summary or Arbitrary Executions, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations.
