Pakistan
Amnesty Intemational remained concemed about the widespread arrest and imprisonment of prisoners of conscience. Prisoners charged with political offences, including the non-violent expressicxi cf opinions, continued to be tried by military courts applying simimary procedures. Amnesty Intemational also received reports that dozens of political prisoners had been detained for over two years without formal charges being filed. The organization continued to receive reports of the torture of some political prisoners and several detainees suspected of criminal offences reportedly died in
246
police custody as a result of torture. A large number of death sentences were imposed, often by special military courts from which there is no judicial right of appeal, and many executions took place. There was a sharp increase in the number of prisoners who were sentenced to be flogged Sentences of amputation continued to be imposed and political detainees were reportedly held in bar shackles for long periods. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about the possible expulsion of reftigees to territories where their life or freedom would be threatened {refoulement).
Martial law entered its seventh year on 5 July 1983. Under martial law regulations, political parties are proscribed and all p>olitical and trade union activities are banned. President Zia-ul-Haq annoimced on 12 August 1983 that provincial and national elections, postponed indefinitely imder martial law, would be held by March 1985, when martial law would be ended The Movement for the Restoration of Democracy (MRD), an alliance of several major opposition parties, launched a campaign of "civil disobedience" on 14 August to press demands for an immediate retum to democratic govemment under the suspended parliamentary constitution. Political demonstrations were held in defiance of martid law regulations. Opposition politicians, party workers, lawyers and students were among those arrested in connection with these protests.
MRD activity found greatest support in Sind province, where some demonstrations resulted in the death of law-enforcement personnel and demonstrators and damage to property. Over 60 deaths of law enforcement persormel and demonstrators were officially acknowledged to have occurred by late September, while opposition sources claimed that there were more than twice that number of civilian deaths alone. Several thousand people were arrested. By the end of the year, the govemment had released some 3,000 people. President Zia-ul-Haq announced in December that those prisoners held without trial who had "courted" arrest could be released on submitting a written apology.
Although Amnesty Intemational did not have exact figures on the number of detainees held at the end of 1983 several hundred detainees were known to be held without formal charge in administrative detention, including most prominent opposition politicians. These detainees had either been arrested before the opposition campaign began or were held for "courting" arrest during demonstrations or had been arrested by police from their homes at different times. Other detainees arrested in the course of demonstrations were brought to trial before Summary Military Courts, before which there is no right to legal representation and no right of appeal. In some cases, trials reportedly took place so soon after arrest Âat the detainees were not informed of the charges against them and had no chance to defend themselves. Some
247
were charged with criminal acts such as assault and damage to property. Charges against other detainees were purely political, for example raising anti-government slogans and delivering speeches "with a view to creating dissatisfaction among the people". The majority of those tried were sentenced to one year's imprisonment and in many cases sentences of flogging were imposed. Some pohtical prisoners were known to have been flogged although Amnesty International was unable to verify that all sentences of flogging were implemented. Amnesty International wrote to President Zia-ul-Haq on 20 September, expressing concern that among the large number of people arrested in the previous four weeks were many whom Amnesty International believed could be prisoners of conscience, arrested for participation in non-violent political activities. The oi^anization urged that all such prisoners be promptly released if there was no evidence of their involvement in criminal acts such as assault or damage to property. Amnesty International also reiterated its grave concern about the large number of prisoners sentenced to be flogged, having already sent urgent appeals a month earlier requesting the President's intervention to stop the implementation of sentences of flogging.
Arnnesty International was also concemed that some detainees arrested in connection with the MRD's campaign were reportedly transferred from regular places of detention and held incommunicado during interrogation by miUtary and police security personnel. Several detainees were said to have been taken from Karachi Central Jail to the Baldia Interrogation Centre where they were held for several days and reportedly beaten. Amnesty Intemational cabled President Zia-iU-Haq on 8 December to express concem about the absence of legal safeguards for detainees, citing the case of Sardar Shaukat Ali, Secretary General of the Mazdoor Kissan (Workers' and Peasants') Party, who was reportedly held incommunicado in Lahore Fort from 12 October.
Lawyers were also detained during 1983 for protesting about the continuation of martial law. During October over 1(X) lawyers were detained in Punjab and Sind provinces while organizing and subsequently participating in a National Coordination Committee (NCC) of Lawyers' day of protest on 19 October. Those arrested included Abdul Hafeez Lakho, President of the Karachi Bar Association (KBA), and two former secretaries of the KBA, Farooq H. Naek and Ilasheed Razvi. A case was filed against them and seven other Karachi lawyers imder Martial Law Regulations (MLR) Nos. 13 and 33 banning political activity and criticism of the armed forces. No trial proceedings had begun by the end of 1983 and all but one of these lawyers remained in detention in Karachi Central Jail. Amnesty Intemational launched appeals on their behalf, concemed that they were being detained for the
248
peaceful expression of their views, and urged that all charges against them be dropped.
Although some prisoners of conscience held without trial were released during the year, including Zamin Shah and Abdus Saleem in April and Irshad Rao in July 1983 {sqq Amnesty Intemational Report 1983), several long-term prisoners of conscience continued to be held in administrative detention. Two political party leaders, Air Marshal (Retd.) Asghar Khan of Tehrik-i-Istiqlal (11) and Nawabzada NasruUah Khan of the Pakistan Democratic Party (PDP) had both been held for over two years under house arrest With only a brief interval, Asghar Khan had been detained under martial law without charge or trial for a total of over four years. Rasul Baksh Palejo, who was due for release on completion of a one-year prison sentence in October 1980, continued to be held under Martial Law Order No. 78, under which individuals can be held indefmitely without being informed of the grounds for their arrest. Amnesty Intemational appealed to the authorities in October 1983 urging his release and that he be given immediate medical treatment, having received persistent reports that his health had seriously deteriorated He was finally transferred to hospital in Lahore in late November, where he remained in detention.
Political detainees other than those arrested in cormection with MRD protests were brought to trial before military courts. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that the conduct of these trials did not conform to internationally accepted standards. Three university lecturers who had been adopted by Amnesty Intemational as prisoners of conscience, Tariq Ahsan, Mohammad Saleem and Jamil Omar, were tried by Special Military Court No. 52, Rawalpindi, between Febmary and April 1983, over 14 months after their arrest They were charged with sedition and possession of subversive docimients, material which the court did not make public. The court's verdict was not handed down until several months after the completion of trial proceedings. In November Tariq Ahsan was sentenced to two years' imprisonment, Mohammad Saleem to three years' and Jamil Omar to seven years' in addition to large fines. Prisoners tried before special military courts are permitted no judicial review of their sentences.
Many political detainees were reportedly held for periods of over two years without formal charge or trial. On 8 November 1983, Amnesty Intemational wrote to President Zia-ul-Haq raising the cases of some 82 political prisoners reportedly held in these circumstances, the majority being held in Haripur Jail, North West Frontier province. Nineteen members of the Pakistan People's Party (PPP) were held in Rawalpindi District Jail, most having been arrested in early 1981. They were held under sections of the Pakistan penal code relating to murder and conspiracy, and MLR No. 13 which bans criticism of the armed
249
forces. No specific charges were brought against them. Amnesty Intemational sought clarification as to the eligibility of all these detainees for bail under Section 497 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended in December 1979. On 26 December 1983, it was announced that Section 497 had been further amended to exclude certain categories of offenders including "a hardened, desperate or dangerous criminal".
As of December 1983, Amnesty Intemational was working for the release of 53 prisoners of conscience and investigating the cases of 33 possible prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty Intemational received reports that some political prisoners continued to be tortured while held incommunicado diuing interrogation. They reportedly included students and political party workers, especially members of the PPP and people accused of involvement with the so-called Al-Zulfikar organization, which the authorities alleged was responsible for violent activities. Torture reportedly took place in Lahore Fort, as well as other interrogation centres. In addition, between September and December 1983, the Pakistan press reported the death in police custody of at least seven detainees arrested on criminal charges. In all seven cases there were complaints alleging that death resulted from torture and investigations were reported to have been undertaken. Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Minister of the Interior Mahmoud A. Haroon on 12 December 1983 welcoming reports that official investigations were being conducted into allegations of police torture and ill-treatment Amnesty Intemational further noted the trial by Special Military Court in April 1983 of nine people accused of torturing a prisoner to death in police custody in 1979. In keeping with its unconditional opposition to the death penalty, however, the organization regretted that three police officers convicted of the offence were sentenced to death and executed in November 1983.
Amnesty Intemational remained concerned about the high number of death sentences and executions in 1983. Many death sentences were handed down by special military courts from which there is no judicial right of api>eal. Although those sentenced to death may apply to the President for clemency, Amnesty Intemational knew of no instance during 1983 when such clemency was granted. No official statistics were published for the total mmiber of executions. It was reported in March 1983 that 1,350 prisoners in Pimjab province alone were imder sentence of death.
In addition to prisoners convicted during protests by the MRD, many hundreds of other prisoners were sentenced to be flogged during the year for a wide range of offences. Amnesty Intemational cabled President Zia-ul-Haq on 19 April expressing concem about reports of mass floggings in Karachi Central Jail between 15 and 18 April. It was
250
reported that 216 men convicted of participation in sectarian rioting had been sentenced to be flogged. Amnesty Intemational was unable to verify whether all sentences of flogging were implemented.
Two men were sentenced to amputation of tiie hand and foot for theft in December 1983 and the Federal Shari'a (Islamic) Court, to which appeals are addressed, confirmed a sentence of amputation in June. Arimesty Intemational appealed to President Zia-ul-Haq to ensure that these sentences were not implemented. President Zia-ul-Haq stated publicly in October 1983 that no amputations had ever taken place in Pakistan.
Airmesty Intemational received disturbing reports that both criminal and politicid detainees were kept in bar shackles for extended periods, contrary to provisions of the United Nations Standard Minimimi Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. Two half-inch thick rods of steel, approximately three feet in length, were said to be fastened at the waist with iron chains and at the ankles with clasps of iron, making it impossible to bend the legs.
On 6 May 1983, Amnesty Intemational cabled President Zia-ul-Haq concerning reports that a number of Iranian nationals faced possible refoulement. Amnesty Intemational urged the government to initiate procediu^es to prevent tiie refoulement of any Iranian who may be deemed a refiigee. Amnesty Intemational received no subsequent information to indicate that the individuals in question had been retumed to Iran.
