Sri Lanka
Amnesty Intemational remained concemed about the use of the Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA) and the Emergency Regulations to detain members erf"the Tamil minority and of opposition parties without trial, sometimes incommunicado, and about continuing allegations of torture of detainees held under the PTA. A major concem was the killing of randomly selected Tamil civilians by members of the armed forces and the killing in prison of a large number of Tamil detainees held under the PTA.
The year was marked by increased political tension resulting from demands for a separate state by the Tainil minority, accompanied by acts of violence on the part of Tamil extremist groups, members of the security forces and the majority Sinhalese populatioa A state of emergency was reimposed on 18 May 1983 for the stated purpose of preventing violence during parliamentary by-elections and remained in force throughout the year.
On 6 July 1983, Amnesty Intemational published the Amnesty International Mission ft) Sri Lanka, 31 January - 9 February 1982. The report, describing events until May 1983, concluded that
258
political suspects held under the PTA were frequently held incommunicado, sometimes for more than eight months, and ¿lat they had been tortured both in army camps and by the police. Methods of torture reportedly included hanging victims upside down from hooks, beating them with metal bars, driving needles under finger-nails and applying chili powder to sensitive parts of the body. When the report was published Amnesty Intemational said that it had continued to receive reports that detainees were being ill-treated, that relatives were being denied information about their whereabouts and that lawyers were being prevented from meeting them for weeks after arrest The mission also collected evidence that three Tamils had been abducted and killed by the security forces, apparently in retaliation for the killing of two police officers on 3/4 June 1981 and that two other Tamils had been abducted, shot and left for dead, and that apparently no measures had been taken against those responsible - despite verdicts of homicide having been given by the magistrate in all cases. The report made 12 detailed recommendations which included: informing detainees of the groimds for arrest; disclosing the place of detention to relatives and allowing immediate and regular access to lawyere; establishing an independent machinery to investigate complaints of torture; and restoring the normal rules of evidence, according to which statements made solely to the police while in custody and not made before a magistrate are inadmissible in court Amnesty Intemational sent the report to President J. R. Jayewardene on 7 Febmary 1983 with a request to meet the President, offering to publish the govemment's comments. On 6 April the govemment informed Amnesty Intemational that it was not possible to discuss the report
The govemment issued a nine-point statement on the day of the report's publication denying in general terms that the human rights violations described had taken place, although stating that some people had been held incommunicado. Amnesty Intemational wrote to President Jayewardene on 19 July to express its grave concem about the government's response. On 22 July the Sri Lanka High Commission in London released a more comprehensive statement on the report. Amnesty International's response to which was described in an Amnesty Intemational Statement updating its human rights concerns in Sri Lanka, July - September 1983 (see below).
On 23 July 1983, 13 soldiers were killed near Thinevely, Jaffna, reportedly by a group of Tamil extremists. Violence directed against the Tamil minority started immediately in Colombo, subsequently spreading throughout the country, several himdred Tamils being killed by Sinhalese groups. During the following few days Amnesty Intemational received renewed reports that unarmed members of the Tamil minority were being killed at random by the security forces in the north.
259
apparently in retaliation for the killing of their own men; that Tamil detainees, held under the PTA, were being killed in a Colombo prison and that members of left-wing opposition parties were being arrested under the Emergency Regulations.
Amnesty International cabled the President on 26 and 28 July saying that it was deeply disturbed by reports of killings by the army, giving details of 16 such killings and urging the government to order an independent investigation into the killings and to bring those responsible to justice. Amnesty International said its concern about these killings was compounded by the government's failure to take legal action against any members of the security forces responsible for earlier killings and the continued existence of Emergency Regulation 15 A, promulgated on 3 June, which allows the security forces to dispose of corpses in secret and without inquest procedures.
On 6 August the government admitted that 20 people had been killed by the armed forces "on the rampage". In late August, the government put the figure at 37, and in a statement of 9 November 1983 by the Sri Lmika High Commission in Lx>ndon the government acknowledged 51 killings, a figure which tallied with the number reported to Amnesty International in July. Inquest proceedings were reportedly held in only one of these cases. By the end of 1983, Amnesty International was not aware of a full independent investigation having been instituted into these killings or of any legal action having been taken against responsible officials although statements were given to the police by relatives in many cases. Six more killings by the security forces of Tamil civilians reportedly occurred in four separate incidents on 31 August, in early September, on 30 September and on 18 November 1983. Amnesty ¿itemational cabled the President on 12 October 1983 expressing its deep concern about the reported killing of four Tamils in September. Two of the corpses were reportedly cremated by the security forces after official permission had been obtained. Amnesty International repeated its call to the President to take immediate steps to halt further killings, to order independent investigations into the foiu- deaths and to rescind Emergency Regulation 15 A. Despite deep concern expressed about Emergency Regulation 15A by Amnesty International, by members of the Human Rights Committee which monitored compliance with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in the course of considering Sri Lanka's report in October/November 1983, and by other international organizations, the provisions of the regulation remained in force throughout the year.
Amnesty Intemational was also gravely concemed about the killing of a total of 5 3 Tamil political prisoners detained or convicted under the PTA on 25 and 27 July in Welikada Prison. According to official reports Sinhalese inmates were responsible for the attack but several
260
reports received by Amnesty Intemational alleged the complicity of some prison personnel. On 26 and 28 July the organization cabled the President urging the government to take immediate measures to protect the lives and safety of detainees. While welcoming the fact ¿at the government followed normal proceedings in setting up a magisterial inquiry the day after the killings, Amnesty Intemational urged that a comprehensive independent inquiry be instituted into the killings, with publication of its findings in full. The magistrate held a one-day inquiry into each of the two incidents, finding that Tamil detainees had been killed by Sinhalese inmates and directing the police to conduct further investigations since prison officials had been imable to identify any of those responsible for the killings.
In an Amnesty Intemational Statement updating its human rights concems in Sri Lanka, July - September 1983, presented to the government on 15 September and subsequently pubUshed, Amnesty Intemational described its concems about tiie July army killings and the Welikada prison killings, as well as the govemment's decision to arrest, under emergency regulations, several dozen members of, or alleged sympathizers with, three left-wing opposition parties, the Janata Vimukhti Peramuna, the Nava Sama Samaja Pa^ and the Communist Party, which were banned on 30 July 1983 for their alleged involvement in the July violence. Amnesty Intemational cabled the President on 3 August 1983 urging that the government publish the names and places of detention of those held and to consider their early release if no specific charges had been brought Some of the detainees were reportedly being held in incommunicado detention without trial for weeks after arrest under the provisions of Emergency Regulation 17, which allows for the indefinite detention of those whom the government believes may act in a manner "prejudicial to national security".
The organization urged that they be allowed access to lawyers and friends on a regular basis. On 9 November 1983 the government informed Amnesty Intemational that it had arrested 42 people under the provisions of Emergency Regulation 17, of whom 16 had been released. On29 December 1983 Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Secretary to the Ministry of Defence welcoming the release of some detainees. Those released included four members of the Communist Party and a 60-year-old lawyer, Prins Gunasekera, whom Amnesty Intemational had adopted as a prisoner of conscience. The organization also asked whether the remaining detainees would also be released given the fact that they had been held for nearly five months without trial and no evidence had apparentiy been produced concerning their alleged involvement in the July events.
Arrests under the PTA continued to be reported throughout the year, with 170 people being arrested under its provisions between
261
October and December from Batticaloa, Vavuniya, Trincomalee and Jaffna On 29 December 1983 Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Minister of Internal Security expressing concem that people continued to be arrested and held without trial under the PTA, and specifically inquiring about the 170 reported arrests, of which it provided details conceming 75 cases. In view of previous evidence of the torture of people arrested under the PTA, Amnesty Intemational asked for official assurances that responsible officials be directed to ensure that none of the detainees were subjected to torture or ill-treatment, that relatives and lawyers were granted immediate and regular access to detainees and that detainees be granted all rights normally accorded to other prisoners.
In a number of cases reported to Amnesty Intemational during the year people arrested under the PTA were said to have been tortured following which several allegedly died while in army custody. One such case was that of K. Navaratnarajah, a young fanner from Trincomalee, who was arrested imder the PTA on 27 March and died in Gurunagar army camp on 10 April, reportedly as a result of torture by the army. At the end of a judicial inquiry into his death, the magistrate retumed a verdict of homicide and 25 external wounds and 10 internal injuries were described in a medical report However, inquest proceedings were not held in the case of the other three people who reportedly died during the year after having been tortured while held in the custody of the security forces.
Although the death penalty remains on the statute books, no executions are known to have taken place since the United National Party govemment took office in 1977.
