Congo
Most of the approximately 50 political detainees whose cases were known to Amnesty International were released during the year, although former President Joachim Yhombi-Opango continued to be held without trial. Two people associated with him were released fi"om detention but were subject to restriction orders. Congo acceded to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), and the Optional Protocol to the ICCPR in October.
Congo celebrated the 20th anniversary of the Trois Glorieuses, Three Glorious Days, revolution in which the country's first head of state was deposed in August 1963. The occasion was marked by the release of most political detainees known to Amnesty International. They included more than 30 Angolan nationals from the Cabinda enclave who had been detained without trial since January 1977 on account of their alleged links with the Frente de Libertaqao do Enclave de Cabinda (FLEC), Cabinda Enclave Liberation Front Thirty-four of them had been taken up for investigation by Amnesty International.
Several people who were detained in May 1982 and others who were arrested later in 1982 after two bomb explosions in Brazzaville were released in September. None of them had been charged or brought to trial. They included Abel Thauley-Ganga, a former trade imion leader. Government sources also informed Amnesty International of the release of Bernard Kolelas, a former government official who had been detained for political reasons on previous occasions and had been formerly adopted as a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty International. However, according to reports received at the end of the year, Bernard Kolelas and one other political detainee were still being held.
38
Two people arrested with former President Yhombi-Opango in March 1979 after he had been deposed a month earlier, were also released from detention in August However, they were restricted by being sent into internal banishment. Their cases were taken up for investigation by Amnesty International. Former President Yhombi-Opango was not released.
Earlier, in March and April, several refugees from Zaire who had been arrested in 1982 when they sought asylum in the Congo were released from custody. They included Kabeya Tchiang and Mupesse Impobakut, both of whom had left Zaire after being imprisoned there for political reasons. There were fears, however, that two other refugees from Zaire might have been repatriated against their will. Egbongo Mangongo and Tumba, both former military officers in Zaire, were detained in May when they sought asylum in Congo. Subsequently, there were unconfirmed reports that they had been sent back to Zaire.
