Czechoslovakia
Amnesty Intemational's main concems were the continuing detention of prisoners of conscience, the ill-treatment of some prisoners of conscience, and the use of the death penalty. At the end of 1983, Amnesty Intemational had 23 cases under adoption or investigation, but believed that the total nmnber of prisoners of conscience was higher.
People continued to be imprisoned for the non-violent exercise of their right to freedom of expression and information under broadly formulated articles of the penal code. They included Dr Jaromir Savrda, a 50-year-old writer and signatory of Charter 77, who was arrested on24 September 1982 following the confiscation ofCharter77 materials and samizdat (unofficial and uncensored) literature during a search of his home. On 3 March 1983, he was sentenced by the District Court in Ostrava to 25 months' imprisonment in the second (stricter) prison category for "incitement" under Article 100 of the penal code. The court found him guilty of collecting, reproducing and disseminating unofficial "anti-state" texts. Among the incriminating materials was a poem by Alexander Tvardovsky which had been published in Czechoslovakia as well as in the Soviet Union and which he had borrowed from a public library. Jaromir Savrda was reportedly seriously ill and according to prison doctors required surgery which could not be performed in any of the prison health institutions. Nonetheless, the court which considered an appeal that his sentence be waived or interrupted concluded on 23 June that he did not require surgical treatment outside the prison health-care system and that surgical intervention was not urgent Jaromir Savrda had served a two-and-a-half-year prison sentence for a similar offence in 1978/81 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1980).
Dr Ladislav Lis, a 57-year-old Charter 77 signatory and a member of the unofficial human rights group VONS, the Committee for the Defence of the Unjustly Persecuted, was arrested on 5 January 1983, after having his home in Northem Bohemia searched, on charges of "incitement" and "theft of socialist property". The latter charge, referring to two bags of com collected in a field after the harvest, was subsequendy dropped. In May 1983, he went on nine days' hunger-strike in protest against his imprisonment and against his wife not being allowed to visit him. On 21 July, the District Court in Ceska Lipa sentenced him under Article 100 to 14 months' imprisonment, followed by three years' protective surveillance. The main charges against him
277
were that he had disseminated texts of an "inciting nature", that he showed several people copies of letters he had written in June 1982 to the authorities asking for protection for his children, whose lives were threatened by anonymous people, and that he had written a letter to western peace movements. Ladislav Lis had been detained, without trial, from May to December 1979 on charges of "subversion" (see Amnesty International Report 1980) and repeatedly between 1980 and 1982.
Jiri Wolf, a 32-year-old worker and Charter 77 signatory was remanded in custody on 17 May on charges of "subversion". He was accused of giving information about prison conditions in the CSSR to the Austrian Embassy in Prague and of writing articles of an "anti-state" nature which were published in emigre joiunals abroad. At the trial on 5 and 6 October, the Prague Municipal Court ordered a psychiatric examination of the accused and adjourned the hearing. On 21 December, Jiri Wolf was sentenced to six years' imprisonment for "subversion in collusion with a foreign power" (Article 98, Sections 1 and2a)andfor"endangering state secrets" (Article 173, Section3). He had served three and a half years in prison in 1978/81 (see Amnesty International Reports 1979,1981). He was again arrested for 48 hours on 2 February 1982 during a police action against a group of young people who produced and distributed leaflets denouncing the imposition of martial law in Poland and calling for solidarity with Polish workers.
People engaged in unofficial religious activities continued to be arrested throughout the year, in most cases for "obstructing the state supervision of the churches and religious bodies" (Article 178). On 27 March and on subsequent days, the State Security Police searched the houses of some 250 clerical and lay members of the Franciscan Order in many parts of the country, confiscating religious literature, typewriters, money and religious objects. All those whose homes were searched were reportedly interrogated and some were detained for up to 48 hours. Some 20 people were remanded in custody on suspicion of "obstructing the state supervision of churches and religious bodies". Three Franciscan laymen from Slovakia, Peter Rucka, Anton Smid and Jaroslav Brazda, were the last to be released, without trial, on 15 July. Two Franciscan priests, Frantisek Pometlo and Josef Mazanec, were brought to trial on 13 July before the Plzen Municipal Court charged with circulating an unlicensed religious publication, with admitting a novice into their religious order and with celebrating mass in the presence of other priests. They were sentenced under Article 178 to six months' and eight months' imprisonment respectively. However, they were released three days later. An appeal hearing took place on 30 September. The Regional Court in Plzen upheld the sentences, which had been suspended.
278
Three prominent Jehovah's Witnesses, engineers Frantisek Risler, Zdenek Taborsky and Jiri Kubik, were sentenced on 21 July by the court in Usti nad Labem to 13 months' imprisonment each for engaging in religious activities and thereby infringing Article 178 of the penal code. The sect is not recognized by the state.
On 23 September, the District Court in Sumperk convicted two Catholics, Jiri Snajdr, a mining technician, and Jan Mokry, a woricer, of meeting their families and friends in private houses, of reading the Scriptures, meditating and praying and singing religious songs without state consent, and gave them suspended prison sentences of 10 and 12 months respectively under Article 178.
Amnesty Intemational leamed that several Pentecostalists were awaiting trial under Article 178. Rudolf Bubik, head of the sect, and two other members, Josef Wojnar and Jan Kotajny, were sentenced on 21 December 1982 by the District Court in Karvina to one year's imprisonment each, suspended for two years, for organizing religious meetings without state consent Rudolf Bubik appealed against this judgement and his appeal was pending.
Amnesty Intemational received reports of the iU-treatment of some prisoner of conscience. Jaroslav Javorsky, who was serving a 13-year sentence in the strictest prison category in Valdice Prison, and who was seriously ill, went on hunger-strike on 17 February to protest against the lack of medical attention. Before ending the hunger-strike he was reportedly beaten and placed in an underground cell without water.
Jiri Gruntorad, serving a four-year prison sentence in Minkovice Prison (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1982), was reported to have been harassed by the prison administration and subjected to frequent administrative punishments including solitary confinement and reduced food rations. On 17 March, he was reportedly beaten by a prison guard and, after complaining, was placed in solitary confinement for six days until traces of his injuries disappeared. On 7 April, he was charged with "making a false accusation".
At least five people were sentenced to death and three were executed in 1983. These figures mark an increase over recent years. Two people who were executed in April had originally been given 25-year prison terms, but had had their sentences changed by the appeal court to the death penalty.
279
