Bangladesh
Demonstrations against martial law were met by the short-term political detention of opposition party leaders, workers and students. Amnesty International also remained concerned about the trial of political prisoners by military courts ^plying summary procedures, allegations of torture, prison conditions, and the death penalty.
On 14 February students in Dhaka, supported by an alliance of opposition parties, demonstrated against proposed educational reforms, which would have included Arabic as one of the compulsory languages in primary education. During the demonstrations, which spread to other towns, violence occurred and at least five people were killed. On 15 February 30 leading politicians of an 18-party political alliance were arrested for holding a meeting in defiance of martial law regulations. They included Kamal Hussain, a former Foreign Minister; Sheikh Hasina Wazed, the leader of the Awami League; Mohammad Farhad, Secretary General of the Communist Party; and Rasheed Khan Menon
209
of the Workers' Party. On 17 February the government armounced that 1,331 people had been arrested and detained in connection with the February demonstrations of whom 1,021 had been released as of 18 February. The remaining 310, it said, would also be released, if not "identified as trouble makers".
On 22 February Amnesty Intemational cabled Lieutenant General Ershad, the Chief Martial Law Administrator, expressing concem about these continued detentions, asking that all those arrested be given access to lawyers and relatives and urging the release of all those detainees against whom no charges had been brought
On 1 March the government announced that 27 leaders of political parties, who had been held in preventive detention, were being released. On 19 March Lieutenant General Ershad ordered the release of some 200 students and members of political parties who had been arrested after the 14 Febmary demonstrations.
An Amnesty Intemational delegate visited Dhaka from 14 February to 2 March and discussed the Febmary arrests with officials in the Home Ministry. The delegate was informed of the govemment's intentions for the early release of the detainees and discussed Amnesty Intemational's concem about the continued use of the 1974 Special Powers Act (SPA) to detain political opponents without trial. He was informed by the government that the number detained under die SPA had been reduced since March 1982 but that as of January 1983, over 400 political detainees and people suspected of criminal offences were being held
Amnesty Intemational wrote to Lieutenant General Ershad on 31 March acknowledging the govemment's cooperation during the delegate's visit and welcoming the reported release of political detainees, many of whom appeared to be prisoners of conscience. It requested clarification of reports in the Bangladesh press that several detainees remained imprisoned and expressed concem about allegations that several people taken into custody after 14 Febmary had been tortured and ill-treated. Amnesty Intemational said that detainees held in the Dhaka Army Cantonment had reportedly been kept bound in iron fetters, and that prisoners were interrogated under threat of torture. It also received reports that prisoners were being beaten, whipped, himg upside down from the ceiling and that in some cases, electric shock torture had been used. Amnesty Intemational named seven detainees allegedly subjected to torture or ill-treatment and asked the government to set up an independent inquiry to investigate these allegations.
Amnesty Intemational also reiterated its long-standing concem about the detention of poUtical prisoner under the SPA and said that it had received repeated allegations of the arbitrary arrest torture and ill-treatment of detainees in army custody in the Chittagong Hill Tracts.
210
One of these reports concemed the joumalist Sunil Kanti De from Rangamatiii, who was arrested on 4 June 1981 and held under the provisions of the SPA until November 1981, when he was charged under Regulation 16 of the SPA and Martial Law Regulation (MLR) No. 17 with committing a "prejudicial act". During the initial period of his detention he was reportedly tortured. Amnesty Intemational also expressed concem that civilians such as Sunil Kanti De continued to be tried before martial law courts employing simmiary procedures without the right of appeal In September 1983 a Summary Martial Law Court ordered his acquittal and release subject to the approval of the Zonal Martial Law Administrator, but as of November Anmesty Intemational was not aware whether such approval had been given.
Sunil Kanti De was one of the 14 prisoners adopted by Amnesty Intemational in 1983 as a prisoner of conscience. Other adopted prisoners included trade unionists sentenced by military courts to several years' imprisonment for contravening martial law regulations prohibiting strikes.
Four prisoners of conscience were released during the year. Among them was Shawkat Ali, a retired army colonel and member of the Awami League, who, after his arrest on 10 May 1982, had been detained imder the SPA and subsequently charged with criminal offences allegedly committed eight years earlier. He was acquitted by the Special Martial Law Court in October 1982, after which he had been held under the SPA. He was released on 8 September. Three students, arrested on 16 September 1982 and sentenced on 23 September to seven years' imprisonment for "fixing anti-state and anti-govemment posters", were released in July 1983.
On 7 November Amnesty Intemational wrote to Lieutenant General Ershad welcoming these releases but presenting information about 10 others believed to have been imprisoned for holding or expressing non-violent political beliefs. They included trade unionists, labour leaders, members of political parties, a newspaper editor and a joumalist imprisoned for publishing articles allegedly critical of the govemment Amnesty Intemational asked lieutenant General Ershad to consider their eariy release together with that of all other individuals detained for the non-violent exercise of their human rights.
Amnesty Intemational also expressed concem that political opponents had been tried imder successive governments by military courts, both for participating in normal political activities made punishable under martial law or for allegedly committing offences punishable under the Bangladeshi penal code. The organization was concemed that procedures before military courts were summary, that those presiding at such courts were largely army personnel not required to have legal qualifications; that legal representation was not allowed before Summary
211
Martial Law Courts, although the accused might be assisted by a person of his or her choosing; that customary rules of evidence and procedure designed to safeguard fair trial had been changed; and that it was not possible to appeal against any order, verdict or sentence handed down by military courts. Amnesty Intemational said that such procedures did not meet the minimum standards provided for in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and urged the govemment to review the cases of all political prisoners who had been tried by military courts, with a view to ordering either their retrial before an ordinary court of law or their release on bail pending such a review.
In view of these concems, Amnesty Intemational requested that the govemment review the cases of six former govemment officials who were arrested between March and July 1982 and were reported to be in hospital because of bad health. While realizing that these men had been sentenced to long terms of imprisonment by military courts for offences including "abuse of official position", "anti-state activity" and "obtaining pecuniary advantage", Arrmesty Intemational expressed concem that normal legal safeguards had not been applied. In some cases prisoners were reportedly only informed of the charges against them on the day they were brought before the military court In others, no record of cross-examination by the defence was kept, and there was no right of appeal. Amnesty Intemational also expressed its concem about the reported arrest of political detainees, including 12 people, among whom were students, teachers, a former state minister and an advocate, who were arrested in May in cormection with an alleged conspiracy in Jessore on 29 March, Some of them were apparentiy held under the SPA and one of them- a fomier Minister of State for Post and Shipping - had reportedly been tortured with electric shocks during his detention in Dhaka Army Cantonment Amnesty Intemational asked the govemment to order an impartial investigation into these reports and to inform the organization about the results of such an investigation and about the charges against the other prisoners.
Some 170 tribesmen in the Chittagong Hill Tracts were reportedly arrested in April and May on suspicion of being "guerrilla sympathizers", but few details about these arrests were known because the area is largely inaccessible.
The martial law ban on political activities was temporarily lifted on 14 November, only to be reimposed on 28 November. On 28 November opposition demonstrations against military rule resulted in violence during which at least four people were killed and over 600 were reportedly arrested, among them exposition leaders. Amnesty Intemational cabled Lieutenant General Ershad on 2 December expressing its concem that among those arrested were people who had not been involved in the violence but had merely participated in demonstrations to express their
212
political views. The organization asked the govemment to take immediate steps towards the release of any such prisoners.
On 11 December lieutenant General Ershad assumed the presidency under the Proclamation Third Amendment Order 1983. On 15 December Amnesty Intemational wrote to President Ershad welcoming the reported release of200 political detainees who had been arrested on 28 November and requesting full details of the govemment's release program, in view of reported claims by opposition parties that the number of arrests as a result of the November demonstrations well exceeded the number of political prisoners -120 - who were released in Dhaka and the 80 whom the govemment announced on 14 December would be released.
In the context of its concem about the conditions in which political detainees were being held in Bangladesh, Amnesty Intemational had asked the govemment in its 7 November letter whether the report of the Jail Reform Committee established on 4 November 1978 and headed by Justice F.K.M.Z. Mimim - which apparently submitted its final report to the govemment on 27 November 1980 - had been published. The report was believed to have made a number of important recommendations conceming prison conditions and Amnesty International asked to be sent a copy, and inquired whether steps had been taken to implement its recommendations. The organization had not received a reply to this and other requests by the end of the year.
Amnesty Intemational appealed to Lieutenant General Ershad in six cases for the commutation of death sentences imposed by civilian or special military courts following convictions for murder. On 30 September Lieutenant Colonel Fazle Hussain was executed in Chitta-gong for his alleged involvement in the killing of President Ziaur Rahman on 3 May 1981. While Amnesty Intemational had been informed that Lieutenant Colonel Fazle Hussain was arrested on 3 June 1981, it had no details of his subsequent trial and conviction. In its letter of 7 November, the organization recorded its concem about this execution and requested information about whether the minimum standards contained in the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights - against the arbitrary deprivation of life and stipulating trials by competent courts with the right to seek pardon or commutation - had been applied in his case.
213
