The Philippines
Amnesty Intemational was concemed that the pattem of serious human rights violations established in earlier years showed no sign of changing. The organization received frequent reports of the torture and ill-treatment of detainees, often while undergoing interrogation in incommunicado detention, "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions. The government continued to be reluctant to investigate these practices and to pimish those responsible. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed alx)ut the use of emergency powers to detain people without trial frequentiy for long periods, some of whom Amnesty Intemational believed were prisoners of conscience. The organization continued to be concemed about the
251
imposition of death sentences and the detention for long periods of people who were awaiting the outcome of appeals against death sentences.
Many of these concems had been presented to the govemment in the Report of an Amnesty Intemational Mission to the Republic of the Philippines November 1981 published in September 1982. In March 1983, the govemment replied to the mission report in a letter signed by the Deputy Minister of Defence. The government's reply questioned Amnesty Intemational's motives, presented altemative versions of the cases recorded by Amnesty Intemational and rejected most of the recommendations outright In a letter to the govemment dated 22 November 1983 Amnesty Intemational responded by reiterating that the purpose of the mission had been to investigate the discrepancy between reports received by the organization over several years indicating serious violations of human rights and the government's stated commitment to upholding those rights. The reply also summarized the findings of the mission, questioned the standards of the investigations previously undertaken by the govemment into the cases presented by Amnesty Intemational and stressed the need for urgent measures to be taken in view of the evidence that serious violations of human rights had continued in the year following pubUcation. Concem was expressed about the apparent official tolerance of human rights violations, evidenced by: new legislation tending further to erode respect for fundamental rights; official statements apparendy justifying the failure to adhere to constitutional safeguards on grounds of national security; and by the government's continuing failure to initiate impartial investigations into human rights abuses and to take disciplinary action where appropriate.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports of the arrest and subsequent incommunicado detention of people accused of subversive political activity. These arrests were usually validated by Presidential Commitment Orders (PCOs) issued under the emergency powers retained by President Marcos after the lifting of martial law in 1981. PCOs issued on the sole authority of the President without recourse to the judiciary were the subject of much domestic controversy, particularly after the Supreme Court, in its decision in Garcia-Padilla v Enrile in April 1983, appeared to abdicate its right to inquire into such actions by the executive in times of emergency. On 5 August 1983 the govemment announced the abolition of the PCO and its replacement by the Preventive Detention Action (PDA). The scope of the le^slation introducing the PDA was almost identical to that of the PCO as PDAs can also be issued by the President without reference to the judiciary.
Following arrest, detainees were frequently reported to have been held in unauthorized places of detention known as "safehouses" and to
252
have been ill-treated and tortured while undergoing interrogation. Lay church leader Carl Caspar "disappeared" following arrest by an intelligence unit and detention on the basis of a PCO issued some days later. The authorities denied any knowledge of his whereabouts, despite repeated attempts by friends and relatives to locate him. In fact, for three days after his arrest, he was detained in a "safehouse", then being flown to Manila where he was held incommunicado for a further 12 days at the headquarters of Military Intelligence Group 15 at Bago Bantay, Quezon City. Carl Caspar alleged that during this period of incommunicado detention he had been held in solitary confinement in a small imlit cell and had been kept blindfold and handcuffed to his bed for part of the time.
Amnesty International also received reports involving the "disappearance" of people believed to have been taken into the custody of government agents but who never reappeared.
On8 June 1983, Amnesty International appealed to the government to investigate the reported "disappearance" of Yolanda Cordula, who was last seen leaving the house of friends in Caloocan City, Metro-manila, with Dr Jose Escandor on the evening of 30 March 1983. At 3 am on 31 March, Dr Escandor was reportedly shot dead by troops of the Metromanila Philippines Constabulary (METROCOM). Efforts by her family to locate Yolanda Cordula in detention centres in Manila and elsewhere were unsuccessful. In its appeal, Amnesty International presented evidence suggesting that Yolanda Cordula had been taken into the custody of the authorities.
Amnesty International received frequent reports of serious human rights violations directed against civilians in areas where units of the Armed Forces of the Philippines were engaged in operations against insurgent groups. One such report concerned an operation from 4 to 6 May 1983 in barrios (villages) in Tubo, Abra, during which a Philippine Constabulary (PC) imit allegedly ill-treated members of the local Tinggian tribal minority and killed three people on 6 May, including a pregnant woman and her child, in the barrio of Be-ew. On 5 July Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to investigate the incident and asked for information about steps taken by the government to prevent the recurrence of such abuses. In December, an inquiry ordered by the Minister of National Defense found 12 soldiers who were involved in the operation guilty of perpetrating abuses but not responsible for the three deaths.
Amnesty International issued a similar appeal for an investigation into the reported killing of four men and the torture of others follovidng the arrest of 16 people on 17 August 1983 in Libungan, North Cotabato, by military personnel of Regional Commands XI and XII. Four of the men had been arrested and transferred to the custody of the
253
provincial commander for Davao del Sur in Bansalan, where they were reportedly killed Subsequent press reports stated that the four had been killed in an encoimter with armed forces personnel, but Amnesty Intemational believed that they may have been bound and in the custody of military personnel at the time they died and appealed on 16 December 1983 for an impartial investigation into the four deaths.
Amnesty International continued to be disturbed by the failure of the Philippines Government to conduct impartial investigations into alleged human rights violations and to prosecute and punish those implicated even in cases where the allegations were well-attested and widely publicized. The assassination at Manila Intemational Airport on 21 August of the opposition leader Benigno Aquino as he retumed to the Philippines from exile in the United States and the government's subsequent decision to set up a commission to investigate the killing prompted Amnesty International to issue a statement on 6 October 1983 setting out criteria for a satisfactory investigation. These included that those entrusted with the inquiry should be chosen for their recognized impartiality, independence and competence; that the investigative body should have the power to ensure the cooperation of witnesses and to obtain all information necessary to its inquiry; and that the methods, evidence, findings and conclusions of the investigative body should be made public.
On 10 October 1983, members of the first commission of inquiry into the Aquino assassination resigned in the face of widespread public doubts about their independence. A second commission of inquiry requested the Chief of Staff of the armed forces to discontinue a separate investigation being conducted by the armed forces on the grounds that witnesses might be discouraged from testifying before the official inquiry as a result of intimidation by the military investigators. At the end of the year the official inquiry was still proceeding. Members of the Aquino family claimed that a number of witnesses who had evidence whdch would rebut the official version of the assassination were afraid to testify for fear of reprisals.
TTie alleged perpetrators of one widely publicized case of extrajudicial execution were tried in 1983. The case involved Macli-ing Dulag, a tribal chief of the Kalingas in northem Luzon, who had led his people's opposition to govemment plans for a dam project in Kalinga territory. Macli-ing Dulag was shot dead in his home on 24 April 1980. In August 1980 on the basis of the findings of an official inquiry, the Minister of National Defence had ordered the arrest and detention of four soldiers pending the filing of murder charges before a military court Amnesty Intemational had noted in its mission report of September 1982 that no progress had been reported in the case. On 9 June 198 3 the court martial of two of the four soldiers named in the report of the official
254
inquiry began and although there were reported irregularities in the proceedings, including the alleged intimidation of prosecution witnesses, the two soldiers were each sentenced to 14 years' imprisonment on 29 November 1983.
Amnesty International was also concerned about the judiciary's lack of promptness in resolving cases of people charged with political offences. In the Karagatan-Andrea arms smuggling case. People of the Philippines v. Jose Maria Sison et al. (see Amnesty International Report 1980), trial proceedings continued throughout the year, having begun in November 1978. The cases of two of the defendants - Fidel Agcaoili, arrested in May 1974, and Saturnino Ocampo, arrested in January 1976 - were being investigated by Amnesty International.
Another detainee whose case Amnesty International was investigating was Baltazar Pinguel, who was held in Camp Bagong Diwa, Bicutan, Metromanila. Baltazar Pinguel had been arrested with 21 othere in May 1980 and charged with subversion before a military tribimal in September 1980. In January 1981, soon after the lifting of martial law, the case was formally transferred to a civil court However, no hearings in the case were held after January 1981. Baltazar Pinguel was the only one of the defendants still in detention at the end of 1983.
Amnesty International learned of several cases of detainees who, despite court orders for their release, continued to be detained on the basis of PCOs or PDAs. However, a nimiber of detainees whose cases had been taken up by the organization were released. They included Sixto Carlos Jr., who had been arrested on 24 April 1979, and was released on 4 November 1983 after subversion charges against him were dismissed and Felix Olalia, one of about 50 trade unionists arrested in August/September \9%2{sqq Amnesty International Report 1983), who was transferred from detention camp and placed under house arrest on 1 May 1983. Aquilino Pimentel, a leading opposition figure arrested in April 1983, was transferred from detention in Cebu City to house arrest in Cagayan de Oro City in July 1983. Six of the prisoners of conscience held in Tagum, Davao del Norte, were released during the year (see Amnesty International Report 1983). Amnesty International issued an appeal in October 1983 on behalf of another member of this group of detainees, Purificación Trinidad, urging that she be given proper medical treatment after learning that she was in poor health. After receiving medical treatment, she was released into the care of the Bishop of Tagum in November 1983. Her husband, Rolieto Trinidad, was the only member of the group to remain in detention at the end of the year.
Amnesty International believed that more than 800 people were under sentence of death, most of them being held in tiie National Penitentiary, Muntinlupa. Most of those under sentence of death had
255
been awaiting review of their sentences for several years, including some who had been convicted in the 1950s. Executions in the Philippines are rare, and none were reported during 1983. However, Amnesty International continued to receive reports of death sentences being imposed for murder and drug smuggling.
