United States of America
Amnesty International's major concem was an increase in the number of executions. Five prisoners were executed during the year, bringing to 11 the number of people executed since 1976. Amnesty Intemational was also concerned about allegations of politically or racially motivated prosecutions, and by procedures which the organization believed had a possible impact on the faimess of trials in such cases. In 1976 a 10-year moratorium on executions ended with a US Supreme Court mling that the death penalty for murder was constitutional if imposed under certain conditions. In 1972 the Supreme Court had vacated all existing death sentences on the grounds that most state laws as then applied violated the US constitution (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1983). Since then 38 states had introduced revised death penalty laws and the number of prisoners on death row had steadily risen. On 20 December 1983, 1,289 prisoners were under sentence of death, the highest figure ever recorded in the USA. By 1983, the appeals of many of those sentenced after 1972 had mn out, and lawyers predicted a large increase in executions in the future.
Amnesty Intemational appealed for clemency in the cases of the five prisoners executed during the year and in a number of other cases where prisoners were granted last minute stays of execution.
John Louis Evans, who was convicted of murder in 1977, was executed by electrocution in Alabama on 22 April 1983. According to press reports, it required three separate jolts of 1,900 vohs each over a 10 minute period before he was officially pronounced dead. During the first jolt the electrode on his leg burned through and fell off" and prison guards repaired it after doctors said he was not dead. During the second shock smoke and flame empted from his left temple and leg. The third jolt was given after doctors put a stethoscope to his chest and said they were still not certain he was dead. This was the first execution in Alabama for 18 years. Amnesty Intemational subsequently wrote to the Govemor of Alabama expressing its unconditional opposition to the death penalty and pointing out that "prolonged suffering was manifestly inflicted in this case". Amnesty Intemational also appealed to the Govemor to grant a reprieve in the case of Wayne Ritter, who was
196
scheduled to be executed on 13 May 1983 in the same chair used to electrocute John Louis Evans (Wayne Ritter was subsequently granted a stay of execution by a federal court).
Amnesty Intemational also wrote letters of concem tothe American Medical Association about the reported participation of doctors in John Louis Evans' execution.
Jimmy Lee Gray, who was convicted in 1977 of the murder of a child, was executed in the gas chamber in Mississippi on 2 September.
On 30 November Robert Sullivan was killed in the electric chair in Florida, the second execution in the state since 1976. He had been on death row since November 1973, longer than any other prisoner in the USA. Two days before the execution, Robert Sullivan had been granted a stay in order that a decision could be taken on whether to hear alleged new evidence in the case, but the US Supreme Court refused to reopen the case.
On 14 and 15 December Robert Wayne Williams and John Eldon Smith were executed by electrocution in Louisiana and Georgia respectively. These were the first executions in both states since the early 1960s.
Amnesty Intemational had earlier appealed for clemency in the case of James Autry who was scheduled for execution by lethal injection in Texas on 5 November. Thirty minutes before this was due to be carried out, James Autry was granted a stay of execution by the US Supreme Court Reportedly, he had already been strapped to a chair and a saline solution, which acts as a vehicle for the fatal dmg, had been injected into his veins. This would have been the second execution by lethal injection in the USA. By the end of the year, 12 states had introduced this as a sole or altemative method of execution: Arkansas, Delaware, Idaho, Illinois, Montana, Nevada, New Jersey, New Mexico, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Texas, Washington.
A number of Supreme Court decisions during the year, denying appeals in death penalty cases, reduced the grounds on which future appeals could be lodged and could therefore speed up the carrying out of executions in the future. The Supreme Court furthermled(inBarefootv Texas) on 6 July 1983 that lower federal courts could promulgate their own mles for expediting Aa^eizs corpus appeals on constitutional issues in death penalty cases, by summarily considering the merits of an appeal at the same time as deciding whether or not to grant a stay of executioa (Many federal courts had previously automatically granted stays of execution pending a separate hearing of the merits of an appeal.) In the same decision, the Supreme Court mled that lower courts should apply tighter standards for considering appeals and should refuse to hear repeated or "frivolous" appeals. One of the dissenting Supreme Court judges criticized this opinion, noting that
197
70 per cent of capital cases decided on their merits by federal courts of appeals since 1976 had resulted in the death sentence being vacated: he stated that it would be wrong for appeals courts in the future to decide such cases under "special truncated procedures".
No prisoners were adopted as prisoners of conscience during the year but Amnesty Intemational continued to investigate a number of cases where people charged with criminal offences alleged that the real reason for the prosecution was political or racial.
On 8 July Amnesty Intemational sent the US Attomey General a copy of its observer's report on the trial of Eddie Carthan in October 1982 on a charge of murder (see ^m/ieify Intemational Report 1983).
Although Eddie Carthan was acquitted of the murder charge, Amnesty Intemational was concerned about procedures which the organization believed had a possible impact on the fairness of the trial; in particular the possible misuse by the prosecution of the "plea bargaining" process, whereby two witnesses, both of whom had confessed to actually carrying out the killings, had been offered generous incentives, including the dropping of serious criminal charges, in return for testifying against Eddie Carthan.
Amnesty Intemational's observer also found that other charges against Eddie Carthan (of assaulting a police officer and two counts of fraud) indicated a pattern of selective prosecution, discriminatory sentencing and harassment of the accused.
Amnesty International raised these concerns with the Attomey General, referring in particular to "the prosecution's apparent misuse of the plea bargaining process which may have encouraged false testimony and which may be evidence of prosecutorial discrimination against Eddie Carthan on political and racial grounds". Amnesty Intemational asked the Attomey General to review the various cases involving the former mayor. No reply was received by the end of the year. When Amnesty Intemational sent its report to the Attomey General, Eddie Carthan was serving a three-year sentence for bank fraud, and prosecution on the second fi^aud charge was pending.
The charge of food fraud against Eddie Carthan was later dropped by the prosecution and in October 1983 a federal judge reduced the sentence on the bank fraud charge to just under nine months. He was released from prison on 13 October 1983.
On 25 July an Amnesty Intemational observer attended part of the retrial of Johnny Harris on a capital murder charge in Bay Minette, Alabama. Johnny Harris, an inmate of Holman Prison, Alabama, had been convicted and sentenced to death in 1975 for the murder of a prison guard during a riot in the prison's segregation unit in 1974. The only death penalty statute then in force in Alabama was one providing for a mandatory death sentence if a prisoner serving a life sentence was
198
convicted of murder. Johnny Harris, who denied involvement in the guard's icilling, alleged that he had been singled out for prosecution because he was the only prisoner in the segregation unit serving a life sentence at the time of the riot; the prosecution had publicly declared a commitment to seeing that the death penalty would be imposed in this case. The conviction had been based not on evidence that Harris had actually carried out the guard's killing, but on the prosecution's claim that he had taken a leading role in the riot, an accusation which Johnny Harris also denied.
In 1981 a federal judge had quashed Johnny Harris' conviction and ordered a new trial on the basis of (possibly exculpatory) evidence from a former inmate of the prison's segregation unit, which had been withheld by the prosecution at the time of the first trial. At the retrial, which began on 18 July 1983, Johnny Harris was again convicted of first-degree murder and sentenced to death.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed that this prosecution may have been politically motivated by the state's desire to obtain a death sentence following the 1974 riot and killing of the prison guard, and that Johnny Harris had been given a mandatory death sentence under a statute pre-dating the US Supreme Court decisions in the 1970s on the death penalty. When, during this period, the Supreme Court ruled that the death penalty was constitutional only if imposed under certain conditions, it specifically reserved consideration of the question of whether mandatory death sentence statutes could constitutionally be applied to prisoners serving life sentences. The Alabama statute under which Johnny Harris was tried therefore contained none of the procedural safeguards laid down then by the Supreme Court; these included the outlawing of mandatory death sentences under all other statutes and provision for a separate sentencing hearing in death penalty cases, in which the aggravating and mitigating factors of each case must be considered. At the end of the year Amnesty Intemational was still investigating the case, and an appeal was pending.
On 13 September an Amnesty Intemational observer attended an appeal in the case of Leonard Peltier before the 8th Circuit Court of Appeals, St Louis, Missouri. Leonard Peltier had been convicted in April 1977 of the murder of two agents of the Federal Bureau oflnvesti-gation (FBI) and had been sentenced to two consecutive life prison terms. The defence sought a retrial on the grounds that newly discovered documents from FBI files showed that the prosecution had suppressed exculpatory evidence at Leonard Peltier's trial According to the defence, this included suppression of a "firing-pin" test proving that bullet casings found in one of the murdered agents' cars could not have come from the gun alleged to have been Peltier's. The defence asked the appeals court to grant a full evidentiary hearing into the
199
motion for a retrial. The appeals court had not yet given its decision by the end of the year.
Amnesty International's concem in this case arose from allegations that Leonard Peltier had been " targetted" for prosecution because of his active membership of the American Indian Movement and that the FBI may have falsified evidence in order to secure a conviction. Amnesty Intemational's concem was increased by the fact that the FBI had previously admitted fabricating evidence in order to secure Leonard Peltier's extradition from Canada to stand trial in 1977 (evidence which was not used to obtain a conviction at the trial).
On 10 October an Amnesty Intemational observer attended a pretrial hearing in Wasco County Circuit Court, Oregon, in the cases of a number of American Indians accused under state and federal laws of violating fishing regulations. They were charged with various counts of catching and selling fish at illegal times and depleting salmon stocks in the Columbia river. The defendants, some of whom had been sentenced to up to five years' imprisonment in a federal court on some of the charges, denied the charges and alleged that they had been subjected to selective and discriminatory prosecution on account of their ethnic origin, rather than for violating fishing regulations, and were being held responsible for a record low salmon mn in order to protect the interests of the commercial marine fishing industry. Amnesty Intemational was still investigating the charges at the end of the year.
