Singapore
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the powers of preventive detention exercised by the Singapore Government under the Internal Security Act (ISA) whereby individuals were held without trial because of their alleged political reliefs or activities. Although one prisoner of conscience who had been detained for 13 years without trial under the ISA was released in August 1983, Amnesty Intemational continued to appeal for the imconditional release of the only other known long-term ISA detainee, held without trial since 1966 and adopted by the organization as a prisoner of conscience. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about the case of a prisoner charged under Section 27(1) of the ISA governing "possession of subversive documents". Two people were executed during 1983 and four others sentenced to death. The organization continued to be concemed about the use of caning as a judicial punishment
Section 8( 1 )(a) of the ISA empowers the Minister of Home Affairs to issue renewable detention orders of two years' duration on grounds of national security. There is no judicial review of these detention orders.
The government has justified its use of long-term preventive detention by reference to the alleged security threat posed in particular by the illegal Commimist Party of Malaya (CPM), claiming that all remaining detainees have some connection with the CPM. The government has repeatedly stated that detainees may be released by signing a statement publicly abjuring future support for the CPM or its affiliated organizations, or the forcible overthrow of the government Altematively, the government has said that detainees can be released if they agree to live in permanent exile.
In spite of the government's insistence on these conditions several ISA detainees released during 1981 and 1982 were not required to make such undertakings. Neither were they forced into exile, although
256
restrictions on movement, association and employment were imposed on them. Amnesty Intemational had no details about the circumstances of the release of the one long-term prisoner of conscience, Chng Min Oh, who was freed in August 1983 after 13 years in preventive detention.
The number of detainees held under the ISA decreased from an estimated 20 people in late 1981 to nine officially acknowledged detainees as of September 1982. The authorities reportedly acknowledged holding only one ISA detainee at the end of the year, eight detainees (including Chng Min Oh) having been freed during the year. Amnesty Intemational continued to appeal for the unconditional release of Chia Thye Poh, imprisoned since 1966. He was formerly a member of parliament for the Barisan Sosialis, Socialist Front, editor of the party's newspaper and assistant lecturer at Nanyang University.
In addition to providing for preventive detention, the ISA also permits the trial of people accused of "possession of subversive documents" (Section 27(1)). Trials of poUtical prisoners have rarely taken place in Singapore and only two trials are known to have been conducted imder the act. The first occurred in Febmary 1982 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1983) and the second in November 1983, when Tan Chu Boon, a tropical fish breeder, was sentenced to one year's imprisonment He was found guilty on two charges: having under his control a tombstone carrying an inscription which, the judge ruled, tended to advocate acts prejudicial to the security of Singapore, and having in his possession a document bearing the same words as those inscribed on the tombstone. The tombstone had marked the grave of Tan Chu Boon's brother. Tan Chay Wa, a member of the Malaysian National Liberation Front (MNLF), an organization affiliated to the CPM, who was executed in Malaysia in January 1983 for a firearms offence. The tombstone described Tan Chay Wa as a "martyr" and a patriot Amnesty Intemational did not consider that Tan Chu Boon's actions demonstrated personal adherence to the political views ascribed to his brother and considered that they therefore did not amount to incitement to overthrow the govemment Tan Chu Boon filed an appeal against the court's decision.
Amnesty Intemational expressed deep regret following the executions in Chiang Prison of two men convicted of dmg trafficking offences. Anwar Ali BChan was hanged on 4 March 1983 and Lim Chuan Keam on 21 October 1983. A total of 14 prisoners were reported to have been executed for dmg trafficking offences since the Misuse of Dmgs Act was amended in 1975 to provide a mandatory death sentence for trafficking in certain quantities of specified dmgs. The only occasion when a mandatory death sentence imposed for dmg trafficking offences was commuted was in February 1983, when the death sentence passed
257
on Siti Aminah Jaffar, co-accused in the case against Anwar Ali Khan was commuted to life imprisonment by President Devan Nair. Amnesty Intemational had initiated urgent appeals on behalf of both prisoners. Four death sentences were imposed by the High Court during 1983, three for murder and one for a dmg trafficking offence. At least eight prisoners were reported to be under sentence of death at the end of the year.
In 1973, caning was made mandatory for about 30 offences, in most cases in addition to a term of imprisonment The law specified the minimum number of strokes that should be imposed by the courts. Sentences of between five and 15 strokes are generally handed down, although habitual criminals may receive up to 40 strokes. Caning as administered by the authorities in Singapore is said to split the skin and may leave scars. Women, children and men over 50 are exempt from the punishment, except children convicted of armed robbery who may receive a maximum of 10 strokes. Amnesty Intemational believed that dozens of prisoners were sentenced to caning during 1983.
