Upper Vol ta
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the detention and restriction under house arrest without trial of civilians and military officers who had occupied prominent political positions.
lliere was considerable political instability in Upper Volta in 1983, including several major and occasionally bloody changes in the country's leadership. Until mid-May, power was shared by the President of the Conseil du salut du peuple (CSP), People's Salvation Council, Major Jean-Baptiste Ouedraogo, and by the Prime Minister, Captain Thomas Sankara. During this period, nearly 25 former senior officials of the administration of General Sangoule Lamizana, which was overthrown by a military coup in November 1980, remained under house arrest while an official commission investigated their cases to determine whether they should be charged with various economic offences. Most of these cases, including those of the former President and of the former Prime Minister Joseph Conombo, were taken up for investigation by Amnesty Intemational. After taking power from the Comité militaire de redressement pour le progrès national (CMRPN), the Military Committee of Recovery for National Progress, in November 1982, the CSP had announced its intention to charge and bring to trial some of the former senior officials of the Lamizana administration. Their trial was due to take place before a special court established under the CMRPN, which was composed mainly of military officers and non-jurists. Amnesty Intemational welcomed the new government's assurance that the detainees would be brought to trial but expressed concem that the court had been given powers to try them for crimes which were made punishable under retroactive legislation and that no appeal would be permitted to a higher court. However, in late March, Prime Minister Sankara gave assurances that his administration was taking steps to alleviate these concerns.
On 19 March, Joseph Ouedraogo, a former President of the National Assembly, and three others including a former government minister and a former ambassador, were detained in the capital, Ouagadougou. The authorities accused them of attempting to "destabilize" the government, by allegedly organizing a "campaign of intoxication" against it and by allegedly mobilizing the countr/s merchants against its policies. Joseph Oue^aogo and at least one other detainee were taken to the remote town of Don and held there. Subsequently, Amnesty Intemational asked the authorities for information about the legal basis of these detentions and reminded them of the
113
detainees' internationally-recognized right to a prompt and fair trial. However, the organization received no reply.
On 17 May, Prime Minister Sankara and the Secretary General of the CSP Secretariat, Major Jean-Baptise Lingani, were arrested on the orders of President Ouedraogo, who accused them of "irresponsible and demagogic activities". Following demonstrations against these arrests in Ouagadougou several days later, six people were detained including the Minister of Youth and Sport, Ibrahima Kone, and Soumane Toure, the Secretary General of the Confédération syndicale voltaïque (CSV), Trade Union Confederation of Upper Volta,
On 27 May, President Ouedraogo annoimced an amnesty for all political prisoners including the Prime Minister and seven others who were arrested in May. Most of the 25 former senior officials of the Lamizana administration were reportedly released from house arrest, as were several senior officers who had served in the CMRPN administration and who had been placed under house arrest in November 1982. Joseph Ouedraogo and the three other individuals who were arrested in March were also released In early June, however. President Ouedraogo announced that former Prime Minister Sankara and Jean-Baptiste Lingani had been rearrested and placed under house arrest for their own security. Ten days later, the President was obliged to release them following an open challenge to his decision to place them under house arrest by paratroop imits supporting the former Prime Minister.
On 5 August, President Ouedraogo was overthrown in a coup and arrested. He was replaced as head of govemment by former Prime Minister Sankara. The latter promptly announced the chssolution of the CSP and the formation of the Conseil national de la révolution ( CNR), National Council of the Revolution. Several people were reportedly killed during or shortly after the coup, including the army Chief of Staff, Colonel Some Yorian, and Major Fidele Guebre. According to official sources, they were shot and killed while attempting to escape from custody. Ten days after the coup. President Sankara announced restrictions on the freedom of movement of nine former senior officials, including former President Lamizana, former Prime Minister Conombo and former President of the National Assembly Joseph Ouedraogo. On 11 October, the authorities announced that 13 former officials, including these nine, were being put under strict house arrest in their home villages, because the authorities had allegedly discovered that they were involved in "major plots" against the govemment In mid-November, these 13 individuals were reportedly taken into custody and detained, probably in Ouagadougoa Amnesty Intemational appealed to the authorities to clarify the legal basis of these detentions and the status of former officials who had apparentiy been amnestied or cleared
114
of all charges during the administration of former President Ouedraogo.
In October, the CNR announced the formation of Revolutionary People's Tribunals, which were given jurisdiction to try cases of a political nature, those involving state security, cases of eml^zzlementof public funds and all cases involving offences by state officials. The tribimals were to comprise 18 judges, three of whom were to be magistrates, the rest being soldiers and ordinary civilians. Defendants appearing before the court were not to be assisted by defence counsel and no prosecutors were to be present to set out the case for the State. There was to be no appeal against conviction or sentence.
In late December 1983, the authorities announced that the Revolutionary People's Tribunals would hold their first hearings in January 1984 when former President Lamizana would face charges of embezzlement and wasting state funds.
