South Africa
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience. They included people detained viithout trial, sentenced to terms of imprisonment by the courts, restricted imder banning orders or imprisoned for refusing to undertake military service for reasons of conscience. The organization was also concerned about the widespread detention without trial of other political prisoners, the death in detention of two political detainees and the death in custody of certain alleged criminal suspects. Many uncharged political detainees were allegedly tortured or ill-treated and there were substantial allegations of gross ill-treatment of convicted criminal prisoners at Barberton Prisoa The government continued to use banning orders to restrict certain political opponents. The death penalty continued to be used on a substantial scale and three
93
political prisoners and many criminal prisoners were executed. Amnesty International was concerned about the imprisonment of large numbers of black people under so-called "pass laws" which discriminate on the grounds of race.
Amnesty International intervened during the year on behalf of more than 200 detainees, many of whom it considered to be prisoners of conscience. They included officials of black trade unions, students, church workers, and political activists suspected of opposing the South African Government or the administrations in the African "homelands" such as Ciskei, Transkei and Venda, which have been declared "independent" but which are not recognized internationally. Most were held under security legislation permitting unlimited incommunicado detention without charge or trial. Such detainees were often held in solitary confinement for prolonged periods and allegedly tortured or ill-treated during interrogation by security police.
Two political detainees died in security police custody. On 8 March, Tembuyise Simon Mndawe, an alleged member of the banned African National Congress (ANC), was reportedly found hanged in apoUce cell at Nelspruit He had been arrested some two weeks before but had not been charged with an offence by the time of his death. No inquest had been held by the end of 1983.
Another political detainee, Paris Malawi, aged 23, was arrested on 4 July and killed the following day while in custody at Protea Police Station in Soweto. Medical evidence indicated that his death was due to a gunshot wound in the forehead inflicted at point-blank range. In October, a security police officer, Sergeant Jan Harm van As, was charged with his murder and remanded on bail for trial in February 1984.
Two earlier deaths of political detainees were also the subject of legal action. In February, two members of the Venda security police were tried in Sibasa on charges of murdering Isaac Tshifhiwa Muofhe, who had died in detention in November 1981. An inquest in July 1982 decided that his death had been caused by an unlawful assault by Captain Muthuphei Ramaligela and Sergeant Phumula Mangaga of the Venda security police. However, they were acquitted and discharged after the trial judge refused to admit as evidence their testimony before the Muofhe inquest, which had incriminated them and which differed in certain respects from the testimony which they then gave at their trial. In March, Anmesty International wrote to the Attorney General ofVenda to ask whether there had been an official inquiry into allegations of torture made by other detainees arrested at the same time as Muofhe, including allegations by three Lutheran Church ministers that they had been beaten severely and tortured with electric shocks. There was no reply to Amnesty International's inquiry.
94
An inquest into the death in security police custody of Ernest Dipale, aged 21, was held in June. He was allegedly found hanged in a cell at the Johannesburg security police headquarters in August 1983. The inquest ruled that he had hanged himself and that no one could be held responsible. However, a statement which Dipale had reportedly made to security police shortly before his death apparently was not made available to the inquest or to lawyers representing his family.
In May, two members of a black farming community threatened with forcible resettlement to an African "homeland", died in police custody in disturbing circumstances within two days. Themba Manana, aged 38, was arrested together with his father apparently for suspected cattle theft. However, neither man had been charged by 3 May when Themba Manana's death occurred at Dirkiesdorp Police Station. On release, his father, Absalom Manana, alleged that he had personally been punched and tortured with electric shocks, giving rise to concern that Themba Manana's death might be attributable to ill-treatment A second death occurred at Dirkiesdorp Police Station on 4 May when Zephaniah Sibanyoni, a 33-year-old man apparently held as a witness, reportedly collapsed and died. Subsequently, it was reported that the authorities were treating Manana's death as murder but believed, on the basis of a post-mortem report, that Sibanyoni's death was due to natural causes.
A month before these two deaths, Saul Mkhize, the leader of the same community had been shot dead by a white police officer while addressing a meeting to protest against the forcible resettlement plans. In September, the authorities announced that a police officer would be charged with Saul Mkhize's murder but his trial had not started by the end of the year.
New allegations of torture were made by former detainees and by defendants and witnesses in political trials. In February, Cedric Mayson, a former Methodist Church minister who had been adopted as a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty Intemational when he was restricted under a banning order in 1977, alleged in court that he had been stripped naked and made to stand for 48 hours, had had some of his hair pulled out forcibly and had been verbally abused during security police interrogation in late 1981. The judge accepted Mayson's account and ruled that he had made incriminating statements which led to his prosecution for treason only under duress. He was granted bail and subsequently left the country. In another case, four people who had been charged under the Terrorism Act were acquitted in April after a trial lasting nine months when the presiding magistrate accepted allegations from several state witnesses, including one woman aged 57, that they had been assaulted in detention and subjected to solitary confinement to induce them to make statements implicating the
95
accused. However, in several other cases allegations of torture and ill-treatment of detainees and witnesses were not accepted by the courts and evidence extracted from them allegedly under duress was used as a basis to obtain convictions.
Particularly serious allegations of torture were made in the second half of 1983 following many detentions in Ciskei. These occurred after residents of Mdantsane launched a boycott of local bus services in protest against an increase in fares. The Ciskei authorities subsequently declared a state of emergency in Mdantsane, detained more than 100 people for interrogation under the Ciskei National Security Act and arrested himdreds more for allegedly infringing curfew regulations. Those detained included many black trade unionists, particularly officials and supporters of the South African Allied Workers' Union (SAAWU), which was banned in Ciskei on 3 September. Many university and school students who joined in the boycott were also detained, as were several journalists and lawyers. Father Smangaliso Mkhatshwa, General Secretary of the Southern Africa Catholic Bishops' Conference, was also detained in late October. Most of the detainees were released before the end of the year but Father Mkhatshwa and a number of students were still being held incommunicado at the end of 1983.
A number of those detained in August were taken to the local Sisa Dukashe sports stadium where they were held in severely cramped and overcrowded conditions. Many were allegedly assaulted severely by Ciskei security personnel or people assisting them including Mvuyo Malgas, a 19-year-old school student who was brutally assaulted with a sjambok, a rhinoceros-hide whip.
Allegations of gross ill-treatment of criminal prisoners were made in September during the trial of eight prison wardere at Barberton Prison. They faced three charges of murder and more than 30 charges of assault as a result of incidents in late December 1982 when prisoners were forced to undertake strenuous physical labour during a heatwave and had then been attacked by prison staff using rubber truncheons. Three prisoners died and more than 30 others were injured. During the period between this incident and the end of the warders' trial some nine months later there were renewed acts of violence at the prison which resulted in several more prisoners' deaths. The warders were ail acquitted of murder but six of them were jailed for assault for terms ranging from one to eight years. After the trial, the government established a commission of inquiry into prison conditions at Barberton but its outcome was not known to Amnesty Intemational by the end of the year.
There was a substantial reduction in the number of people restricted under banning orders. With one exception, all banning orders in force at the end of June 1982, numbering more than 50, were withdrawn in
96
accordance with a provision of the Internal Security Act of 1982. This stipulated that all such orders should be withdrawn one year after 2 July 1982, the date on which the act took effect However, 10 of those whose banning orders were lifted were almost immediately rebanned for further terms ranging from two and a half to five years, including Nonzamo Winnie Mandela, who has been ahnost continually restricted or detained without trial since the early 1960s. Their cases were taken up by Amnesty Intemational.
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the introduction of new legislation which significantly increased the penalties for refusal to undertake military service for reasons of conscience. The Defence Amendment Act for the first time provided an altemative form of service for those who object to military service on strictly religious grounds, but it stipulated that those whose objection was based on moral or political factors would be liable to imprisonment of up to six years.
The death penalty remained a major concem. There was a continued high rate of executions: no official figures were available by the end of the year but it appeared that the number of executions might be comparable to the 1982 total of 101. Most of those sentenced to death and most of those executed were convicted of criminal offences. However, in June three alleged members of the ANC who had been convicted of treason and other offences were hanged at Pretoria Central Prison. Marcus Thabo Motaung, Jerry Semano Mosololi and Thelle Simon Mogoerane had ail been convicted in 1982 of guerrilla activities which resulted in loss of life. They were the first prisoners convicted of treason to be executed in South Africa for almost 70 years.
The organization deplored the executions that took place but welcomed the govenmient's decision to commute the death sentences of three other alleged ANC members convicted of treason, apparently because there had been no loss of life as a result of their actions. In December, Amnesty Intemational appealed for clemency for Benjamin Moloise, another alleged member of the ANC, who was sentenced to death in June after being convicted of a political murder and who had exhausted all judicial appeals by late November. He had not been executed by the end of the year.
97
