Colombia
Amnesty International was concerned about extrajudicial executions which appeared to be carried out as a matter of policy by some sectors of the Colombian army. Further concerns included the reported "disappearance" of at least 80 prisoners in 1983; reports of systematic torture by the police and army, sometimes in conjunction with extrajudicial execution, and the detention - generally for relatively short periods- of leaders of peasant and Indian organizations in the course of land disputes. About 300 prisoners detained for alleged involvement in guerrilla activities faced trial in civilian courts at the end
140
of 1983. No prisoners of conscience were adopted by Amnesty Intemational. The organization was also concemed about cases of execution-style killings of kidnap victims held captive by Colombia's several guerrilla organizations.
Amnesty Intemational welcomed measures by Attorney General Carlos Jiménez Gómez and civilian criminal court judges to investigate "death squad" killings attributed to police and army forces, to identify publicly those adjudged responsible and to call for their prosecution. Amnesty Intemational received specific information on over 300 extrajudicial executions in 198 3, attributed to regular forces of the Colombian army and National Police, and civilian irregular forces enlisted by mral army and police garrisons as counter-guerrilla auxiliaries, including security personnel employed by private landowners or business figures placed at the disposition of police and army units. The tme number of extrajudicial executions was believed to be considerably higher.
On 3 Febmary Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Attomey General requesting information on the progress of an inquiry reported to have begun the previous year into killings attributed by army representatives to a "death squad" called Muerte a Secuestradores ("MAS"), "Death to Kidnappers". The letter expressed concem about evidence that sectors of the army and National Police had been responsible for "disappearances" and the killing of suspected opponents of the govemment which they had ascribed to "MAS", and that the number of such killings had greatly increased in 1982. The letter cited information on a number of cases of multiple killings reported in the Magdalena Medio region and referred to the published testimony of three civilians accused of murder in San Vicente Chucuri, Santander department, who said that they had received military training, arms, payment and orders from Fifth Brigade army officers to carry out killings as members of an army counter-guerrilla force.
The preliminary findings of the Attomey General's investigation were made public later in Febmary. The findings confirmed that police and army personnel - including Fifth Brigade officers - had been involved in killings ascribed to "MAS", and stated that "MAS" did not exist as an organization but as a "state of mind" among some sectors of the security services. On 20 Febmary a communique was published by the Ministerio Público, Public Ministry, signed by its head, the Attomey General and by seven criminal court judges identifying by name 163 people considered to merit prosecution for "death squad" actions.
The communique named 59 members of the armed forces on active duty, including commanders, deputy commanders and other top army officers of the principal garrisons in the Magdalena Medio region. They included officers of the Bárbula Battalion (Puerto Boy acá, Boyaca); the
141
BombonáBattalion (Puerto Benío, Antioquia); Operational Command No. 10 (Cimitarra, Santander); Germán Olano Air Base (Puerto Salgar, Cundinamarca); and the Patriotas Battalion (Honda, Tolima department).
Although civilian criminal courts subsequentíy opened proceedings against individuals named in the Ministerio Público's communique, few of the civilians named, and to the knowledge of Amnesty Intemational, none of the police and military personnel were detained or brought to trial The Minister of War, General Fernando Landazábal, rejected the report out of hand, refusing to release active duty persormel for trial by civilian courts, and declaring that every member of the armed forces would contribute one day's salary to a fond for the defence of those accused.
In June Colombia's Tribunal Disciplinario, the high court that mies on conflicts of jurisdiction between civil and military courts mled that the tiials of Lieutenant Colonel Velandia Hurtado, commander of the Patriotas Battalion, and of other army personnel accused of "death squad" activities could take place only under the jurisdiction of the military courts, since their actions were not performed in a private capacity but as members of the military institution. Amnesty Intemational was unaware of any military court subsequently having investigated or tried personnel accused of "death squad" activities.
Investigations by civilian courts and public prosecutors of crimes attributed to police or army persormel in the course of 1983 were also obstructed by death threats. Amnesty Intemational sought information on the investigation of the "death squad" killing of the public prosecutor of Antioquia Domingo Cuello, on 27 September, after he accused National Police intelligence officers of tying the student Luis Femando Giraldo to a lamp-post in Medellin and exploding him with dynamite on 20 August Dr Cuello was killed after publicly rejecting the statement by National Police Director General Colonel Reinaldo Martínez which had claimed that Giraldo was a member of the guerrilla group Ejército de Liberación Nacional (ELN), National Liberation Army, that he had been released from custody prior to his death, and that police had not been involved in the killing. In November 1983 a Medellin court issued detention orders against the head of National Police intelligence (Section F-2) and two police lieutenants for the murder of Giraldo; the three were not detained, however, but transferred by the police to other cities. Thejudge who issued the orders subsequently received threats in the name of a "death squad" and left the country. The family of the murdered student and their lawyer also fled after a series of death threats. Amnesty Intemational was unaware of any progress being made in the two murder investigations.
The number of reported extrajudicial executions in the Magdalena
142
Medio region increased dramatically following the creation of a XlVth Army Brigade based at the Bomboná Battalion headquarters in Puerto Berrio in April 1983, and the launching of a counter-insurgency campaign agzmsiihQFuerzasAnnadasRevolucionariasde Colombia (FARC), Colombian Revolutionary Armed Forces, a guerrilla group operating in the area. During the first six months of 1983 Colombian human rights organizations reported 380 execution-style "death squad" killings by regular and paramilitary auxiliary forces in the region, a total which they estimated rose to about 800 by December. Most of the victims whose cases were known to Amnesty International were peasant fármers who had moved into the area since the 1950s and had cleared small plots of unoccupied land. Many such farmers increasingly came into conflict over land titles with the owners of large and expanding cattle ranches. The owners and administrators of such ranches have in recent years been the principal targets of guerrilla violence, particularly kidnappings. Military representatives have labelled peasant farmers remaining in areas of FARC activity as "communists" and guerrilla sympathizers.
In some isolated areas in the Magdalena Medio, as well as the Arauca and Caqueta regions army counter-insurgency operations served to drive suspect peasant populations from their rural communities because of the threat of mass "death squad" killings. The most widely reported incident provoking the flight en masse of a rural population in which mass extrajudicial executions were documented occurred in the Segovia and Remedios areas of Antioquia in August At least 22 people were reportedly killed and survivors attributed the killings to army officers of the Bomboná Battalion's Segovia Base, which had been implicated in "death squad" activity months before by the Ministerio Publico. In August, parish priests appealed to the Minister of War, General Landazábal, for an inquiry into anhy involvement in the killings, noting that victims included peasants associated with Ligas Campesinas, Peasant Leagues, labour organizations of farm workers, and in some cases their childrea General Landazábal responded with a televised statement denying army involvement in the killings, and accusing the priests of being in the pay of the FARC. The Attorney General, in contrast, ordered an investigation which found evidence that the killings had been ordered by the commander of the Segovia Base Captain Jorge Valbuena B arriga. By the end of 1983, however, the army had apparently not permitted Captain Valbuena to appear before a civilian court, nor had it removed him from active service. It had also failed to initiate either military investigations or trial proceedings with respect to the case.
Extrajudicial executions reported outside the Magdalena Medio area followed a similar pattern, being attributed by the army and police
143
to "death squads" operating outside their control, or being said to have occurred in the course of armed clashes between guerrilla groups and the army. In some cases killings by men in plain clothes who identified themselves in the presence of witnesses as members of "MAS" were subsequently said by the army to have occurred when the victims attacked regular army units. As in the Magdalena Medio, the principal victims of extrajudicial executions were peasant farmers, particularly those organized into peasant leagues or umons, or active in civic organizations such as the Juntas de Acción Comunal, Juntas of Communal Action, or Comités de Planeación y Desarrollo, Committees of Planning and Development, which were organized at the community level in many rural areas. Elected members of local govemment belonging to legal left-wing political parties have also been special targets of death threats or extrajudicial execution. Amnesty Intemational appealed for an investigation into the reported killing by personnel of the Bomboná Battalion in Puerto Berrio of four of that city's elected councillors between July 1982 and May 1983. Other victims of extrajudicial execution or recipients of death threats included teachers, members of rural human rights committees, and leaders of urban squatters' organizations.
As a result of a November 1982 amnesty law most of the country's estimated 500 political prisoners at that time were released. Provision was made for the vocational training of ex-prisoners and an estimated 1,500 former guerrillas who had requested amnesty and a return to civilian life. At least 39 former guerrillas who accepted the amnesty, however, were reported to have been the victim of political killings and 12 were reported as "disappeared" by the end of 1983. This situation of insecurity was cited by guerrilla leaders as a reason for many guerrillas refusing to lay down their arms and for at least 50 amnestied members of the M-19 guerrilla group reportedly requesting political asylum abroad Amnesty Intemational appealed for an inquiry into the Idlling of Luis Bemal on 29 November. The killing was carried out within hours of his having registered and applied for the benefits of the amnesty. Amnesty Intemational received testimonies from other former guerrillas who had accepted the terms of the amnesty, but on returning home had been informed by police or army officers that they would be killed if they did not agree to join the army's civihan counter-guerrilla forces.
Amnesty Intemational launched appeals with respect to a number of reported "disappearances". Some of the results of an investigation undertaken by th^Ministerio Publico into 230 cases of"disappearances" reported over several years were made public. One "disappeared" person, Gustavo Albeiro Muñoz, a student at the University of Antioquia, was confirmed by the Attorney General's office to have been detained by an army patrol on 26 May 1982. The investigators
144
cited confidential records kept at army headquarters in Bogotá which proved that the detention had occurred and that it had been routinely reported to headquarters by the arresting authority. The military had, however, consistently denied to the student's parents that he had ever been detained, and had presented written denials to that effect to a civilian court pursuing a writ of habeas corpus on his behalf. The Ministerio Público's investigation confirmed that his body had been found in a small village some five weeks after his arrest, and that he had died in army custody. Despite the publication of these findings, no proceedings were known to have been initiated against the army officers responsible and the family of Gustavo Albeiro Muñoz was reportedly refused the right to recover the body.
Amnesty Intemational wrote to the authorities in Febmary regarding evidence that a group of political prisoners detained in December 1982 and held in secret detention at the army's intelligence headquarters in Bogotá, the Brigada de Institutos Militares (BIM), Military Institutes Brigade, had been tortured, and had received death threats in the name of "MAS". The prisoners included Froilán Rivera, and other leaders of the peasant organization ^soc/ac/ó« Nacional de Usuarios Campesinos (ANUC), National Association of Peasants, and its associated political party. Amnesty Intemational said that it had assessed reports of medical examinations carried out on the prisoners after they left the BIM, and had found that they recorded injuries consistent with the specific allegations of torture. In October the civilian court hearing a charge of kidnapping against these prisoners ordered charges to be dropped and they were released; 12 of the co-accused in the case fled the country as a result of having received death threats.
Costa Rica
Amnesty Intemational continued to follow the cases of some 40 people held without trial on politically related charges for periods exceeding those permitted by Costa Rican law (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1983). A number of such persons were brought to trial during the year, including members of an alleged clandestine group called "La Familia ", The Family, some of whom had been detained since 1981 without trial, and seven foreigners who were arrested in early 1982. Some of the detainees were acquitted, but several others were sentenced to prison terms of up to 12 years on charges of terrorism. The foreigners who were
145
sentenced were then deported on the grounds that the acts of which they had been convicted were not directed at Costa Rica.
During the year, the Costa Rican press reported that allegations of ill-treatment made by these and other political detainees had not been satisfactorily resolved. Amnesty Intemational had repeatedly called for full independent investigations into these allegations. However, proceedings against officers of the Organismo de Investigación Judicial (OU), the special police investigation unit of the Costa Rican judiciary, who had been accused of responsibility for such ill-treatment, had been closed in 1982 on the grounds that the evidence given by prisoners was contradictory.
In June 1983, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (lACHR) of the Organization of American States (OAS) resolved to close the case of Viviana Gallardo and others, which had originally been presented to the Inter-American Court of the OAS by the Govemment of Costa Rica in October 1981. Viviana Gallardo, a political detainee, had been shot and killed in her cell at Civil Guard headquarters in June 1981 and her two cell-mates, also detained on political charges, had been wounded in the same incident. Amnesty Intemational had called on the govemment to institute a full and independent inquiry into the matter and to bring those responsible to justice. The government itself had asked the Inter-American Court to determine whether there had been a violation of those human rights protected under the American Convention on Human Rights; the Court had passed the matter to the lACHR on procedural grounds. The Commission decided to shelve the case in June 1983 on the grounds that the Govemment of Costa Rica had applied the full force of domestic law in investigating the matter and sentencing Civil Guard José Manuel Bolaños Quesada to 18 years' imprisonment for the act
