Guinea-Bissau
Amnesty International's main concern was the continued detention without trial of former government officials arrested after the coup which brought President Joao Bernardo Vieira to power in November 1980. By the end of the year all but two of these detainees had been released uncharged, although President Vieira had earlier accused some of them of being responsible for secret extrajudicial executions which had been committed by the previous administration of President Luiz Cabrai.
Thirteen former officials of the Cabrai government were in detention at the beginning of 1983. However, nine of them, all former members of the national security service, were released in May. Two others, both former senior members of the armed forces, were freed in November. None of them were charged or brought to trial despite government allegations that they had been responsible for secret extrajudicial executions carried out on government orders between 1975 and November 1980.
Only two of the long-term detainees were still believed to be in custody at the end of the year. They were Umaru Djalo, who was Minister of Defence before the coup of November 1980, and former Interior Minister Constantino Teixeira, who was arrested a few weeks after the coup when he returned from an overseas visit However, official sources claimed that they were not imprisoned but that they were living under a form of house arrest The authorities said that Raphael Barbosa, a political prisoner whose case was being investigated by Amnesty International and who had previously been in prison for political reasons prior to the November 1980 coup, was also no longer in prison but was living under house arrest
In May the government released Leopoldo Alfama (known as "Duki Djassi"), who had been arrested in June 1982 in connection with an alleged plot against the government Two other detainees who had been arrested at the same time, Honorio Fonseca and Joáo da Costa, were released in November. After these releases, President Vieira claimed that there were no longer any political prisoners in Guinea-Bissau.
57
In May 38 people who had been sentenced to death in the mid-1970s reportedly had their sentences commuted to terms of imprisonment They had apparently been convicted on charges relating to offences against the security of the state. All 38 were believed to have been subsequently released from prison.
