Sierra Leone
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the detention without trial of suspected political opponents of the government or of the ruling All People's Congress Party (APC), inadequate conditions of detention and the judicial death penalty.
Over 100 people were reportedly in detention in the Pujehun area at the end of the year, apparently on suspicion of having committed acts of political violence. Many of them, possibly including some who were detained in 1982, had not been charged by the end of the year. They were arrested as a result of a dispute between rival factions in the Pujehun East parliamentary constituency which arose when the incumbent member of parliament, Mana Kpaka, was defeated in the general election of May 1982 by another candidate, Solomon Demby. Mana Kpaka's supporters claimed that Solomon Demby's election had been irregular and instituted court proceedings to overtiun his election. Following the murder of the chief witness on behalf of Mana Kpaka in October 1982, there were violent clashes between supporters of Mana Kpaka and Solomon Demby. At least 10 people, and perhaps as many as 50, were reportedly killed as a result of political violence in the area in May 1983 alone. Those detained in connection with the dispute were reportedly held at police stations at Bo and Pujehun where they were said to have received insufficient food. At least five people detained on political grounds reportedly died in Pujehun police station during the year from malnutrition or diseases related to it, while others were transferred to Pujehun hospital suffering from malnutrition.
On 20 September Amnesty Intemational wrote to President Siaka Stevens expressing concern about reports that agents of government security forces or of the APC had been responsible for, or had deliberately failed to prevent, acts of political violence including political killings in the Pujehun area. The organization urged the
89
authorities to act to prevent such abuses and to institute an inquiry into the disturbances. On 17 November President Stevens repUed to Amnesty Intemational, stating diat the security forces had inflicted casualties only when defending themselves against armed opponents. He also stated that all the murders which had taken place in the region and which had been cited in Amnesty International's letter of 20 September were being investigated, that those responsible would in due course be brought to trial by the appropriate authorities, and that the government was doing all in its power to maintain law and order in the area.
In May, Amnesty Intemational learned that 17 people were awaiting execution after having been condemned to death by tiie courts in previous years. Nine death sentences were reportedly imposed by the courts during the year. However, no executions are believed to have been carried out for more than three years. On 5 July, Amnesty Intemational appealed to the President to commute the death sentences passed on Ahmed Turay, Saliu Bangura and Michael Turay, who had all been convicted of armed robbery. The organization expressed the hope that the commutation of death sentences in recent yeare might imply a step towards total abolition of the death penalty.
