Haiti
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about allegations of torture and other forms of ill-treatmen^ detention without trial, including the unacknowledged detention for prolonged periods of time of political prisoners, some of whom were prisoners of conscience; poor prison conditions; and "disappearances".
Reports of torture and ill-treatment continued to reach Amnesty International during the year. One case related to Gérard Duclerville, a lay preacher arrested on 28 December 1982 {sQt Amnesty Intemational Report 1983), who was held in solitary confinement in the Casernes Dessalines military barracks, in Port-au-Prince, whom the organization considered to be a prisoner of conscience. According to reports received by Amnesty Intemational, he was repeatedly beaten with sticks, particularly on the buttocks while tied in a position known as the "Jack". In this position the victim is tmssed into a crouching position with arms hugging the legs. A pole is passed through the narrow gap between the bent knees and elbows and the pole is then placed between, for example, two desks, with the result that the victim hangs downwards. Gérard Duclerville was released without charge on 7 Febmary 1983. His release followed appeals made on his behalf by the Catholic Church in Haiti, the Ligue haïtienne des droits humains, Haitian Human Rights League, and a number of intemational organizations including Amnesty Intemational. The govemment-appointed Commission nationr ale des droits de l'homme. National Human Rights Commission, also reportedly intervened on his behalf. He is said to have needed hospital treatment, including skin grafts, as a result of the beatings. Father Gérard, as he was known, stated that during detention he was interrogated about a radio program called "Messe du Matin" which he broadcast daily owQvRadio Cacique. On 27 January the Haiti Bishops' Conference and the Cottfèrence haïtienne des religieux, Haitian Conference of
165
Religious Orders, issued a pastoral letter concerning Gérard Duclerville's continuing detention, in which they stated, inter alia: "Today it is the turn of Gérard and those whose names we do not know, but tomorrow it will be ours, yours, mine, somebody else's. Whenever a man is being degraded and tortured, the whole human race is being degraded and tortured"
By the end of the year the government had provided no explanation for Gérard Duclerville's arbitrary detention and, to Amnesty International's knowledge, had not undertaken any official inquiry into his allegations of torture.
In addition to receiving such reports concerning political prisoners. Amnesty Intemational also received allegations of ill-treatment inflicted by the Volontaires de la sécurité nationale (VSN), the political police known as the Tontons macoutes, and by members of the army on non-political detainees and believed that such practices were widespread In one reported incident near Saltadère, close to the border with the Dominican Republic, several people were arrested on suspicion of smuggling rice. Two of the detainees were reportedly severely beaten; one was tied up and stmck all over his body; the other was forced to lie face down on the ground and was then beaten. The former is reported to have needed hospital treatment Despite his complaints to the authorities Amnesty Intemational was not aware of any initiatives having been taken by the authorities to investigate the incident
A number of prisoners of conscience were detained during the year. Most appeared to have been arrested and detained with total disregard for their constitutional and other legal rights. Arrest warrants were not presented at the time of detention and detainees were not brought before a judge within the 48 hours required by the Constitution. The detainees were, for the most part, held in unacknowledged incommunicado detention, and those released were given no explanation for their arrest and detentioa
Some detainees who were later released without charge were Haitian-bom individuals living abroad who had been arrested when returning to visit Haiti. Henri Lemarque, a Haitian-bom United States citizen was arrested on 2 January and held in solitary confinement for 52 days in the Casernes Dessalines. He was said to have been questioned about his connection with groups of Haitian exiles in the United States, and about a bombing which occurred on 1 January in Haiti. He was released without explanation on 22 Febmary.
Frank Blaise, a 70-year-old Haitian who had been living in the United States for approximately 15 years, retumed to Haiti in June. He was arrested without warrant on 25 August at Petit Goâve, taken by uniformed police to the Casernes Dessalines, and after a superficial interrogation was taken to a dark, dirty and damp cell where he was kept
166
in solitary confinement, dressed only in underpants, until 19 November, when he was released without any explanatioa In an interview with Amnesty Intemational, Frank Blaise described the poor conditions, deficient diet and lack of medical attention in the Casernes Dessalines and reported that he had been given no explanation for his arbitrary arrest
Yves Médard, a film director known under the professional name of Rassoul Labuchin, who had lived for some years in Mexico, was arrested without warrant in Port-au-Prince on 29 August by armed civilians. He was held in solitary confinement, almost naked, in the Casernes Dessalines until his release in October. He was allowed to leave Haiti with his family for France, but was given no specific reason for his arrest While in detention Yves Médard was accused by the Head of Police of having "political ambitions".
A number of other prisoners of conscience were held in arbitrary and unacknowledged detention for several months, including Jacques St Lot and Paul Théodat, who were released in August after eight months' detention in the Casernes Dessalines. They were co-defendants with Sylvio Claude, President of the Parti démocrate chrétien haïtien (PDCH), Haitian Christian Democrat Party, in his 1982 retrial (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1983). Although they had been granted full freedom by Président-à-Vie, President for Life, Jean-Claude Duvalier in September 1982, they had been obliged to report every three days to the authorities prior to their arrest As a result of continuous harassment and fear of rearrest, five other co-defendants took asylum in the Mexican Embassy at the beginning of 1983, and subsequently left the country.
Oreste Léon and Nicole Dagobert, also members of the PDCH, were arrested in May and released without explanation on 24 December. Nicole Dagobert was reported to have been held naked in the Casernes Dessalines throughout the period of her detention They are believed to have been arrested because of their connections with Sylvio Claude.
The harassment, detention and ill-treatment of Sylvio Claude, his family, and supporters of the PDCH, continued during the year, apparently motivated by Sylvio Claude's refusal to leave the country voluntarily, and his desire to involve his party in Haitian political life. In January one of his daughters, Marie-France, who was also Vice-President of the PDCH, sought political asylimi in Venezuela, following her continual harassment by members of the VSN. In September Sylvio Claude's wife was ill-treated while detained for a few hours, and another of his daughters, Marie-Jocelyne, was held for three days in the Casernes Dessalines, where she said she was beaten up. Her testimony was confirmed by ex-prisoners who were interviewed by Amnesty Intemational.
167
In October, Sylvio Claude was again arrested and taken to the Casernes Dessalines. He was reportedly severely beaten before being released in December, While detained he was said to have been threatened with death if he did not agree to leave Haiti, After his release he was kept under house arrest Despite his poor health, occasioned by ill-treatment, fear of persecution prevented local doctors from giving him medical treatment after his release.
Amnesty Intemational appealed for the release of Maître Dupleix Jean-Baptiste, a former judge and founder member of the Ligue haïtienne des droits humains, Haitian League of Human Rights, who was detained with several others in May. They were released without charge in August All are thought to have been arrested because of their links with Sylvio Claude.
At the end of 1983, the govemment had still not officially acknowledged the detention of several other people suspected of political activities. No charges had been brought against them and access to them was not permitted For example, Frantz Héraux and José Sinai had been held since March, reportedly in the Casernes Dessalines, in solitary confinement Others believed to have been arrested in 1983 and to have been held in the Casernes Dessalines in unacknowledged detention were: Joseph Pardovany, Frid Esper, Schneider Merzier, Dominique Joseph, Joseph Lomini, Frantz Joachim and Eugène Nazon.
Amnesty Intemational continued to press the govemment to bring charges or to release several political prisoners who had been in detention for several years without any legal proceedings being held Among them were Vladimir Jeanty, Jean-Roland Denis, Jean-Claude Bastien, and Roosevelt Blaise Moise, who had all been in detention since 1981 in thQ Pénitencier National, National Penitentiary.
In 1983 Amnesty Intemational renewed its appeals to the govemment to acknowledge the detention of Rock Chiles Derose (also known as Jérôme Jean) and William Josma, who "disappeared" in 1981 and 1982 respectively and to disclose their whereabouts. In both cases Amnesty Intemational received eye-witness reports that they were in detention centres, and that they had been taken by the authorities to unknown destinations. Amnesty Intemational submitted both cases to the United Nations Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances.
An Amnesty Intemational delegate visited Haiti from 1 to 12 December. Before the delegate's arrival the organization had requested a meeting with the Minister of the Interior, but this was not granted However, the delegate was able to meet the majority of the members of the National Commission of Human Rights, to whom he explained Amnesty Intemational's concems in Haiti. Representatives of the
168
Minister of the Interior and the Minister of the Presidency were also present at the meeting.
Amnesty Intemational submitted a report in April on the violation of human rights in Haiti to those authorities in the United Nations dealing with work on human rights, under Economic and Social Council Resolution 728F (XVIII). This report had been presented previously to the Haitian Government, but at ¿le time of writing no comment had been received.
