Turkey
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the imprisonment of large numbers of prisoners of conscience; widespread and systematic torture and ill-treatment of political prisoners; and the imposition and use of the death penalty. The organization was also concemed that Iranian political refugees were retumed to Iran from Turkey.
According to official figures, on 30 June 1983 there were 21,046 political prisoners held in military prisons, but after the ratification of sentences by the Military Court of Cassation political prisoners are transferred to civil prisons and no figure was available for ^e number of political prisoners in civil prisons. Amnesty Intemational knew of several hundred prisoners who had been charged or convicted on account of their non-violent political or religious beliefs or activities, but believed that the actual number might be much higher.
Following elections in November 1983, civilian govemment was restored to Turkey, but martial law continued to be in force throughout the country and political offences continued to be tried in martial law courts.
Most prisoners of conscience known to Amnesty Intemational were charged or convicted under Articles 141 and 142 of the Turkish penal code which respectively prohibit "membership of an illegal organization" and "making communist propaganda". These articles were generally used to imprison left-wing political activists, as well as joumalists, publishers, writers, translators and academics. Hundreds of alleged members of the illegal Turkish Communist Party, were imprisoned for offences under Articles 141 and 142, as well as members of parties which were legal before they were banned after the September 1980 military coup, such as the Turkish Workers' Party (TIP), the Turkish Socialist Workers' Party (TSIP) and the Turkish Workers' and Peasants' Party (TIKP). Members of TOB-DER, the teachers' association, and of the Progressive Women's Association (IKD) were also imprisoned under these articles.
On 14 November in Istanbul 23 leading members of the Turkish Peace Association were convicted of offences under Article 141 and received five or eight year prison sentences, to be followed by periods of intemal exile (seeIntemational Report 1983). Inidally taken into custody in Febmary 1982, most of them were released in December 1982 while their trial continued, but all those present in court when the verdict was announced were immediately reimprisoned
307
Among those sentenced to eight years' imprisonment were Mahmut Dikerdem, a former Turkish ambassador; Reha Isvan, former Deputy Head of the Istanbul Department of Education; Erdal Atabek, President of the Turkish Medical Association; Ali Sirmen, a journalist, and Metin Ozek, a Professor of Psychiatry. Those sentenced to five years' imprisonment included Orhan Apaydin, former President of the Istanbul Bar Association, and Melih Tiimer, former Dean of the Istanbul Academy of Political Sciences.
Amnesty Intemational leamed of the prosecution of many writers, publishers, translators and journalists under Article 142. Many remained free pending the completion of legal proceedings, but a number of those convicted received lengthy prison sentences, including Recep Marasli, the director and editor in charge of Komal Publishing House in Istanbul, which specialized in the history of the Kurdish ethnic minority in Turkey. He was already serving a four-year sentence passed in July 1982 for publishing a book on Kurdish issues when, in January and May 1983, he received two further sentences of 12 years' and three years' imprisoimient because of other publications variously alleged to have weakened national feelings, made separatist propaganda, and to have insulted the Grand National Assembly, the security forces and the "moral personality" of the govemment. Among the works brought out by Komal Publishing House were those of Dr Ismail Be^ikgi, a sociologist serving a 10-year sentence passed in March 1982 {sqq Amnesty International Reports 1982, 1983).
Some of the numerous trials of Kurds were concluded during the year. Many were charged with violent offences, but among those charged under Articles 125, 171 and 173 of the penal code with separatist activities were some who were not accused of involvement in violence and were adopted by Amnesty Intemational as prisoners of conscience. They included Mehdi Zana, former Mayor of Diyarbakir, who was sentenced to 24 years' imprisonment on 26 October 1983. An Amnesty Intemational mission visited Diyarbakir in April 1983 to observe the trials of various groups of Kurdish activists, all charged with separatist activities, eventually being admitted to the trial of membere of the Labour Party of Kurdistan(KIP), afler initially being denied access to any trial in Diyarbakir.
The trial of leaders, officials and advisers of the Confederation of Progressive Trade Unions (DISK), which started in December 1981, continued throughout the year. Some defendants, including Ahmet Isvan, the former Mayor of Istanbul, were released, but were still on trial, while new defendants were added to the trial. At the end of 1983 the total number of defendants was 85, of whom 40 were still in prison. All the defendants with one exception were charged under Article 146 of the Turkish penal code, 74 under paragraph 1, which carries the
308
death penalty, the remainder under paragraph 3, which provides for a prison sentence of not less than 15 years {sqq Amnesty Intemational Report 1983). The 817-page DISK indictment did not state explicitly that the defendants committed or advocated acts of violence and they were not charged with any specific violent acts. Amnesty Intemational believed all the DISK defendants to be prisoners of conscience.
Leading members of the National Salvation Party, a legal political party before the 1980 coup, were sentenced in Febmary 1983 to terms of between two and four years' imprisonment under Article 163 of the penal code for intending to adapt "the basic social, economic, political or judicial orders of the State to religious principles and beliefs". At the end of 1983 they were still free pending the outcome of appeals. Throughout the year the Turkish media carried frequent reports of the detention and in some cases the trial of membere of various religious sects, also charged under Article 163. On 6 May Ankara radio reported the conclusion of the trial in Antalya of 115 officials of religious philanthropic associations, charged under Article 163. Forty-six were sentenced to two years' imprisonment, eight to one yeaf s imprisonment and 11 to six months' imprisonment.
All political offences were tried by martial law courts. Most lawyers acting in political cases continued to have insufficient access to their clients and were unable to have private consultations with them. Some were also reportedly put under pressure by having criminal charges brought against them. In April 1983 seven lawyers in Istanbul were brought to trial, charged with having damaged the reputation of the state abroad by providing information about conditions in Metris Military Prison. They were acquitted in September after expert testimony had established that they had not personally signed the document in question.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the length of time - 45 days - a person might be detained incommunicado before being brought before a court to be charged or released. Most allegations of torture received by Amnesty Intemational related to this period. In many cases families were reportedly unable to discover the whereabouts of detainees.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive allegations that prisoners charged witii political offences had been tortured and that in some cases death had resulted. In December 1982 Amnesty International was informed that Mustafa Hayrullahoglu, who had been detained in October or November 1982, had been tortured and was in a critical state of health. On 9 December Amnesty Intemational asked the Turkish Ambassador in London, Rahmi GUnirikiuoglu, for information about Mustafa Haymllahoglu's whereabouts and state of health and called for an investigation into the torture allegations. No reply was
309
received, so on 5 January 1983 Amnesty Intemational asked the Turkish Foreign Minister, liter Turkmen, for the same informatioa No reply was received On 5 April 1983 Amnesty Intemational learned that Mustafa Hayrullahoglu was dead. After months of trying to discover his whereabouts his family finally leamed that he had been buried in Kasimpasa cemetery in Istanbul. They subsequently received two letters from the authorities. The Martial Law Prosecutor for Istanbul stated that Mustafa Hayrullahoglu had been detained on 21 October 1982 and had committed suicide on 26 October. The Public Prosecutor for Istanbul stated that he had been detained on 5 November 1982, had become sick on 16 November and had died on the way to hospital. On 11 May 1983 Amnesty Intemational wrote again to the Turkish Ambassador asking to be informed if any investigation had taken place into Mustafa HayruUahoglu's death. No reply was received.
In July 1983 Amnesty Intemational received reports that approximately 2,000 prisoners in Metris, Sultanahmet, Sagmalcilar and Kabakoz prisons in Istanbul were on hunger-strike in protest against prison conditions, executions, torture and restrictions on access to lawyers. During the hunger-strike, which lasted for a month, an Amnesty Intemational delegate visited Istanbul to seek information about the treatment and condition of the prisoners.
Throughout the year Amnesty Intemational received frequent allegations that Kurdish prisoners in Diyarbakir and Erzumm Military Prisons were being subjected to torture. Among them were Halil Aksoy, whose brother Metin had died as a result of torture in October 1980, Miimtaz Kotan, Ru§en Arslan, Mehdi Zana, Pa§a Uzun, Nurettin Baysut and Salih Altindag. At a court hearing in Erzumm on 2 November Nurettin Baysut appeared with his head bandaged, allegedly because of wounds caused by torture, and Salih Altindag took off his clothes and showed marks he alleged to have been the result of torture. The two men stated that torture in Erzurum Military Prison consisted of savage beating,(beating of the soles of the feet) and being hit with sand bags. They demanded that their testimony be recorded in the minutes of the hearing.
In September 1983 a hunger-strike by political prisoners took place in Diyarbakir Military Prison in protest against torture, bad prison conditions and restrictions on access to lawyers. On 8 September Amnesty Intemational expressed concem to President Kenan Evren and the Martial Law Commander of Diyarbakir, General Kaya Yazgan, about reports that prisoners on hunger-strike had been tortured.
There were 24 executions in 1983, bringing to 48 the number of people executed since the September 1980 coup (prior to which no executions had taken place since 1972). Amnesty Intemational did not know the total number of people awaiting execution atthe end of 1983,
310
but believed it to be between 250 and 300. The organization appealed throughout the year to the authorities for a halt to executions and for the abolition of the death penalty.
In November 1983 approximately 60 Iranian refugees in Turkey were forcibly retumed to Iran by the Turkish authorities. Amnesty Intemational expressed concern about these refoulements to President Kenan Evren and pointed out that at least some of the refugees were in danger of imprisonment, torture or even execution in Iran because of their alleged political opposition to the Iranian Government,
On 6 December 1983 the European Commission on Human Rights declared admissible the inter-state complaints filed against Turkey by Denmark, France, the Netherlands, Norway and Swedea The applicant-govemments had alleged that during the period 12 September 1980 to Î July 1982 Turkey had violated the following provisions of the European Convention on Himian Rights: Article 3 (prohibition of torture); Article 5 (liberty and security of person); Article 6 (right to fair trial); Article 9 (freedom of conscience); Article 10 (freedom of expression); and Article 11 (freedom of assembly and association). The applicant-governments alleged that torture and inhuman or degrading treatment of detainees was a widespread and systematic practice and that the measures taken by the Turkish Government to combat such treatment were not sufficient. The Commission in its decision on admissibility found that there was prima facie evidence of a "repetition of acts" of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners. It noted the large number of complaints which had been addressed to the Turkish authorities between June 1981 and July 1982 and concluded that the efforts of the government to prevent violations of Article 3 on a considerable scale had apparently not been sufficient This seemed to indicate "that there was tolerance, at the level of direct superiors of those immediately responsible for the acts involved, of such violations".
311
