Bolivia
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about reports of torture and ill-treatment by military personnel of members of rural communities and prisoners held in incommunicado deten-tioa The Comisión Nacional de Investigación de Desaparecidos, Bolivian Commission of Inquiry into "disappearances", which was established on 28 October 1982, continued to investigate the "disappearances" which had occurred since 1970, On 11 August 1983 the Bolivian Government renewed the mandate of the commission "until the cases within its competence have been fully clarified".
On 14 Febmary 1983, following an investigation by the commission at the main cemetery in La Paz, 14 bodies which had been buried in a secret grave were discovered The bodies were those of 10 Bolivians, three Argentines and one Chilean who "disappeared" during 1971 and 1972, Examination of their remains indicated that all had been tortured The remains of other victims were located throughout the year. On 14 April 1983 a body, believed to be that of Juan Carlos Flores Bedregal,
	
	
	i
	¡ r ' S/ t'A "
130
was discovered in a secret grave in Rio Seco, La Paz. In 1980 Amnesty International had appealed on his behalf after he had "disappeared" following the coup of 17 July 1980. On 13 May 1980 the body of René Sánchez Chalco, a trade union leader who was detained and allegedly tortured during the government of General Luis Garda Meza, was discovered in the main cemetery in La Paz. He allegedly died after an unsuccessful operation and was then secretly buried under a false name.
On 25 February 1983 the Minister of the Interior told journalists that 15 people had been detained in connection with the activities of paramilitary groups which had been implicated in "disappearances", extrajudicial executions and other human rights violations. Individuals in this group had reportedly been charged with involvement in the killing of Father Luis Espinal, a Jesuit priest and editor of the newspaper.^g'Mz in March 1980, and of Marcelo Quiroga Santa Cruz, a leader of the Partido Socialista No. 1, Socialist Party 1, who was killed after being detained in the raid on the Central Obrera Boliviana (COB), Bolivian Trade Union Confederation in July 1980 {sqq Amnesty International Report 1980, 1981).
Amnesty International was concerned about the apparent lack of progress injudicial investigations related to "disappearances". Three members of the Armed Forces and one civilian indicted at the beginning of 1983 in connection with the arrest and subsequent "disappearance" of Renato Ticona Estrada, who was detained in Oruro with his brother in July 1980, had not even made initial statements to the judge by the end of 1983.
In November 1983 Amnesty International learned of the arrest in October of five Bolivians and two Chileans in the town of Luribay, La Paz Department, by army personnel. After their arrest they were reportedly taken to the barracks in Patacamay where they were briefly held before being transferred to the San Jorge military police barracks in La Paz. For 42 days their detention was not acknowledged and they were held incommunicado. During this period they were reportedly tortured in the headquarters of the Army Command and were allegedly forced to sign false statements. All the prisoners were still in detention at the end of 1983, three of them reportedly being held in isolation in small unhygienic cells.
The initial statements by government officials regarding the reason for the arrests, the specific legislation under which the prisoners had been charged and whether they would face civilian or military legal proceedings were contradictory. The Minister of National Defence, Manuel Cárdenas Mallo, informed Amnesty International members in November 1983 that the prisoners were being held under military jurisdiction in connection with alleged offences under Articles 221 and 222 of the Military Penal Code relating to the possession of arms.
131
On 16 December 1983 the prisoners were brought for the first time before the Tribunal Permanente de las Fuerzas Armadas, Permanent Court of the Armed Forces. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that the procedures being applied might not conform to intemationally recognized standards for a fair trial and that they might not comply with provisions of the Bolivian Civil Code of PensJ Procedures.
