Bulgaria
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience; and also about two cases in which people were allegedly confined in a psychiatric hospital for political rather than medical reasons. The organization leamed of two executions and the imposition of two death sentences.
The criminal code contains a number of articles imder which a person may be imprisoned for having non-violently attempted to exercise the rights to freedom of movement and freedom of expression. The constiUition does not guarantee the right to freedom of movement and citizens who seek to emigrate are rarely permitted to do so by the authorities. Those who seek to leave the country without official permission may be pimished, under Article 279, witii up to five years' imprisonment, or up to six years' imprisonment if the offence is repeated.
People who express views which are not officially approved of or who possess literature containing such views may be imprisoned for up to five years for "anti-state agitation and propaganda".
Amnesty Intemational adopted a recently graduated high-school student, Kiril Spasov, as a prisoner of conscience. He was reportedly sentenced to three years' imprisonment on charges brought under Articles 279 and 108 after having been convicted by a Sofia court in September of having made preparations, together with a friend, to leave the country without official authorization. He was also reportedly convicted of possessing tape-recordings of foreign radio broadcasts and leaflets which the court considered to be "anti-state propaganda".
Amnesty Intemational sought to investigate allegations that Alek-sander Nikolov, the editor of an army newspaper, had been forcibly confined in the psychiatric section of a military hospital in early October after expressing criticism of the coimtry's political leaders at a meeting of the newspaper's correspondents. Amnesty Intemational also received reports that Volodya Nakov, aged 29, from Sofia had been confined for over a week in Jdy in a psychiatric hospital after informing foreign embassies of his wish to emigrate. He was subsequently alleged to have been threatened with prosecution on charges under Article 108 of "slandering the state" if he continued to contact those embassies.
Amnesty Intemational continued to seek information from the Bulgarian authorities about a number of political prisoners whose cases it was investigating. These included Asen Andonov, aged 38, who was
275
sentenced to eight years' imprisonment in 1973 for leaving the coimtry without official permission while doing military service. In 1975 he received a further sentence, making a combined sentence of 14 years and six months. He was convicted of having founded, while detained in Pazardzhik prison, a group which aimed to undermine the authority of the state "by kidnapping and taking the life of state and party officials". Amnesty Intemational sought further information from the authorities about the groimds for the latter charges, but received no reply.
Amnesty Intemational also continued to seek details of the charges and of the current legal status of Jumer Uanski and Mr Bunzev, two Pomaks (Bulgarians of Muslim faith) who were sentenced to 15 and 20 years' imprisonment respectively in 1973 after they had taken part in protests against an official ruling requiring Pomaks to change their Muslim names to Bulgarian ones.
Information about human rights violations in Bulgaria was severely restricted by official censorship and Amnesty Intemational believed that it leamed of only a small proportion of the total number of prisoners of conscience. According to estimates by former political prisoners there were approximately 250 political prisoners detained in Stara Zagora prison - where most political prisoners were held - at the beginning of the 1980s. Many of them were reportedly pecóle convicted of having attempted to leave the country without permissioa People convicted of this offence were also held in Sofia Central Prisoa In addition, 20 to 30 political prisoners were reported to be held at that time in Pazardzhik prison, where recidivists are generally sent Amnesty Intemational did not receive any information indicating that the above figures had substantially changed by 1983, nor that prison conditions, described as poor - and particularly harsh in Pazardzhik-had improved.
Amnesty Intemational leamed of two executions and of two death sentences, in all four cases for murder. It was reported on 24 October that Stoiko Iliev Getov had been executed and on 5 November that Mustafa Yustenov Mustafov had been executed. It was reported in Febmary that Todor Tsvetanov Ivanov had been sentenced to death and in December that Maria Hristova Georgieva was appealing to the Supreme Court against a death sentence imposed on her.
lie,
