Cameroon
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the continuing detention without trial of one prisoner of conscience who had been held since 1976, and investigated the cases of 10 other untried detainees considered likely to be prisoners of conscience. The organization was also concemed about reports of beatings inflicted on both criminal and political prisoners after a riot at Yaoundé central prison.
President Biya's authority as Head of State was contested by former President Ahmadou Ahidjo, who resigned from office in favour of President Biya in November 1982 but remained President of the ruling party, the Union national camerounaise (UNC), Cameroon National Union, until September 1983. In August 1983, President Biya announced the detention of Commandant Ibrahim Oumarou (an administrative officer) and Captain Salatou Adamou, an aide-de-camp on the staff of former President Ahidjo, who had left Cameroon shortly before the arrests. All three were accused of plotting to assassinate President Biya, They had not been formally charged or tried by the end of the year.
Amnesty Intemational continued to appeal throughout the year for the release of Martin Ebele-Tobbo, a prisoner of conscience who was still held at Tcholliré Centre de ré-education, "re-education" centre, at the end of the year. He was the sole remaining prisoner from a group of 200 students, teachers and workers who were detained in July 1976 apparently on suspicion of distributing anti-govemment literature. On 10 November 1983 Amnesty International wrote to President Biya to clarify whether or not Martin Ebele-Tobbo had been released However, no reply was received
Anmesty Intemational also continued to appeal for the trial or release of Jean Kona and Thomas Mabong, who had both been detained since January 1982. They were close friends who, after a long period of residence in France, were detained when they retumed to Cameroon on holiday. They were held apparently because an article considered to be critical of Cameroon had been found in Jean Kona's possession. This was believed to be an article by Jean-François Médard entitled "De l'Etat sous-développé au Cameroun" ("On the Underdevelopment of the State in Cameroon"). Jean Kona was reportedly held at Tcholliré and Thomas Mabong at Yoko prison de production, labour camp.
26
Among the cases taken up for investigation as possible prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International were those of Winston Fonyonga, Vincent Nteh, Ferdinand Langsi and a man named Fokemba. They were among a group of 21 people who were detained in October 1982 in connection with a riot which had occurred during a public meeting concerning a land dispute between the villages of Bali and Mbengwi. They were subsequentiy released uncharged. The four were then rearrested in March 1983, apparentiy to punish them for opposing local politicians and a member of the National Assembly in the dispute. They reportedly remained uncharged at the end of the year. The second arrest was carried out by officers of the Brigade mixte mobile (BMM), a paramilitary police force. Amnesty International had received reports in previous years that people arrested by the BMM had often been detained for considerable periods without trial. The organization repeatedly asked the authorities for information as to the basis for the arrest of the four detainees, but received no reply.
On 18 February prisoners at Yaoundé central prison rioted after a rumour had spread tiiat they had been deliberately excluded from an amnesty (Law no. 82-21 of 26 November 1982) which in fact applied to people convicted of only minor criminal offences. As a result of tiie riot, several prisoners were reportedly beaten and doused with urine and human excrement in the presence of senior government officials. Some of those alleged to have participated in the riot, including political prisoners, were subsequently reported to have been transferred to administrative detention centres or camps, including Yoko, as a punishment On 6 July Amnesty International wrote to Jean Fouman Akame, the Minister of Territorial Administration, asking whether the government had initiated an inquiry into the alleged ill-treatment of prisoners in connection with the riot However, the organization had received no reply by the end of the year.
27
