Sudan
Amnesty Intemational's concems were the large scale detention without trial of political opponents of the government, many of whom were believed to be prisoners of conscience; allegations of torture or ill-treatment of political prisoners; the introduction and application of laws permitting the penalties of amputation and flogging ; and the death penalty.
During the year, the govemment re-divided the country's formerly semi-autonomous southern region into three separate regions, despite strong local opposition, and provided for the creation of elected regional assemblies in each of the country's eight regions. Security in the south deteriorated considerably during 1983, with several violent incidents, including armed attacks on both military and civilian targets by Anyanya II, an opposition guerrilla organization.
Abuses by both sides to the conflict were reported, including abductions of civilians \>y Anyanya II. Tens of thousands of people fled the country as a result of these disturbances.
The possible introduction of Islamic {Shari'a) law in Sudan, where up to two-thirds of the people are Muslim, had been under consideration by the govemment for several years. As a result of a presidential decree on 9 September, later ratified by parliament, the previous secular penal code was replaced by a new Islamic penal code. New penalties were introduced for certain offences, to be inflicted after completion of civil judicial procedures providing the right to legal representation and appeal. The new penalties of concem to Amnesty Intemational were those of amputation and flogging. The introduction of Islamic law was followed by the release of all criminal prisoners in the coimtry, numbering about 13,000, who had been convicted under the previous secular penal code and sentenced to prison terms. Few political prisoners, however, were released on this occasion.
At the beginning of 1983, an estimated 300 or more political opponents of the govemment were detained under the State Security Law. This law provides for indefinite detention without charge or trial on the grounds of state security. The govemment does not publish the names and number of detainees and to Amnesty International's knowledge there is no formal procedure for independent and regular review of detentions.
Further political arrests under this law took place during 1983. In January several prominent southem politicians were arrested for opposing the govemment's plan for the re-division of the south. Those
98
arrested included William Ajal Deng, a member of the national parliament Opposition continued to be expressed against this measure and further arrests took place in 1983; Dhol Achuil Aleu, Vice-President of the High Executive Council for the south (the southem regional govemment), was detained in March, and Bona Malwal Madut a joumalist and former Minister of Information, was detained in May. Amnesty Intemational issued urgent appeals to the govemment for the release of these and other people detained for their peaceful opposition to the re-division measure and adopted them as prisoners of conscience. Some of these prisoners were released later in the year without being charged, such as William Ajal Deng and Justin Yac, but the majority remained in prison at the end of 1983.
Other political opponents of the govemment arrested in 1983 included alleged members or sympathizers of barmed opposition organizations. Since 1975, the only political party permitted has been the Sudanese Socialist Union. Suspected members of the banned Sudan Communist Party, Arab Ba'athist Socialist Party, and a section of the Democratic Unionist Party were arrested on several occasions in 1983.
Ustaz Mahmoud Taha, the leader of the Republican Brotherhood, an Islamic organization, and over 50 of its members, including Abdullahi Ahmed al-Naim, a law lecturer, Ahmed Mohamed el-Hussein, a political science lecturer, civil servants, students and others, were arrested in May and June 1983. The organization had reportedly published leaflets accusing certain govemment officials of promoting religious conflict Amnesty Intemational appealed for their release as prisoners of conscience. At the end of 1983 they were still being detained without charge.
On 25 September, Sadiq el-Mahdi, a former Prime Minister, was arrested with over 100 of his followers from the Ansar sect after he had publicly criticized the introduction of Islamic law earlier in the month. The prominent Ansar members Nasreldin el-Hadi and Mubarak el-Mahdi were also arrested. Amnesty Intemational expressed concem to the govemment that they appeared to be imprisoned for their nonviolent opinions and called for them to be released if they were not to be charged with any criminal offence.
Mario Muor, leader of the African Nationalists' Organization, an organization of southem students at Khartoum university, was detained for about two months after addressing an open letter to President Numeiri condemning the imposition of Islamic law on non-Muslims.
Amnesty Intemational also continued to appeal on behalf of prisoners of conscience who had been detained at various times in the previous four years. Some of them were released during 1983, such as Sidgi Kaballo, a postgraduate student detained in 1981; Mahgoub Sharif, a poet detained in 1982 and Saudi Daraj, a former trade union
99
officiai, also detained in 1982. By the end of 1983, Amnesty International believed that over 500 people were detained in Sudan on political grounds, including a considerable number of prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty International was concerned about allegations that some political prisoners were tortured or ill-treated. Several teachers and others arrested in the southern town of Rumbek in August and September 1983, for example, were said to have been beaten and to have had hot pepper put in their eyes. State Security Service officials in October 1983 reportedly beat several prisoners from the south during interrogation, including David Dak Gash, who had been held in Kober prison in Khartoum since 1982. Amnesty International received reports that certain other prisoners held by the State Security Service in Khartoum were similarly ill-treated, but was unable to confirm the reports.
Delays were reported in the provision of medical treatment for prisoners held in civil prisons, such as Kober prison. In December Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to ensure the immediate provision of the necessary medical treatment for nine political prisoners who were reportedly seriously ill. They included Youssif Hussein, a former Communist Party official who was arrested in 1979, and who was said to be suffering from rheumatoid arthritis and a duodenal ulcer.
In October, Amnesty International expressed its deep concern to the govemment about the introduction in September of the judicial penalty of amputation. Under the new Islamic penal code, theft of items worth more than 250 Sudanese pounds (about $US 200) was made punishable by amputation of the right hand Amputation of both the right hand and the left leg was made the punishment for armed robbery and persistent theft. Amnesty International called for an urgent review of this law on the grounds that amputation is a cruel, inhuman and degrading punishment and as such is prohibited by intemational law.
The first two amputations under the new law were carried out publicly on 9 December when two prisoners who had been convicted of theft had their right hands publicly severed by an official executioner at Kober prison. Several others who had been convicted of theft were awaiting infliction of the same penalty at the end of the year.
Following the amputations, Amnesty Intemational protested to the govemment and called for the practice to be immediately discontinued The organization reminded both the govemment and Sudanese medical authorities that any participation by medical personnel in preparations for amputations would breach intemational codes of medical ethics which clearly forbid medical persormel from participating in or condoning any form of cmel, inhuman or degrading punishment
100
Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about the introduction at the same time of the penalty of flogging for adultery by an urmiarried person, brewing or selling alcohol and false accusation of an offence against Islamic law. By the end of 1983 over 100 floggings of between 25 and 100 lashes each were believed to have been carried out in public following conviction before the courts.
The new penal code made adultery by a married person a criminal offence punishable by death, with execution to be carried out by stoning, and also required that all executions be carried out in public. A person condemned to death for premeditated homicide could, however, be pardoned and released if the victim's family accepted compensation for the murder. This change was also made applicable to all those condemned to death under the previous penal code. No executions were known to have taken place under the new penal code instituted in September. Amnesty Intemational had no knowledge of the number of people under sentence of death at the end of the year or the number of people who had been executed between January and September under the previous penal code. On 9 June Amnesty Intemational made inquiries to the government about the reported execution of a number of soldiers following their conviction by court martial for mutiny in connection with disturbances within the army at Bor, but no reply was received.
