Tunisia
Amnesty International was concerned about the continued imprisonment of prisoners of conscience in Tunisia; procedures in political trials which fell short of internationally agreed standards; and continued allegations of torture and ill-treatment of political detainees. The organization learned of the passing of one death sentence during the year.
During 1983 Amnesty International continued to work for the release of over 40 adopted prisoners of conscience serving sentences of up to 10 years' imprisonment in connection with activities allegedly related to the Mouvement de la tendance islamique (MTI), Islamic Tendency Movement They included Ali Ben Younes Nouir, a former secondary school mathematics teacher who was arrested in 1981 and sentenced to 11 years' imprisonment on charges of defamation of the Head of State, associating with an unauthorized organization and distributing false information. His sentence was later reduced on appeal to 10 years' imprisonment, which he was serving at Bouij Er-Roumi Prison (Nadhour Prison II) near Bizerte.
On 20 March, Tunisia's Independence Day, 16 prisoners of conscience serving sentences of between two and thjee years' imprisonment for alleged activities in connection with the MTI were released. Later in the year Amnesty International learned of the release, reportedly on grounds of ill-health, of two other adopted prisoners of conscience, Abdelfattah Mourou and Nejib Ben Ali El Ayari, who had both been serving sentences of 10 years' imprisonment in connection with their alleged links with the MTI. Amnesty Intemational continued to work on behalf of Abdelfattah Mourou, after receiving reports that he remained subject to physical restrictions following his release from prison.
Amnesty Intemational made special appeals for the release of Hachemi Ben Mohamed Hamdi, a prisoner of conscience whose health reportedly deteriorated during the year due to acute mental disorders. He was serving a three-year sentence at Timis Civil Prison, having been convicted in 1981 of being associated with the MTI.
In January 198 3 two groups of individuals were arrested apparently for non-violently exercising their rights to freedom of expression and association. One group of 56 people were reportedly arrested because of their alleged connection with the MTI. In the subsequent trial in July 38 individuals were tried on charges relating to the formation of an unauthorized organization, 16 being charged in absentia. Two were
366
acquitted, two were sentenced to one year's imprisonment and 18 were sentenced to six months' imprisonment The 16 who were tried in absentia received sentences of two years' imprisonment The second group of nine people were arrested in January 1983, accused of constituting an unauthorized left-wing organization and were released at the end of February. Amnesty Intemational knows of no related trial having taken place.
Amnesty Intemational investigated the cases of 30 alleged members of the Islamic Liberation Party (ILP) who were tried (one of them in absentia) and sentenced by a military court in August 1983 to terms of imprisonment ranging from two to eight years. Nineteen of these prisoners were members of the armed forces and were charged with having affiliated to a political association, having helped to establish it and having attended its meetings. The remaining 11 civilians in the case were charged with inciting military personnel to join an underground association of a political character.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the conduct of political trials, including the ILP case in which all 30 defendants including 11 civilians were tried and found guilty by a military court with no right of appeal. Trial and sentencing was reportedly concluded in one day with the court rejecting all requests made by defence counsel, including requests that the trial be postponed to allow the defence lawyers sufficient time to examine their clients' files and to allow them access to books, leaflets and other printed materials allegedly confiscated by the authorities as evidence against the defendants. All but one of the defence lawyers subsequently withdrew from the hearing in protest Amnesty Intemational was concemed that the conduct of this trial appeared to be contrary to the provisions for fair trial contained in Article 14 of the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which Tunisia has ratified.
Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about the trial of 12 defendants before a criminal court in Tunis in July. They were charged, among other things, with forming an unauthorized association (referred to as "the secret organization") with the aim of carrying out attacks against people and property. Defence lawyers again withdrew from the hearing in protest against the lack of respect for the rights of the defence. The 12 were sentenced to prison terms ranging between two and eight years' hard labour.
At the end of the year Amnesty Intemational was seeking further information conceming the trial in December of several people reportedly arrested in the vicinity of Ain Draham in the spring of 1983 on charges relating to the MTI.
Disturbances began on 29 December 1983 as a result of a govemment announcement to cut subsidies on bread and other staple
367
foods. Hundreds of arrests subsequently took place. As of the end of the year, however. Amnesty Intemational had not received details regarding these arrests.
Throughout 1983 Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports that political detainees had been subjected to torture or ill-treatment while held in pre-trial detentioa During trial proceedings some detainees requested that courts permit medical examinations to ascertain whether physical marks they bore resulted from such treatment These requests, as well as those made by lawyers on behalf of detainees, appear to have been rejected During 1983, Amnesty Intemational leamed of no independent inquiry into torture allegations, nor of any measures taken to prosecute those responsible and to compensate the victims.
In November 1983 Amnesty Intemational sent a cable to President Habib Bourguiba urging the commutation of a death sentence passed on a man convicted of premeditated murder. By the end of the year Amnesty Intemational had received no information as to whether the sentence had been carried out.
Yemen (People's Democratic Republic of)
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the continued long-term imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and the death penalty.
Amnesty Intemational continued to work for the release of 20 prisoners of conscience. Most had already spent more than 10 years in prison, and some had reportedly been imprisoned for as long as 16 years because of their association with the former federal govemment under British colonial mle. In February, Amnesty Intemational learned of the release of two brothers, Mohsen Saleh Bin Abdullah A1 Fadhli and Muhammed Saleh Bin Abdullah A1 Fadhli, both of whom had been adopted as prisoners of conscience and had been imprisoned apparently without charge or trial since 1967.
In November Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Ambassador of the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen in London, enclosing a list of the names of 29 people whose cases had been investigated by the
368
organization or who had been adopted as prisoners of conscience. These included several individuals whose whereabouts remained unknown and were possibly no longer alive. Amnesty Intemational sought clarification of the prisoners' situation, including their present whereabouts and the dates when they were expected to be released. By the end of 1983 Amnesty Intemational had received no response to its inquiries.
Amnesty Intemational leamed of one death sentence during 1983, passed on Qahtan 'Aboud Naji who was reportedly convicted of premeditated murder and other charges. On 21 December Amnesty International cabled President 'Ali Nasir Muhammad concerning reports that the death sentence had been confirmed and urged that his sentence be commuted. Amnesty Intemational received no information by the end of the year as to whether the sentence had been carried out
