Nepal
Although over 50 political detainees held under the Public Security Act (PSA) were released in 1983, Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the arrest and imprisonment of opponents of the government, often for short periods, and in many cases vdthout charge or trial.
On 18 July 1983 the Minister of Home Affairs, Padma Sundar Lawati, aimounced in the Rastriya Panchayat (National Assembly) that the new govemment imder Prime Minister Lokendra Bahadur Chand had decided to release political detainees held under the PSA, which allows preventive detention imder renewable nine-month detention orders up to a maximum of three years without judicial review. Amnesty Intemational wrote to Prime Minister Chand welcoming the armounce-ment of the release of detainees and requesting details of those concemed. The govemment aimounced on 20 July 1983 that 28 detainees had been released. A further 20 detainees were released on 30 August 1983. No confirmation was given by the govemment that all detainees held under the PSA had finally been released and Amnesty Intemational was concemed that some prisoners held under the PSA remained in detention beyond August 1983.
Detentions on political grounds, often of a short-term nature, occurred regularly during the year. Political activity is severely restricted imder Nepal's "partyless" panchayat system of govemment The Organizations Control Act prohibits political parties or advocacy of support for the party system. Political prisoners, some of whom may have been prisoners of conscience, were held under the provisions of this act as well as under the PSA for participating in meetings of political parties, in particular the Nepali Congress Party (NCP), or for possessing or circulating pamphlets critical of govemment policies. Approximately 4(X) students belonging to the Nepal Students Federation, an affiliate of the NCP, were arrested between 26 and 30 September 1983 when planning to hold their national convention. One hundred and ninety-three were released on 4 October 1983 and all the others were reportedly freed by 7 October.
Workers and labour activists were also detained for protesting about working conditions. Thirty-four labour leaders of the Balaju Industrial Estate in Kathmandu were arrested in late March 1983, six of whom remained in detention until late October 1983. Eight people, including one trade union leader, Sikandar Bux, were arrested on 19 May 1983 and detained for one month after attempting to hold a demonstration.
245
Nepal's press laws forbid publication of any news or comments directed against the Nepalese monarch or other members of the Royal Family. Amnesty Intemational was investigating the case of Ramchandra Humagain, editor and publisher of the weekly Nepal Bhooni, who was sentenced to one year's imprisonment by a Kathmandu court in June 1983, having been found guilty of publishing remarks disrespectful of King Birendra.
Amnesty Intemational also received reports that Christians in some parts of Nepal had been arrested, accused either of proselytizing or of having changed religion, both of which may be deemed offences under Nepal's constitution. Some of these detainees were reportedly released on bail, while others were freed without formal charges being brought The local authorities appeared to exercise considerable latitude in deteraiining arrests and prosecution. Amnesty Intemational wrote to the govemment on 12 October 1983, making reference to intemationally-established standards pertaining to religious freedom, and urging it to ensure that citizens of religious beliefs other than Hinduism had their rights peacefully to practice and teach their faith protected.
The total number of prisoners of conscience in Nepal was difficult to estimate because imprisonment was often short-term. Some arrests took place in remote areas of the country which also made it difficult to obtain detailed information.
Nepal has abolished the death penalty for ordinary criminal offences, retaining it only under legislation covering attacks on the Royal Family, certain anti-state acts (for example, treason and insurrection) and some military offences.
