NEPAL
Approximately 1,800 people were arrested for political reasons, including scores of possible prisoners of conscience. Torture by police was widespread; at least one person reportedly died as a result. Five people were reported to have "disappeared". More than 200 people, including many civilians, were kiUed by police in disputed circumstances. An armed opposition group was responsible for human rights abuses, including deliberate killings of civilians.
Three different coalition governments held power during the year. Prime Minister Surya Bahadur Thapa, of the Rastriya Prajatrantra Party, National Democratic Party, resigned in April after losing the support of the Nepali Congress Party (ncp) and Nepal Sadbhavana Party (nsp). ncp
leader Girija Prasad Koirala was appointed Prime Minister in April. In August the govemment reached an agreement with nine leftist parties covering a number of issues such as law and order, the withdrawal of Indian troops from Kalapani in the Far-West Region, and review of the 1950 India-Nepal Friendship Treaty. On the strength of the agreement, the Prime Minister formed a new coalition with the support of the Communist Party of Nepal-Marxist Leninist (cpn-ml), a breakaway faction of the cpn-United Marxist Leninist (cpn-uml). In mid-December the cpn-ml pulled out of the govemment over failure in the implementation of the commitments in the August agreement. A new coalition between the nop, cpn-uml and NSP was formed and parliamentary elections were scheduled for May 1999.
Armed conflict between the armed opposition group. Communist Party of Nepal (cpn) (Maoist), and the security forces, which began following the declaration of a "people's war" in 1996, continued to escalate and spread to at least 20 districts (see previous Amnesty International Reports). On 26 May the govemment launched an "intensified security mobilization" in the affected districts, involving the transfer of police units from the capital, Kathmandu. In July the Prime Minister offered a general amnesty to Cpn (Maoist) members who agreed to give up arms. More than 1,400 of them reportedly surrendered to the police.
The govemment failed to institute any independent inquiries into serious human rights violations reported in the context of the "people's war". Despite repeated promises by Prime Minister Koirala to establish the National Human Rights Commission, enacted in January 1997, no move had been made to appoint the members by the end of the year. Twelve people initiated claims under the Torture Compensation Act 1996. Six people were reported to have withdrawn their claims because of intimidation or fear for their safety.
In March Nepal acceded to the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penally.
The International Committee of the Red Cross was invited to visit political detainees on a regular basis.
Approximately 1,800 people were arrested on suspicion of being members or
NEPAL/NIGER
sympathizers of the cpn (Maoist); scores were possible prisoners of conscience. At the end of the year, an estimated 400 remained in detention without trial. Many were arrested without warrant and kept in police custody without being brought before a judicial authority within 24 hours, in contravention of the Constitution. Scores of prisoners were also held for more than 25 days without being formally charged as required under the law. Many were not given access to lawyers or relatives.
Torture in police custody, particularly of political detainees, was widespread. A group of teachers arrested in Kailali District in the Far-West Region in August on suspicion of being involved in an attack by the cpn (Maoist) were tortured, including by falanga (beating on the soles of the feet) and beating on the buttocks and other parts of the body with a bamboo stick. Two yoimg women from Bardiya District, arrested in August on suspicion of being involved in the murder of a local ncp member, were subjected to falanga and belana (rolling a weighted bamboo cane over the prisoner's thighs) while under interrogation by police in Banke District.
At least one person, Ganesh Rai, was reported to have died as a result of torture in Hanuman Dhoka police station in Kath-mandu; he reportedly died on 14 October. A post-mortem recorded multiple contusions on his body.
Five people were reported to have "disappeared" after arrest. Among them were Mohan Prasad Oli, who "disappeared" after arrest in Jime by police at his home in Mahatepuri Village in Banke District.
More than 200 people, including many civilians, were killed during the "intensified security mobilization" operation by police. Among them were armed members of the cpn (Maoist) killed in what the authorities called "encounters" with the police; however, reports suggested that many of those killed were extrajudicially executed after being taken prisoner. In other instances, civilians suspected of being sympathizers of the cpn (Maoist) were alleged to have been extrajudicially executed. In one such incident in June in Sakla, JaJarkot District, nine villagers - two women and seven men - were killed by police during a festival and their bodies bumed on the spot.
Members of the cpn (Maoist) were responsible for human rights abuses. Activ-
ists of mainstream political parties were reported to have been kidnapped, including one who was severely beaten as an apparent punishment for participating in local elections. At least 29 civilians were deliberately and arbitrarily killed. Among them was Govinda Poudel, an ncp member, who was hacked to death at Rambha-pur, Bardiya District, on 9 August.
Amnesty Intemational urged the govemment to establish independent investigations into all reports of human rights violations, including torture, alleged extrajudicial executions, and "disappearances", to make the findings public, and to bring to justice those responsible for violations,
An Amnesty Intemational delegation visited the country in November to investigate reports of an escalation in human rights violations in the context of the "intensified security mobilization" operation, and raised its findings and concems with government officials. The organization also expressed concern to representatives of the cpn (Maoist) about human rights abuses committed by the group.
