TUNISIA
Himdreds of people, including many prisoners of conscience, were detained because of their alleged links with unauthorized political opposition groups or their non-violent activities. Among them were human rights defenders. Up to 2,000 political prisoners, most of them
TUNISIA
prisoners of conscience, remained in prison. Political trials continued to violate international fair trial standards. Torture and ill-treatment, especially during incommunicado detention, continued. At least one person died in custody possibly as a result of torture or ill-treatment. Several people remained under sentence of death. No executions were reported during the year.
The government of President Zine el 'Abidine Ben 'Ali increased restrictions on freedom of expression. In May a law on postal services was passed banning any mail considered to "undermine public order and security" and allowing the confiscation of such mail. A draft amendment to the law on the external security of the state, which proposed making contacts with agents of foreign or international organizations a crime (see Amnesty International Report 1998), was withdrawn. Access to numerous Internet sites, including some of Amnesty International's websites. carrying information about human rights in Tunisia was blocked.
In November the un Committee against Torture examined Tunisia's report and called on the government to put an end to the practice of torture and to eliminate the gap between the law and its implementation. The Committee concluded that the government was granting immunity to those responsible for torture by constantly denying all allegations of torture. It urged the government to reduce the police custody period to a maximum of 48 hours and to ensure strict enforcement of the provisions of law and procedures of arrest and police custody.
The un Special Rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers and the un Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression, who had asked the government for permission to undertake a joint mission, were not allowed access to the country.
The authorities continued to target human rights defenders and suppress their activities. In February prisoner of conscience Khemais Ksila. Vice-President of the Lj'gue tunisienne des droits de I'homme (ltdh), Tunisian League for Human Rights, who was arrested in September 1997 (see Amnesty International Report 1998), was sentenced to three years' imprisonment for "outrage to public order". The sentence was upheld in April by the Appeal Court and confirmed in May by the Cassation Coml. In August the un Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities requested the un High Commissioner for Human Rights to inquire about the situation of Khemais Ksila.
Human rights lav\ryer Radhia Nasraoui and her two daughters suffered increasing harassment by the security services. In February her office was ransacked. In March, as she was observing a trial for Amnesty International in Mali, she was charged in absentia with "links to a criminal and terrorist gang, holding imauthor-ized meetings and inciting rebellion". On her return, she was granted bail but forbidden to leave Tunis. No date had been set for her trial by the end of the year.
Lawyer Najet Yaqoubi and her children were under constant police surveillance from June. Lawyer Anouar Kousri was also under heavy surveillance throughout the year. Human rights lawyer Najib Hosni and ltdh former President Moncef Marzouki continued to be subjected to harassment and restrictions (see Amnesty International Report 1998).
Scores of prisoners of conscience suspected of having links with unauthorized left-wing groups or the Islamist group al-Nahda (Renaissance) were among hundreds of people arrested for political reasons. At least 10 were released without charge or trial, but most remained in detention or were tried and sentenced to prison terms. Dozens of female relatives of imprisoned or exiled supporters of al-Nahda were detained; they were prisoners
TUNISIA
of conscience. Among them was Radhia Aouididi; she was sentenced in May to three and a half years in prison on charges of links with a criminal gang and holding a false passport (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1998). In October Radhia 'Aouididi and four of her relatives were charged with "belonging to a criminal gang" on the grounds that her family had received money from her brother and her fiancé exiled in Exirope.
In May Nizar Cha'ari, a Tunisian studying in France, was arrested at Tunis airport after visiting his family. He was reportedly tortured during incommunicado detention, which was prolonged well beyond the maximum stipidated by Tunisian law. He was charged with "links with an unauthorized association [al-Nahda) and criminal gang". At the end of the year he remained in detention awaiting trial.
In luly, two women, Salwa Dimassi and Ahlam Garat-'Ali, both prisoners of conscience arrested in May 1996 and charged with links with "a criminal gang" (see i4m/iesiy International Report 1997) were brought to trial, but the trial had not concluded by the end of the year.
In May Samir and 'Abdessatar Gasmi, two brothers exiled in Libya, were arrested by the Libyan authorities. They were handed to the Tunisian authorities in August, who detained them. Samir Gasmi was released a week after his forcible re-txun; 'Abdessatar Gasmi was kept in detention, allegedly tortured and transferred in August to 9 Avril prison in Tunis.
Families of exiled supporters of al-Nahda suffered increasing harassment and were prevented from leaving the coimtry. Hayat Hammi and her three children, for example, were prevented from leaving Tunisia to be reunited with her husband, Samir Ben 'Arfa, a refugee in Switzerland.
Up to 2,000 political prisoners arrested in previous years, most of them prisoners of conscience, remained in detention. They included Sou'ad Charbati, sentenced to seven years' imprisonment in 1997, and Mohamed Habib Hemissi, sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment in 1997 (see Amnesty International Report 1998). Jalel Ma'alej (see Amnesty International Report 1995) was released in January but subjected to administrative control. 'Imed 'Ebdelli was released and fled abroad; 'Ali Hafdi, released in 1997, was authorized to leave the country; and 'Abdelmoumen Belanes
was released after completing his sentence (see Amnesty International Report 1998). Lazhar No'man, who had been released on expiry of his sentence in late 1997, was subjected to administrative surveillance (see Amnesty International Report 1998).
Political trials continued to violate international standards for fair trial. The courts did not investigate allegations of torture and ill-treatment, and sometimes failed to call witnesses for cross examination. In August Tareq Soussi, a former prisoner of conscience suffering from poliomyelitis, a physically debilitating disease, was charged with "physical assault" and "blasphemy" after he stopped reporting to the police station. He was sentenced in September by the Bizerte Court to five months' imprisonment. The court refused to summon the plaintiff and the witnesses for cross-examination. Tareq Soussi's sentence was reduced to three months on appeal in November and he was released, In November Lazhar Bel-gacem (see Amnesty International Report 1998) was sentenced to three years' imprisonment on charges of "links with a criminal gang". He was never allowed to see the police report that allegedly contained his confession and no evidence was brought against him.
Torture and ill-treatment continued to be reported, especially in the premises of the Ministry of the Interior. In February and March, following student strikes and meetings calling for improved studying conditions, scores of students and young people were arrested in the capital Tunis and other cities. Some were released within days or weeks, but 16 of them remained in prison at the end of the year. Lotfî Hammami, a student, was reportedly tortured during incommunicado detention by having his genitals tied and pulled with a rope. He was denied specialized medical care until September. Another student, Najib Baccouchi, was also reportedly tortured. In June 'Imen Derouiche was beaten so badly in prison that she needed hospital treatment for several days. No investigations into these cases were carried out, nor were trial dates set.
At least one person died in custody possibly as a result of torture or ill-treatment. Tijani Dridi, a former political prisoner sentenced in 1992 by a military court to five years' imprisonment, had been under administrative control since
TUNISIA/TURKEY
his release. In August he went to report to Ariana police station in the suburbs of Tunis but never returned. The police informed his family that he had been injured in a traffic accident but forbade them to go to the hospital. Seven days later Tijani Dridi's body was buried under heavy police surveillance. His family was not allowed to see the body. No investigation into this and other cases of deaths in custody reported in previous years took place.
Several people remained under sentence of death, convicted of non-political crimes. No executions were reported.
Amnesty Intemational attended the trial of Khemais Ksila. In November Amnesty Intemational issued a report, Tunisia: Human rights defenders in the line of fire, highlighting the increasing intimidation and harassment of human rights defenders. An Amnesty Intemational researcher continued to be banned from Tunisia.
