TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
About 80 people remained under sentence of death. Twenty men were scheduled to be hanged, some in defiance of international court orders. No executions took place. One person was reportedly subjected to corporal punishment while his appeal was pending. Conditions of
detention and imprisonment were reported to be cruel, inhuman or degrading.
In order to facilitate executions, the government, led by Prime Minister Basdeo Panday, took unprecedented steps to cut off recovuse to international bodies for redress of violations of human rights. On 26 May it informed the Secretary-General of the Organization of American States of Trinidad and Tobago's withdrawal as a state party to the American Convention on Human Rights. Unless rescinded, the withdrawal will take effect on 26 May 1999. Calling this a "serious step backwards in the hemispheric attempt to strengthen the Inter-American human rights system", the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (iachr) called on the government to reconsider its decision. This message was echoed by the General Assembly of the Organization of American States.
The government also took measures to preclude the un Human Rights Committee from considering petitions brought by people sentenced to death who claim that their rights under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (iccpr) have been violated in connection with capital proceedings against them or any matter related to the carrying out of the death sentence. To this end, the government notified the un Secretary-General on 26 May that Trinidad and Tobago was withdrawing as a state party to the Optional Protocol to the iccpr, and on the same day submitted an instrument to rejoin the treaty as a state party, but with a reservation that seeks to prevent the Human Rights Committee from examining claims submitted by people sentenced to death.
About 80 men and women remained imder sentence of death under laws which make the death penalty mandatory for murder. Among them was Indravani Pamela Ramjattan, a battered woman who was convicted in 1995 of involvement in the murder of her abusive common-law husband. The un Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions raised concern that the beatings she sustained, threats to shoot her and repeated rapes were not considered by the investigating authorities or courts to constitute mitigating circumstances. Considering the death penalty to be "too harsh a pimishment for a crime committed in
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO/RINISIA
such situations", the Special Rapporteur urged the government to commute her death sentence and to respect the de facto moratorium on the execution of women in Trinidad and Tobago. She also expressed concern about the time limits placed by the government on international human rights bodies' scrutiny of death penalty cases,
The government scheduled the executions of 20 men, relying on instructions issued by the government in October 1997, which purport to set strict time limits for the lachr's consideration of petitions brought by people under sentence of death (see Amnesty International Report 1998). Ten of the men were scheduled to be hanged despite the fact that the iachr had not completed consideration of their petitions which claimed that their rights under the American Convention on Human Rights had been violated. Execution dates for five of the 10 men - Denny Baptiste, Anthony Briggs, Anthony Garcia, Wences-laus James and Anderson Noel - were set even though the Inter-American Court of Human Rights had ordered the government to preserve their lives while their cases were pending in the Inter-American system.
In August the Inter-American Court of Human Rights noted that executing people while their petitions to the iachr were pending would: "create an irremediable situation incompatible with the object and ^ purpose of the [American] Convention and would amount to a disavowal of the authority of the [Inter-American] Commission and would adversely affect the very essence of the Inter-American system". The iachr stated that in accordance with international law, the government could not invoke provisions of national law to justify its failure to comply with an international treaty.
No executions took place as all 20 men received stays of execution, almost all pending determination of constitutional challenges in the national comts.
The death sentences of more than 20 people, several of whom had spent more than five years on death row, were commuted to terms of imprisonment.
It was unclear whether at least three people, who were sentenced during the year to corporal punishment in addition to terms of imprisonment, had been whipped. The Court of Appeal reportedly
described as "monstrous" the fact that Edward Boucher received 15 lashes in August while the appeal of his conviction and sentence was pending.
Despite requests, Amnesty International received no information from the authorities about developments in investigations into criminal proceedings brought in cases of fatal shootings by police in previous years (see Amnesty International Report 1998).
Reports gave rise to concern that conditions in places of detention continued to be so insanitary as to constitute cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or pimish-ment. Complaints about conditions of confinement on death row were pending before national courts and the iachr.
Amnesty International expressed dismay at Trinidad and Tobago's withdrawal as a state party to the American Convention on Human Rights and urged the government to reconsider the decision. Amnesty International expressed deep regret about Trinidad and Tobago's reservation on reaccession to the Optional Protocol to the iCCPr. The organization also expressed regret that these measures were taken to enable executions to proceed without international scrutiny of whether the internationally protected rights of people sentenced to death had been upheld. Amnesty International urged the un High Commissioner for Human Rights and the iachr to take appropriate action in order that Trinidad and Tobago withdraw the instructions purporting to set time limits for the consideration by international human rights bodies of petitions brought by people under sentence of death. The organization also lu^ed the government not to carry out executions, to commute the sentences of all people currently under sentence of death and, among other things, to propose and support legislation to create alternative punishments for murder.
