GREECE
Around 80 conscientious objectors to military service on religious grounds continued to serve prison sentences. All were prisoners of conscience. Legal proceedings continued in the cases of 10 people prosecuted for peacefully exercising their rights to freedom of expression or religion. There were further allegations of ill-treatment and excessive use of force by law enforcement officers.
Law 2510/97 on conscription entered into force in January. Although this law allows for a civilian alternative to military service for the first time, some of its provisions, such as the punitive length of the alternative civilian service, fall short of international standards and recommendations (see Amnesty International Report 1998). About 80 conscientious objectors, who had been convicted before the law entered into force, continued to serve prison sentences. All had been released by the end of the year.
In September Parliament adopted the Law on Universal Defence. Under this legislation everyone aged between 18 and 60 not serving in the armed forces is required to complete up to four days' service a year in universal defence units. Pregnant women and mothers with children under the age of 12 are exempt. Although defence units perform a range of functions, units in border areas may be armed in certain circumstances, such as "in cases of war, mobilization or tension or for the purpose of scheduled exercises in peace time". Failure to report for service is punishable by one month's imprisonment and a repeat offence carries a three-month prison sentence.
In September Greece ratified Protocol No 6. to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms concerning the abolition of the death penalty.
Legal proceedings continued against 10 people prosecuted for peacefully exercising their right to freedom of expression or religion. For example, in February Mehmet Emin Aga was sentenced to a total of 14 months' imprisonment by Lamia Appeal Court for "usurping the function of a Minister of a known religion in Greece". He had been elected by his community as Mufti of Xanthi. However, the Court found that by signing various messages as the "Mufti of Xanthi" he had "deliberately carried out duties which by their nature apply exclusively to the legitimate Mufti, E. Sinikoglou", Mehmet Emin Aga exercised his legal right to request that his prison sentence be converted into a fine, which was granted. In December he was sentenced to a further seven months' imprisonment for the same offence.
Vasilis Romas, Costas Tasopoulos, Pet-ros Vasiliadis and Pavlos Voskopoulos, all members of the ethnic Macedonian minority Ourania Toxo (Rainbow) party, were acquitted in September (see Amnesty International Reports 1997 and 1998). They had been charged with "causing and inciting mutual hatred among citizens" for displaying a sign bearing the words "Fiorina Committee" in both Greek and Macedonian in September 1995.
The trial of Traianos Pasois, another member of the Rainbow party, began in March before the Fiorina Police Court. He was charged with "spreading false information and rumours which could provoke fear and anxiety amongst citizens" for reportedly having crossed the border into Greece from the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia in 1996 carrying two wall calendars which "disputed the Greek character of Macedonia, aiming at its dismemberment, secession and annexation by a neighboiuing state then enemy of Greece". He was acquitted in November.
Six members of the Organosi gia tin Anasingrotisi tou Kommunistikou Kom-matos Elladas, Organization for the Reconstruction of the Communist Party, convicted in 1992 of incitement and illegally posting bills, were acquitted on appeal (see previous Amnesty International Reports).
GREECE/GUATEMALA
During the year there were further allegations of police ill-treatment, including of members of ethnic minorities.
hi May Lazaros Bekos and Lefteris Kotropoulos, two Roma aged 17 and 18 respectively, alleged that they were beaten by police officers dirring their arrest and interrogation at Mesolongi police station. Lazaros Bekos alleged that a police officer hit him on the back of the head with a gun, pushed him to the ground and stepped on him. He alleged that while in Mesolongi pohce station he was hit with truncheons and that during his interrogation a police officer put an iron bar under his throat and threatened to choke him if he refused to speak. When he pushed the police officer back, he was beaten on the back with the iron bar and kicked in the neck.^ Lefteris Kotropoulos also alleged that he was refused permission to telephone his mother to inform her of his whereabouts. A preliminary inquiry into the allegations was ordered by the Ministry of Public Order, but there were fears that pressure was put on the two youths to withdraw their complaint.
There were reports of severe overcrowding in the Drapetsona detention centre in Piraeus, Detainees also reportedly suffered from poor conditions including lack of adequate exercise; insufficient natiual daylight; inadequate sanitary facilities; severely limited access to medical treatment; and restricted visits. In August, 12 detainees from outside the European Union (eu), who had either completed their sentences or had never been charged with any offence, alleged that they had been detained for long periods in these conditions pending deportation to their countries of origin.
There were reports of excessive use of force by law enforcement officers, hi April Angelos Celal, a Rom, was fatally shot by police near Partheni, Thessaloniki. According to his two friends who survived the shooting, the three men had stopped their car to smoke hashish near a bam where policemen were hidden, deployed on an unrelated affair. As the three men ran back to their car, one of the police officers fired at them. Angelos Celal started to drive the car away, but was shot dead. The two survivors of the shooting claim none of the three men carried a weapon. An investigation into the circumstances surrounding Angelos Celal's death was
initiated by the Ministry of Public Order in August. The Prosecutor's office said that three police officers had been charged with offences including manslaughter, attempted murder and illegally carrying and using weapons.
Throughout the year Amnesty International wrote to the authorities raising its concerns about restrictions on the right to freedom of expression. In April the Prime Minister's Office replied stating that the Greek authorities were particularly careful in the enforcement of restrictions to the right to freedom of expression and that these were imposed only in extreme circumstances.
In Jime Amnesty International expressed concern about the shortcomings of the draft Law on Universal Defence, which does not recognize the right to conscientious objection. In July the organization expressed concern about the practical apphcation of Law 2510/97 after 16 conscientious objectors who had applied for alternative service complained about punitive conditions. No reply had been received by the end of the year.
Throughout the year Amnesty International sought information from the authorities about the progress of investigations into incidents of shootings and ill-treatment by police officers. In August Amnesty International wrote to the authorities requesting detailed information concerning the legal grounds for the continued detention of the 12 non-bu nationals and mging the authorities to take all necessary steps to ensure that conditions in Drapetsona detention centre were improved. No reply had been received by the end of the year.
