KYRGYZSTAN
Four prisoners of conscience were administratively detained. One prisoner of conscience had his sentence reduced on appeal. At least 34 people were sentenced to death and at least four executions were carried out.
In March President Askar Akayev approved nominations to a new Presidential Human Rights Committee. At the end of September the non-govemmental Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights was informed in a letter from the Ministry of Justice that it had been deprived of its registration. Its appeal against the decision had not been heard by the end of the year.
In October a package of constitutional changes, including the privatization of
KYRGYZSTAN/LAOS
land, changes to the structure of parliament, a reduction in parliamentary immunity. and the outlawing of state censorship were approved in a nationwide referendum.
In December a two-year moratorium on executions came into force.
Four human rights activists were detained in connection with a planned demonstration against the proposed referendum. Three activists from the regional branch of the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights were detained in the city of Jalal-Abad on 23 September. Albert Korgoldoev, the branch head, Tynybek Batyraliev and Abdunazar Mamatislamov were members of a committee which had sought permission to hold a peaceful demonstration in Jalal-Abad on 25 September. The committee was still awaiting a decision by the local authorities when the three were arrested. Albert Korgoldoev and Tynybek Batyraliev were reportedly charged with violating public order for inviting the public to attend the demonstration; according to some reports, they were found in possession of leaflets and posters. They were sentenced on the morning of 24 September by Jalal-Abad City Court to 15 days' administrative detention. Apparently they had not been given access to a lawyer. They were released on 7 October, but criminal proceedings were reportedly opened against Abdunazar Mamatislamov. Edgar Parpiev, a member of the regional human rights organization Justice, was administratively detained for 15 days in connection with the demonstration, which reportedly went ahead peacefully on 25 September.
hi May the Supreme Court heard appeals by prisoner of conscience Topchubek Turgunaliyev (see Amnesty International Report 1998) against his sentences of 1996 and 1997. The Supreme Coiut upheld the sentence imposed in 1996 for libel, but decided to retroactively apply an amnesty of 1997, a step which was reported to be no more than a formality, since Topchubek Turgunaliyev had already completed the sentence. The appeal against a four-year sentence imposed in 1997 for "abuse of authority" was also rejected, but the Supreme Court reduced the sentence from four to three years. In November Topchubek Turgunaliyev was released before the end of his sentence. He had been serving the remainder of his sentence in
Bishkek where he was allowed to live at home and to receive appropriate medical assistance.
Unofficial statistics on the apphcation of the death penalty became available. In 1997 at least 40 death sentences had been passed, 31 people executed and three death sentences commuted. In 1998 at least 34 death sentences had been passed and four executions had taken place, prior to the moratorium on executions which came into force in December.
Amnesty International appealed for the immediate and unconditional release of Albert Korgoldoev, Tynybek Batyraliev and Abdunazar Mamatislamov. In a reply received in December, the government stated that the arrests of Albert Korgoldoev and Tynybek Batyraliev were in accordance with national legislation and that they had been released following repeal of this law on 1 October. Abdunazar Mamatislamov was released on 1 December when Susak Court sent his case back for further investigation.
Amnesty International asked for assurances that an ethnic Uighur from the Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous Region of China would not be returned to China, where he would be at risk of torture and arbitrary detention. It called for a moratorium on executions and appealed for commutation of all death sentences.
