MOZAMBIQUE
Scores uf people were reportedly beaten by police. Investigations into allegations of torture or ill-treatment were slow or non-existent. Several people were shot and killed in circumstances that suggested excessive use of force or extrajudicial executions by the pohce.
Local elections were held in 33 municipalities in June, but opposition parties complained about the way they had been organized and refused to participate. Only 15 per cent of the electorate voted.
MOZAMBIQUE
President Joaquim Chissano's party, the Frente para a Libertagao de Mozambique (frelimo), Mozambique Liberation Front, won majorities in each municipal assembly.
Despite economic growth, Mozambique remained one of the poorest countries in the world. High unemployment and the availability of weapons contributed to high crime rates.
Under the terms of the project to re-structiue and retrain police agreed in 1997 (see Amnesty International Report 1998], members of the Spanish Civil Guard trained 66 police instructors who subsequently trained 1,210 selected trainees, including over 100 women. The syllabus included courses on police ethics and human rights, Originally, the whole police force, estimated at 18,766 officers, was to be retrained over a seven-year period. However, funding sufficient for only two years was available.
Progress was made in drafting legislation, including revisions of the penal and criminal procedure codes and new police statutes. A draft amendment to the Constitution, which contained substantially strengthened provision for human rights protection, was published in September. It was put forward for public debate and comment with a view to submitting the amendment to the National Assembly in 1999.
Other reforms included the appointment of magistrates to review and confirm detentions within 48 hoius of arrest.
Robert McBride, a senior South African Foreign Ministry official and a prominent opponent of the previous apartheid government, was arrested in Mozambique in March and subsequently charged with espionage and gun-running. Six Mozambi-cans, including three military personnel, were arrested on related charges. All seven were held in excess of the 90-day period stipulated by law before being released on bail in September. Robert McBride said that he had been engaged in an investigation of arms trafficking between Mozambique and South Africa. By the end of 1998 none of the seven had been brought to trial.
The Special Rapporteur on prisons and conditions of detention of the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights, who visited Mozambique in December 1997, presented his report to the
African Commission in April. It expressed concern about severe overcrowding and made recommendations for the improvement of prison conditions. On 10 December, the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the government announced that it was conducting an inquiry into prison conditions in order to ensure action to improve them. The government also said that from the year 2000, human rights would be part of the cxuxicu-lum in all primary schools.
Scores of people were reportedly beaten by police. Reports of severe beatings or other forms of torture in police stations were not promptly and thoroughly investigated. In July, in the Hulene subxub of Maputo, Argentina Zacarias Valói was said to have been badly beaten by police officers searching for her stepson, who had been involved in a fight with another child and had fled when the police arrived. In September, also in Hulene, Chico Camabaco was reportedly beaten by two police officers as he tried to escape arrest. One of the officers then shot at his brother, Jaime Ernesto Camabaco, who was trying to stop the beating, and hit him in the foot. Chico Camabaco was taken to the Hulene police station. Five days later a police officer took him and another detainee to an isolated place outside the city and interrogated them about a case of arms trafficking. The two men were reportedly beaten with whips and truncheons studded with spikes. Chico Camabaco was released but later rearrested and remained in detention at the end of the year. No investigation was known to have been initiated into either incident.
Peter Mashaba, a Swazi businessman, and Edward Plaatjies, a South African, were brought before a judge in January. Despite allegations that they had been tortured at the time of their arrest in December 1997, the judge reportedly failed to order an investigation into the allegations. They were unconditionally released two weeks later and left the country.
In April, 12 people who had been arrested and allegedly tortured in August 1997 were tried in Pemba, Cabo Delgado Province, and sentenced to prison terms of between eight and 24 years. The prisoners claimed that they had been tortured in order to extract confessions and to implicate their co-defendants; several stated that they had been forced to stand and denied
MOZAMBIQUE/MYANMAR
food and water for prolonged periods. No official inquiry into the allegations was was known to have been initiated.
Several people were killed or injured by police using what appeared to be excessive force. Some may have been extrajudicially executed. In January police opened fire on 250 striking workers at a Maputo security firm. One striker was killed and foiu- others were seriously injured. The results of an inquiry into the shootings had not been made public by the end of the year.
In January in Chonguene, Gaza Province, a police officer, who was allegedly drunk at the time, accosted 14-year-old Avelino Macuacua, accused him of setting off a firework and shot him. The bullet passed through Avelino Macuacua's stomach and killed a young girl. A second officer arrived and reportedly beat Avelino Macuacua, who was writhing on the ground in pain. According to reports, an investigation was initiated, but neither police officer was arrested.
Oscar Marrengula was shot dead by police from the 7th Police Station in Matóla, Maputo Province, in May. He had been arrested on suspicion of armed robbery and the police claimed he was shot while trying to escape. Criminal investigation police said that they had taken Oscar Marrengula from the police station on the night of his arrest so that he could assist them to gather evidence. They reportedly did not use handcuffs or any other precaution against escape. The Liga Mogambi-cana dos Direitos Humanos, Mozambique Human Rights League, which followed the case, noted long delays in submitting the reports on the incident to the judicial authorities. The investigation into the killing had not concluded by the end of the year.
Amnesty International published a report, Mozambique: Human rights and the police, in April.
In June, an Amnesty International delegation, including a high-ranking Dutch police officer, visited Mozambique, principally to inquire into the project for restructuring and retraining the police. Amnesty International welcomed efforts to train police in the protection of human rights. It also expressed concern about the failiu-e to conduct prompt and thorough investigations into reports of human rights violations.
