PARAGUAY
Landless peasant farmers were arrested and intimidated in the context of land disputes; three were shot dead. Criminal suspects were tortured and ill-treated by police and there were continued reports of ill-treatment, "disappearance" and deaths in unclear circumstances of armed forces recruits, including minors. Prosecutions for past human rights violations continued, although little progress was made in investigating more recent abuses.
A prolonged political crisis led to continued instability throughout the year. In March former army commander and presidential candidate Lino Oviedo was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment by an extraordinary military tribunal for an attempted coup against President Juan Carlos Wasmosy in 1996 (see previous Amnesty International Reports). The sentence was confirmed by the Supreme Coiut of Justice in April. Former General Oviedo was also given a dishonoiuable discharge and barred from running for elective office. His vice-presidential running mate, Raúl Cubas Grau, took his place as the ruling Colorado Party's candidate and won the presidential elections in May.
PARAGUAY
Three days after his inauguration in August, President Cubas issued Decree Law 117 wiiich reduced Genera! Oviedo's 10-year prison sentence to three months and ordered his immediate release on the groimds that he had already served the sentence, hi December the Supreme Court ruled Decree Law 117 unconstitutional and ordered that General Oviedo return to jail to serve his full prison term. The institutional and political crisis deepened when President Cubas refused to comply. General Oviedo remained at liberty at the end of the year.
A new penal code, making torture, genocide and enforced disappearance criminal offences pimishable by minimum five-year prison sentences, came into force in November.
Against the backdrop of the long-running political crisis there was a deterioration in respect for human rights. Reports of harassment, intimidation and attacks on peasant farmers in the context of land disputes increased. Peasant farmer Cristino Romero Vera was reportedly shot dead by police agents in the locality of Maciel in August. An investigation was opened. In a growing number of cases, those responsible for attacks against landless peasants were civilian gunmen — allegedly hired by landowners - who acted with the complicity of the police or judicial authorities. More than 500 families legally settled on 226,000 hectares of land in Amambay and Concepción departments were repeatedly threatened and harassed by a group of gunmen composed of police, retired army officers and civilians believed to be acting on behalf of the former owner of the land. The land, known as Antebi-cué, was expropriated by Congress in 1996 in favour of landless peasant families. Despite repeated complaints of harassment lodged on behalf of the families before judicial authorities, no action was taken to investigate and bring to justice those responsible. In November unidentified gunmen shot dead Gumercindo Pavón Díaz, a peasant farmer resident on the disputed land, and tortured his fiiend, Victor Ramón Fernández.
There were renewed reports of torture and ill-treatment in police custody. Criminal suspects, including minors, were routinely ill-treated by police, In January brothers Narciso and Emilio Fernández were arrested by police and accused of
theft. They were taken to the 3rd police station in the capital, Asunción, and allegedly tortured and threatened in order to extract confessions. A formal criminal complaint was filed by their parents on their release.
There were numerous reports of enforced recruitment and ill-treatment — in some cases resulting in death - of military conscripts, many of whom were minors. Fourteen-year-old Cristian Ariel Núñez Lugo and 15-year-old Marcelino Gómez Paredes "disappeared" in January while carrying out their military service in the army's General Coimán detachment based in the western Chaco region bordering Bolivia. Military authorities claimed the two conscripts were alive in Bolivia. However, the investigating judge charged an army second lieutenant in connection with their "disappearance". Their whereabouts remained unknown. Military authorities continued to forcibly and arbitrarily recruit youths, including minors, in contravention of national legislation and international standards. In January, 15-year-old Rubén Viera Martínez was reported missing after he failed to arrive in Asunción from his home in Yegros, department of Caazapá. Forty days later, after a petition of habeas corpus had been presented on his behalf to judicial authorities, he was located in a military barracks in Pedro Juan Caballero, Amambay department, where he had been posted after being seized and forcibly recruited by military personnel. He was returned to his family.
Judicial proceedings into human rights violations by state agents during the administration of General Alfredo Stroessner (1954 to 1989) continued. At least 20 cases of torture, "disappearance" and death in custody were pending before the courts (see previous Amnesty International Reports). In September the Supreme Court of Justice confirmed a prison sentence of 12 and a half years imposed on Agustín Be-lotto, a member of the Police Investigations Department, for his responsibility in the torture and death in custody of Amil-car Oviedo in 1975. However, efforts to bring former President Stroessner and former Interior Minister Sabino Augusto Montanaro to justice were unsuccessful and they continued to live in exile.
Paraguayan national Angel Francisco Breard was judicially executed in the usa
PARAGUAY/PERU
in May. The case caused controversy in Paraguay after the execution was allowed to proceed in defiance of an explicit order from the International Court of Justice which required the usa to halt the proceedings (see usa entry).
