GUYANA
At least one person was sentenced to death. About 22 people remained under sentence of death at the end of the year. There were no executions. There were further reports of ill-treatment and shootings in disputed circumstances by police.
An audit of the December 1997 presidential elections (see Amnesty International Report 1998) by the Caribbean Community and Common Market (caricom) team concluded that the result of the "recount varied only marginally from that of the final results". In July President Janet Jagan and Desmond Hoj^e, leader of
GUYANA
the People's National Congress Party, signed a "peace agreement" intended to end the succession of violent protests which erupted following the election.
In November parliament voted in favour of a motion proposed by the government to withdraw as a state party to the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (iccpr). U also voted to reaccede to the Optional Protocol to the iccpr with a res-, ervation piuporting to preclude the un Hxunan Rights Committee from considering petitions brought by people under sentence of death claiming that their rights guaranteed by the iccpr had been violated in the course of the capital proceedings against them.
At least one person was sentenced to death. There were approximately 22 people under sentence of death at the end of the year.
In March the un Human Itights Committee issued its conclusions on petitions by two people under sentence of death -Abdool Saleem Yasseen and Noel Thomas (see Amnesty International Reports 1997 and 1998) - who alleged that their rights guaranteed under the iccpr had been violated. The Committee concluded that both men had been deprived of a fair trial as their rights to a defence and to a trial without undue delay had been violated and that, therefore, sentencing them to death violated their right not to be arbitrarily deprived of their life, as guaranteed by Article 6 of the iccpr. These conclusions were based, among other things, on the fact that the second trial went ahead despite the fact that Abdool Saleem Yasseen was not represented by counsel for the first four
days of the proceedings. The Committee also concluded that the conditions in which they were held prior to trial and while under sentence of death violated their right to be treated with humanity and with respect for the inherent dignity of the human person. In August the government announced it would not follow the recommendations of the Committee to release Abdool Saleem Yasseen and Noel Thomas. Motions filed with the High Court in August by Abdool Saleem Yasseen and Noel Thomas seeking to have their death sentences commuted to life imprisonment were still pending at the end of the year.
Although no executions took place, in July warrants were issued for the executions of "Paulo" Rampersaud and Raymond Persaud (see Amnesty International Report 1998); their executions were stayed because they each had petitions pending before the un Human Rights Committee. "Paulo" Rampersaud, however, died in prison in August.
Reports of ill-treatment and torture by police were received. In May Mark Brown was allegedly taken by police officers into an unoccupied room in a private house and held on the floor by an officer while other officers sprinkled acid on various parts of his body.
There were further reports of fatal shootings by law enforcement officials in disputed circumstances. In Jime, for example, Victor "Junior" Boxirne, who was reportedly wanted by the police, was shot and killed by police officers in Rasville, Georgetown. Initial police reports allegedly indicated that he opened fire after being confronted by the police and was then shot. Witnesses, however, reported that he was still in bed when the police shot him. An investigation into his death was reportedly conducted by the police, but the findings had not been made public and no officer had been charged in connection with the killing by the end of the year.
In May Amnesty International called on the authorities to comply with the recommendations of the un Human Rights Committee on the cases of Abdool Saleem Yasseen and Noel Thomas and asked what measures the government was taking to ensure that conditions of detention and imprisonment were consistent with international standards. In September Amnesty International expressed concern about
GUYANA/HAITI
fatal shootings by police in disputed circumstances and requested information about the case of Victor "Junior" Bourne, hi December the organization urged the government to submit Guyana's overdue reports to the un Committee against Tor-tme and Human Rights Committee and to reconsider the decision to withdraw as a state party to the Optional Protocol to the iccpr. In December Amnesty International called on the authorities to investigate the alleged torture of Mark Brown and to bring those responsible to justice,
