NEPAL
Scores of political prisoners were reportedly detained without trial in police custody for up to several months. There were reports of torture by police of political and criminal detainees. Several people were killed by police officers in circumstances which suggested they may have been extrajudicially executed.
Scores of opposition party supporters were reportedly arrested between May and July under the 1970 Public Offences Act (poa), which permits detention without trial for up to five months. They included Devi Lai Thapa, who was held for several days after his arrest at Jumla while peace-
fully demonstrating against price rises during a visit by the Prime Minister. Several members of the monarchist National Democratic Party were also reportedly detained for several days in May by police in Pokhara after canvassing during local elections. Fifteen members of the Communist Party of Nepal (United Marxist-Leninist), the main opposition party in parliament, were also reportedly arrested in May and detained for over three months, apparently without trial, after protesting about police action during demonstrations.
Torture of political and criminal detainees by police continued to be reported. Dilip Darewa, who had been arrested on a criminal charge in late 1991, reportedly displayed wounds on the soles of his feet, the result of his being beaten and burned in police custody, when he appeared in court in January. He was released in February. In Baglung district over 500 people were arrested following the murder of a policeman in January. Ten of them, including eight members of opposition parties, were held incommunicado, and allegedly forced to sign false statements under police torture. They were beaten on the face and body and in some cases subjected to other torture methods, including suspension from a pole, beatings on the soles of the feet, burning of the feet with flaming cloths soaked in kerosene, and having their bodies pierced with pins. When the 10 were formally charged in March, after up to 55 days in illegal police detention, three were unable to walk and had to be carried into court. They were remanded in custody in prison where seven remained without trial at the end of the year.
Five men arrested under the poa in February after a public protest were also
nepal/netherlands (kingdom of the)
reportedly tortured by police in Kath-mandu, the capital. They denied any involvement in the protest and were released on bail in March.
Several people were shot dead by police officers in circumstances which suggested that they may have been victims of extrajudicial executions. They included Tenzin, a Chinese national of Tibetan origin, who was shot dead by police in Solukhumbu district near the border with China on 3 January. Further killings occurred in Kath-mandu and nearby Patan on 6 April when at least seven people "were shot dead by police during a general strike against the government's economic policies. The killings occurred after demonstrations in support of the strike ended in clashes between police and demonstrators, but some of the victims had apparently not been involved in the protests. They included a seven-year-old boy. Human rights groups and some politicians alleged that the actual number of dead was higher than the official figure of seven. However, no official investigation was initiated into the circumstances of the killings or the number of victims.
In June Amnesty International published a report, Nepal: a summary of human rights violations. It described widespread human rights violations under the pre-1990 non-party system of government and continuing violations on a lesser scale since April 1990. The report made a series of recommendations to the government to increase legal and procedural human rights safeguards and to bring to justice perpetrators of human rights violations under previous and present governments. Throughout the year Amnesty International urged the government to publish and act on the reports of two commissions which had investigated torture, "disappearances" and possible extrajudicial executions before April 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1992); to hold independent and impartial investigations into all post-1990 allegations of torture and extrajudicial or unlawful killings and bring those responsible to justice; and to ensure effective safeguards against hiunan rights violations. In October the government informed Amnesty International that it had already implemented or was considering implementing several of Amnesty International's recommendations for increased human rights protection.
