UKRAINE
One known prisoner of conscience, a conscientious objector to military service, was held until March. At least four people were executed, and at least 13 people were believed to be under sentence of death at the end of the year.
Ukraine gained international recognition as an independent state following the
break-up of the Soviet Union. Headed by President Leonid Kravchuk, the country, already a member of the United Nations, joined the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe in January.
From February, for the first time, a civilian alternative to military service became available. However, it was open only to religious believers and its length was set at twice that for military service. In June the death penalty was abolished for two economic crimes, thereby reducing its scope to five offences, all involving the use of violence.
Prisoner of conscience Sergey Osnach was released in March from an 18-month sentence of compulsory labour imposed in Jime 1991 for his refosal on grounds of conscience to perform obligatory military service. Compulsory labour involved working under strict surveillance at a location determined by the authorities, with restrictions on freedom of movement. Unofficial sources reported that several dozen people who had been sentenced for refusing to perform military service on religious grounds were released in November.
At least four people were executed after their petitions for clemency had been turned down. All had been convicted of murder. At least 13 people were believed to be under sentence of death at the end of the year. No statistics were issued on the application of the death penalty, and the true number of death sentences passed and carried out was probably much higher.
Throughout the year Amnesty International urged the authorities to commute all death sentences and to publish comprehensive statistics on the application of the death penalty. The organization called for the release of Sergey Osnach. It called for
ukraineajnited arab emiratesainited kingdom
the civihan alternative to military service not to be punitive in length and to be open to all those with political, ethical or other conscientiously held objections. No replies to any letters had been received by the end of the year.
