LATVIA
Two people were executed. Three people were under sentence of death at the end of the year.
In February the number of offences punishable by death was reduced to seven. Newly released statistics recorded that 16 executions had taken place during the period 1988 to 1991, five more than previously known (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
Also in February an amendment to Article 124 of the criminal code legalized consensual homosexual relations between adults.
LATVIA/LEBANON
The Republic of Latvia acceded to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment in April.
Two death sentences were carried out, one in January and one in May. Both of those executed had been convicted of premeditated murder under aggravating circumstances. Five death sentences were passed, of which two were commuted. At the end of the year the three people under sentence of death were still waiting to hear the outcome of their petitions for clemency.
During the year Amnesty International raised again with the authorities its concern at the length of the alternative service to military service - 24 months compared to 18 months (see Amnesty International Report 1992). The Minister of Defence informed Amnesty International that a new bill had been drafted by his ministry which would reflect the principle that military and alternative service should be the same length. There were no reports of people being imprisoned for refusing conscription on grounds of conscience.
In July the Minister of Justice informed Amnesty International, in response to a query from the organization, that people who had been imprisoned for homosexuality had been released from prison immediately after the change in the law.
In October Amnesty International representatives visited Latvia in order to collect information on human rights issues related to the organization's mandate. This was the first research visit by Amnesty International to the country.
During the year Amnesty International called for the commutation of all death sentences of which it learned. The organization also urged the authorities to consider the complete abolition of the death penalty.
