HONG KONG
A draft bill for the abolition of the death penalty was introduced. The screening process to determine the refugee status of Vietnamese asylum-seekers detained in Hong Kong continued to have shortcomings.
In a policy statement before the opening session of the Legislative Council in October, Governor Christopher Patten outlined proposals for major changes in the structure of Hong Kong's government and announced his intention to submit a draft bill aiming at the abolition of the death penalty to that session of the Council. The abolitionist legislation was tabled in November but no vote had taken place by the end of the year. The Legislative Council had called in 1991 for abolition of the death penalty, mandatory for murder but systematically commuted since 1966 (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
Governor Patten proposed that a majority of the Legislative Council's members be elected either directly or indirectly by a broad electoral base. He also proposed to resign from the chairmanship of the Legislative Council to allow the Council to elect its own chair. The Governor's proposals were broadly endorsed by the Legislative Council in November, pending detailed discussion due in 1993. However, the authorities of the People's Republic of China sharply criticized Governor Patten's proposals, arguing in particular that they would alter the Hong Kong Basic Law adopted by China in 1991 and due to come into force in 1997 when sovereignty over Hong Kong reverts to China (see Amnesty International Report 1992). These criti-
cisms increased the uncertainty about the future course of Chinese policy towards Hong Kong. In March the Chinese Public Security Minister confirmed press reports that his ministry had collected information on Hong Kong residents, including political activists, suspected of opposing the Chinese Government. He stated that reports that such people would risk arrest after 1997 were "inaccurate".
At the end of the year around 43,000 Vietnamese asylum-seekers remained in detention, of whom more than 27,000 had been "screened out" (denied refugee status). The rest were awaiting a decision on their claim for refugee status. Over 300 asylum-seekers who had been "screened out" were forcibly returned to Viet Nam under an agreement signed in 1991 with the Vietnamese Government (see Amnesty International Report 1992). A further agreement between the governments of Hong Kong and Viet Nam signed in May 1992 opened the way for the eventual forcible return of all "screened out" asylum-seekers. There were still shortcomings in the screening process: in particular, asylum-seekers did not have the right to appear in person when appealing against refusal of refugee status.
In July the Hong Kong authorities decided that two asylum-seekers should be returned to China despite fears that they would be liable to imprisonment there on account of their peaceful political activities. Liu Yijun, a poet, and Lin Lin, a university graduate, had left China for Hong Kong in December 1991, when they feared they faced imminent arrest. Amnesty International was concerned that the two women would be at risk of imprisonment as prisoners of conscience if forcibly returned to China and appealed to the Hong Kong authorities not to take such a step, In the event, the authorities permitted them to remain in Hong Kong pending a judicial review of their case, but before this took place the two women were accepted as refugees by Canada and allowed to travel there.
In October a representative of Amnesty International met government officials during a visit to Hong Kong. He reiterated the organization's concerns about the screening procedures and raised questions about the government's policy of detaining Vietnamese asylum-seekers.
Amnesty International representatives
HONG KONG/HUNGARY/lNDiA
met Governor-designate Christopher Patten shortly before he took office in July. They urged him to introduce as a matter of urgency legislation to abolish the death penalty.
