TOGO
The authorities failed to take any steps to investigate past human rights violations or to bring those responsible to justice. Two armed forces officers suspected of opposition to the President were detained without charge and reportedly tortured. Opposition leaders were subjected to assassination attempts in which the army was implicated; two were killed.
Political instability and violence intensified, with continuing rivalry between President Gnassingb6 Eyadema, backed by the army, and Prime Minister Joseph Kokou Koffigoh. Support for the Prime Minister was strongest in the south, while the President and the army were identified principally with the north. Prime Minister Koffigoh had been appointed by the National Conference in 1991 to head a transitional government until elections scheduled for 1992. After initially surrendering some of his power as a result of army action against him in late 1991 (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1992), Prime Minister Koffigoh's authority was eroded further during 1992, with President Eyadema regaining control of much of the machinery of government. This process culminated in an amendment to the draft constitution allowing President Eyadema to stand for presidential election without having first to resign fi?om the army. The transitional period was extended to the end of the year when elections, originally scheduled for early 1992, were again postponed.
A new Constitution was endorsed by referendum in September. In October members of the transitional executive body were briefly taken hostage by the army until they agreed to unfreeze assets of the former ruling party led by President Eyadema. Two lieutenants were excluded ft-om the army, apparently for their role in the hostage-taking. A general strike which began in mid-November was continuing at the end of the year: it was called by the opposition to demand the resignation of President Eyadema following his refusal to accept Prime Minister Koffigoh's decision to dismiss two ministers, both members of
TOGO
the former ruling party, from his government.
Although substantial new evidence had come to light diuring 1991 about violations of human rights committed while President Eyadéma had been in power (see Amnesty International Report 1992], no steps were taken to investigate further the reports of arbitrary detention, torture and extrajudicial executions or to bring those responsible to justice. This lack of action, which amounted to granting impunity to soldiers and others responsible for human rights violations, was a direct result of the political situation, with supporters of the Prime Minister expressing fear that further investigations of reported violations might provoke the army to seize power. Army spokesmen described the reports of violations as fabrications and lies.
There were several reports of prisoners being tortured in military custody. In July Captain Esso Charles Pello, former head of the military intelligence service, was arrested in the capital, Lomé. He was apparently suspected of links with the President's political opponents and of having sensitive information about the role of soldiers in human rights violations. He was held incommunicado at the gendarmerie headquarters in the northern town of Kara, where he was reportedly beaten and tortured with electric shocks, and deprived of food until he went into a coma. Rumours then circulated that he was dead. The Presidency later circulated a letter signed by Captain Pello which stated that reports of his death were incorrect and that he had simply been transferred to a new posting in the army.
Another soldier, Corporal Nikabou Bik-agni, was arrested in October by the gendarmerie in Aflao, on the border with Ghana. The Presidency reported that he had confessed to carrying weapons and explosives with a view to bombing civilian targets in Lomé. There were signs that his confession was made as a result of torture and that the real reason for his arrest was his perceived support for Prime Minister Kofiigoh. A few days later his father and brother were arrested; they remained held without charge at a prison in Bassar, northern Togo, at the end of the year. Corporal Bikagni also remained in custody in Lomé.
Prominent members of the opposition faced a new pattern of assassinations and assassination attempts during the year, in
which the armed forces appeared to be involved. In May four people, including Dr Marc Atipede, a leading government opponent, were killed, and another opponent, Gilchrist Olympio, was seriously injured when their motorcade was ambushed by gunmen in northern Togo while they were travelling to a political rally. Gilchrist Olympio. the son of a former president deposed by President Eyadéma and assassinated, was president of the Union des forces de changement (ufc). Union of the Forces for Change, a coalition of 10 opposition parties; Dr Atipede was the leader of one of the coalition parties. An inquiry into the incident was conducted by the Paris-based Fédération internationale des droits de l'homme (fidh). International Federation of Human Rights, at the request of Prime Minister Koffigoh and a Togolese human rights group. The ftoh, whose representatives visited Togo in June, concluded that the army had probably planned and carried out the attack with the complicity of the highest levels of the army command. It found circumstantial evidence of soldiers' involvement in the incident, including the use of a type of automatic weapon used only by the army and the presence of certain senior officers in the area at the time. The army rejected the findings as a "tissue of lies".
In July another opposition leader, Tavio Amorin, was shot while walking in Lomé, reportedly by two people in civilian clothes. He died of his wounds two days later. Tavio Amorin chaired a Committee for Human Rights in the transitional executive body set up by the National Conference and was Secretary General of a new opposition coalition. Prime Minister Koffigoh's goverrunent suggested that a police identity card found near the scene of the shooting was evidence of security force involvement.
In continuing political violence later in the year, opposition figures and members of President Eyadéma's party were attacked. None of the attacks was the subject of official or independent investigations by the authorities. Although Prime Minister Koffigoh announced that the evidence gathered by the fidh on the attempted assassination of Gilchrist Olympio was being transmitted to the procuracy, no further action was reported on the case. In relation to acts of political violence and reports of human rights violations in 1992,
togo/trinidad and tobago
the procuracy appeared inactive and unable or unwilling to pursue an independent and impartial role.
In April Amnesty International published Togo: Impunity for human rights violators at a time of reform, which described past human rights violations, in particular those publicized during 1991. The report stressed the importance of impartial investigations of all reported abuses in order to establish the facts and provide appropriate remedies. It also urged the authorities to introduce a series of safeguards for human rights and warned of the dangers for human rights in the future if no action was taken.
The President's Office publicly denied that the human rights violations described in the report had occurred. Representatives of President Eyadema repeated the denials during two visits to Amnesty International's International Secretariat and submitted a 39-page document disputing the accuracy of Amnesty International's information. This claimed that the findings of the official inquiry by the National Commission of Human Rights into the killings in 1991 were inaccurate and biased, and denied that officials were responsible for deaths of prisoners at Kaza detention camp in preceding years. However, its conclusions were not based on independent or impartial investigations. In September Amnesty International responded in detail to the document, observing that the controversy over some of the facts re-emphasized the need for a thorough and impartial investigation into past human rights violations.
During the year Amnesty International expressed concern at reports of torture and urged that independent inquiries be carried out into the cases of both Captain Pello and Corporal Bikagni. It appealed for Corporal Bikagni and his relatives to be released unless they were to be charged with criminal offences. The organization also called for investigations into the assassinations of opposition leaders, urging that all evidence implicating the army in extrajudicial executions be examined independently and impartially and that every attempt be made to hold soldiers accountable for their actions.
