BURKINA FASO
Over 80 people were assaulted and severely beaten by soldiers in June; nine soldiers were subsequently sentenced to short prison terms. A commission of inquiry into the killing of an opposition leader in December 1991 had not reached any conclusions by the end of the year. The government made no efforts to
burkina faso/burundi
investigate the "disappearance" of two prisoners of conscience who were believed to have died in detention in 1989 and 1990 as a result of torture.
The first multi-party parliamentary elections since 1978 were held in May and contested by over 20 political parties. The ruling Organisation pour la démocratie populaire/Mouvement du travail, Organization for Popular Democracy/ Labour Movement, won an outright majority of seats. In June President Blaise Campaoré appointed Youssouf Ouedraogo as Prime Minister and the latter formed a new government.
In June over 80 people were reportedly injured, four seriously, in Fada N'Gourma, when soldiers rounded up residents in the town centre and beat them with belts and chains, apparently in reprisal for a dispute between a local resident and a soldier. In July over 32 soldiers were tried on various charges in connection with this incident. Nine of them were sentenced to between three and 10 months' imprisonment for assault and battery, theft, looting and destruction of private property; 23 others were fmed and received suspended prison sentences.
A commission of inquiry set up at the end of 1991 to investigate the killing of opposition leader Clément Oumarou Ouedraogo and the attempted murder of another opposition activist in December 1991 (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1992) had not announced any conclusions by the end of the year, It comprised representatives of the government, opposition political parties and human rights groups, who reportedly met several times during the year and interviewed over 50 people in the course of their inquiries. An armed forces sergeant was reportedly detained for investigation by the procuracy in connection with these cases.
The government made no attempt during 1992 to investigate the "disappearance" of two prisoners of conscience who were believed to have died in detention as a result of torture (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 to 1992). Guillaume Ses-souma, a university lecturer, was arrested in 1989 in connection with an alleged conspiracy to overthrow the government. He allegedly died less than 24 hours after his arrest as a result of injuries sustained during torture. Medical student Boukary Dabo was arrested in 1990 with over 40 other
students. He reportedly died several hours after his arrest after losing consciousness as a result of severe beating and torture. Amnesty International continued to receive further information about the torture and ill-treatment of the two "disappeared" prisoners of conscience and other political detainees arrested in 1989 and 1990.
No death sentences or executions were reported during the year. Although the transitional government informed Amnesty International in January that it was seriously considering the question of the death penalty, no steps were taken to abolish it in law,
Amnesty International again urged the government to investigate the "disappearance" of prisoners of conscience Guillaume Sessouma and Boukary Dabo, Amnesty International also called on the government which took power in June to ratify international human rights treaties and take steps to abolish the death penalty.
