YUGOSLAVIA
(FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF)
In Kosovo province in the Republic of Serbia hundreds of ethnic Albanians were beaten or otherwise ill-treated by police; at least 16 ethnic Albanians died añer being shot by police in disputed circumstances. Ethnic Albanians continued to be sentenced to up to 60 days' imprisonment for non-violent political activity. Ethnic Albanian political prisoners were convicted añer unfair trials. In June and July four Croats were sentenced to death by a military court in Belgrade for war crimes.
A new state, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, comprising the Republics of Serbia and Montenegro, was proclaimed in Belgrade on 27 April. This followed the break-up of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia after the independence of three of its former republics, Slovenia, Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina.
Conflict in Croatia largely ended with the signing of a cease-fire which came into
yugoslavia (federal republic of)
effect in January. A United Nations (un) peace-keeping force, known as unprofor, was then established in the conflict zones in Croatia. In May the Yugoslav President Dobrica Cosió announced the withdrawal of Yugoslav National Army (jna) troops from Bosnia-Herzegovina, but soldiers who originated in that republic were authorized to stay. Together vrith jna arms and equipment they were effectively absorbed into the army of the self-proclaimed "Serbian Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina", which by the end of the year controlled some 70 per cent of the territory of Bosnia-Herzegovina (see Bosnia-Herzegovina entry). In August the un Commission on Human Rights appointed a Special Rapporteur to investigate the human rights situation in former Yugoslavia, and in October the un Security Council set up a Commission of Experts to investigate war crimes committed in former Yugoslavia.
Ethnic tensions in Kosovo province in southern Serbia remained acute. Leaders of Kosovo's main ethnic Albanian political party, the Democratic League of Kosovo, demanded that Kosovo province be granted independence from Serbia. There were widespread protests by ethnic Albanians in September and October when secondary schools and university faculties remained closed to ethnic Albanian teaching staff and students who refused to accept Serbian educational programs. Ethnic Albanians continued to be dismissed, on political grounds, from their jobs.
Over 400,000 people, the majority Serbs from Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina, sought refuge in Yugoslavia. Thousands of Croats and Hungarians fled their homes in the Vojvodina province of Serbia after threats or the destruction of their property by members of Serbian extremist political parties, including Serbian refugees and Serbian irregulars. Similarly, thousands of Muslims left the Sandiak region after their homes, businesses or cars were destroyed by Serbian and Montenegrin political extremists and irregulars, By October the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe had established a long-term mission in Kosovo, Sandiak and the Vojvodina to monitor the human rights situation in these regions.
There were almost daily reports that ethnic Albanians had been beaten or otherwise ill-treated by police. Among the victims was Ismet Krasniqi from Pe6, who was
among a group of parents who in January protested against the Serbian curriculum followed by the Xhemail Kada primary school in Pet. He was arrested at the school by police who took him to a police station and beat him. Photographs and a medical report showed that he had sustained severe bruising to his buttocks, feet and hands, and that his left ear-drum had been perforated.
Ethnic Albanian sources alleged that in the period firom 1 September to 10 October over 240 demonstrators had been beaten by police. The demonstrators had participated in protests against the closure of secondary schools and university faculties to ethnic Albanian students and staff who rejected the curricula laid down by the Serbian authorities. Several hundred others were beaten during similar demonstrations on 12 and 13 October. Among those severely injured were Sabrie Rrustaj and Samile Pupovci ft'om Pe6. Sabrie Rrustaj reportedly had her ear torn off and suffered a fractured arm; Samile Pupovci had her leg broken.
Conflict between police and ethnic Albanians resulted in the deaths of at least 16 ethnic Albanians in disputed circumstances. In one incident Bajram Hoxhaj, Muharrem Hysenaj and Hasan Hysenaj died after being shot by police in the village of UCe on 31 January. Ethnic Albanians alleged that police had arrested three school children and then opened fire on members of their families who sought their release. Police officers claimed that they had fired in self-defence after their patrol was fired at.
Ethnic Albanians continued to be sentenced to up to 60 days' imprisonment for the peaceful exercise of their right to freedom of expression. Among them were Fat-mir Shala and Behadin Krasniqi. In July each received a 60-day prison sentence for sending a cassette tape containing greetings for broadcast on a local radio station in the neighbouring republic of Albania. In October Jahja Halabuku and Shukri Qerimi were sentenced to 60 days' imprisonment each for organizing demonstrations against the closing of education faculties to ethnic Albanians.
In October the district court of Pe6 convicted 19 ethnic Albanians of founding an illegal organization in order to obtain, by arms, the secession of Kosovo province from Yugoslavia, They were not accused of
yugoslavia (fedefial ref>ublic of)
using violence and charges of terrorism against them were dropped diu-ing investigation proceedings. They received sentences of between one and seven years' imprisonment. The principal accused, Mentor Kagi, reportedly admitted in court that he had bought a gun and revolver from a Swiss citizen and that he had tried, unsuccessfully, to buy arms in Albania. He and other defendants stated that they obtained weapons only for self-defence, in case the conflict in former Yugoslav territories spread to Kosovo. At the trial many defendants withdrew statements they had given during pre-trial proceedings, alleging that they were false and had been extracted under torture or threat of torture. Prison medical reports reportedly showed that Mentor Ka?i and several other defendants had suffered physical injuries as a result of ill-treatment following their arrest in late December 1991. Their lawyers had previously filed complaints that investigation proceedings had been carried out by police officers rather than the investigating judge. Their lawyers had also protested that they had been refused information about the charges against their clients and had been denied access to their clients until 19 January, though even then they had not been able to speak with them without supervision. Eight other ethnic Albanians accused of similar ofiences and their lawyers made almost identical complaints at a subsequent trial in the district coiul of Pri§tina in October. Seven were convicted and received prison sentences of between two and six years, while one was acquitted.
The Constitution of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, promulgated in April 1992, abolished the death penalty and required that federal criminal law be brought into conformity with this by the end of 1994. Four men were subsequently sentenced to death by a military court in Belgrade. In June Martin SabljiC, Zoran Sipo§ and Nikola CibariC, all Croats from Borovo Naselje near Vukovar in Croatia, were convicted of armed rebellion against the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and of war crimes against Serbian civilians in Vukovar. In July Zdenko Stefancic was convicted on similar charges. All four, together with co-defendants who received prison sentences, were released in August as a result of an agreement between the goverrunents of Yugoslavia and Croatia to exchange prisoners of war according to
the principle of "all for all" and without conditions.
Amnesty International repeatedly urged the Serbian authorities to investigate cases in which police officers in Kosovo province allegedly beat or otherwise ill-treated ethnic Albanians. In June the organization published a report, Yugoslavia: Ethnic Albanians - Victims of torture and ill-treatment by police in Kosovo province, in which it documented, with medical reports and photographs, 15 illustrative cases. In September the organization received from the Ministry of Justice a briefing prepared by the Ministry of the Interior, which denied allegations of police abuses and claimed that police used physical force only in accordance with the law, that is, in self-defence. Despite medical and photographic evidence to the contrary, the briefing stated that police had never used physical force against Ismet Krasniqi. In August Amnesty International delegates attempted to observe the trial befpre a Belgrade military coxirt of three Croats charged with war crimes against Serbian civilians and armed rebellion. The trial was postponed and the three men were released in a prisoner excl\ange later that month. Amnesty International expressed its concern about death sentences previously imposed on four Croats and about allegations that confessions made under duress had been used as evidence. It called for the commutation of their death sentences and an investigation into allegations of torture and ill-treatment.
In November Amnesty International wrote to the government expressing concern about human rights abuses committed by all parties to the conflict in Bosnia-Herzegovina (see Bosnia-Herzegovina entry). It said that the governments of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and of Croatia shared a heavy responsibility for abuses to the extent that they had supported politically and materially the various forces operating in Bosnia-Herzegovina. Amnesty International called on all parties to ensure respect for international human rights and humanitarian standards.
