AZERBAYDZHAN
Scores of people, including possible prisoners of conscience, were held as hostages on grounds of their ethnic origin. Many alleged they were tortured or ill-treated in detention. Hundreds of non-combatant civilians were deliberately and arbitrarily killed in the disputed region of Nagorno-Karabakh, according to reports. At least 18 people were sentenced to death and one death sentence was commuted.
Azerbaydzhan was recognized as an independent state after the break-up of the
azer8ay0zhan
Soviet Union. It joined the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe in January and became a member of the United Nations in March. President Abulfaz Elchibey came to power following elections in June. Armed conflict in the disputed region of Nagorno-Karabakh, an area populated mainly by ethnic Armenians who had declared their own republic, continued and claimed hundreds of lives during the year.
In August Azerbaydzhan acceded to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
Scores of people said to be non-combatant civilians, including women and children, were detained as hostages solely on grounds of their ethnic origin. They appeared to be held for the purpose of future prisoner exchanges by the Azerbay-dzhani authorities, ethnic Armenian paramilitary forces and private individuals, For example, two ethnic Armenian citizens of the Republic of Georgia, Vilik Oganasov and Artavaz Mirzoyan, were arrested by Azerbaydzhani police in April at Baku airport in Azerbaydzhan while in transit from Russia to Georgia. At the end of the year they still had not been charged with any criminal offence, and unofficial sources claimed their ethnic origin was the sole ground for their detention, Ethnic Azeri Saltanat Zulal gyzy Mamedova was reportedly detained by Armenian paramilitary forces together with two of her daughters and three grandchildren, the youngest aged four, in late February, while they were attempting to flee the site of an alleged massacre at Khodzhali. They were said to have been seen six weeks later held as hostages in the village of Venk. Their situation had not been clarified by the end of the year.
Many of those detained alleged they were tortured or ill-treated. Ethnic Armenian Eleanor Grigoryan, for example, was
said to have been bleeding from multiple wounds when released in March after a month's detention together with her four-year-old son. She alleged she had been repeatedly raped by Azeri military units, and that her son had had his hand burned with cigarettes. Ethnic Azeri women detained in late February and early March said that they had been beaten and raped by ethnic Armenian forces,
Hundreds of non-combatant civilians were said to have been deliberately and arbitrarily killed as a result of the conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh. In April, 45 non-combatant Armenian inhabitants of Mar-aga, including women and children, were reportedly extrajudicially executed after Azerbaydzhani army units entered the village. Over 300 Azeri non-combatants, including women and children, were said to have been killed by ethnic Armenian paramilitary forces while attempting to leave the scene of fighting around the town of Khodzhali at the end of February.
Official statistics on the death penalty were released for the first time in October. Seventy-six people had been sentenced to death since 1986, including 18 people in the first half of 1992. All but two convictions were for premeditated, aggravated murder. The exceptions were for sabotage and the attempted murder of a police officer. Thirty-four people were executed between 1986 and 1990, all for premeditated, aggravated murder, but no executions were reported to have been carried out since then. One death sentence was commuted. Lieutenant Yevgeny Lukin, an ethnic Russian army officer, was sentenced to death for murder in August but pardoned and returned to Russia at the end of December.
Throughout the year Amnesty International urged all parties to the conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh to ensure that no non-combatants were detained as hostages, or otherwise held solely on the grounds of their ethnic origin. The organization also appealed to all sides to protect non-com-batants from all acts of reprisal and violence and to treat prisoners in their custody humanely. It called for all alleged abuses within its mandate to be investigated fully and impartially, with the results made public and the perpetrators brought to justice.
Amnesty International continued to urge the authorities to commute all pending death sentences and to take concrete steps towards abolition of the death penalty.
bahamas/bahrain
