HUNGARY
There were reports of ill-treatment of foreign nationals in detention. The police reportedly failed to protect members of the Roma community from racially motivated violence.
In November Hungary ratified the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and its Sixth Protocol, which provides for the abolition of the death penalty for peacetime offences, It declared that it recognized both the right of individual petition and the compulsory jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights.
Foreign nationals in the Kerepestarcsa detention camp near Budapest were reportedly ill-treated by the police. The alleged incidents involved people who were staying in the country without authorization and were in some cases awaiting deportation. In one case, in January, a Chinese man was reportedly hit about the face and head until he lost consciousness, and then kicked. Following pressure from fellow inmates he was taken to hospital. Beatings were reported to have occurred often in the camp. For example, on 25 April inmates were beaten after they protested against what they considered to be unacceptably poor hygiene and other conditions. A unit of the Budapest police intervened using truncheons, police dogs and tear-gas in confined spaces.
Police reportedly failed to protect mem-
bers of the Roma community in Ketegyhaza from violent attacks. On 8 September a dozen men deliberately drove a truck into the home of Peter Csurar, a Rom, injuring one person and destroying the house and furniture. A police unit failed to detain those responsible for the attack even though they were known to the victims. Only four policemen remained in the village in spite of mounting anti-Roma tensions. At around midnight, other Roma homes were attacked and two houses were set on fire with petrol bombs.
Amnesty International wrote to the government of Prime Minister Joszef Antall in February urging it to investigate reports of ill-treatment of foreign nationals detained in the Kerepestarcsa camp. As many of those detained in Kerepestarcsa were asylum-seekers and following reports that people attempting to enter Hungary, some of whom may have been asylum-seekers, had been summarily expelled. Amnesty International sought assurances from the authorities that all asylum-seekers would be granted access to a fair and satisfactory asylum procedure. The government replied in March that official inquiries had not produced evidence to suggest any unlawful action on the part of the authorities and that all asylum-seekers in Hungary were treated in accordance with international standards. Amnesty International asked the authorities for full details of this inquiry, particularly the methods used in the investigation.
In September Amnesty International urged the Minister of the Interior to investigate allegations concerning police behaviour in Ketegyhaza. The authorities denied that the attack in Ketegyhaza was racially motivated and stated that an inquiry had established that the police took appropriate steps to "restore and maintain public order". Amnesty International asked the authorities for full details of this inquiry.
