MALAWI
Hundreds of people, including many prisoners of conscience, were held for weeks without charge, as the authorities attempted to suppress emerging political opposition. Some were tortured and most were held in deliberately harsh prison conditions. One long-term prisoner of conscience died in prison. Nearly 70 long-term political detainees were released during the year, including one man who had been held for 27 years. However, at least one long-term prisoner of conscience remained held in poor conditions. At least 45 people were believed to be under sentence of death and 36 death sentences were commuted to life imprisonment. It was not known if any executions were carried out.
MALAWI
Unprecedented opposition to the one-party state headed by Life-President Dr H. Kamuzu Banda emerged during the year. In March the country's Roman Catholic bishops issued a pastoral letter in which they criticized aspects of the government's human rights record, corruption and the lack of popular participation in political life. The bishops were interrogated by the Inspector General of Police and held briefly under house arrest, and one was expelled from the country. The pastoral letter was declared seditious, making possession of it a criminal offence. A meeting of senior officials of the ruling Malawi Congress Party (mcp) openly discussed whether the bishops should be killed. After international appeals, the government gave public guarantees of the bishops' safety, although members of the paramilitary Malawi Young Pioneers harassed Roman Catholics and burned down the press where the pastoral letter had been printed. In the following months members of other denominations, notably the Church of Central Africa (Presbyterian), endorsed the position of the Roman Catholic bishops and were themselves harassed.
The pastoral letter sparked off widespread demonstrations in favour of a multiparty political system. These included protests at the University of Malawi, which resulted in the arrest of student leaders on public order charges. In May industrial and plantation workers started the first wave of strikes since the 1960s. More than 40 people were shot dead by police during riots in Blantyre, the main industrial centre.
In July President Banda announced reforms to the Preservation of Public Security Regulations, under which many government critics had been detained in the past.
introducing for the first time a Detainees' Review Tribimal chaired by a High Court judge to adjudicate the reasons for detention. However, in the second half of the year the authorities appeared to stop using these regulations, instead holding suspected opponents unlawfully for several weeks before releasing them without charge or charging them with sedition. The charge of sedition in Malawian law penalizes anyone found to have made "statements likely to undermine public confidence in the Government". Anyone imprisoned solely on such grounds would appear to be a prisoner of conscience.
Malawi's main aid donors suspended all non-humanitarian assistance in May for six months, Its resumption was to depend on significant improvements in respect for human rights. In August the International Committee of the Red Cross (icrc) was allowed to begin visits to Malawian prisons. However, the suspension of aid continued as donors considered that there had not been sufficient progress on human rights.
On 31 December President Banda announced that there would be a referendum in March 1993 on whether to retain the one-party state or reintroduce a multi-party system.
Many hundreds of people, most of whom appeared to be prisoners of conscience, were arrested in the months after the bishops' pastoral letter was published. Many of them were office workers suspected of having duplicated and distributed the pastoral letter or other documents advocating a multi-party system. For example, in May more than 20 employees of the National Bank of Malawi were arrested after an industrial dispute because they were suspected of having leaflets advocating multi-party democracy. All the staff of the computer section at the Electricity Supply Commission of Malawi were arrested at about the same time, apparently on suspicion of having used office equipment to circulate opposition literature. Those arrested were all released after about three months, some without charge and some to face trial on charges of sedition, but none had been tried by the end of the year.
In April Chakufwa Chihana, an official with an international trade union body, was arrested at the airport in Lilongwe, the capital. He was held for three months without charge. The authorities failed to com-
MALAWI
ply with repeated High Court orders for him to appear in court and for the legal basis for his detention to be clarified. In July he was charged with sedition in connection with speeches he had made calling for a multi-party political system. He was released on bail but rearrested two days later. He was later charged on further counts of sedition relating to comments he had made to the press after his release. He was released on bail for a second time in September. At his trial before the High Court, which began in November, he was sentenced to two years' imprisonment after being convicted of sedition. His appeal had not been heard by the end of 1992. Chakufwa Chihana had been a prisoner of conscience for five years during the 1970s when he was detained without charge for non-violent opposition to the government.
Church members were also vulnerable to arrest. There were dozens of reported arrests during the year of members of the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society - the Jehovah's Witnesses — which is illegal in Malawi and has been subject to persecution for many years. Jehovah's Witnesses refuse to join the ruling mcp: membership of the J)arty is virtually compulsory. It appeared that many Jehovah's Witnesses were released before the August visit of the icrc. The Reverend Aaron Longwe, minister of the Mzuzu Presbyterian congregation, was arrested in April after preaching a sermon which was deemed critical of the government. He was released the following day but rearrested shortly afterwards with an elder of the congregation, Steven Chen-da Mkandawire. The next day two other elders of the congregation. Gift Kaunda and Jairos Beza, were also arrested. The Reverend Longwe and Steven Mkandawire were released in May but the other two were held without charge until July. The Reverend Longwe was briefly detained again at the end of August with other Presbyterian and Roman Catholic church members.
Krishna Achutan, the son-in-law of Aleke Banda, a prisoner of conscience released in July (see below), was arrested in May, the day after he had given an interview to a British radio station drawing attention to his father-in-law's poor health in prison. After being held for two months without charge and in defiance of High Coiut orders that he be produced, Krishna Achutan was released in July and charged
with publishing information "likely to be prejudicial to public security" and with making a broadcast "harmful to the interests or to the good name of Malawi". If convicted he faced a maximum penalty of life imprisonment. He had not been tried by the end of the year.
In December over 260 people were arrested in Blantyre at a peaceful demonstration against the imprisonment of Chakufwa Chihana. All were released within a few days but about 130 of them were charged with "unlawful assembly" or other offences and were due to be tried in early 1993.
There were frequent reports that many of those arrested for possession of multiparty leaflets were tortured by police. There were persistent allegations of prisoners being subjected to severe beatings. Women prisoners alleged that police interrogators used pliers to inflict sexual abuse on them. One woman was alleged to have been stripped naked, beaten and poked with an electric cattle prod. Two officials of the Blantyre Polytechnic student union, arrested in March after a demonstration in support of the Roman Catholic bishops, were alleged to have been tortured by having their genitals squeezed. There were repeated accounts of detainees being forced to clear human excrement out of cells with their bare hands.
Crowded and insanitary prison conditions appear to have been used as a form of deliberate ill-treatment. Many of those arrested for suspected involvement in the multi-party movement were taken to Chichiri Prison in Blantyre or Maula Prison in Lilongwe, which were already the most overcrowded in the country. Previously prisoners in Chichiri spent nights sitting back-to-back because there was insufficient room for them to lie down. After the new wave of arrests, prisoners were reportedly forced to stand through the night as there was not enough space for them to sit. One cell in Chichiri Prison, measuring about five metres by four metres, was reported to contain 285 prisoners. Former prisoners estimated that on average one prisoner in this cell died every two nights. When a prisoner died he was immediately replaced by another, suggesting that overcrowding was being used as a deliberate form of ill-treatment.
A total of about 70 long-term political detainees. including prisoners of conscience.
MALAWI/MALAYSIA
were released in January, June and July. Among the prisoners of conscience were Aleke Banda, who had been held without charge since 1980 for criticizing President Banda's financial management of a paras-tatal company; Machipisa Munthali, detained for 27 years for political opposition; Danny (Goodluck) Mhango, whose brother was an opposition journalist murdered in an unexplained firebomb attack in Zambia in 1989; and Laurent! Phiri, who had been imprisoned because he had bought tobacco from tenant farmers on land owned by President Banda (see Amnesty International Report 1992].
However, other long-term prisoners of conscience remained in custody, notably Orton Chirwa and his wife. Vera Chirwa, who were reportedly abducted from Zambia in 1981 and then convicted of treason after an unfair trial in a "traditional court" (see previous Amnesty International Reports). They were sentenced to death but in 1984 President Banda commuted their sentences to life-imprisonment after international appeals. In September 1992 they received a visit from a delegation of British lawyers, their first outside visit for many years. It was also the first time since 1984 that they had been permitted to see each other. Both were in poor health, and Orton Chirwa died in October. Vera Chirwa was not allowed to attend his funeral and the authorities failed to comply with calls for an inquest into his death.
The authorities continued to fail to investigate the frequent instances of deaths in custody (see Amnesty International Report 1992). In April prisoner of conscience Frackson Zgambo died in custody. He had been held without charge since 1989. There were unsubstantiated reports that he had died as a result of poisoning or other ill-treatment. However, despite the requirements of the Inquests Act, there was no inquest or other impartial investigation into his death.
More than 40 protesters were shot dead in May, many of them allegedly by the "Red Army" - a newly organized paramilitary force incorporating members of the red-shirted Malawi Young Pioneers, who have powers of arrest. The shootings took place during violent protests by striking workers in Blantyre and Lilongwe - the first public demonstrations against the government since independence in 1964. The government did not respond to calls for an
independent inquiry into the killings.
At least 45 prisoners were believed to be under sentence of death at Mikuyu and Zomba Prisons in mid-1992. It was not known if any executions were carried out during the year. Earlier in the year 36 prisoners under sentence of death were reported to have had thefr sentences commuted to life imprisonment by the National Traditional Court of Appeal. It was not known what offences these prisoners had been convicted of.
Amnesty International published two reports on its concerns: in March, Malawi: Prison conditions, cruel punishment and detention without trial, and in September, Malawi: March to July 1992, mass arrests of suspected government opponents. Amnesty International welcomed the release of prisoners of conscience and the decision to allow the icrc access to political detainees. The organization called for the release of prisoners of conscience held because of their non-violent support for the multiparty movement and for the withdrawal of all criminal charges against them. Amnesty International publicized the death threats by senior ruling party officials against the Roman Catholic bishops and called for the government to guarantee their safety. It asked the government to establish an independent commission of inquiry into the deaths of more than 40 protesters in May. Representatives of Amnesty International held meetings with Malawian diplomats abroad and the organization asked in April and September to send a delegation to observe court proceedings involving Chakufwa Chihana. No formal reply was received from Lilongwe, but a Malawian diplomat indicated that Amnesty International would not be welcome in the country.
