CHINA
Thousands of political prisoners were held, including hundreds of prisoners of conscience. Scores of prisoners of conscience were serving prison sentences but others were detained without charge or trial. Political activists, religious leaders and members of ethnic groups continued to be arrested and held without charge or
CHINA
trial or sentenced to terms of imprisonment af^er unfair trials. Administrative detention continued to be used on a large scale to hold political prisoners without charge or trial. Torture and ill-treatment were frequently reported. The death penalty continued to be used on an extensive scale: 1,891 death sentences were recorded and 1,079 executions, but the true figures were believed to be much higher.
The police and security forces continued to exercise extensive powers of arbitrary arrest and detention. Political dissidents and others were detained for prolonged periods without trial or sentenced to lengthy terms of imprisonment for "crimes of counter-revolution". There was still no public inquiry into the killings of over 1,000 civilians by government forces in Beijing during the 1989 pro-democracy protests.
In August the government issued a "white paper" entitled The Reform of Criminal Offenders in China, but this failed to acknowledge or take into account the frequency of human rights violations in Chinese prisons and the need for urgent measures to remedy such violations. In September another government "white paper", Tibet - Its Ownership and Human Rights Situation, made clear that activities considered to be detrimental to "stability and unity" in Tibet - such as peaceful political demonstrations - would be "cracked down on relentlessly".
Hundreds of prisoners of conscience arrested in connection with the 1989 pro-democracy protests remained in prison; the fate of thousands of others remained unknown (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 to 1992). Many prisoners of
conscience were serving prison sentences imposed after unfair trials; others were held without charge or trial.
Arrests of people suspected of involvement in political activities continued during the year. In June several dozen people were arrested in Beijing and elsewhere during a crackdown on pro-democracy activists. They included Chen Wei, a former student, and Wang Guoqi, a printer, both of whom had been arrested three times since 1989. Also detained were at least six members of the China Progressive Alliance, a newly formed non-violent political organization. The same month Wang Wanxin was arrested in Tiananmen Square, Beijing, for unfurling a banner commemorating the massacre of 4 June 1989. In July it was reported that he had been confined to a mental hospital and forcibly given drugs. Several other political activists were arrested in September. Two of them were released without charge a few weeks later, but the others were believed to be still detained at the end of the year.
Hundreds of people were arrested because of their religious activities or for their membership of ethnic or other groups. Some were released but others remained in detention without charge or trial. Early in the year at least 30 members of the "New Birth" Christian Church were arrested in Henan, Shanxi and Liaoning provinces: 20 of them were later sentenced administratively to three years' detention, known as "re-education through labour". In the same period some 160 other Christians were arrested in Henan, Jiangsu and Shanxi provinces. In September a further 160 Christians were reportedly arrested in Henan Province. In January it was reported that Pei Ronggui, a Trappist priest from Hebei Province, had been sentenced to five years' imprisonment: he was arrested in 1990 while administering the last rites to a dying man.
The same month Zhang Weiming, a Catholic intellectual from Baoding, Hebei Province, was sentenced administratively to two years of "re-education through labour" because of his religious activities. He had been held incommunicado in Baoding for over a year following his arrest in December 1990. He was moved to a labour camp in Shijiazhuang after being sentenced and released in November.
Some 60 Roman Catholic clergy and lay members remained held, including
CHINA
76-year-old Bishop Yang Libo. However, several others were released. James Xie Shiguang, the 74-year-old bishop of Xiapu in Fujian Province, and two priests from Fujian who were arrested in July 1990 during a religious meeting, were freed in January. Among others reported released were Li Side, Roman Catholic bishop of Tianjin, and Liu Guangdong, bishop of Yixian in Hebei Province. All belong to the "underground" church which remains loyal to the Vatican.
Members of ethnic groups in the Autonomous Regions of Inner Mongolia and Xinjiang were arrested and accused of instigating "separatist activities". Others arrested in previous years remained in prison. In Inner Mongolia, those still held, apparently without charge or trial, included Huchin Togos, a teacher, and Wang Manglai, a linguist, both of whom had been arrested in May 1991 for founding two cultural organizations. In Xinjiang several political activists were reportedly detained in and around Kashgar at the beginning of the year. Scores of others who had been arrested in 1991 or before remained in prison throughout 1992. Kajikhumar Shab-dan, a 62-year-old ethnic Kazakh writer and poet, was believed to be still serving a sentence of 12 years' imprisonment. He was reported to have been arrested in 1988 with about 10 other people following peaceful demonstrations jn Tacheng, northern Xinjiang. He had previously been arrested in 1958 and jailed for 18 years for allegedly "opposing socialism".
Arrests of Tibetan political activists continued. Over 200 political prisoners, including at least 100 prisoners of conscience, remained held in Tibet. They included Buddhist monks and nuns detained for peacefully advocating Tibetan independence, and lay Tibetans allegedly found in possession of Tibetan nationalist material. Some were serving prison terms imposed after unfair trials, others terms of "re-education through labour" imposed without formal charge or trial. Among the latter was Dawa Kyizom, a student, who was serving a three-year term imposed in October 1990 after she reportedly gave a Tibetan flag to a monk. She was held in Gutsa Detention Centre. Several Tibetan prisoners of conscience were released during the second half of the year after completing their sentences.
Trials continued to fall far short of inter-
national standards for fairness. Minimum standards for fair trial are not provided for in Chinese law, such as the right to have adequate time and facilities to prepare a defence, the right to be presumed innocent until proven guilty, and the right to call defence witnesses. In practice, the verdict and sentence are often decided by the authorities before trial. Other major obstacles to fair trial include extreme limitations on the role of defence lawyers and the use of torture to extract "confessions".
Prisoner of conscience Qi Lin, a journalist with the Beijing Daily newspaper, was tried in secret in Beijing and sentenced in April to four years' imprisonment on charges of "leaking state secrets". He was accused of telling a Taiwanese newspaper about political sanctions imposed on a member of China's National People's Congress. Qi Lin is diabetic and his health seriously deteriorated in prison. He was released on bail on medical grounds in June but his sentence remained in force.
Two prominent prisoners of conscience were convicted, after more than three years' detention without trial, for their activities during the 1989 protests. Bao Tong, a senior official of the Chinese Communist Party (ccp) and close associate of former ccp leader Zhao Ziyang, was sentenced to seven years' imprisonment in July for "leaking state secrets" and "counter-revolutionary propaganda and incitement". In a related trial. Gao Shan, a researcher in a ccp institute headed by Bao Tong, was sentenced to four years in prison in August for "leaking state secrets". Both trials were held in secret before the Beijing People's Intermediate Court and lasted only a few hours. The court's verdict against Bao Tong indicated that the charge of "leaking state secrets" was based solely on a private conversation between him and Gao Shan. An appeal by Bao Tong was rejected in August by Beijing Municipal High People's Coiut.
New information was received in 1992 about unfair trials of political prisoners in previous years. For example, information was received that Hu Hai, a peasant from Liuzhuang township in Henan Province, had been sentenced to three years' imprisonment in November 1991 for taking part in peaceful petitions by peasants against local taxes. He was convicted by a local court in Weihui city of "disturbing social order".
CHINA
The authorities restricted the freedom of movement, association and other fundamental human rights of released prisoners of conscience. Restrictions on freedom of movement included being forced to live in specific isolated areas, house arrest, and regular mandatory reporting to local Public Security offices. Relatives of former political prisoners were also harassed and subjected to restrictions.
Torture and ill-treatment of prisoners were common. The methods most frequently cited were severe beatings, shocks with electric batons and the use of shackles. Deprivation of sleep or food, exposure to extremes of cold or heat, and being forced to adopt exhausting postures were also reported to be common during interrogation. Such torture and ill-treatment of prisoners were said to be particularly severe in Liaoning, Shaanxi and Hunan provinces and in the Tibet Autonomous Region.
Political prisoners in Lingyuan No. 2 Labour Reform Camp in Liaoning Province were repeatedly beaten and given electric shocks with high-voltage batons. As a result, several reportedly needed hospital treatment. However, despite international appeals on behalf of the victims, no investigation was known to have been initiated by the authorities and allegations of torture continued to be received. The victims included Liu Gang, who had been a student leader in Beijing during the 1989 protests.
Political prisoners reportedly tortured in Hunan Province included Yu Dongyue, Yu Zhijian and Lu Decheng, who were sentenced in 1989 to long prison terms after being convicted of defacing a portrait of Mao Zedong and distributing political leaflets. By early 1992 they had been held continuously in solitary confinement in extremely harsh conditions for more than two years in Hunan Provincial No. 3 Prison in Lingling; two of them were reported to be in poor health,
Torture and ill-treatment of prisoners also reportedly continued in Tibet. Tane Jigme Sangpo, a primary teacher detained since 1983, and three others remained in solitary confinement; they had been put in solitary confinement in December 1991 after one of them shouted slogans supporting Tibetan independence. There were fears for the health of Tane Jigme Sangpo, who had spent a total of 25 years in prison
since 1960. hiformation was received that Laba Dunzhu, a Tibetan political detainee, had died at the People's Hospital in Lhasa in November 1991 after being transferred there from Gutsa Detention Centre. He had been arrested in 1989 and was reportedly tortured in detention, suffering a ruptured spleen and other injuries.
Han Dongfang, a former prisoner of conscience and a prominent labour activist during the 1989 protests, was reportedly beaten, kicked and stunned with electric batons by court officials in May when he appeared before the Dongcheng District People's Court in Beijing on a matter related to his housing.
During the year the authorities revealed that 407 cases of "torture to extract confessions" had been investigated and prosecuted by the procuracy in 1991 - a figure believed to represent only a fraction of actual cases.
Prison conditions were often harsh and many prisoners were reported to have fallen ill as a result. Prisoners faced prolonged periods in solitary confinement as punishment, often resulting in physical or psychological disorders. Medical care was frequently inadequate. Ren Wanding, a prisoner of conscience held in Beijing since 1989, was reported to be in danger of losing his sight and to have numerous other health problems. Li Guiren, an editor from Xi'an in Shaanxi Province held since 1989, became severely ill in prison in late 1991 but was still reportedly being denied adequate medical care in July. Several himger-strikes were held by prisoners to protest against prison conditions, including one begun in August in Yang Qing Prison by Wang Juntao, a vmter and political activist who had been sentenced to 13 years' imprisonment in 1991 for his involvement in the 1989 protests (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
The dramatic increase in the use of the death penalty which began in 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991) continued, particularly during an anti-drug campaign in the first half of the year. At least 1,891 death sentences and 1,079 executions were recorded by Amnesty International, but the actual figures were believed to be far higher. Many of those executed were tried under legislation which allows for summary procedures.
Throughout the year Amnesty International urged the authorities to release
china/colombia
prisoners of conscience, ensure fair trials for all political prisoners and commute all death sentences. The government did not respond directly to any of these appeals and did not allow Amnesty International representatives to attend political trials or visit the country.
In oral statements to the United Nations (un) Commission on Human Rights in February and to its Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns in China.
In April Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in China for un review under a procedure, established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728f/1 503, for confidential consideration of communications about human rights violations.
The organization published several reports about human rights violations in China including; in January, Amnesty International's Concerns in Tibet, in February, Drugs and the Death Penalty in 1991; in May, Continued Patterns of Human Rights Violations in China and Repression in Tibet, 1987-1992\ in November, Secret Violence: Human Rights Violations in Xinjiang; and in December, Torture in China.
