CROATIA
Thousands of people, the majority of them Serbs, were charged with armed rebellion or seeking to undermine the territorial unity of Croatia by force; they included some prisoners of conscience detained on account of their ethnic origin. There were reports of extrajudicial executions by members of the Croatian Army. In areas under Serbian control, "special police units" were linked to the extrajudicial execution of over 50 people. Many people were beaten and ill-treated in custody by civilian or military police and at least three people died in Split as a result. People detained in areas under Serbian control were also reportedly beaten and ill-treated in custody, as a result of which at least four died.
The conflict in Croatia largely ended with the signing of a cease-fire agreement which came into effect in January and allowed the establishment of a United Nations (un) peace-keeping force in areas of Croatia under Serbian control. These areas, amounting to almost one third of the territory of Croatia, were named United Nations Protected Areas (unpas). In May Croatia became a member of the un.
As a result of the conflict in the former Yugoslavia, there were over 750,000 displaced persons in Croatia, including at least 450,000 refugees from Bosnia-Herzegovina.
According to official Croatian figures.
military courts passed judgment in 423 cases of war crimes and crimes against humanity. The conviction rate was 91 per cent and most of those convicted were Serbs. In several cases, members of the Croatian Army who had been charged with the miirder of Serbian civilians or captured soldiers were released, either after acquittal or pending further trial proceedings. The military public prosecutor of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia stated in November that proceedings had been started there against 125 members of the Croatian Army accused of war crimes and crimes against humanity; 60 had been indicted and 12 convicted. Most, however, had already been released in prisoner exchanges with Croatia in August.
According to official Croatian figures, some 20,000 people were charged between August 1990 and June 1992 with armed rebellion, many of whom were tried in absentia. Over 70 per cent of those charged were Serbs. Among these were people who appeared to have been prosecuted solely because of their ethnic origin. For example, a Serb from the Split area arrested in June and charged together with 44 others with "armed rebellion" was detained in prison for two months, despite lack of evidence against him. He was then, £igainst his will, offered in an exchange of prisoners with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. In August he refused to be exchanged and returned to Split, where he was rearrested and held for 24 hours before finally being released.
Proceedings against many people charged with "armed rebellion" were discontinued under an amnesty granted in September. In December, 94 prisoners were pardoned. Among them were 38 Serbs fi:om the village of Budimci who had been arrested in April and convicted on charges of preparing or taking part in armed rebellion in November 1991. According to the Croatian Vice-Premier, members of the Yugoslav National Army (jna) had distributed arms to them, but they had not used the arms. Also pardoned were members of the Croatian Army, among them 11 men variously convicted of murder, attempted murder and assault and battery.
In areas under Croatian Government control, there were reports of extrajudicial executions committed by members of the Croatian Army. In November a goverrunent official stated that the "Croatian police will
CROATIA
do eveiything they can to ensure that the Croatian state becomes as soon as possible a legal state in which peace and protection will be provided for all citizens, regardless of their religion, race or nationality". However, in certain areas local authorities sometimes appeared unwilling or unable to take effective action against extrajudicial executions or to bring their perpetrators to justice. According to the military prosecutor of Osijek, in the first nine months of the year, members of the Croatian Army had been responsible for 72 killings in the Osijek area alone and there had been 14 convictions. Those killed included Serbs, among them four elderly people in Markuáica in August.
In the unpas. particularly in eastern Slavonia and the Knin area, local Serbian authorities largely failed to implement the un peace plan's demilitarization program; Serbian irregulars, including refugees from Bosnia-Herzegovina, were absorbed into units, described as "special police units", which retained their military weaponry. In October a senior un official reportedly linked these "special police units" to the murders of some 50 non-Serbs in eastern Slavonia between April and October. Among the victims were an elderly Croatian couple from Branjin Vrh. By the end of the year reports indicated that the security of remaining non-Serbs in eastern Slavonia had improved. Serbian authorities in the unpas pointed to numerous violations of the cease-fire by Croatian forces in which they claimed civilians as well as members of Serbian forces had been killed. In December a un Commission of Experts investigating war crimes in former Yugoslavia found evidence of a mass grave in a field near Vukovar alleged to contain the bodies of up to 300 men extrajudicially executed by jna units, together with Serbian irregulars, in November 1991.
A number of people died after being tortured or otherwise ill-treated in custody by Croatian military or civilian police. At least three reportedly died as a result of torture by the military police in Split. They included Nenad Kne¿evi6, a Serb, who was arrested at home in Kaátel Lukáié on 13 June by five Croatian military police officers. A day later he was taken to hospital in Split in a coma. A certificate issued by the hospital stated that he was being treated for injuries to the liver, bruising of the body and head, four broken ribs and
gunshot woimds. He died on 23 June. In August Dalibor Sardelié, a Croat, died following arrest; in September criminal proceedings were started against four military police officers in connection with his death, but by the end of the year they had not been brought to trial.
In June Serbian authorities in Knin handed over to the Croatian authorities the bodies of two soldiers and three civilians (two of them women) from Bosnia-Herzegovina. The five had reportedly died in Knin prison on various dates in April and May. Autopsies carried out in Split hospital concluded that four had died as a result of injuries inflicted by beatings. The cause of death of the fifth could not be established because of putrefaction.
After tens of thousands of people fleeing Bosnia-Herzegovina had been admitted to Croatia, the Croatian Government announced that it could not accept any more refugees. From July onwards, there were several reports that people fleeing Bosnia-Herzegovina without proper documents were being refused entry at the Croatian border, in violation of international standards. In August, dozens of men of military age were forcibly returned ft-om Croatia to Bosnia-Herzegovina; after protests from un officials, the government reportedly agreed to halt such returns. However, in November there were further reports that refugees had been forcibly sent back to Bosnia-Herzegovina from Croatia.
In January Amnesty International wrote to the Croatian authorities expressing concern about reports of the arrest or "disappearance" in the previous months of a number of Serbs. The organization asked about the reason for their arrest and called for the release of any who had not been charged with a recognizably criminal offence, and for all others to be granted proper legal safeguards. Amnesty International also urged the authorities to take effective action to ensure that law enforcement officers implemented international standards for law enforcement. The organization subsequently learned of the release of several people about whom it had inquired, but the fate of others remained unknown. In October Amnesty International called on the Croatian authorities not to return people against their will to Bosnia-Herzegovina, since they risked becoming victims of human rights abuses.
In November Amnesty International
croatia/cuba
wrote to the government expressing concern about human rights abuses committed by all parties to the conflict in Bosnia-Herzegovina (see Bosnia-Herzegovina entry). It said that the governments of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and of Croatia shared a heavy responsibility for abuses to the extent that they had supported politically and materially the various forces operating in Bosnia-Herzegovina. Amnesty International called on all parties to ensure respect for international human rights and humanitarian standards.
