MADAGASCAR
Government forces killed at least five people in a demonstration; it appeared they might have been extrajudicially executed.
There was conflict throughout the year between supporters of President Didier Ratsfraka, known as federalists, and his
madagascar/malawi
principal rival in the presidential elections, Albert Zaiy. Several people were killed in the violence. President Ratsiraka, who came to power in 1975, had been deprived of all but titular powers in 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992], although he retained control of the Presidential Guard. Albert Zafy, leader of the political alliance Hery Velona, Active Forces Committee, headed the High State Authority, part of the interim government established in November 1991 to introduce a multi-party political system. He escaped an assassination attempt on 30 March.
A new Constitution, drafted in March by a National Forum which included opposition parties and the churches, was approved by referendum in August. The federalists wanted the referendum to offer the option of a federal as well as a unitary constitution and prevented voting in some provincial towns. In August and October they seized control of radio stations and administrative buildings in provincial capitals, declared the provinces of Antsir-anana, Toamasina and Toliary to be "federal states", and cut off oil supplies and railway links from the port of Toamasina toHhe capital, Antananarivo. They also took captive members of Hery Velona.
The first round of presidential elections in November was won by Albert Zafy, with a further round and legislative elections planned for 1993.
In March the government became a party to the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights.
At least 14 people were detained after an armed group briefly seized control of the national radio station in Antananarivo in July and announced the dissolution of the government. They were reportedly members of an opposition group, the National Unity Rally, which had taken similar action in 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991]. The detainees were charged in September with attempting to overthrow the government, taking hostages and disturbing the peace, and were released to await trial.
On 31 March, eight people were killed and 31 wounded when hundreds of federalists tried to force their way into the National Forum's debate on the new constitution. At least five unarmed federalist demonstrators, including Gaston Lahy, a former goverrunent minister, were shot dead by soldiers.
On 8 October troops shot dead eight people. including federalist leader Mohamed Koubessy and journalist Thérèse Bandrou, in clashes with armed federalists trying to close the airport at Antsiranana. Mohamed Koubessy had previously been arrested after political violence in June in which six people had died, but had escaped from custody with the assistance of some soldiers.
In August and October supporters of President Ratsiraka took captive several Hery Velona members in Antsiranana and reportedly beat some of them. Although some were released within days, others were apparently held for several weeks; they included Dr Jeanson Rakotoeu^inivo, a medical doctor, and Patricia Bardoux, a French sculptor. Also in August, federalists were reported to have killed a director of a sugar company in Ambilobe, northern Madagascar, who had been nominated to the post by Hery Velona.
Amnesty International called for an inquiry into the killings of the federalists in March and October and urged that, if they were found to be extrajudicial executions, those responsible should be brought to justice. No inquiries were opened into these killings, and there was still no indication that any inquiry had taken place into the extrajudicial execution of dozens of demonstrators by the Presidential Guard in August 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
