ZAIRE
More than 100 suspected opponents of the government, including prisoners of conscience, were detained during 1992. Although many of them were released, more than 70 were still held without charge or trial at the end of the year. About 30 soldiers, including one prisoner of conscience, were convicted unfairly by military courts. Torture and ill-treatment of detainees and government opponents were widely reported. Several dozen people "disappeared" after being arrested or abducted by armed men believed to be members of the security forces. Soldiers responsible for dozens of extrajudicial executions of civilians went unpunished.
The Sovereign National Conference which began in August 1991 to review and reform Zaire's political system continued, despite objections by President Mobutu Sese Seko and his supporters. In mid-January Prime Minister Nguz a Karl-i-Bond stopped its proceedings, saying that it was too costly. He also said it was dominated by members of the Luba ethnic group, apparently because Etienne Tshisekedi, a Luba and leading opponent of President Mobutu, was favoured by the Conference to replace Nguz a Karl-i-Bond as Prime Minister. The Conference resumed in April following pressure on the government from a series of workers' strikes and demonstrations and from foreign governments.
Conference delegates opposed to President Mobutu accused him and his supporters of responsibility for the country's social and economic collapse and for gross human rights violations. Delegates loyal to President Mobutu pulled out of the Confer-
ence several times, claiming that the criticism was unjustified and defamatory. In May the Conference set up several commissions to investigate responsibility for crimes, including human rights violations, committed since President Mobutu came to power in 1965. The outcome of the investigations had not been announced by the end of the year.
In August the National Conference elected Etienne Tshisekedi, who had been imprisoned several times as a prisoner of conscience since 1980, to replace Nguz a Karl-i-Bond as Prime Minister. However, President Mobutu retained control over most state institutions, including some of the security forces, and refused to relinquish some of his powers as requested by the National Conference.
Political violence broke out in the country's southeastern Shaba region after the replacement of Nguz a Karl-i-Bond, as members of his Lunda ethnic group attacked members of new Prime Minister Tshisekedi's Luba commimity, killing dozens. Thousands of Luba left Shaba after their homes had been destroyed. The security forces did not intervene until several weeks after the violence had begun.
Following the January suspension of the National Conference, the security forces-violently suppressed peaceful demonstrations calling for the resumption of the Conference. A peaceful march in Kinshasa on 16 February organized by lay Christian religious leaders was broken up using firearms, hot-water carmons, metal-tipped whips and tear-gas. At least 37 people were killed and dozens more injured. At least 50 demonstrators were arrested, including three Belgian missionaries. About 10 other demonstrators were detained dming another protest on 1 March.
The detainees, all apparently prisoners of conscience, were released without charge by the end of April. The authorities refused to order a public inquiry into the security forces' behaviour on 16 February, claiming that their intervention was necessary because the demonstration was illegal.
Eight people preparing to welcome a delegation of French-based human rights activists were arrested at Kinshasa airport in December. The eight, all prisoners of conscience, included Mukendi wa Mu-lumba, a lawyer and adviser to Prime Minister Tshisekedi, and three security advisers to the Prime Minister. The eight
ZAIRE
were assaulted at the time of their arrest by troops loyal to the President, and were held incommunicado for three days until they were released without charge.
One other prisoner of conscience, Luc Mayolo Mokakoso, a lieutenant-colonel and army dentist, was held throughout the year. He had been arrested with several other soldiers in July 1991 and accused of plotting against the government, apparently because of their suspected links with opposition political parties. They were held at Ndolo military prison in Kinshasa where they were reportedly ill-treated and denied visits. Luc Mayolo Mokakoso's co-accused were provisionally released in mid-1992 and went into hiding in apparent fear of rearrest. He was tried by a military court in July 1992 and convicted of disobeying military orders by contacting politicians in order to form a political group within the army known as the Military Committee for National Salvation. He was sentenced to two years' imprisonment with hard labour.
Sixty-two soldiers arrested in January remained in incommunicado detention, without charge or trial, throughout the year. The authorities said they had committed criminal offences but others maintained they had been arrested on suspicion of sympathizing with opposition parties. They were transferred to Irebu military prison in Equateur region. At least two of them were later reported to have died from torture and lack of medical care.
Twenty-four soldiers were convicted in April by the Higher Court Martial in Kinshasa after an unfair trial. Four others were acquitted. They had all been arrested on 22 January after occupying a studio in Kinshasa's radio and television complex and broadcasting an appeal to President Mobutu's government to resign. They were held incommunicado at Kinshasa's Camp Tshatshi military barracks where they were reported to have been tortured. They had no access to legal counsel before their trial. The 24 who were convicted included 17 who the authorities claimed had escaped, and who were tried in absentia and sentenced to death for endangering the security of the state. There were fears expressed, however, that these 17 had been killed in custody before the trial and there had been no news of them by the end of the year. Of the 11 prisoners who appeared in court, seven were convicted and sentenced to
prison terms of between five and 10 years.
Tortuje and ill-treatment of prisoners and other government opponents was reportedly widespread. For example, the soldiers tried in April told the court that while in custody members of the Division spéciale présidentielle (dsp). Special Presi--dential Division, had systematically tortured them to force them to confess and to implicate civilian political opposition leaders. They claimed that they had been regularly stripped and beaten with whips and gun butts. They were stabbed with bayonets and subjected to mock executions, and, in some cases, sexually assaulted. The court failed to order an investigation into the torture allegations and rejected demands by their lawyers that they should be examined by a doctor.
There were numerous reports of starvation and unsanitary conditions in Zairian prisons and detention centres. Dozens of prisoners were reported to have died in Kinshasa's Makala prison as a result of malnutrition and medical neglect.
In April and May there were reports of torture of civilians, including the rape of dozens of women, by members of the security forces during ^an anti-poaching operation around Salonga National Park, in Equateur region's Boende sub-region. Members of the security forces reportedly tortured men to force them to hand over property and to prevent them protesting about the rape of their wives or daughters. More than a dozen people were reportedly executed extrajudicially during the operation. Unarmed villagers were reportedly shot simply because they protested. Despite protests from local human rights groups, the authorities were not known to have investigated the reports or taken any action against the culprits.
Several dozen people, some of them suspected government opponents, reportedly "disappeared", especially in Kinshasa. They were reportedly abducted from their homes or on the streets by armed men in civilian clothes. For example, Jean-Marie Katonga Kabuluku, a former member of the National Assembly and a supporter of Etienne Tshisekedi's party, was reportedly abducted by unidentified men in January and had not been found by the end of the year. In July René Kanda, a resident of Kinshasa's Selembao zone, was seized by men in plain clothes carrying bayonets and handcuffs; his whereabouts remained
ZAIREyZAMBIA
unknown. Appeals by human rights groups and relatives to the authorities to investigate these "disappearances" remained unanswered. The failure of the security forces to observe formal detention procedures made it difficult to identify those responsible for the abductions or to establish if the "disappeared" were in custody.
There were numerous reports of people being extrajudicially executed by soldiers engaged in looting or during reprisal attacks on civilians. In January soldiers in Kinshasa killed at least two people who apparently tried to stop them looting their homes. In mid-October several people were reportedly killed by soldiers on a looting spree in Mbandaka, the capital of Equateur region. In November soldiers near Likasi in Shaba reportedly executed extrajudicially about 10 villagers to avenge an army officer found dead in a village. The authorities failed to punish those responsible for these killings and for the killings of 37 demonstrators on 16 February, effectively condoning extrajudicial executions.
The United Nations (un) Special Rapporteur on summary and arbitrary executions told the un Commission on Human Rights in February that his investigation into an attack on students at Lubumbashi university campus in May 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1992) had revealed that government troops had been involved and had killed students. He called for an official inquiry into the attack to be reopened, but the authorities took no action.
Seventeen soldiers convicted in absentia in April were still under sentence of death at the end of the year. A group of 24 others convicted of murder and robbery in 1989 were also known to remain under sentence of death. No executions of prisoners sentenced to death were reported.
Amnesty International protested at the killings of demonstrators in February, and other alleged extrajudicial executions. It called on the authorities to forbid the use of firearms and other lethal weapons by the security forces when lives were not at risk, and to investigate impartially reports of extrajudicial executions. The organization called for the release of Luc Mayolo Mokakoso and other prisoners of conscience and urged the government to account for prisoners and others who had "disappeared".
