GUYANA
Allegations of torture and ill-treatment of people by the police continued. At least three people were sentenced to death for murder and some 25 people were under sentence of death at the end of the year. No executions were carried out.
The People's Progressive Party (???) came to power after winning a general election in October, defeating the People's National Congress (pnc) which had governed the country since 1964. The ?pp leader Dr Cheddi Jagan became President.
There were several reports of torture and other ill-treatment by the police. Har-dath Ramdass, a ??? supporter, was arrested in January and allegedly tortured while being questioned about an alleged plot to
GUYANA/HAITI
overthrow the pnc government and about armed robberies. In an affidavit he alleged that he was blindfolded, shackled, stripped and beaten repeatedly about the head, body and soles of his feet, was kicked in the groin and had a gun placed in his mouth and a liquid resembling methylated spirits poured into his ears. His lawyer who saw him in custody four days after his arrest said that he saw "marks of violence" on his body. Hardath Ramdass was released without charge after eight days in custody. A 13-year-old boy arrested with him was held for four days in police custody with adult prisoners and allegedly threatened into signing a statement before being released without charge.
The wife of a murder suspect alleged that five plainclothes police officers assigned to search her house raped her on a public road in July and that she was raped again by both police and prisoners while detained at a police lock-up. The Police Commissioner announced in September that an investigation into the allegations had been completed but the results were not made public. The woman's lawyer was reported to be considering a private prosecution against the officers allegedly involved.
There was no information regarding the outcome of police investigations into the alleged ill-treatment of suspects in police custody in June and July 1991 and threats made against human rights worker Shirley Howells, who was briefly kidnapped by unidentified men in October 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
The trial was still pending in the case of several people charged with treason, which carries a mandatory death penalty on conviction (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
At least three people were sentenced to death for murder. However, no executions were carried out for the second consecutive year.
Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Home Affairs in May expressing concern at the alleged torture of Hardath Ramdass and urging that a full, impartial inquiry be held, The Minister replied that the case had been referred to the Attorney General for action.
In October Amnesty International wrote to the Police Complaints Authority about alleged police abuses during the past two years, including the case of Hardath Ram-
dass and several fatal police shootings of unarmed suspects who appeared to offer no immediate threat of deadly resistance. Amnesty International asked whether the cases it mentioned had been reviewed by the Authority or passed to the police for investigation and for the results of any such inquiries. No response was received.
In December Amnesty International wrote to President Jagan, welcoming the fact that there had been no executions for two years and urging the government to take steps to abolish the death penalty. It also asked about the outcome of investigations into police torture and ill-treatment, including the rape case cited above and cases involving questionable shootings. The organization called for the United Nations Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officers and the Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms to be incorporated into police codes and practice.
