TURKMENISTAN
At least 11 government opponents spent short periods under house arrest; they were prisoners of conscience. At least four death sentences were passed and at least four executions were carried out.
Turkmenistan's independence, declared in October 1991, was recognized internationally following the dissolution of the Soviet Union. Headed by President Saparmurad Niyazov, Turkmenistan
304
uniïed states of americaajruguay
Attorney General of Mississippi in November, urging that a full, independent inquiry be held into the death of a black youth, Andre Lamond Jones, found hanged in August in a Mississippi jail. Although his death had been ruled a suicide, no inquest was held and family and community members expressed concern about the circumstances. The Attorney General replied that extensive inquiries had been conducted into the case but gave no further information. Amnesty International continued to seek information on the case.
In oral statements to the un Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August and its Working Group on Indigenous Populations in July, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns in the usa. In October Amnesty International published Human rights violations against the indigenous peoples of the Americas, which included concerns in the usa. In November Amnesty International published a report, usa: Human rights and American Indians. Cases described in the report included prisoners under sentence of death; allegations of ill-treatment; fair trial concerns in the case of Leonard Peltier and concerns surrounding the unsolved murder of an Indian lawyer, Julian Pierce, in North Carolina in 1988.
URUGUAY
Beatings and other forms of ill-treatment of criminal suspects by police continued to be reported. Judicial investigations into most reported human rights violations committed in recent years made little progress. The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights ruled that the 1986
Expiry Law which blocked investigations into human rights violations committed before 1986 was incompatible with the American Convention on Human Rights, and called on the government to investigate killings, torture and "disappearances" committed under the military government of the 1970s and early 1980s.
During the year there was a resurgence of clandestine armed groups allegedly linked to the military, which carried out several violent attacks, including bombings. Among the groups claiming responsibility were the Guardia de Artigas, Artigas Guard, and the Comando Juan Antonio Lavalleja, Juan Antonio Lavalleja Commando, which reportedly said it had been formed by 50 military officers, 15 of them on active duty. Among those whose property was attacked were former President Sanguinetti, the Commander-in-Chief of the Navy and a parliamentary deputy.
Uruguay ratified the Inter-American Convention to Prevent and Punish Torture in November.
New reports of ill-treatment of detainees in police custody were received. At least five of the victims were minors. In some cases, complaints were presented to the courts for investigation, but to Amnesty International's knowledge those responsible were not brought to justice.
Beatings were the most common method of ill-treatment, but other methods were also reported. One man arrested in Artigas in mid-1992 said that he had been deprived of food for three days to make him confess to a murder he had not committed.
In August a 17-year-old mentally handicapped youth shot in the leg as he attempted to flee from police was reportedly beaten on the injured leg while in police custody. His leg was fractured in three places but it was several hours before he received any medical treatment. Two 14-year-old youths arrested in Salto in August alleged that they were beaten on the chest and stomach and made to run around inside the police station. The head of pohce in Salto later made a public commitment to investigate the incident and punish those responsible, but it was not clear to Amnesty International whether any action was taken.
Little progress was reported in judicial investigations into cases of torture and ill-treatment which had occurred in previous
uruguay/uzbekistan
years. In April the United Nations (un) Committee against Torture recognized the government's commitment to abide by its international obligations but called on it "to prosecute cases of torture which were still outstanding".
In December, following the publication in a national newspaper of photographs claiming to show four detainees chained to their beds in punishment cells in Libertad prison, members of the Human Rights Commission of the House of Representatives visited the prison to investigate these claims, including the authenticity of the photographs, and other allegations of ill-treatment. Allegations were also received that excessive force had been used in a security operation in the prison shortly before the photographs were published. Prisoners said that a group of guards acting without the director's authority were responsible for the ill-treatment. The commission's report on its findings was due in early 1993. A judicial investigation was also initiated.
In its report to the un Committee against Torture, the government stated that information about the death of 16-year-old Rafael Berón Charquero in Miguelete prison in 1991 had been passed to the judicial authorities, and that as a result of an administrative inquiry two special staff at the prison had been dismissed (see Amnesty International Report 1992). Lawyers acting on behalf of his family presented a civil suit for damages against the state, which was continuing at the end of the year.
In the case of Raúl González, who was shot dead by police in 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992), the state agreed to pay substantial damages to his family after acknowledging that one of its employees was responsible for his death.
No steps were taken to bring to justice those responsible for killings, "disappearances" and torture during the period of military rule from 1973 to 1985. In October the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights ruled that the 1986 Expiry Law (see Amnesty International Reports 1988 to 1992) was incompatible with the American Convention on Human Rights. Among other things, it violated the right to a fair trial and the right to court protection against acts that violate fundamental human rights. The Commission recommended that the government take measures
to clarify the facts and identify those responsible for human rights violations during the period of military rule.
In May a judge ordered that a blood test should be carried out on a 15-year-oId boy to ascertain whether he was the "disappeared" son of Sara Méndez (see Amnesty International Report 1992). Lawyers acting on behalf of the adoptive parents of the boy appealed against the judge's decision to order the blood test against the boy's will. The judge had ruled that under Uruguayan law a minor is not capable of acting "with mature judgement". The appeal was still pending at the end of the year.
UZBEKISTAN
305
Several prisoners of conscience were detained. Opponents of the government and independent journalists were assaulted by unidentified attackers, possibly with the complicity of the authorities.
Uzbekistan's independence, declared in August 1991, was recognized internationally following the dissolution of the Soviet Union. Headed by President Islam Kari-mov, Uzbekistan became a member of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe in January and the United Nations in March.
Prisoner of conscience Babur Shakirov was arrested in August and charged with "calling for the overthrow of the state and social order" under Article 60 of the Criminal Code. The charge related to his involvement in forming a non-violent social organization called Milli Mejlis. National Council. He had previously been a prisoner of conscience for 10 years under the Soviet government. In December, two other organizers of Milli Mejlis - Khazratkul Khuday-berdi and Odanazar Arifov - were arrested on the same charge as Babur Shakirov. The same month human rights activist Abdu-mannob Pulatov was abducted by Uzbek
