COMOROS
About 30 soldiers and civilians arrested during and after a coup attempt in September were still held without trial at the end of the year. Among them were possible prisoners of conscience. Some of the detainees were reportedly tortured and all were held incommunicado in harsh conditions. Several civilians were killed during the coup attempt and there were reports that some were extrajudicially executed by loyalist forces.
Following a national reconciliation pact between President Said Mohamed Djohar and opposition political parties at the end of 1991, a new government led by a former
comoros
opposition leader, Mohamed Taki, was formed in January. Mohamed Taki is leader of the Union nationale pour la démocratie aux Comores (uNDc), National Union for Democracy in the Comoros, whose supporters had been arrested and accused of an attempted coup in 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
A National Conference to discuss the coimtry's political future started in January and ended in April. Conference delegates drafted a new federal Constitution which was adopted by referendum in June.
The National Conference was followed by a period of political instability. In May the President appointed a new government, again headed by Mohamed Taki. In July President Djohar accused Mohamed Taki of appointing a former French mercenary to a government post and dismissed him and the government. The undc and other opposition parties accused the President of violating the national reconciliation pact and called for his resignation. In early September the government announced that legislative elections would be held in October. In mid-September members of the gendarmerie used violence to disperse demonstrators in Moroni demanding the President's resignation. The first round of legislative elections on 22 November was marred by violence and gross irregularities, and some opposition parties boycotted them. The second round passed more peacefully and a number of National Assembly members were elected.
On 26 September about 100 soldiers took control of the national radio and announced that they had deposed President Djohar. They were led by two sons of former President Mohamed Abdallah, who was assassinated in November 1989 and succeeded by President Djohar (see Amnesty International Report 1990). Forces loyal to the government thwarted the coup and about 10 soldiers involved in the revolt, including former President Abdallah's sons, were captured.
In the aftermath of the coup attempt more than 20 civilians were detained, including Omar Tamou, a former Minister of the Interior and member of the Udzima political party, and M'Tara Maecha, a former Minister of Foreign Afiairs. They were apparently detained because they had expressed support for the overthrow of President Djohar. None had been tried by the end of the year, although the author-
ities said in October that they would soon be brought to trial. A few were released without charge by mid-October, including Djamal Edine Salim, a former Minister of Justice and Public Service. At least five people, including Loutfi Adenane, President of the Parti comorien pour la démocratie et îe progrès (pcdp), Comorian Party for Democracy and Progress, were charged with complicity in the coup attempt but released provisionally. Omar Tamou, M'Tara Maecha and about 20 other civilians remained in custody at the end of the year. Some of them appeared to be prisoners of conscience detained solely on the basis of their non-violent opposition to President Djohar. On 6 October the 10 detained soldiers appeared before an examining magistrate who remanded them in custody in a civilian prison. However, military officials transferred them instead to Kandani military barracks, despite protests by judicial officials and defence lawyers.
Some of the detainees were reportedly tortured. One of them, Hassan Arouna, was said to have been severely beaten while in police custody for eight days in October, with resulting damage to one of his eyes and paralysis of the right side of his face. He was subsequently transferred to prison where he received medical treatment, but no action appeared to have been taken against those who tortured him. The detained soldiers were kept incommunicado in harsh conditions: each was held in a separate cell with no furniture and only straw to sleep on.
At least six civilians were killed in mid-October during and after an attack on Kandani barracks by armed government opponents who were apparently trying to free the 10 imprisoned soldiers. Opposition sources and the Comorian Human Rights Association claimed that some of those killed were executed extrajudicially by government troops on suspicion of supporting the armed opponents. Among those killed were Ahmed Abdallah Djida, an aide to Mohamed Taki, and two former soldiers who were said to have been extrajudicially executed at a private house where they were staying overnight. These claims could not be confirmed; however, no investigations were undertaken by the authorities to indicate the exact circumstances in which the killings occurred.
During the year Amnesty International learned that four supporters of the undc
comoros/congo
who had been held since 1990 in connection with an alleged coup attempt had been freed at the end of 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992). None had been brought to trial. They included All Soihili, a journalist, and Abdou Bakar Boina, a former secretary general of the undc.
After the coup attempt Amnesty International urged the government to investigate reported killings of civilians by government soldiers in the aftermath of the coup attempt and to bring to justice anyone responsible for committing extrajudicial executions. Amnesty International also called for the release of those against whom there was no evidence of involvement in the coup attempt and for those accused of involvement to be tried in accordance with international standards for fair trial. It urged the authorities to end the use of prolonged incommunicado detention.
