BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA
Hundreds, probably thousands, of civilians and captured or wounded combatants were deliberately and arbitrarily killed in the course of armed conflict. Tens of thousands of people were detained in connection with the fighting, in most cases solely because of their ethnic origin, sometimes as hostages for exchange. Torture or other ill-treatment of detainees, including rape, was common. Although all sides in the conflict were responsible for abuses, the majority of victims were Muslims and the main perpetrators were local Serbian armed forces.
Ethnic tensions increased in Bosnia-Herzegovina with the break-up of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia following declarations of independence by the Republics of Slovenia and Croatia in June 1991, and subsequent armed conflict, largely on Croatian territory. Bosnia-Herzegovina's Serbian communities sought to remain within a Yugoslav federation while its Muslim and Croatian communities demanded independence. At the beginning of March open conflict flared up when a referendum, supported by Muslim and Croatian communities but largely boycotted by Serbian communities, favoured independence for the republic. By mid-March serious fighting had broken out. On 7 April the European Community (ec) and the United States of America recognized Bosnia-Herzegovina's independence. The same day, Serbian political leaders proclaimed the independence of "the Serbian Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina" (areas of
BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA
the republic under Serbian control). Fighting spread rapidly throughout Bosnia-Herzegovina. In April the Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina was accepted as a participatory state in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe and in May it became a member of the United Nations (un).
Numerous members of the Yugoslav National Army (jna) of Bosnian origin, as well as jna supplies and arms, remained in the republic after the official withdrawal of the ina in May. By December, together with mobilized local Serbian reservists and Serbian irregulars, they had occupied some 70 per cent of the republic's territory. Local Croatian forces, aided by forces of the Croatian Army and Croatian irregulars from the Republic of Croatia, established control over much of Herzegovina, proclaimed as the "Croatian Community of Herceg-Bosna". This led to sporadic clashes with Bosnian government forces, although the two were supposedly allied. The area of the republic over which the Bosnian Government had effective control declined throughout the year.
Vast numbers of civilians fled their local communities to escape the conflict; many were deliberately intimidated by their opponents into leaving. This was particularly evident in areas under Serbian control, where many Muslims and Croats were rounded up and forcibly expelled. The scale of human rights abuses and the obstacles to collecting evidence made it difficult to substantiate allegations of atrocities. The difficulty was compounded by media reports in which all sides sought to minimize abuses committed by their own forces and maximize those of their opponents. While all parties to the conflict committed abuses, it was clear that the Serbian side was responsible for the majority of atrocities committed and that Muslims were the chief victims. In August the un Commission on Human Rights appointed a Special Rapporteur to investigate the human rights situation in former Yugoslavia, and in particular in Bosnia-Herzegovina. At the end of August a joint un-ec International Conference on the former Yugoslavia was established, which tried to achieve a cessation of hostilities in Bosnia-Herzegovina and to bring the parties together to negotiate a new constitutional arrangement for the country. In October the un Security Council set up a Commission of Experts to
investigate war crimes committed in former Yugoslavia.
There were many reported incidents in which civilians and unarmed or wounded combatants were deliberately and arbitrarily killed. The Yugoslav news agency Tan-jug reported that 15 members of five Serb families had been massacred by Croatian troops on the night of 26 to 27 March in the village of Sijekovac near Bosanski Brod. A Muslim fighting with Croatian forces who claimed to have taken part in this massacre and others described in a statement video-recorded while he was held prisoner in Yugoslavia how he and other soldiers had killed over 30 elderly villagers in their homes and had abducted and raped young women.
On 16 May at least 83 Muslims, including men, women and children, were massacred in the village of ZaklopaCa, near Vlasenica. According to eye-witnesses, the massacre was carried out by local uniformed Serbs who had previously surrounded the village. Some surviving eye-witnesses believed that as many as 105 people were killed.
In the town of Mostar on 13 June, according to the account of a surviving witness (a Muslim), Serbian forces rounded up some 150 people in his neighbourhood. After separating out the women, children and Serbs, they took the remaining men to the morgue at Sutina cemetery. While the witness was waiting to be questioned, he heard bursts of gunfire. After interrogation he and another prisoner were forced to carry the corpses of seven or eight men to a rubbish dump near the banks of the river Neretva. Their captors then fired on his companion; he himself escaped by throwing himself down an embankment. In August the police chief of the town of Mostar announced that 150 bodies had been found in mass graves, one of them in the Sutina quarter of town; a pathologist stated they had almost all been killed at close range.
At least 30 Muslim civilians were reportedly deliberately and arbitrarily killed in Bosanski Petrovac between 19 and 24 September when local Serbian soldiers returning to the town apparently took revenge for losses they had suffered on the front. On 22 October, 16 Muslims, including one woman, from Sjeverin village in the Sandiak region of Serbia were abducted by armed men while travelling to
BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA
work by bus across Serbian-held Bosnian territory. Another Muslim man from Sjev-erin had been abducted the previous night. Borba, a Belgrade newspaper, citing military sources in Serbia, reported that they had been killed the same day by Serbian forces near ViSegrad in Bosnia-Herzegovina. This was never confirmed. Two Serbian irregulars, described by Serbian military sources in Bosnia-Herzegovina as volunteers fighting under the command of the ViSegrad brigade, were arrested in Serbian territory four days later but were soon released. By the end of the year the fate of the 17 remained unknown, despite the creation of a Yugoslav state commission to investigate their "disappearance".
Released Muslim prisoners stated that Serbs had deliberately and arbitrarily killed large numbers of prisoners, including civilians, detained in camps in Bosnia-Herzegovina. Not all these reports could be confirmed, but accounts from many former detainees agreed that in June and July prisoners were killed almost every night in Omarska camp. Many died after being clubbed to death by guards or by local Serbs who entered the camp at night. According to these accounts, on some nights as many as 30 men were killed. Detainees were also reportedly killed in other camps, including Keraterm, Manjaca and Trnopolje. There were also allegations that Serbian prisoners had been killed by their captors. Serbian sources alleged that at least five men held by Bosnian government forces in a place of detention near Konjic died as a result of beatings between mid-June and late July.
Thousands of non-combatants, the majority Muslims, were arbitrarily detained in connection with the conflict, in most cases solely because of their ethnic origin, sometimes as hostages for exchange. In May all parties agreed to give the International Committee of the Red Cross (icrc) access to detention centres, but there continued to be unacknowledged places of detention, ranging from cellars in private houses to factories and school-halls. From September onwards considerable numbers of detainees were released, mostly under the supervision of the icrc. Arbitrary detention was sometimes accompanied by forced expulsion, particularly in areas under Serbian control. For example, on 26 June local Serbs and irregulars from Serbia detained Muslim families in the village of Kozluk
and forced them at gunpoint to board a convoy of lorries which took them to Loznica in Serbia. From there they were taken by train to the Hungarian border, where Serbian police issued them with passports before they crossed into Hungary.
Many detainees were tortured or ill-treated in detention centres, and conditions often amounted to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. In June large mmibers of Muslim and Croat civilian men were detained by Serbian forces in the area of Bosanski Novi; witnesses believed that prominent and better-educated members of the local community had been targeted for detention and interrogation. Villagers from Blagaj were rounded up and transported en masse: women, children and men over 60 were subsequently expelled into Muslim-controlled territory. Several hundred men were held in a football stadium at Mlakve, and individuals were held in Bosanski Novi town, in places such as the police station and a hotel. All witnesses reported that detainees were routinely beaten with truncheons and rifle butts. Former detainees often reported that prisoners were not only beaten, but were also deliberately humiliated and degraded in other ways. For example, prisoners detained by Serbian forces in Keraterm, a ceramics factory near Prijedor, in June and July, alleged that men were forced to perform sexual acts with each other. Almost all accounts indicated that prisoners were severely underfed in camps, and that in some cases, for instance at Omarska, ManjaCa and Trnopolje, this amounted to near-starvation. Serbs held by Muslim forces similarly reported that they were subjected to regular beatings and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Among them was Milan §obi6, a Serbian journalist, who in July was reportedly severely beaten by Muslim irregulars and military police in Zenica. The available evidence indicated that all sides to the conflict raped female prisoners, including young girls, and in some cases kept selected women prisoners in conditions amounting to brothels for the use of the military and police, but the majority of victims were Muslim women held by local Serbian armed forces.
Amnesty International repeatedly called on all parties to the conflict to release all civilians detained solely because of their national origin, and for an end to deliberate
eOSNIA4iERZEGOVIIWBOTSWANA/BIRA2IL
and arbitrary killings and the torture and ill-treatment of detainees. It urged all parties to provide information to relatives and international organizations on. the w^here-abouts and fate of people who "disappeared" after being detained by military, paramilitary or police forces. Amnesty International also urged that full and impartial investigations into human rights abuses be carried out and that the perpetrators be brought to justice. In oral statements to the first and second special sessions of the UN Commission on Human Rights in August and November, Amnesty International urged that a substantial on-site human rights investigative and monitoring operation be established. In October the organization published a report. Bosnia-Herzegovina: Gross abuses of basic human rights.
