URUGUAY
Beatings and other forms of ill-treatment of criminal suspects by police continued to be reported. Judicial investigations into most reported human rights violations committed in recent years made little progress. The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights ruled that the 1986
Expiry Law which blocked investigations into human rights violations committed before 1986 was incompatible with the American Convention on Human Rights, and called on the government to investigate killings, torture and "disappearances" committed imder the military government of the 1970s and early 1980s.
Diuring the year there was a resurgence of clandestine armed groups allegedly linked to the military, which carried out several violent attacks, including bombings. Among the groups claiming responsibility were the Guardia de Artigas, Artigas Guard, and the Gomando Juan Antonio Lavalleja, Juan Antonio Lavalleja Commando, which reportedly said it had been formed by 50 military officers, 15 of them on active duty. Among those whose property was attacked were former President Sanguinetti, the Commander-in-Chief of the Navy and a parliamentary deputy.
Uruguay ratified the Inter-American Convention to Prevent and Punish Torture in November.
New reports of ill-treatment of detainees in police custody were received. At least five of the victims were minors. In some cases, complaints were presented to the coiuls for investigation, but to Amnesty International's knowledge those responsible were not brought to justice.
Beatings were the most common method of ill-treatment, but other methods were also reported. One man arrested in Artigas in mid-1992 said that he had been deprived of food for three days to make him confess to a murder he had not committed.
In August a 17-year-old mentally handicapped youth shot in the leg as he attempted to flee from police was reportedly beaten on the injured leg while in police custody. His leg was fractured in three places but it was several hours before he received any medical treatment. Two 14-year-old youths arrested in Salto in August alleged that they were beaten on the chest and stomach and made to run around inside the police station. The head of police in Salto later made a public commitment to investigate the incident and punish those responsible, but it was not clear to Amnesty International whether any action was taken.
Little progress was reported in judicial investigations into cases of torture and ill-treatment which had occurred in previous
URUGUAY/UZBEKISTAN
years. In April the United Nations (un) Committee against Torture recognized the government's commitment to abide by its international obligations but called on it "to prosecute cases of torture vi'hich were still outstanding".
In December, following the publication in a national newspaper of photographs claiming to show four detainees chained to their beds in punishment cells in Libertad prison, members of the Human Rights Commission of the House of Representatives visited the prison to investigate these claims, including the authenticity of the photographs, and other allegations of ill-treatment. Allegations were also received that excessive force had been used in a security operation in the prison shortly before the photographs were published. Prisoners said that a group of guards acting without the director's authority were responsible for the ill-treatment. The commission's report on its findings was due in early 1993. A judicial investigation was also initiated.
In its report to the un Committee against Torture, the government stated that information about the death of 16-year-old Rafael Berón Charquero in Miguelete prison in 1991 had been passed to the judicial authorities, and that as a result of an administrative inquiry two special staff at the prison had been dismissed (see Amnesty International Report 1992). Lawyers acting on behalf of his family presented a civil suit for damages against the state, which was continuing at the end of the year.
In the case of Raúl González, who was shot dead by police in 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992), the state agreed to pay substantial damages to his family after acknowledging that one of its employees was responsible for his death.
No steps were taken to bring to justice those responsible for killings, "disappearances" and torture during the period of military rule from 1973 to 1985. In October the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights ruled that the 1986 Expiry Law (see Amnesty International Reports 1988 to 1992) was incompatible with the American Convention on Human Rights. Among other things, it violated the right to a fair trial and the right to court protection against acts that violate fundamental human rights. The Commission recommended that the government take measures
to clarify the facts and identify those responsible for human rights violations during the period of military rule.
In May a judge ordered that a blood test should be carried out on a 15-year-old boy to ascertain whether he was the "disappeared" son of Sara Méndez (see /Imnesiy International Report 1992). Lawyers acting on behalf of the adoptive parents of the boy appealed against the judge's decision to order the blood test against the boy's will. The judge had ruled that under Uruguayan law a minor is not capable of acting "with mature judgement". The appeal was still pending at the end of the year.
