PERU
At least 139 people "disappeared" and at least 65 were extrajudicially executed by the security forces. Widespread torture and ill-treatment were reported. Some 70 people were sentenced by military courts to life imprisonment after unfair trials. Two prisoners of conscience were incarcerated. Thousands of past cases of human rights violations remained unclar-ifíed. The main armed opposition group, the Partido Comunista del Perú (Sendero Luminoso) (pcp), Communist Party of Peru (Shining Path), arbitrarily and deliberately killed large numbers of civilians.
Internal armed conflict continued to afflict most of the country and large areas
remained emergency zones under military control. Independent human rights defenders stated that they were unable to visit parts of the country for fear of attacks by the seciuity forces or the pcp. An extensive pattern of human rights violations by the government's seciuity forces was reported throughout the year. Widespread atrocities by the pcp were also reported and, on a significantly lesser scale, by a second armed opposition group, the Movimiento Revolucionario Tupac Amaru (mrta), Túpac Amaru Revolutionary Movement. The pcp carried out deliberate and arbitrary executions of civilians; sabotaged public utilities, co-operatives and rural development projects; detonated powerful car bombs in urban centres; and threatened strike-breakers.
In January and February, in an attempt to strengthen civilian participation in counter-insurgency policies. Congress modified or repealed legislative decrees issued by the executive in 1991. However, on 5 April President Alberto Fujimori, with the full backing of the Armed Forces Joint Command, dissolved Congress, suspended constitutional rule, and set up an emergency government. The President also announced that the judiciary, Public Ministry, Congress and Constitution were to be comprehensively reformed. The judiciary and the Public Ministry were rendered inoperative for four weeks, during which complaints of human rights violations and habeas corpus petitions could not be filed. The dissolution of Congress meant that several commissions investigating human rights violations and political violence were forced to abandon their work.
From April President Fujimori and his Council of Ministers ruled the country by decree law. Decrees issued in April included the dismissal of the Attorney General, 13 Supreme Court judges and over 130 judges and prosecutors, and their replacement with appointees named by the executive.
Decrees issued in May and August widened the definition of "crimes of terrorism", accelerated judicial proceedings in such cases and lengthened prison sentences. The August decree defined the crime of treason and extended military jurisdiction to civilians accused of treason, The measures provided for secret trials. In July a decree penalizing "disappearances" was published, replacing a similar law
PERU
issued in 1991 and repealed in May 1992.
In early May at least 39 pcp inmates and two policemen were killed diu'ing a police operation to regain control of two wings of the Castro Castro Prison in Lima, the capital. The authorities claimed the inmates died as a result of an armed confrontation or were deliberately killed by fellow inmates to prevent them from surrendering. pcp inmates subsequently claimed that at least 10 of the victims were killed after surrendering to the police.
Peter Cárdenas, of the mrta, and Victor Polay, its leader, were arrested in May and June respectively. In September pop leader Abimael Guzmán and members of the organization's central committee were arrested and charged with treason; scores of other pcp activists were detained in the following months. President Fujimori stated repeatedly that he favoured the death penalty for those convicted of treason.
From mid-September the government refused the International Committee of the Red Cross (icrc) access to ail prisons.
In response to international pressure for a return to democratic rule, elections were held in November for an 80-member legislative Congress charged with reforming the Constitution. The party political alliance Ahueva Mayoría-Cambio 90, New Majority-Change 90, backed by President Fujimori, achieved an outright majority. Three major opposition parties refused to participate in the elections.
Of the 178 people known to have "disappeared" after detention by the security forces, 139 remained unaccounted for, 22 were later found dead, 16 had their detention acknowledged or were released, and one said he had escaped. Among the "disappeared" were 10 peasants from the department of Junin, who were detained in February by a civil defence patrol acting with the support of the army. The victims, seven men and three boys from the Paccha community in the province of Huancayo, were reportedly beaten, tied up and taken away by the patrol.
Between April and July Amnesty International documented 23 "disappearances" and three extrajudicial executions in the department of San Martin, most of which were attributed to soldiers stationed at the Mariscal Cáceres military base in Tarapoto city.
Lecturer Hugo Muñoz Sánchez and nine students "disappeared" on 18 July after
reportedly being detained by soldiers on the army-controlled campus of the Enrique Guzmán y Valle Education University on the outskirts of Lima. The authorities claimed to have investigated the case and concluded that the 10 victims had not been detained. However, their whereabouts remained unknown.
In May, five police officers were charged with "violating personal freedom and abuse of authority" in connection with the 1991 detention and transfer into army custody of three officials and a peasant from Chuschi, Ayacucho department (see Amnesty International Report 1992). However, the authorities failed to initiate proceedings against soldiers alleged to have been responsible for their subsequent "disappearance".
A judge decided in August to close the case against four police officers charged with abuse of authority in connection with the "disappearance" in 1990 of Ernesto Castillo Páez (see Amnesty International Reports 1991 and 1992). An appeal against the decision remained pending.
Scores of people were reported to have been extrajudicially executed by the security forces. On 8 February, five peasants were killed when police opened fire on some 200 unarmed peasants as they marched to a small police station in the district of Chavin, Huari province, Ancash department.
On 17 March, three members of the Alianza Política Izquierda Unida (unir). Political Alliance of the United Left, were reportedly extrajudicially executed by hanging in the presence of witnesses. According to reports, they were detained in the village of Para, Lucanas province, Ayacucho department, by hooded men in civilian clothing acting under the orders of the military stationed at the Chaviftas military base. The victims were apparently accused of "subversion" and ill-treated before being killed.
Between August and October at least 19 university students in the city of Huancayo, Junin department, were found dead in circumstances suggesting they had been extrajudicially executed. A further seven students were reported to have "disappeared" during this period. All had allegedly been detained by the security forces in or near the city. In October the Attorney General appointed an ad hoc prosecutor to investigate the "disappear-
PERU
anees" and the circumstances and manner in which eight of the students had died.
With few exceptions, the courts failed to bring to justice those responsible for human rights violations. In February a civilian court contested the jurisdiction of the military justice system over the trial of soldiers accused of murdering 14 peasants from the community of Santa Bárbara, Huancavelica department, in 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992]. A decision on jurisdiction by the Supreme Court remained pending.
In March 'it was reported that a military tribunal had sentenced an officer to six years' imprisonment for the death of 30 of the 69 peasants killed in Accomarca, Ayacucho department, in 1985 (see Amnesty International Reports 1986 and 1990]. The officer was said to have been conditionally ft'eed pending an appeal against conviction. In September a sergeant accused of the massacre of 18 peasants from San Pedro de Cachi, Ayacucho department, was reportedly absolved by the Supreme Council of Military Justice of responsibility for the killings (see Amnesty International Reports 1991 and 1992). In December the Army Command published a communique claiming that a document publicly circulated by former vice-presi-dent Máximo San Román was forged: the document stated that soldiers had carried out the massacre of 16 people in Lima in 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992). However, SI, a national magazine, subsequently published the testimony of an officer attached to the Army Intelligence Service confirming the army's involvement in the killings.
Torture and ill-treatment were frequently reported. In April, 15-year-old Olivia Pérez, who was seven months pregnant. was reportedly beaten by soldiers stationed at the Mariscal Cáceres military base in San Martin department. She subsequently lost her baby. In November members of the Lima Bar Association voted unanimously to condemn the "proven" police torture of a pcp leader and lawyer. Dr Martha Huatay, before her military trial on treason charges. Relatives and lawyers representing four active and retired army officers detained with 13 others following a coup attempt on 13 November against President Fujimori's emergency government claimed that the four had been tortured while in the custody of the army.
The systematic ill-treatment of hundreds of political detainees was reported from several prisons. In May, after the authorities regained control of two wings of the Castro Castro Prison, hundreds of men and women were transferred to other prisons and some 300 men kept in Castro Castro Prison. These and the transferred prisoners alleged that they were subsequently denied adequate clothing, food and medical attention. Those held in Castro Castro Prison also alleged that they were kept lying down in the prison yard for nearly two weeks and that many of them were severely beaten by armed guards on 22 May.
The procedures under which members of armed opposition groups were tried for treason by secret military tribunals fell short of international fair trial standards. Some 70 alleged pcp and mrta activists, many of them leading members, were reported to have been sentenced to life imprisonment by such tribunals.
The authorities incarcerated two prisoners of conscience on false terrorism-related charges. In March Michael Soto Rodriguez, a medical student, was detained and charged with being a member of Socorro Popular, a welfare organization attached to the pcp. Amnesty International believes he was detained solely for gjving medical attention to an alleged pcp member wounded in an armed confrontation with the police. In September Ayacucho-based journalist Magno Sosa was detained by the police and charged with having links to the pcp. Amnesty International believes Magno Sosa was detained for no other reason than his newspaper articles drawing attention to human rights violations by the security forces (see Amnesty International Report 1992). At least 16 other people were imprisoned during the year who appeared to be possible prisoners of conscience.
The pcp carried out scores of deliberate and arbitrary executions of civilians. Many of those killed had been previously tortured. Among the unarmed civilians killed were members of local authorities, aid workers, community leaders, peasants and town dwellers. On 15 February Maria Elena Moyano, a deputy mayor, was gunned down by members of the pcp and her body dynamited in Villa El Salvador, a Lima shanty town. Men, women and children were killed by pcp car bomb attacks on civilian targets in Lima. For instance, 25
PERU/PHILIPPINES
people were killed in separate attacks on the headquarters of a television station and a residential street in June and July respectively. On the night of 10 October a pcp unit attacked the community of Huayllao, Ayacucho department, and massacred 47 peasants, including 14 children aged fom to 15. The community had reportedly established a civil defence patrol but was said to have been armed with no more than five shotguns. On 18 December Pedro Huillca, Secretary General of the Confederación General de Trabajadores del Perú, General Confederation of Workers of Peru, was shot dead in Lima. El Diario, a clandestine newspaper sympathetic to the pcp, claimed the pcp had carried out the killing.
Amnesty International condemned such arbitrary and deliberate killings by the pcp in niunerous publications, letters to the Peruvian authorities and in statements to the Peruvian press and on radio stations.
Amnesty International repeatedly appealed to the government to thoroughly and impartially investigate cases of "disappearance", extrajudicial execution, and torture and ill-treatment, and to bring the perpetrators to justice. The authorities replied on several cases, in most denying the allegations, but failed to investigate thoroughly thousands of past human rights violations or bring the perpetrators to justice.
In April Amnesty International expressed its deep concern to the President at measures taken by his emergency government which seriously undermined the protection of human rights. The organization called for the unconditional release of prisoners of conscience and investigated the cases of possible prisoners of conscience.
In May Amnesty International wrote to the President requesting a full and impartial inquiry into the deaths of pcp prisoners killed in Castro Castro Prison. The government replied that it had made public a complete list of the prisoners killed, and of those transferred to hospitals and other prisons. However, the government failed to initiate a full and independent inquiry into the killings and to supply information Amnesty International had requested on the fate of up to 130 pcp prisoners apparently unaccounted for after the operation.
In October Amnesty International published Human rights violations against the indigenous peoples of the Americas, which included concerns in Peru.
In October Amnesty International urged
the President to ensure that the trial of pcp leader Abimael Guzmdn would be conducted according to standards enshrined in international human rights law. In November the organization urged the President not to extend the death penalty, but to abolish it for all crimes. Also in November the organization publicly appealed to the government requesting guarantees for the physical safety of army officers detained after the coup attempt. In December Amnesty International stated publicly that it was concerned that procedures for the trials of alleged members of armed opposition groups fell short of international standards.
Amnesty International included reference to its concerns in Peru in oral statements to the United Nations (un) Commission on Human Rights in February; to the un Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August; and to the Sub-Commission's Working Group on Indigenous Populations in July. In April Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Peru for un review under a procedure, established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728f/1503, for confidential consideration of communications about human rights violations.
