BHUTAN
A prisoner of conscience, a former adviser to the King, remained in detention throughout the year. Around 150 political detainees, all Nepali-speaking people arrested in 1992 and previous years, remained held without charge or trial at the end of the year. Thirty-two others, all suspected of violent "anti-national" activities, were convicted of treason and jailed after a trial which may have been unfair. At least one detainee died in custody owing to inadequate medical treatment. There were reports of torture, ill-treat-ment and generally harsh prison conditions. The government took a number of steps to improve human rights.
Unrest continued in southern parts of the country, where groups of Nepali-speaking people continued to oppose the government policy of national integration on the basis of driglam namzha (northern Bhutanese traditions and culture), the application of the 1985 Citizenship Act and the carrying out of a census (see previous Awnesty International Reports). By the end of the year, more than 70,000 Nepali-speaking people had fled to Nepal. Among them were many who had been classified as illegal immigrants during the census. Many refugees said that they had been forced to leave by local officials or that they had left out of fear of falling victim to human rights violations by government security forces. Certain opposition groups, including the Bhutan People's Party (bpp), were allegedly responsible for torturing, killing and kidnapping civilians, including government officials and people suspected of being government informers.
Towards the end of the year, the government took a number of steps to improve the human rights situation. A new National Security Act, replacing the Law of Treason, made the death penalty an optional rather than a mandatory punishment for crimes against the state. The government also banned the use of shackles in prisons, gave relatives access to prisoners and invited the International Committee of the Red Cross to visit Bhutan periodically.
Tek Nath Rizal, one of six prisoners of conscience arrested in late 1989 for allegedly initiating unrest among the Nepali-speaking population (see Amnesty International Report 1992], continued to be detained without trial. On 29 December he was charged with nine offences, including acts against national security, although the real reason for his detention appeared to be his non-violent opposition to government policies. His trial was due to begin in January 1993. The two others who remained held without charge or trial at the start of the year, Jogen Gazmere and Sushil Pokhrel, were among 313 political prisoners released in an amnesty announced by King Jigme Singye Wangchuck in February. By the end of the year, the King had ordered the release of 530 detainees in amnesties.
Scores of people of Nepali origin were arrested during 1992 on suspicion of supporting or sympathizing with southern opposition groups engaged in violent activities. In May, 41 prisoners were brought to trial before the Thimphu High Court on charges of treason, including four in absentia. One of them was sentenced to life imprisonment, 31 were sentenced to prison terms ranging between nine months and just over 10 years, and five were acquitted after a trial which may have been unfair. The four tried in absentia had not been sentenced by the end of the year. Around 150 political detainees remained held without charge or trial at the end of 1992, about half of whom had been detained for more than two years. The large majority of them were detained at Chemgang detention camp near Thimphu; the place of detention of others remained unknown. Deo Datta Sharma, who had been detained at Wangdi Phodrang prison, was transferred to another place of detention on 31 December 1991. The government has since refused to reveal his precise whereabouts,
Torture, ill-treatment and generally poor
bhutan/bolivia
conditions in prison camps were reported. Several former prisoners alleged that conditions at Chemgang detention camp were particularly harsh. They said that all prisoners there were forced to do hard labour, even when ill, and that guards routinely beat prisoners. In early January one political prisoner, H.P. Sapkota, was seen being taken to Thimphu Hospital in shackles and in a very weak condition. After several months of conflicting reports as to his fate, the government finally confirmed in July that H.P. Sapkota had died from typhoid. An independent doctor who studied the medical records for Amnesty International concluded that inadequate diet or poor prison conditions may have contributed to his illness and that H.P. Sapkota appeared to have been given "inappropriate and ineffectual medical care". The government admitted that normal procedures for informing the next of kin of his death had not been followed.
An Amnesty International delegation visited Bhutan for the first time in January, The delegates met the King and government officials to discuss human rights. They also visited Samchi District in southern Bhutan but were not permitted to go to Chirang District for "security reasons". The delegates were also refused permission to visit places of detention. They met former prisoners of conscience and other victims of human rights violations, as well as people affected by opposition violence, In June the government refused Amnesty International permission to observe the trial of 41 political prisoners charged with treason.
During the year Amnesty International called for the release of prisoner of conscience Tek Nath Rizal and urged the authorities to try or release other political detainees. It also urged the government to introduce safeguards to prevent torture and ill-treatment in prison camps. Amnesty International welcomed the steps taken by the government to improve human rights.
In December Amnesty International published a report, Bhutan - Human rights violations against the Nepali-speaking population in the south, which documented the organization's concerns since 1990 and made several concrete recommendations for safeguarding human rights.
