NETHERLANDS
(kingdom of the)
There were further reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners in the Netherlands Antilles and Aruba, two Caribbean countries forming part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
In the Netherlands Antilles a Commission of Inquiry, established by government decree, completed its report in August into allegations of unlawful violent behaviour by the police. It found evidence of unlawful use of violence by the police on every island except Saba. The violence mostly consisted of beatings with truncheons and, occasionally, fists; firearms were infrequently used. The Commission stated that neither disciplinary nor criminal action had been taken in obvious cases of serious police violence. One per cent of a representative cross-section of the entire population claimed to have been ill-treated by the police.
In June the Government of the Netherlands Antilles supplied further information on the cases of Heruy K. Every, who died in custody in June 1990 (see Amnesty International Report J992); Moreno Fabias,
netherlands (kingdom of the)/nicaragua
who required medical assistance after being beaten by police in May 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992); and Leroy Neil, who died of peritonitis in February 1991 while being interrogated by police in Curaçao. He had alleged that during a previous interrogation the police had forced a truncheon into his anus.
In July Cheroen Xavier Fluonia died in a police cell in Curaçao. According to the police, he had committed suicide by hanging himself. Amnesty International received reports that he had suffered substantial facial injuries consistent with allegations of ill-treatment before his death.
Benigno Guzman, a prisoner in Aruba, alleged that in August he had been kicked repeatedly in the stomach and beaten with a whip by prison guards, whom he identified. The day after the alleged assault eyewitnesses stated that they had seen injuries consistent with his allegations.
In June the Government of Aruba informed Amnesty International of the results of an internal police inquiry into allegations of severe beatings and other forms of torture and ill-treatment. In some cases the complainants had required hospital treatment (see Amnesty International Report 1992). The government stated that there was no basis for the complaints.
In October Amnesty International wrote to the Attorney General of the Netherlands Antilles about three cases of alleged torture and ill-treatment: the deaths in custody of Henry K. Every and Leroy Neil and the allegations of ill-treatment by the police of Moreno Fabias. Amnesty International considered that a full examination of the information had raised serious questions regarding the conduct and findings of the investigations into the two deaths and the decision of the authorities not to investigate fully the third case. The Attorney General was urged to investigate further certain specific points in the three cases. Amnesty International also wrote to the Attorney General requesting a thorough investigation into the case of Cheroen Fluonia, including the allegations of ill-treatment.
In December Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Justice for the Netherlands Antilles regarding the report of the Commission of Inquiry into allegations of unlawful police behaviour. Amnesty International urged the government to implement the recommendations of the report and to introduce comprehen-
sive safeguards and remedies against torture and ill-treatment.
In July Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Justice for Aruba welcoming draft legislation to establish a committee to deal with complaints against the police and requested further information on its powers, procedures and when it would start work.
