COLOMBIA
At least 1,000 people were extrajudicially executed by the armed forces or paramilitary groups operating with their support or acquiescence. Many of the victims had been tortured before being killed. "Death squad"-style killings of "social undesirables" in urban areas continued to be reported. Over 100 people "disappeared"
after detention by the security forces or paramilitary groups. In several cases disciplinary sanctions were imposed on police and army personnel for human rights violations but little progress was reported in judicial inquiries. Several hundred people were held hostage by armed opposition groups and scores more were deliberately and arbitrarily killed.
Peace talks resumed in March between the government and the coordinating body of armed opposition groups, the Coordinadora Nacional Guerrillera (cng) -representing the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarías de Colombia (farc), Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia; the Ejército de Liberación Nacional (eln), National Liberation Army; and a faction of the Ejército Popular de Liberación (epl), Popular Liberation Army. The talks were adjourned in May and indefinitely suspended after the insurgents launched a major offensive in the second half of the year resulting in heavy casualties on both sides. The government responded to the guerrilla offensive by imposing a nation-wide 90-day state of "internal commotion" in November and issuing a series of emergency decree laws. These included constraints on media coverage of guerrilla activities, penalized the failure to pass to the authorities information about insurgent activities and empowered the armed forces to carry out judicial investigations and press charges against civilian suspects.
Throughout the year there were intense counter-insurgency activities in several areas of the country, particularly the central Magdalena Medio region and Meta department. In this context government forces and paramilitary groups operating under their control or with their support were responsible for serious human rights violations, including the extrajudicial execution, "disappearance" and torture of non-combatant civilians in conflict areas. Serious abuses were also committed by the farc, eln and epl who held hundreds of hostages and, in some cases, carried out deliberate and arbitrary killings of civilians, including hostages.
At least 1,000 people were extrajudicially executed during the year. Victims of human rights violations by government forces were mainly peasant farmers in conflict zones, but included students, teachers, trade imionists, members of legal left-wing political associations and human
COLOMBIA
rights defenders. Leading members of human rights organizations were publicly accused by senior military commanders of being members of guerrilla organizations or collaborators. In some cases accusations were followed by attacks on their lives. Members of the Magdalena Medio-based Comité Regional para la Defensa de los Derechos Humanos (credhos), Regional Human Rights Committee, were particularly targeted, In January credhos secretary Blanca Valero de Durán was killed outside the Committee's offices in Barrancaber-meja, Santander department, by gunmen in civilian clothes. Three policemen who witnessed the attack reportedly ignored her cries for help and made no attempt to pursue her assailants. During the first few months of the year credhos repeatedly protested at the severe escalation of abuses against civilians by the army, police and paramilitary forces in the Magdalena Medio region. Following statements by local military commanders in February accusing credhos of links with guerrilla organizations, threats from army-backed paramilitary forces against credhos members increased. In June credhos worker Julio Berrio was killed by unidentified gunmen. In July Ligia Patricia Cortez, a student who was working on an educational project for credhos, was shot dead together with trade unionists Parmenio Ruiz Suárez and René Tavera by unidentified gunmen in a restaurant in Barrancabermeja. Only days before, Parmenio Ruiz and another trade unionist, Gustavo Chinchilla Jaimes, had lodged a complaint with the Regional Procurator's office after receiving death threats. Gustavo Chinchilla was abducted and killed in Bogotá in October as he made preparations to leave the country. His body was found with signs of torture.
Oscar Elias López Muñoz, a lawyer, was killed in May in Santander de Quilichao, Cauca department, by unidentified armed men. Oscar López worked as legal adviser to the Consejo Regional Indígena del Cauca (cric). Regional Indigenous Council of Cauca. He had received death threats which he believed were connected to his representation of the Paez indigenous community, 20 of whose members were massacred in December 1991. The Indians, who had been occupying a property called "El Nilo" near Caloto, were attacked by some 40 heavily armed and hooded men - some dressed in military uniforms - who burst
into a building where they were holding a meeting. Among those killed were four children. Before the massacre the Paez had made repeated official complaints to the authorities about harassment and threats by armed gunmen believed to be acting for a would-be owner of the farm. However, no action was taken by the authorities to investigate the allegations or to protect the community. In March the Procurator General announced that his office was investigating whether senior Cauca police officials had participated in the massacre. In November lawyers who took over the case following Oscar López' death reported receiving repeated death threats.
Members of the legal left-wing political alliance Unión Patriótica (up), Patriotic Union, continued to be particular targets for political killings. Among those killed were elected local government officials: in June William Ocampo, recently elected mayor of El Castillo in Meta department, outgoing mayoress Maria Mercedes Méndez, municipal treasurer Rosa Peña Rodríguez, her husband Ernesto Serralde and their driver Pedro Agudelo were killed when the car in which they were travelling was attacked with hand grenades and submachine guns by men in military uniforms at Caño Sibao near El Castillo. Only days before the massacre Maria Méndez had reported to local police and military authorities the presence of paramilitary groups in the area and had asked for protection. In November her husband, José Rodrigo García Orozco, vice-president of the departmental Assembly of Meta, was killed by unidentified gunmen. An official bodyguard, assigned to him after the murder of his wife, had been withdrawn two days earlier.
According to an official report produced in October by the People's Defender, political violence against the up is particularly concentrated in regions where they receive most electoral support. The report documents 717 killings of up members between January 1985 and September 1992: in only four cases have those responsible been convicted. The People's Defender concluded: "One of the most horrifying forms of violence that up activists have suffered has been the massacres. Innumerable deaths, a complete lack of security prior to the events - in spite of their being 'pre-announced' in many cases - and irregularities in the investigations are factors
COLOMBIA
contributing to impunity in these cases."
Paramilitary forces, declared illegal by the government in 1989, continued to engage in counter-insurgency operations with the armed forces, to forcibly recruit civilians, including children, and to commit widespread human rights violations, including torture, extrajudicial execution and "disappearance". Among the areas most severely affected by paramilitary abuses was the municipality of Carmen de Chucurí, Santander department. In June Juan de Dios Gómez, a 70-year-old peasant farmer, was killed when a group of armed and hooded men bm-st into his home in the community of Los Aljibes and shot him repeatedly. Shortly before his murder, Juan de Dios Gómez had denounced paramilitary and army abuses against the civilian population in a sworn statement before officials of the Procurator General's office and in declarations to the press and television.
In November the Prociu-ator Delegate for the Armed Forces "brought disciplinary charges against the head of military intelligence, General Carlos Gil Colorado, and six other army officers. They were accused of organizing, arming and conducting joint operations with illegal paramilitary groups responsible for the murder of community leaders and suspected guerrilla sympathizers in Santander department. However, efforts to hold members (^f paramilitary groups in Santander department criminally liable for gross human rights violations were obstructed by army personnel, In March a civilian public order judge, accompanied by judicial police, tried to enforce arrest warrants against 26 people implicated in paramilitary activities in Carmen de Chucurí, including the mayor. Local officials and army personnel based in the town intervened and only one person was arrested. In June the mayor surrendered to the authorities. Members of another paramilitary organization sentenced to 30 years' imprisonment in 1991 for a series of massacres in the Urabá region of Antioquia in 1988 were still at large at the end of 1992 (see Amnesty International Reports 1989 and 1992).
Killings of "social undesirables" by "death squads" backed by the police in major cities and towns continued to be reported. Vagrants (including children), homosexuals and petty criminals were gunned down in the streets at night or were
seized and driven away in unmarked cars. Their bodies, which were rarely identified, often bore signs of torture. Community leaders, students and unemployed youths in shanty towns surrounding major cities were also frequently threatened and killed by shadowy "death squads". In July heavily armed men entered the neighbourhood of Juan Pablo II in Ciudad Bolivar on the southern outskirts of Bogotá and opened fire on a group of teenagers leaving a birthday party: six were killed. Rosabel Jiménez, the grandmother of one of the victims, was shot dead as she attempted to apprehend one of the killers. A police cap was found beneath her body.
Over 100 "disappearances" were reported. Gustavo Salgado Ramírez, a biologist and project consultant for the French development agency Terres des Hommes and a collaborator with the Liga Internacional de Mujeres por la Paz y la Libertad, International League of Women for Peace and Freedom, was last seen in Bogotá on 4 November. Some two months earlier an unidentified man had threatened him with death because of his human rights activities.
Two members of the judicial police were arrested in September in connection with the "disappearance" of lawyer Alirio Pedraza Becerra in July 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991). His whereabouts remained unknown.
In several cases the Procurator General's Public Ministry opened disciplinary investigations and imposed sanctions on members of the army and police for human rights violations. In August disciplinary charges were brought against four officers from Bogota's Metropolitan Police for their part in the "disappearance", torture and death of university student Alvaro Moreno Moreno in January 1991 (see Amnesty International Report Í992). Also in August, the Procurator General formally requested the dismissal from the armed forces of three army officers for the massacres of banana plantation workers in the Urabá region in March 1988. According to the ruling, one of the three army officers, then a major (since promoted to Lieutenant-Colonel), paid the hotel bills for the paramilitary agents who carried out the massacres and identified 20 plantation workers who were to be killed as "guerrilla suspects". No information was made available about criminal proceedings
colombia/comoros
against the army officers after the case was taken over by the military courts in 1991.
The judiciary failed to bring to justice those responsible for the vast majority of human rights violations, although in exceptional cases civilian judges made significant progress in their investigations, In August a civilian judge ordered the arrest of a former mayor of Arauca and an army colonel implicated in the killing by two soldiers of journalist Henry Rojas Monje in December 1991. The colonel's lawyers immediately asked for the case to be passed to the military justice system. Military tribunals investigating human rights violations by army personnel have persistently failed to bring those responsible to justice and have routinely released army personnel facing trial. In March it became apparent that at least one of the soldiers whose arrest had been ordered by a military court judge in 1991 in connection with the killing of five members of the Palacios family in August 1991 (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1992) was no longer in detention. He was rearrested in March and charged with the killing, days before, of a further three people, including a 17-year-old pregnant woman, in Bogotá.
Victims of deliberate and arbitrary killings by the farc, eln and epl armed opposition groups included people suspected of being informers for the armed forces, petty criminals, members of rival groups and local government officials believed to be collaborating with paramilitary organizations. Several hundred people were believed to have been kidnapped and held hostage by guerrilla organizations. Many, including landowners, industrialists and business people, were held for ransom. Several hostages were killed or died while in captivity. Argelino Durán Quintero, a 77-year-old former cabinet minister, died in March of a heart attack while being held hostage by the epl. He had been kidnapped in January. Other hostages were seized and held for propaganda purposes or to force local government officials to adopt policies favoured by the insurgents.
Amnesty International repeatedly urged the government to ensure effective and impartial investigations into all reported extrajudicial executions, "disappearances" and torture cases, and called for those responsible to be brought to justice. It urged the government to dismantle para-
military forces and to take measures to ensure that human rights monitors and others are able to carry out their legitimate activities without fear of reprisal.
Amnesty International investigated and expressed concern about abuses by armed opposition groups.
In oral statements to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in February and the Working Group on Indigenous Populations of its Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns about extrajudicial executions, "disappearances" and torture committed by the armed forces and paramilitary groups in the course of counter-insurgency operations. In October Amnesty International published Human rights violations against the indigenous peoples of the Americas, which included concerns in Colombia.
