ESTONIA
One person was sentenced to death and was later granted clemency. At least two other people were believed to be under sentence of death at the end of the year.
Following parliamentary and presidential elections in September, Lennart Meri replaced Arnold Riiutel as President and Mart Laar was confirmed as Estonia's new Prime Minister.
In June a new criminal code entered into force. The death penalty was retained for three crimes: aggravated murder, acts of terrorism and assassination. Under the new code homosexual acts between consenting adult males are no longer criminal offences punishable by imprisonment. In July the new Constitution of the Republic of Estonia came into effect. In August the length of military service was reduced from 18 to 12 months. The length of alternative service remained unchanged at 24 months. In October the procedure for appealing for clemency, the final stage of the judicial process for capital offences, was amended. Petitions for clemency are now heard by the President.
One person sentenced to death during the year was granted clemency. At least two other people - one sentenced to death in June 1991 and the other in December 1992 - were believed to be still under sentence of death at the end of the year. All three men had been convicted of aggravated murder.
In May Amnesty International asked the Minister of Justice whether anyone had been imprisoned for engaging in consensual homosexual acts at the time the new criminal code came into force, and if so whether they had subsequently been released. No reply had been received by the end of the year.
In July the authorities informed Amnesty International that Rein Oruste's execution (see Amnesty International Report 1992) had been carried out by firing-squad. However, the organization continued to receive reports that the prisoner had been shot by prison guards in the washroom or sauna, allegedly in retaliation for an earlier altercation.
In December Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of the Interior and asked for an inquiry to be conducted into the circumstances surrounding the killing of Rein Oruste. The organization also urged that the regulations on the procedures for executions be made public.
In August Amnesty International raised again its concern about the punitive length of alternative service (see Amnesty International Report 1992). A senior official in the
ESTONIA/ETHIOPIA AND ERITREA
Ministry of Defence told the organization in October that mihtary service was of shorter duration than alternative service because the conditions under -which it was performed were considerably harsher. There were no reports of people imprisoned for refusing conscription on grounds of conscience.
In October Amnesty International delegates visited Estonia to collect information on hiunan rights issues. This was the first research visit by Amnesty International to the country.
Amnesty International appealed for commutation of the three death sentences during the year and urged the authorities to consider the complete abolition of the death penalty.
