DJIBOUTI
Several government opponents and human rights activists who were detained for periods of days or weeks appeared to be prisoners of conscience. Eleven prisoners of conscience held since January 1991 were convicted and sentenced to terms of imprisonment after an unfair trial. The security forces reportedly carried out dozens of extrajudicial executions in areas affected by fighting with rebel forces. One prisoner remained under sentence of death.
A new Constitution introduced in September after a referendum ended 11 years of one-party rule. It allowed a maximum of
djibouti
four political parties, including the ruling Rassemblement pour !e progrès populaire (rpp). Rally for Popular Progress, and strengthened the independence of the judiciary. In the parliamentary elections on 18 December, which were boycotted by many government opponents, the rpp won all 65 seats.
Government forces faced armed opposition in the north and southwest of the country from the Front pour la restauration de l'unité et de la démocratie (frud), Front for the Restoration of Unity and Democracy. Government control over both areas was disrupted by fighting, although a cease-fire lasted from late February until July.
A partial amnesty for opponents of the government was declared on 29 June and led to the release of several captured frud fighters. The frud fi^eed 25 captured government soldiers in November, but continued to hold 29 others. Several people facing charges or suspended prison terms on political grounds had the cases against them dropped as a result of the government amnesty.
Leaders of new human rights organizations, as well as other government opponents, were arrested and held for several days or weeks for criticizing President Hassan Gouled Aptidon's government. Several appeared to be prisoners of conscience. Mohamed Houmed Souleh, President of the Association pour la défense des droits de l'homme et des libertés (addhl), Association for the Defence of Human Rights and Liberties, was arrested in April and accused of forming an illegal association. He was released after three days but was later charged with publishing false reports. He was tried and given a three-month
suspended prison sentence in June.
Hassan Ali Mohamed ("Dalga"), President of the Comité de soutien pour la libération des détenus politiques à Djibouti, Support Committee for the Release of Political Detainees in Djibouti, was arrested three times during 1992 for criticizing human rights violations. He was arrested in June but the case against him was dropped under the terms of the 29 June amnesty. He was rearrested a week later after organizing a protest demonstration at the trial of Ali Aref (see below). The security forces fired on demonstrators outside the court, wounding several, and arrested at least seven, whom they detained throughout the seven-day trial. Hassan Ali Mohamed's own arrest took place inside the courtroom as he was about to appear as a defence witness. He too was released when the trial ended on 11 July but was rearrested eight days later. He was convicted in October of insulting the Head of State and sentenced to three months' imprisonment, but was released as he had already spent three months in detention.
Another government opponent, Abbate Ebo Adou, a doctor who had been arrested in December 1991, was still detained at the beginning of 1992. He had been appointed by the frud to represent the organization in negotiations with the Djibouti Government, with the mediation of the French Government. He was released on 28 February, without being tried, when a cease-fire was announced. Rearrested on 13 April and charged with insulting the Head of State by criticizing political repression, he was released under the June amnesty after three months in detention. He was nevertheless put on trial in July, but fled the country before any verdict was announced.
Twenty-nine people were tried from 5 to 11 July by a special security court, 15 of them in absentia, on charges of subversion. Ali Aref, former head of Djibouti's pre-independence administration up to 1977, and the 13 others in court with him. had been arrested in January 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992). They were accused of responsibility for an attack on a military barracks and conspiring to overthrow the government. Most of the judges at their trial before the Security Tribunal of the Republic were government officials and the trial proceedings were marred by serious irregularities. The prosecution case was based mainly on statements obtained
djibouti/dominican republic
by torture or threats of torture, which were admitted as evidence by the court without any scrutiny of the torture allegations. One defendant, lawyer Aref Mohamed Aref, was acquitted. Ali Aref and 12 others, along with the 15 tried in absentia, were all convicted and sentenced to prison terms of five or 10 years. Their appeals to the Supreme Court had not been heard by the end of the year. Ali Aref, who was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment, and 10 others appeared to be prisoners of conscience.
One man accused of planting a bomb at an army barracks in mid-1990 was still held awaiting trial at the end of 1992 (see Amnesty International Report 1991).
Extrajudicial executions of dozens of civilians were reported in February during fighting between government forces and the frud. In Yoboki village in the southwest, some 50 civilians were reportedly extrajudicially executed by government troops on 11 and 12 February, after a frud force which had occupied the village withdrew. In the nearby village of Garabous, 10 people were reportedly executed in similar circumstances.
The authorities failed to bring to justice those responsible for human rights violations in previous years. Four police officers charged after a judicial investigation into the deaths of at least 10 prisoners in September 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992] were provisionally released in 1992. The result of a police investigation into shootings by police of at least 30 unarmed civilians in the Arhiba quarter of the capital in December 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992) was not published and no action was announced by the authorities against those responsible.
The only prisoner under sentence of death, Adouani Hamouda Ben Hassan (see Amnesty International Report 1992), had his appeal to the Supreme Court rejected in June. At the end of the year he was awaiting the outcome of an appeal for presidential clemency.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience and the fair trial of other political prisoners. An Amnesty International representative observed the trial of Ali Aref and others in July. In a report published in December, Djibouti: Prisoners of conscience - an unfair security trial, Amnesty International appealed for the release of 11 prisoners of
conscience and for the fair retrial of two others. It repeated earlier calls for an impartial inquiry into allegations of torture, and urged abolition or thorough reform of the special security court, as its composition and procedures are incompatible with international standards for fair trial. Amnesty International also called for independent inquiries into the reports of extrajudicial executions by the security forces, and appealed for the commutation of the one death sentence.
