BANGLADESH
Hundreds of prisoners of conscience and other political prisoners were among over 1,700 people illegally detained under the Special Powers Act (spa). Torture continued to be widespread, resulting in at least 12 deaths in police custody. At least six people were reportedly extrajudicially executed by the paramilitary Bangladesh Rifles (bdr). In the Chittagong Hill Tracts, over 100 tribal civilians were reported to have been extrajudicially executed in April by the security forces. At least 66 people were sentenced to death between eariy 1991 and September 1992. Four people were executed during 1992.
Political and criminal violence continued at a high level throughout the year.
bangladesh
More than 25,000 people were arrested during an anti-crime campaign called "Operation August 92". but about 22,000 were released within days for lack of evidence.
The trials on criminal charges of former President Hossain Mohammad Ershad and several other former government ministers and officials continued. A parliamentary standing committee reviewed charges brought against political activists during the nine-year rule of President Ershad, most of whom had been freed on bail. The committee recommended withdrawing charges in 103 cases, and by September 91 cases had been withdrawn. Home Ministry sources said in March that over 6,000 people could benefit from the continuing review process.
	
	yf \ A
	
	
	
In July the Presidential Security Force Ordinance (Amendment) Act was passed, granting legal immunity to security personnel if they shoot to kill anyone believed to endanger the security of the prime minister.
In September President Abdur Rahman Biswas promulgated the Curbing of Terrorist Activities Ordinance, which extended the use of the death penalty. It also provided for the establishment of special tribunals which can impose the death penalty in trials that fall short of international standards in several respects, including restrictions on the rights of the defence. The offences listed as "terrorist" which the tribunals are to try and which carry the death penalty include obstructing or diverting traffic and damaging vehicles or property. In September, 65 courts were set up, but no death sentences were known to have been passed by them during 1992.
Parliament passed a bill based on the Ordinance in November.
The government of Prime Minister Begum Khaleda Zia appointed a committee in July to negotiate a political solution in the Chittagong Hill Tracts. In August the Shanti Bahini (Peace Force), the armed group seeking autonomy for the area, declared a unilateral cease-fire. Talks between the government and tribal representatives began in November. Abuses of human rights by Shanti Bahini forces were reported during the year.
Members of the Rohingya minority group continued to flee widespread human rights violations in Myanmar, and by December the number of refugees in Bangladesh exceeded 260,000. In April an agreement was signed with Myanmar providing for the safe and voluntary return of refugees, but refugees resisted repatriation and insisted that the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (unhcr) should monitor the repatriation process. From September onwards, over 2,000 refugees were repatriated to Myanmar, many of them reportedly against their will and without unhcr involvement.
The spa was used extensively to detain suspected government opponents, including hundreds of prisoners of conscience. The spa empowers the authorities to detain without charge or trial for an indefinitely renewable period anyone suspected of committing a "prejudicial act" likely or intended "to endanger public safety or the maintenance of public order". The Home Minister stated in June that 5,120 people had been detained under the spa since July 1991, of whom 2,538 were still in detention. Between August 1991 and July 1992, the High Court ruled that spa detention orders were illegal in 1,742 cases. At least four detainees reportedly continued to be held by the authorities despite High Court orders for their release.
Torture in police and military custody continued to be reported. At least two journalists were beaten by riot police when they took photographs during a demonstration in July. About 50 other journalists were injured, some seriously, when police broke into the National Press Club in Dhaka, the capital, on the same day and opened fire. A commission of inquiry identified seven police officials responsible for the incident, and recommended that they be given exemplary punishment. It
bangladesh/barbados
was not known if any criminal proceedings were initiated against them.
At least 12 people were reported to have died as a result of torture, among them Mominuddin Ahmed who was arrested on 18 August by police in Rangpur. During a court hearing the next day he told his wife that he had been severely kicked in the chest and stomach. He died on 1 September in Rangpur Medical College Hospital. A post-mortem established that he had died of "shock as a result of perforation [of the stomach] ... and intracranial haemorrhage". No investigation into his death was known to have been initiated.
At least six people were reportedly extrajudicially executed by the paramilitary bdr in three separate incidents. On 10 July a bdr party seized cattle in Ramchan-drapur which they claimed were smuggled. When the owners protested, the bdr opened fire and killed Monirul Islam, aged 16, and wounded a bystander.
Tribal people in the Chittagong Hill Tracts continued to be subjected to torture, illegal detention under the spa and extrajudicial executions. On 10 April over 100 tribal people were reportedly killed in Logang, apparently in reprisal for the killing of a Bengali boy by Shanti Bahini fighters. Paramilitary security forces reportedly set fire to the village and shot dead those attempting to escape. The bdr arrived later, but reportedly did not attempt to stop the killing. The government later admitted that 12 tribal villagers were killed and 13 injured in the incident by paramilitary forces acting together with Bengali civilians. An official inquiry confirmed these figures, Some of those apparently responsible for the extrajudicial executions were said to be in custody but it was not known whether any of them had been prosecuted by the end of 1992.
According to official sources. 114 people were on death row in September, of whom 66 had been sentenced to death since early 1991. Four people were reportedly executed, three of them for murder.
In March Amnesty International was informed by the government that arrest warrants against eight police officers had been issued in connection with the death of a prisoner in police custody in Mymensingh in 1990.
Amnesty International expressed its concern to the government in January and May about the renewed use of the death
penalty. In a report published in April. Bangladesh: Reports of torture and possible extrajudicial executions, Amnesty International described how in 1991 at least 10 people died and more than 100 were injured as a result of unlawful or unnecessary use of force by security personnel. In May Amnesty International published a report, Bangladesh: Reprisal killings in Logang, Chittagong Hill Tracts, in April 1992, and called for a full and impartial inquiry into the incident. Amnesty International repeatedly urged the government to ensure that none of the Rohingya refugees in Bangladesh would be forcibly returned to Myanmar, and that effective international monitoring of returning refugees would be provided. In July the organization urged the government to investigate the ill-treatment of journalists in the Dhaka Press Club.
