BENIN
At least 18 government opponents, including students, were detained for short periods and several received suspended prison sentences. Among them were possible prisoners of conscience. A group of soldiers were detained without charge for over six months in connection with an alleged coup attempt. One detainee died in custody reportedly as a result of torture.
Benin acceded to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in January and in March to both the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
The government of President Nicephore Soglo made no attempt to investigate or bring to justice officials who had been responsible for human rights violations while former President Mathieu Kerekou was in power between 1972 and 1990 (see previous Amnesty International Reports). However, 10 associates of the former head of state were tried on corruption charges and convicted. Amadou Mohammed Ciss6, a Malian religious figure who had been a close adviser to President Kerekou and was widely seen as having influenced his government's repressive policies, was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment for embezzlement. Seven of the 10 received prison sentences of between two and eight years, and the remaining two were given suspended prison sentences and released.
Two former senior security officials associated with President Kerekou's government were detained throughout the year but were not brought to trial. Jean N'Tcha
BENIN
and Fousséni Seïdou Gomina had been arrested in August 1991. It had initially appeared that their arrest was connected to a formal complaint about the death of a prisoner in 1984 (see Amnesty International Report 1992). However, in 1992 it became clear that both faced charges of murder and theft in connection with other offences allegedly committed in 1984 while they were security officials. Jean N'Tcha faced additional charges of carrying out illegal arrests, and Fousséni Seïdou Gomina was also apparently suspected of organizing, while in jail, an alleged coup attempt in May 1992.
The authorities faced widespread opposition during the year, including demonstrations against taxes, student unrest, and an army mutiny in August which was rapidly quashed. Most of those arrested in connection with the protests were referred promptly for investigation by the procuracy and most of those convicted received suspended prison sentences. However, there were important exceptions,
François Comían, a journalist, was sentenced in May to six months' imprisonment after writing an article alleging financial irregularities in President Soglo's 1991 election campaign. He lodged an appeal against his conviction and remained free on bail pending appeal. If imprisoned he would be a prisoner of conscience.
Student unrest led to the arrest and conviction of students, some of whom may have been prisoners of conscience. In March a meeting of university students in Cotonou was broken up by the police on the grounds that it was unauthorized. Four students addressing the meeting were arrested. They were held for three days before being released pending trial. In April they were convicted of various acts of violence and received three-month suspended prison sentences. It was unclear if they had in fact used or advocated violence. Another student ft-om Cotonou, Benoît Sossou, was detained for two months before being given a six-month suspended prison sentence for acts of violence. Again, it was not clear if he had used or advocated violence. One other student was held for three weeks from March and charged with assaulting an official. He was released on bail and had not been tried by the end of the year.
A group of military officers arrested in May in connection with an alleged coup
attempt the same month were still held without charge at the end of the year. However, seven of those arrested escaped from Ouidah barracks during the army mutiny in August.
Three people arrested in May 1991 (see Amnesty Internationa! Beport 1992] on suspicion of distributing a tract criticizing divisions between the north and the south of the country were tried in May. All received suspended prison sentences. An appeal against their conviction had not been heard by the end of the year.
The two remaining prisoners still held in connection with protests during the March 1991 presidential election (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1992) were brought to trial in mid-1992. They were each sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment after being convicted of organizing acts of violence. The sentence was reduced to 10 years in a general measure of clemency.
Celestin Ongala, a Zairian refugee, was arrested in May and held incommunicado for two months without charge. He was apparently suspected of involvement in the bombing of an aircraft in neighbouring Niger several years earlier. Although not formally charged, he was released provisionally in July while inquiries into his case continued.
One prisoner died in detention reportedly as a result of torture. Gbea Orou Sianni was among at least seven people arrested in March and taken to the central police station in Kandi, in the north of the country, after participating in a demonstration against police corruption during which a police officer was injured. Others were arrested and taken to the gendarmerie offices in Segbane. Gbea Orc-u Sianni died shortly afterwards allegedly as a result of torture. No investigation was believed to have been carried out into his death. Two of the seven were held briefly and released; two were tried and received 10-month prison sentences for injuries caused to the police officer; and the others remained held awaiting trial on similar charges.
Amnesty International sought clarification of the legal basis for the continued detention without charge of those suspected of involvement in the alleged May coup attempt and urged that any who did not face criminal charges should be released without delay. It also urged the authorities to initiate an independent inquiry into the death in custody of Gbea Orou Sianni.
