EQUATORIAL GUINEA
Four opposition party supporters were detained without trial but released before the end of the year: all were prisoners of conscience. Four other prisoners of conscience serving sentences imposed after an unfair trial in 1988 were released under an amnesty in January, as were several possible prisoners of conscience who had been imprisoned or restricted. Hundreds of new arrests of opposition activists were reported but virtually all those held, most of whom appeared to be prisoners of conscience, were released within weeks. Most were reported to have been tortured or ill-treated. Two people were sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment by a military court after an unfair trial. At least two people were sentenced to death and one was executed.
Several laws were passed in January to give effect to the amended Constitution,
approved in 1991, which introduced a multi-party political system. However, the new Law on Political Parties initially placed opposition parties at a disadvantage by requiring them to pay a substantial amount, equivalent to 2,000 times the average annual salary, to obtain legal recognition while President Obiang Nguema's ruling Partido Democrático de Guinea Ecuatorial (pdge). Equatorial Guinea Democratic Party, was automatically recognized under the law. Following criticism, the new law was amended in October and its most restrictive clauses deleted. By the end of the year six opposition political parties had obtained recognition.
The Law on Freedom of Assembly and Demonstration requires that official permission is obtained in advance for any gathering of more than 10 people in a public place and provides that those organizing such meetings or demonstrations are to be held accountable for the actions of those present. The Law on the Exercise of Freedom of Religion retained various restrictive clauses including six forbidding criticism of government actions or policy by ministers of religion.
In January the government granted an amnesty for all political offences committed before December 1991. Among the prisoners freed were four prisoners of conscience - Pedro Bacale Mayé, Joaquín Elema Borengue, Gaspar Mañana Okiri and Francisco Bonifacio Mba Nguema - who were serving sentences imposed after an unfair trial in September 1988 (see Amnesty International Reports 1989 to 1992). Several possible prisoners of conscience held in prison or restricted to their villages since 1990 were also released. However, some of those released from prison were apparently required to return to and remain in their home villages. Ricardo Nvumba Bindang, who had been restricted to his village in March 1991 after he sent a letter to the Gabonese President Omar Bongo asking him to promote democracy in Equatorial Guinea (see Amnesty International Report 1992), apparently remained restricted to his village until late July 1992.
Information was also received in 1992 that another prisoner of conscience, Antonio Ebang Mbele Abang (see Amnesty International Reports 1991 and 1992), had been released in late 1991.
Foik opposition party supporters were
EQUATORIAL GUINEA
detained without trial for between two and four months. All were prisoners of conscience. Plácido Mikó Abogo, a leader of the Convergencia para ¡a Democracia Social (cPDs), Convergence for Social Democracy, was arrested in February in Malabo after security officials at the airport intercepted party documents and letters which were being taken to Spain. He was arrested in the street at gunpoint, beaten and then tortured in police custody. He was charged with insulting the Head of State and with resisting arrest and held incommunicado for four months until June, when he was released under a presidential pardon issued to mark the Head of State's birthday. Four other cpds members evaded arrest by temporarily seeking refuge in foreign embassies. However, two of them, Celestino Bacale and José Luis Nvmnba Mañana, were arrested in April after charges of insulting the Head of State were brought against them. Both prisoners of conscience, they too were released untried in June under the presidential pardon. Celestino Bacale was rearrested for political reasons on 10 December. Before being released without charge on 29 December, he was tortured so severely he sustained serious kidney injuries and broken teeth.
Several possible prisoners of conscience were also freed under the presidential pardon in June, including Andrés Abaga Ondo Mayé. He was serving a three-year sentence imposed by a military court in 1991 after being convicted of defaming the authorities by complaining that his family had received death threats (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
In June Pilar Mañana, José Luis Nvumba Mañana's aunt, was arrested apparently for being in possession of the cpds newspaper. She was held incommunicado until late July when she was charged with insulting the Head of State and resisting arrest. However, she was released untried a month later.
Scores of other suspected government opponents were arrested and detained without trial for exercising their right to freedom of expression. At least 40 members of the Unión Popular (up), Popular Union, which had been officially recognized as a political party in May, were arrested in June after holding a meeting in Bata. All were released except José Martínez Bikie, a possible prisoner of
conscience who was tried in October on charges of insulting the Head of State and sentenced to six months' imprisonment.
In September, 30 supporters of the Partido del Progreso de Guinea Ecuatorial (ppge). Equatorial Guinea Progress Party, were arrested in Malabo: they were detained without charge or trial for between one and seven weeks and then released. They included Felipe Ndong Ecua, a former sergeant in the customs police who had previously been detained as a suspected ppge supporter. He and seven others were tried in December on charges of public disorder: four were given prison sentences ranging from two to four months and foiu' were acquitted.
Many of those detained were reportedly tortiu'ed or ill-treated in detention. For example, Plácido Mikó Abogo was allegedly tied up, suspended and then beaten. Other prisoners were reportedly beaten on the soles of their feet with truncheons, batons or whips. In another case, a prisoner was reportedly tied up for hours under a tap from which water was dripped on to his head.
Forty students were reportedly tortured after they were arrested in late November in Bata for participating in a peaceful demonstration. The victims included an eight-months pregnant woman. A male student apparently lost consciousness as a result of torture. The female students were said to have been made to dance naked in front of security officers.
Over 100 people were beaten severely or tortured in Malabo after their arrests following a reportedly peaceful student demonstration in December. The students were protesting against the rearrest of Celestino Bacale (see above). Most of those arrested were teachers and students, but priests and members of opposition parties who had not taken part in the demonstration were also held. Some of those detained were tortured with particular brutality. Among them were two Roman Catholic priests, Father Luis Maria Ondò Mayé and Father Pedro Ncogo, both well known government critics, who sustained serious injuries. Following international pressure, all the detainees were released by the end of December, although none was given permission by the government to go abroad for medical treatment.
In November two Spanish nationals, Salvador Vilarrasa and Santiago Hanna,
EQUATORIAL GUINEA/tSTONIA
were tried by a military court and convicted of conspiring to overthrow the government. They had been arrested in October after they imported siuplus Dutch military vehicles and other equipment for use in their timber business. Both were sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment and a fine. Their trial was unfair: in particular, they were denied adequate access to defence counsel. They were released from prison a few days after they were sentenced following the intervention of the Spanish Government, but were told they could not leave the country until the fines were paid. The restrictions were later lifted and both left the country in December.
At least two people were sentenced to death for murder and one was executed. Angel Marcos Asumu Esono, a member of the security forces, was executed in December two hours after he was sentenced without having the right to appeal to a higher court against his conviction and sentence.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience and for the introduction of effective safeguards against torture and ill-treatment of prisoners. An Amnesty International representative visited Malabo in June to observe the trial of Plácido Mikó Abogo and four others (two in absentia), but the trial did not take place as the defendants were released under the presidential pardon.
