BARBADOS
One person died apparently as a result of ill-treatment in police custody. At least one person was sentenced to be flogged but corporal punishment was declared unconstitutional by the Court of Appeal. Two prisoners had execution dates set but they were granted stays of execution. At least three death sentences were passed during the year. Sixteen people were under sentence of death at the end of the year.
In April 17-year-old Ryan Jordan died three days after being arrested by police on suspicion of theft. He died in hospital as a result of injuries allegedly sustained while under interrogation in police custody. Information ft'om various sources, including a post-mortem report, pointed to a severe beating while in detention as the most likely cause of the injuries leading to his death. Officials stated that his death
barbados/belarus/belize
would be investigated, but little or no progress appeared to have been made by the end of the year.
A man convicted of rape was sentenced in April to 28 years' imprisonment and the maximum 24 strokes with the cat-o'-nine-tails (a device of nine knotted cords or hide thongs attached to a handle). However, in August the Appeal Court upheld the appeals of two men who had been sentenced to flogging with the cat-o'-nine-tails in 1991. The court ruled that flogging constituted "inhuman and degrading punishment", in contravention of Barbados' Constitution. The prison sentences of the two men were increased by five years to 15 and 20 years instead.
Peter Bradshaw and Denzil Roberts, sentenced to death in 1985 and 1986 respectively, were scheduled to be executed on 25 May, There had been no executions since 1984. Lawyers submitted a constitutional motion on their behalf and they were granted a stay of execution at a rare Sunday sitting of the High Court. The constitutional motion was dismissed in September and the coifrt granted a six-week stay of execution pending further appeals to the Court of Appeal. Appeals were still pending at the end of the year.
Three people were sentenced to death in May on conviction of a murder committed in 1991,
In May Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Justice and Public Safety about the death of Ryan Jordan. It called for a thorough, independent and impartial investigation and for those responsible for the death to be brought to justice. In June the Minister replied stating that "in this case as in all others in Barbados, the law will take its course with thoroughness, independence and impartiality".
Amnesty International wrote to the Governor General, Dame Nita Barrow, and the Prime Minister. Erskine Sandiford, in June. It expressed its grave concern at the attempt to resume executions. It welcomed the stays granted to Peter Bradshaw and Denzil Roberts and urged the government to introduce legislation to narrow the use of the death penalty as a first step towards abolition. It also urged that all death sentences be commuted. Acknowledgements were received from the Governor General's and Prime Minister's offices in June; Amnesty International was informed that its concerns were receiving consideration.
