MAURITIUS
There were reports that prisoners in police custody were beaten; one was reportedly killed. Death sentences against five men convicted of drug-trafficking were quashed and they were referred for retrial. One other death sentence was commuted.
In February the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council (jcpc) in London, the highest court of appeal for Mauritius, ruled that a section of the Dangerous Drugs Act (1986) providing for the death penalty was unconstitutional. In April the National Assembly amended the law with the effect of restoring a mandatory death sentence for drug-trafficking.
In July Mauritius ratified the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights.
Two journalists were acquitted in February of charges which could have resulted in them becoming prisoners of conscience if convicted. Sydney Selvon, the editor of Le Mauricien newspaper, and Harish Chundunsing, then a reporter with Le Mauricien, faced charges of publishing or giving out false news information in connection with an article they had published in 1990.
There were reports of police ill-treatment of criminal suspects. In June Eddy
MAURITIUS/MEXICO
Labrosse died after he and another man were arrested by police in Pamplemousses and reportedly beaten. After an autopsy the police said that Eddy Labrosse had died as a result of injuries sustained in a road accident. An independent autopsy reported in October that Eddy Labrosse's injiu-ies were incompatible with the police explanation for them. It was not clear to Amnesty International whether any investigation was undertaken.
In August Anil Imrith, a burglary suspect, was admitted to hospital following interrogation by officers of the Criminal Investigation Department (cm) at Vacoas. He alleged that he had been severely beaten on the feet in order to secure a confession. It was not clear to Amnesty International whether any investigation was undertaken.
In February the JCPC quashed the death sentences on three men convicted of drug-trafficking in previous years on the grounds that the law under which they were convicted was unconstitutional. An effect of the ruling was to render null and void the death sentences against two other men sentenced under the same legislation. Retrials were ordered in all five cases under legislation which provides for a maximum s'entence of 20 years' imprisonment.
In May, following the recommendation of an advisory committee on the prerogative of mercy, President Cassam Uteem commuted the death sentence imposed on Ponsamy Poongavaram to life imprisonment. Ponsamy Poongavaram had been convicted of murder in 1987. At the end of the year, one person, Roger France de Boucherville, who had been convicted of murder, remained under sentence of death (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
Amnesty International urged members of the National Assembly to vote against amendments to the law that would reinstate the death penalty for drug-trafficking. The organization appealed for the commutation of all death sentences and for the abolition of the death penalty. In July Amnesty International representatives visiting Mauritius met President Cassam Uteem and government ministers to discuss human rights issues of concern to the organization.
