ALBANIA
A student died reportedly as a result of ill-treatment by police. Fourteen people were sentenced to death and seven of them were executed.
Elections were held in March and won by the Democratic Party. Its leader, Sali Berisha. was elected state President by the People's Assembly in April. In May Albania's first Constitutional Court was sworn in. In October a special commission, formed to identify people from the Shkoder area who had allegedly been killed for political reasons by security forces during the years of communist rule from 1944 to 1991, produced its first report. It stated that it had so far discovered six common graves in Shkoder and had succeeded in identifying 40 victims, although it believed the total to be some 2,000.
Leonard Arapi, a student at Shkoder university, died two days after being arrested by officers of a police unit known as the Rapid Deployment Forces. He had reportedly been seized from a bus near Sukth on 27 February. Albanian radio reported that he had been beaten so severely that he died from his injuries two days later in Tirana hospital. In December five police officers convicted of responsibility for the deaths of four men during demonstrations in Shkoder in April 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992) were imprisoned for between 15 and 20 years.
Eleven offences were punishable by death, including embezzlement, theft of state property, treason, espionage and murder. Fourteen men were sentenced to death for murder or other offences resulting in death. Three death sentences were commuted to imprisonment. Seven men were
executed, among them Ditbardh and Josif C^uko. They had been sentenced to death for acts of looting which led to the deaths of five members of a family. On 25 June they were hanged in the early hours of the morning in a square in the town of Fier, where they were exposed to public view for the rest of the day.
Amnesty International called on the authorities to commute death sentences and urged an immediate moratorium on the passing and carrying out of death sentences, with a view to the eventual abolition of the death penalty.
