GHANA
One prisoner of conscience was held throughout the year and over 50 other government opponents arrested in 1992 may have been prisoners of conscience. Some 37 long-term political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, were released. At least three people were sentenced to death, but no executions were reported.
The ruling Provisional National Defence Council (pndc) set out a timetable for a retxrm to civilian rule by early 1993. In April a new Constitution, due to come into force on 7 January 1993, was approved by referendum, despite controversy over provisions granting immunity from prosecution to all pndc members and appointees for their actions while in power. It will effectively abolish the National Public Tribunal. the highest in a system of special courts created in 1982 which are not independent of the executive and whose procedures do not guarantee a fair trial. The new Constitution will also give a right of appeal from lower Public Tribunals to the higher courts in the ordinary court system. Public Tribunal chairpersons will have to have the same qualifications as High Court judges and the judiciary will be given the main responsibility for their appointment.
In September two laws providing for indefinite administrative detention without charge or trial were repealed: the Preventive Custody Law, pndc Law 4 of 1982; and the Habeas Corpus (Amendment) Law, pndc Law 91 of 1984. They were replaced by the Public Order (No. 2) Law, pndc Law 288 of 1992, which allows the Secretary (Minister) of the Interior to order 28 days'
administrative detention without charge or trial of any person whose actions he considers are likely, among other things, to foment ethnic conflict or violence. After 14 days the detention must be reviewed by a panel of three judges, which may approve the detainee's continued detention. The coiuts are specifically excluded fi:om challenging such detentions.
In May the ban on political parties was lifted. On 3 November, in the first multiparty elections since 1979, the pndc Chairman, Flight-Lieutenant J.J. Rawlings, who had been Head of State since 1981 and who retired from the armed forces to stand for election, was elected President. Opposition parties accused the government of electoral malpractices and vote-rigging, and boycotted legislative elections in December.
At least one prisoner of conscience remained in prison. George Naykene, editor of the Christian Chronicle newspaper, had been detained in late 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992). He was sentenced in April to 18 months' imprisonment for libel by the Circuit Court in Accra, the capital. He had published a letter which alleged that all members of the former Armed Forces Ruling Council (afrc) - the military government headed by Flight-Lieutenant Rawlings from June to September 1979 following a coup - had profited from an illegal foreign loan. The court ruled that he had not proved that every afrc member had profited from the loan, although evidence before the court showed that some members had. Kwesi Armah, a lawyer and former government minister also detained in late 1991 in connection with the same case, was released uncharged on 5 April. He had apparently been detained because he refused to testily for the prosecution.
In April four pro-democracy demonstrators, including government critic and former prisoner of conscience Kwesi Pratt (see Amnesty International Report 1992), were arrested and detained for a few days after peacefully demonstrating against the immunity granted to the pndc in the new Constitution. They were charged, although not subsequently prosecuted, with public order offences.
At least 21 people were arrested by the security police - the Bureau of National Investigation (bni) - following several bomb attacks in Accra and the port of Tema after the November elections. They
GHANA
were suspected of involvement in the attacks or of having connections with Al-haji Tahidu Braimah Damha, who had been detained without charge or trial for two years from December 1984 on suspicion of plotting to overthrow the government. Those detained included Johnny Hansen, a former government minister and opposition leader; seven relatives of Alhaji Damba; and several soldiers. Five of Alhaji Damba's relatives were released by December and one apparently escaped and fled abroad. The seventh, Hadi Tahidu Damba, was charged before the National Public Tribunal on 7 December, with Alhaji Damba and two others in absentia. They were charged with conspiracy, abetment and causing criminal damage. Johnny Hansen was released from detention after testifying in court in December. Some of those detained may have been prisoners of conscience, held because of their criticism of government policies or their relationship to a government opponent. On 17 December Kwesi Pratt (see above) and Professor Albert Adu-Boahen. leader of the New Patriotic Party (npp), were charged with obstructing the court for refusing to testify on the grounds that they did not consider the court to be independent of government influence. The case had not been completed by the end of the year.
On 5 and 6 December more than 35 people in the Ashanti Region, an opposition stronghold, were detained in Kumasi and Obuasi. Among them were at least 15 leading npp members and supporters, including Nana Yaw Boakye, who is over 70 years old. It was not known whether they had been released at the end of the year.
In March Flight-Lieutenant Rawlings announced that security agencies had been instructed to review the cases of all those detained on grounds of national security with a view to releasing prisoners "where appropriate". Later that month the government announced the release of the first 17 prisoners. They included at least 15 political prisoners: 14 untried detainees and one serving a prison sentence. Several were prisoners of conscience, including Major Courage Quarshigah, detained without charge or trial on suspicion of conspiring to overthrow the government (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 to 1992], and Jacob Jabuni Yidana, a former Chief Superintendent of Police (see Amnesty International Report 1992). Other political
prisoners released included Andrew Kwame Pianim, as well as Bombardier Mustapha Mohamed, who had been detained without charge or trial since 1982, and four other members of the armed forces held without charge or trial since 1983.
At least 22 other political detainees were among about 60 detainees released without announcement, mostly during April and May. Little information was available about the reasons for their detention and it was difficult to determine how many had been held for political reasons. Among those released were prisoners of conscience Edward Akakpo, Joy Cudjoe and Simon Sablah, who had been arrested in September 1989 in connection with the same alleged coup attempt as Major Courage Quarshigah and held without charge or trial. Also released was Corporal Moses Harlley, who had allegedly been tortured after his arrest in 1985 in an attempt to coerce him to give evidence in an unfair political trial.
Seven other political prisoners convicted in connection with alleged conspiracies were still serving prison sentences. All had been tried before Public Tribunals,
At least three people were sentenced to death. Kwaku Duroh and Kofi Ntorie were sentenced to death by firing-squad for murder in separate trials in January before Public Tribunals. In April Bukari Musah was sentenced to death by hanging following conviction for murder by the High Court, Tamale. No executions were reported.
Amnesty International called for the immediate and unconditional release of all prisoners of conscience, and the release of other political suspects held in administrative detention if they were not to be promptly charged and brought to trial. It welcomed the releases of prisoners of conscience and detainees held without charge or trial as well as the repeal of laws which allowed unlimited detention without charge or trial. However, the organization expressed concern that the new detention law still allows prisoners of conscience and others to be detained without recourse to the courts. It appealed on behalf of the prisoners sentenced to death, urging that their sentences be commuted, and called for abolition of the death penalty.
