SWITZERLAND
Scores of conscientious objectors to military service served sentences of imprisonment or compulsory work imposed by military tribunals. The death penalty was abolished for all offences.
A national referendum held in May approved a proposal to amend the Federal Constitution to introduce a civilian alternative to military service. However, civilian service was not available to conscientious objectors during the year as the text of a law establishing its nature and length was still being drawn up.
In June Switzerland acceded to the
International Covenants on Civil and Political Rights and on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. In September an amendment to the Military Penal Code came into force, eliminating the death penalty from the Code and thus for all offences.
Scores of conscientious objectors were imprisoned although in several cantons there was a moratorium on implementing prison sentences imposed for refusing military service. Those sentenced during the year were tried under the amended Military Penal Code introduced in July 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992). Under its provisions refusal of military service remained a criminal offence. However, when a military tribunal concluded that a conscript was unable to reconcile military service with his conscience because of "fundamental ethical values", he was sentenced to a period of work in the public interest, and did not acquire a criminal record. The law provided for sentences of compulsory work ranging from one and a half times the total length of military service refused to two years. Sentences of compulsory work were not carried out until after 15 July when the relevant enabling legislation came into force.
However, a number of conscientious objectors announced during their trials that they would not serve sentences of compulsory work. They did not consider that a sentence imposed by a military tribunal, following a trial for a criminal offence, constituted a genuine alternative civilian service.
For example, in February a military tribunal concluded that the sincerity of Nicolas Carron's Christian faith and non-violent philosophy was without question and that his refusal of military service was based on
SWITZERLAND/SYRIA
"fundamental ethical values". Nicolas Car-ron, who had refused military service after completing initial military service training and seven refresher courses, rejected a sentence of compulsory work and started a two-month prison sentence in June.
Some tribunals apparently used a rather narrow interpretation of what constituted "fundamental ethical values" irreconcilable with military service. Conscientious objectors who failed to convince the tribunals that they qualified for a sentence of compulsory work and those who declared that they would not carry out such a sentence were liable to up to three years' imprisonment. In practice, sentences of up to 10 months' imprisonment were passed.
Some imprisoned conscientious objectors had been tried before the introduction of the amended Military Penal Code in July 1991. During the year Stefan Hasinger, who had refused military service on ethical and pacifist grounds but declared his willingness to carry out an alternative civilian service, served a seven-month sentence imposed in September 1989. The military tribunal had acknowledged the presence of certain ethical considerations, but had concluded that his reasons for refusing military service were predominantly egoistic and political.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience and expressed concern that under the July 1991 amendment to the Military Penal Code people continued to be punished for refusing military service on grounds of conscience. The organization welcomed the constitutional amendment establishing the principle of a civilian alternative to compulsory military service. It said this was a first essential step towards the introduction of a genuine alternative civilian service, outside the military system and of a non-punitive nature, available to conscripts objecting to military service on all grounds of conscience.
