TANZANIA
More than a dozen supporters of opposition political parties were briefly imprisoned as prisoners of conscience. A prominent government opponent continued to face charges brought for political reasons. At least one prisoner was sentenced to death.
tanzania/thailand
In February a presidential commission recommended the ending of the one-party state. In May both Union and Zanzibar parliaments endorsed legislation amending the Constitution to allow political parties in addition to the ruling Chama cha Mapinduzi (ccm). Party of the Revolution. Political activity continued to be restricted by regulations governing the registration of new political parties and the organization of meetings. New political parties were allowed to hold public meetings only if they were licensed by local government officials called Area Commissioners, the majority of whom were ccm members appointed by the central government. By the end of the year over 20 political parties had been registered.
Early in the year, before the constitutional amendments approved in May, a number of non-violent opponents of the government were briefly detained, continuing the pattern of harassment of multiparty activists noted in previous years (see Amnesty International Reports 1991 and 1992). In February, 15 men were detained for 24 hours on Zanzibar, reportedly on suspicion of holding an illegal meeting. They included several men who were well-known for their opposition to the ccm, some of whom had been detained without charge or trial during 1990. The arrests followed a public announcement by Salmin Amour, the President of Zanzibar, that anyone found "instigating" people against the ccm would be arrested.
In July Christopher Mtikila and three other men were sentenced to nine months' imprisonment after holding a recruiting meeting for the Democratic Party in Dodoma. The meeting had been denied official permission and was illegal because
the party was not then registered. In mid-September the four prisoners of conscience were released on appeal.
Seif Shariff Hamad, a former chief minister of Zanzibar and a leading Zanzibar! nationalist, continued to face charges of illegal possession of government documents (see Amnesty International Report 1992). The charges had been brought in 1989 and Seif Shariff Hamad had been released on bail in December 1991. In December 1992 he petitioned the appeal court for the charges to be dropped. No decision had been reached by the end of the year.
At least one man was sentenced to death for murder. There were no reports of executions.
Amnesty International urged the government to release prisoners of conscience and appealed for the commutation of all death sentences.
