ECUADOR
Dozens of cases of torture and ill-treatment by members of the security forces were reported and one person allegedly died under torture. A juvenile was reported to have "disappeared" following his detention by members of the security forces.
There were widespread protests against government policies during the year. In January President Rodrigo Borja ordered the mobilization of troops in the province of Guayas following a wave of street violence in Guayaquil in protest at the municipal authorities' decision to dismiss thousands of municipal employees. Sixto Duran Ballen, of the Partido Unidad Republicana, Republican Unity Party, became President in August after elections, In September the goverrunent issued Decree Law 86, mobilizing the army and the police in anticipation of street demonstrations protesting at economic austerity
ECUADOR
measures imposed by the incoming government. In October thousands of members of Indian communities from all over the country met in Quito, the capital, to protest against the economic measures and against celebrations marking the 500th anniversary of Columbus' arrival in the Americas. Also in October, more than 1,000 members of the Huahorani Indian community marched from the Amazon region to Quito to protest against a road construction project which would penetrate the territory where they live.
By the end of the year the judicial police force whose creation was announced in 1991 had not begun to operate (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
A number of detainees were reportedly tortured by members of the Oficina de Investigación del Delito (oíd). Office of Criminal Investigation, the police unit which replaced the disbanded Servicio de Investigaciones Criminales (sic). Criminal Investigation Service (see Amnesty International Report 1992). Victor Hugo Cadena was detained in July by the police in a street in Quito on suspicion of theft. He was taken, hooded, to the Pichincha offices of the oid. He was held for three days and was reportedly suspended from a rope with his arms tied behind his back, beaten and given electric shocks. A medical certificate issued by the public prosecutor's office certified that his body was bruised. In an official reply to a complaint presented by a human rights organization, the oiD denied that he had been detained.
Five young artists taking part in a peaceful public protest against the celebrations to mark Columbus' arrival in the Americas were detained in Quito by members of the army in October. Andrea Stark, Susana Tapia, Amparo Ponce, Joan Bagué and Jean Marc Duray were reportedly tortured with electric shocks at the Pichincha Battalion army base, and were threatened with being thrown out of an army helicopter. They were transferred to the custody of the oid, and again threatened with death by members of the police. The artists were released three days later without charge.
One detainee died in custody, allegedly as a result of torture. Felipe Moreira Chávez was detained on 20 August and taken to the oiD office in Quevedo, province of Los Ríos. Two days later, his body was taken by the police to the local morgue. Although the police claimed he
died after a fall while attempting to escape, his family claimed that he died under torture.
The authorities failed to conduct thorough investigations into many of the torture cases reported during 1991. including that of José María Cabascango (see Amnesty International Report 1992). An inqufry into the death under torture of Mayer Yoncer Mina Montaño in July 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992) was reported to have been initiated by the military judiciary, but by the end of 1992 it was not known whether the investigation had been completed. In August the Tribunal de Garantías Consí/íuc/ona/es, Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees, urged the public prosecutor to initiate criminal proceedings against the police officers allegedly responsible for the torture of Edison Roberto Sarasti and Eddy Pablo Rivadeneira Muñoz (see Amnesty International Report 1992). However, by the end of December judicial proceedings were not known to have been initiated.
One person "disappeared" from police custody. On 24 February, 16-year-old Marco Antonio Romero Carrasco was detained by police at a bus stop in the city of Esmeraldas, in the presence of numerous witnesses. He then "disappeared". When questioned by a public prosecutor, the police denied having detained him, A judicial investigation into the "disappearance" was initiated but produced no results by the end of the year.
In October the public prosecutor issued his final report on the "disappearance" in 1988 of the Restrepo brothers (see Amnesty International Report 1992). The report recommended that the police officers believed to be responsible for the "disappearances" be brought to trial. The file on the case was subsequently referred to the Supreme Court. Two days after the prosecutor's announcement, retired police general Gilberto Molina, the former director of the sic who was alleged to be responsible for the "disappearances", escaped from detention and fled to Colombia. The Ecuadorian authorities announced that they would request his extradition. The case of Consuelo Benavides who was killed in 1985 (see Amnesty International Reports 1987, 1990 and 1991) was also passed to the Supreme Court, where new witnesses were summoned,
Colombian political refugee Oscar
ECUADOR/EGYPT
Ameiris was detained in October on suspicion of "subversion", and it was feared that he would be forcibly returned to Colombia, where he would be at risk of human rights violations. The Ecuadorian authorities granted Oscar Amaris a limited period to find a third country of asylum.
Amnesty International called on the government to investigate reported cases of torture and death in custody. In October Amnesty International appealed against the possible refoulement (forcible return) of Colombian refugee Oscar Amaris. In November Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Government and Police calling for an investigation into the torture of the five artists detained in Quito. The organization urged the government to clarify the fate of Marco Antonio Romero Carrasco.
In an oral statement to the Working Group on Indigenous Populations of the United Nations Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in July, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns about human rights violations against indigenous peoples in Ecuador. In October Amnesty International published Human rights violations against the indigenous peoples of the Americas, which included concerns in Ecuador.
