SIERRA LEONE
After a coup in April, more than 150 people associated with the former gov> ernment or suspected government opponents were detained without charge or trial: among them were prisoners of conscience. Most were still held at the end of the year. Torture and ill-treatment by the
security forces were reported before and after the coup, and about 300 Liberian nationals detained in 1991 were reported to have died in custody as a result of torture or neglect. Suspected rebels and people accused of supporting them in areas affected by armed conflict were tortured and extrajudicially executed by soldiers. Nine people were sentenced to death for murder. In December, 26 people accused of involvement in alleged coup attempts were executed after grossly unfair and hasty trials carried out in secret before a special court, and at least three others were extrajudicially executed.
Armed conflict between the army and rebel forces in southeastern Sierra Leone persisted throughout the year. In mid-1992 the government estimated that more than 8,000 civilians and 125 soldiers had died since March 1991 when an invasion force from Liberia, led by members of the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (npfl). captured villages and towns in Southern and Eastern Provinces. The rebel forces -principally Sierra Leoneans belonging to the Revolutionary United Front, a group in armed opposition to the government -were pushed back towards the Liberian border but again seized control of parts of Eastern Province from September. Government troops tortxrred and executed people suspected of supporting or assisting rebel forces and the rebels, for their part, tortured and killed unarmed civilians who refused to support them. Thousands of people fled as refugees to neighbouring Guinea or Liberia or sought refuge in other parts of Sierra Leone.
On 29 April the government of Major-General Joseph Saidu Momoh was overthrown in a military coup led by officers
SIERRA LEONE
from the war front, who were subsequently joined by the security forces in the capital, Freetown. They proclaimed a National Provisional Ruling Council (nprc), headed by Captain Valentine E.M. Strasser. The new military government suspended the October 1991 Constitution and declared a state of emergency. New and emergency legislation was introduced, giving the security forces unlimited powers of administrative detention without charge or trial, and specifically preventing challenges against such detentions in the courts.
On 7 December the nprc promulgated the Treason and Other Offences (Special Military Tribunal) Decree, No. 12 of 1992, which established a special military court with the power to try any person involved in an attempt to overthrow the nprc. The court comprised four army or police officers presided over by a senior armed forces officer, all appointed by the nprc. No judicial appeal was allowed and all sentences had to be confirmed by the nprc. The decree provided for a High Court judge to act as legal adviser to the special tribunal and for defendants to be represented by lawyers of their own choice. However, it specifically barred all other courts from questioning any decision of the tribunal or the confirming authority.
After the April coup more than 50 former government ministers and officials were detained. Former President Momoh sought refuge in neighbouring Guinea. Also arrested were people who appeared to have been detained solely because they were associated with or related to members of the former government. Some of the detainees were prisoners of conscience. All were held at Pademba Road Prison in Freetown and initially denied access to families and lawyers. Most were subsequently interrogated by a judicial commission of inquiry into the assets of former government ministers. Six were released uncharged in November and a further six in December, including three brothers of former President Momoh, although some were immediately restricted under house arrest and forbidden from communicating with other people. Many others had not been charged or brought to trial by the end of the year, although in a number of cases the commission had apparently found no evidence of corruption.
About 100 others were detained without charge or trial between May and December,
and were believed to be still held at the end of the year. The reasons for their detention were not made known but they were believed to be held because of suspected opposition to the government.
Torture and ill-treatment of suspected rebels and their supporters, both by soldiers in the war zone and by security police, was common. Captives often had their arms bound tightly behind their backs with the result that many reportedly were paralysed and lost the use of their hands and arms. Of six captured suspects taken to Kenema in mid-March, for example, four were later released with burns and bruises on their bodies and serious injuries to their arms from being tied too tightly.
After the April coup there were further reports of soldiers beating, ill-treating and in some cases killing civilians accused of supporting the rebels. In one reported case in Koidu, Kono District, a boy was detained and badly beaten on 25 August and his mother later detained and beaten when she made inquiries about him. The new government reportedly punished some soldiers in such cases. In a well-publicized case, the government dismissed from office the Resident Minister for Southern Province, a senior army officer, after he ordered soldiers to beat a church minister unconscious in front of the Anglican Bishop of Bo on 29 August.
About 300 Liberian prisoners died in Pademba Road Prison as a result of torture or neglect in 1991 and 1992, according to 27 Liberians released from the prison in September. Nine of the 27 had been so badly treated in custody that they died in hospital in Liberia within a few days of their release. The Liberians had been arrested in March and April 1991 after the npfl-supported invasion. Some were npfl fighters captured in the war zone; others were Liberian nationals living in Sierra Leone. Survivors said they had been held in appalling conditions, in total darkness for the first four months, and denied adequate food and all medical attention. The security pohce reportedly tortured to death many of the 300, while the others died from malnutrition and disease. It was not clear whether Sierra Leoneans and other nationals also held at Pademba Road Prison since 1991 after being denounced as rebels - sometimes by personal or business rivals - were released in September. Their detentions, like those of the Liberians, had
SIERRA LEONE
been without any basis in law. They included Ishmael Mansaray, who reportedly died in detention in February, Ben Koni irom Bonthe, Dauda Kamara and Santibi Kamara from Freetown, and two Ghanaians, Bruce Alphonso and Robert Cleur.
Government troops fighting rebel forces in the southeast were reported to have executed suspected rebels and their supporters after only the most perfunctory investigation and without any legal authority. Executions took place in public, in graveyards, on river banks and sometimes in the streets. Some of those executed were unarmed civilians, and all were denied the right to defend themselves in a court of law. In some cases, detainees were shot after they had been unable to prove that they were not rebels before unofficial investigation panels comprising military officers and local officials. None of the large number of rebels claimed to have been captured by the military authorities appeared to be held in detention centres or prisons: it was feared that they too had been executed extrajudicially.
Shortly after it came to power, the new military government offered an amnesty to all rebels who surrendered but, after rebel forces attacked Kono District, Eastern Province, in September, soldiers reportedly killed civilians accused of supporting the rebels. On 31 October, Sahr Songu-Mbriwa, a traditional ruler and former government minister, was reportedly flogged in public in Koidu before being tortured and killed by soldiers. Soldiers were reported to have carried out extrajudicial executions in public of two rebel suspects in Bo, Southern Province, in late October and of a rebel suspect in Koidu in early November.
On 18 February five men were sentenced to death after being convicted of murder, On 23 November three men were sentenced to death for aggravated robbery. All eight had been convicted by the High Court, Freetown, and appeals lodged with the Court of Appeal had not been heard by the end of the year. On 18 November a soldier was sentenced to death, without right of appeal, by a military court in Freetown. He had been convicted of an aggravated robbery in Koidu in September.
In December, 26 people were executed and at least three extrajudicially executed on suspicion of involvement in alleged coup attempts. On 21 November, 19 people had been detained on suspicion of plotting
to overthrow the government. On 29 December the nprc announced that a second coup attempt had been foiled the night before and the perpetrators arrested. On 31 December it announced that three alleged conspirators had been shot in cross-fire on 28 December and that 26 others had been sentenced to death: 16 men and a woman in connection with the alleged November coup attempt; and nine men for the alleged December coup attempt. It stated that the 26 had been convicted of treason by a Special Military Tribunal and their sentences confirmed. However, it later emerged that the sentences had been carried out on 29 December within hours of being confirmed and that the main evidence against them was their confessions and the testimony of an alleged co-conspirator. Those executed included nine civilians and 17 military and police officers.
Unoffical sources alleged that there had been no coup attempts, that no shooting or unrest had been heard in the area of Freetown where the government said the arrests took place, that some of those executed had not been tried at all, and that some had been tortured before being killed. At least two were alleged to have been killed before 28 December: James Bambay Kamara, a former Inspector General of Police and Minister of State, and Lieu-tenant-Colonel James Yayah Kanu, a former war commander. Both had been detained without charge or trial in Pademba Road Prison since the April coup. Those who were brought before the Special Military Tribunal received a hurried, secret and grossly unfair trial in which they were denied all rights of defence - neither defence lawyers nor the court's legal adviser were present. The homes and property of those executed were seized and plundered by the military.
Rebel forces were also responsible for gross human rights abuses. They tortured and killed suspected government supporters and the inhabitants of towns and villages which they attacked. Among the victims were traditional chiefs and Muslim businessmen. At Bunti, Kenema District, in mid-March rebels killed at least 20 and possibly as many as 50 people as they fled their houses, in one case setting fire to a house and burning alive a woman and her two children. Further rebel attacks on villagers were reported from Kailahun District in March and from Kono District late in the
SIERFW LEONE/SINGAPORE
year. In October the rebels took control of Koidu, killing civilians who resisted and looting the diamond mines. In late October they took prisoner a foreign Red Cross worker and two Liberian nationals, who were held for over a month. In late November rebels beheaded a soldier they had taken prisoner near Koidu and cut off the hands of a civilian with him who was accused of assisting government forces.
In March Amnesty International representatives visited Sierra Leone and discussed the organization's concerns with government officials and others in Freetown and in Southern and Eastern Provinces. Amnesty International urged the government to halt extrajudicial executions and to order an immediate impartial inquiry into all reports of torture and killings by government forces. In April Amnesty International published a report, Sierra Leone: The extrajudicial execuijon of suspected rebels and collaborators, which described killings of prisoners, torture and illegal detentions by government forces and torture and killings by rebel and NPFi forces. The report called for the prompt introduction of measures to regulate and record the detention and interrogation of suspected rebels and their supporters.
After the April coup, Amnesty International called on the new government to release immediately any prisoners of conscience and to give all other detainees a prompt and fair trial or release them. It also called for all detainees to be allowed access to their families and lawyers and to be given medical care. In a response in September the government denied that the security forces had been responsible for extrajudicial executions or torture. It said that rebels who had responded to the government's amnesty had been screened at detention centres and released if found to have been coerced into joining the rebels. Detained former government officials found to be corrupt by the commission of inquiry would, it said, be "treated in accordance with the law" and, if found innocent, be released.
Following the December executions Amnesty International urged the government to give any other suspects fair and open trials and to commute any further death sentences.
In an oral statement to the United Nations Sub-Commission on Prevention of
Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns about indefinite detention without charge or trial in Sierra Leone.
