KOREA
(democratic people's republic of)
New information emerged about political prisoners held in labour camps. One person was reported to have been publicly executed.
In April the Supreme People's Assembly amended the 1972 Constitution and adopted a new Code of Criminal Procedure. The texts were not available outside the country. One of the constitutional amendments was said to remove "freedom of anti-religious propaganda" from the provision guaranteeing freedom of religious belief and to introduce a prohibition on religion being used to involve foreign powers in the country's affairs or to destroy the state or social order. However, this could not be confirmed.
Information about human rights concerns was severely limited and difficult to verify. Human rights issues were rarely reported in the media, which is controlled by the goverrunent of President Kim II Sung, and there was no independent group in the country monitoring and recording human rights problems. Access to the country remained restricted and Amnesty International received no reply to its request to visit the country diuing the year.
New information became available during the year about political prisoners held in labour camps. In Japan, the media published interviews with relatives of Koreans and Japanese who had settled in North Korea in previous decades and had apparently been arrested for alleged espionage or other political reasons. They had reportedly been sent to labour camps, often with members of their families. In one case,
KOREA (DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC 0F)/K0REA (REPUBLIC OF)
three brothers were said to have been detained in labour camps from 1969 to 1977, although they consistently denied any involvement in espionage.
Further information on imprisonment in labour camps was provided in October by two North Koreans who had recently fled to South Korea. They said that they had been held in a labour camp in Yodok county, South Hamgyong Province. One reported that he had been held from 1977 to 1987 with members of his family because a relative was suspected of espionage. The other said that he had been held from 1986 to 1989 after returning from an unauthorized visit to China. Both named other people who were believed to be still held in the camp. Among them were relatives of a South Korean who, having moved to the north, later defected from there to Europe. They also named people held in the camp in previous years, including Japanese women who had settled in North Korea with their Korean husbands who were held in the 1970s, and former senior government officials who were held in the 1980s.
One person was reported to have been executed by shooting at a public rally in the northern city of Hamhung in November. According to eye-witnesses, the victim had been sentenced for desertion from the armed forces and murder. No statistics on the total npmber of executions were available. Reports during the year suggested that 13 army officers had been executed in June 1991 after they led a protest march in Pyongyang, the capital, to complain about shortages of food and building materials.
Amnesty International submitted a memorandum to the government in May and sought information about the protection of basic rights. The organization asked how many prisoners were being held for alleged "anti-state" crimes and whether they included several named individuals reported to have been arrested in previous years. There was no response by the end of the year.
