SENEGAL
Government forces were alleged to have committed extrajudicial executions following an upsurge of violence in the Casamance region. Armed separatists in the region also reportedly committed serious abuses.
There was renewed fighting in Casamance during the last months of the year between government forces and armed separatists belonging to the Mouvement des forces démocratiques de Casamance
(mfdc). Democratic Forces of Casamance Movement.
Fighting broke out after the government of President Abdou Diouf announced in September that presidential and parliamentary elections would take place in early 1993 throughout the country, including in Casamance.
Government forces were alleged to have beaten and killed civilians and suspected supporters of the mfdc during counter-insurgency operations in Casamance but few details were available. The victims were said to include villagers in the Diouloulou area, who were briefly detained and beaten during army searches in October. and civilians at Bissine village, five of whom were reportedly killed when soldiers attacked their village in late September or early October. The dead were said to include two children.
There were also reports of arrests of suspected mfdc supporters but none was known to have been brought to trial. There was concern that two suspected mfdc supporters apparently "disappeared" after they were detained in September. The two, Ibou Sagna and Famara Bodian, a Cambian national, were said to have been detained after an armed clash between government soldiers and mfdc separatists at Kaguitt. In other cases, suspected mfdc supporters were alleged to have been tortured while in military custody in Casamance. In several cases detainees reportedly had molten plastic dripped on to their skin.
Other suspected mfdc supporters were forcibly returned from Guinea-Bissau in October and detained. The exact number was unclear. Some were reported to have "disappeared" in custody and others to have been referred to the procuracy, but the
SENEGALySIERRA LEONE
charges against them were not known. More than 50 were held in Ziguinchor prison at the end of the year. More than 10 other suspected mfdc supporters were also held in Ziguinchor prison, apparently after being referred to the procuracy. None had been brought to trial by the end of the year.
The government took no steps to investigate past human rights violations related to the Casamance conflict. Despite a statement in October before the un Human Rights Committee, a body of experts which monitors implementation of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, that a law of amnesty was not intended to absolve officials of responsibility for human rights violations, the authorities have continued to interpret the amnesty which it had granted in 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992) as conferring immunity from prosecution on members of the security forces and others who in the past perpetrated human rights violations.
The mfdc was also responsible for serious abuses, including deliberate killings of civilians, some of them because of their ethnic origin. More than 30 civilians, including children, were reported to have been deliberately killed by mfdc forces at Cap Skirring in October and at Pointe Saint-Georges in November, in some cases apparently because they came from outside Casamance. Boubacar Mané, head of the village of Bissiné, was said to have been executed by mfdc separatists in September or October after they accused him of assisting government forces.
When violence restarted in Casamance, Amnesty International began investigating reports of detentions, to establish if detainees were being dealt with in accordance with the law. It also investigated allegations that some prisoners or unarmed civilians had been executed extrajudicially. Confirmation, however, was not available by the end of the year.
