ETHIOPIA (and ERITREA)
Almost 20,000 suspected supporters of the Oromo Liberation Front (olf) and dozens of other government opponents were detained in Ethiopia. Some 2,000 senior members of former President Mengistu Haile-Mariam's government and armed forces arrested in mid-1991 remained in detention without charge or trial, accused of human rights violations and other offences. There were reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners and of extrajudicial executions by government forces. Armed opposition groups, including the olf, were also reported to have carried out deliberate and arbitrary killings. In Eritrea, 900 former officers of the Ethiopian armed forces who had been captured in May 1991 were handed over
to the Ethiopian authorities and detained. Over 200 Eritreans accused of human rights violations or criminal offences under the previous Ethiopian government remained in detention in Eritrea without charge or trial, and some opponents of the new Eritrean government were reportedly detained.
The former state of Ethiopia continued to be administered by two separate provisional governments, one in Ethiopia and one in Eritrea. Both were scheduled to hold office for a two-year transitional period following the overthrow of former President Mengistu's government in May 1991.
The Transitional Government of Ethiopia under President Meles Zenawi was headed by the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front (eprdf). The leading member of the eprdf, the Tigray People's Liberation Front (tplf), formed the new government security forces from its former guerrilla force. The eprdf and its allied political groups in the Council of Representatives (parliament) were opposed by other political groups, which were also mostly ethnic-based. Some of these groups had their own armed forces which clashed with the government's forces sporadically throughout the year, notably the olf.
Elections for 14 new regional assemblies in Ethiopia were held in June. International observers criticized electoral irregularities and arrests of government opponents in some regions. Four political parties, including the olf. boycotted the elections, which in two regions were postponed until later in the year because of fighting and general insecurity. There were widespread arrests during the regional elections campaign, particularly of olf members. Hundreds of olf supporters, many of them unarmed activists, were reportedly detained and scores of others were allegedly killed by government or pro-government forces. olf armed units were also reportedly responsible for deliberate killings of civilians. Immediately after the elections, the olf withdrew from the government coalition and most of its leaders went into self-imposed exile. Dlf armed units, which had clashed sporadically with government troops earlier in the year, opposed government forces in some rural Oromo-populated areas which the olf claimed to control. Government forces detained almost 20,000 olf personnel but continued talks with the olf, which prevented any
ESTONIA/ETHIOPIA AND ERITREA
major escalation of the conflict. A high level of insecurity in the south and east disrupted relief operations for victims of drought and famine, as well as for him-dreds of thousands of refugees from civil wars and famine in Somalia and Sudan.
The Provisional Government of Eritrea began preparations for a 1993 referendum on independence with United Nations and other international observers. The Central Committee of the Eritrean People's Liberation Front (eplf), which formed the provisional goverimient and was the only permitted political party, assumed legislative powers. Some armed clashes were reported early in the year in western border areas between eplf forces and an opposition Eritrean Liberation Front-Revolutionary Council (elf-rc) force.
In Ethiopia, thousands of government opponents were arrested and held outside any legal framework. These new detainees, as well as others arrested in 1991, were held without charge or trial and without any safeguards for their basic rights.
A Special Prosecutor's Office was established in August to investigate and institute criminal proceedings against people accused of abusing their positions in the former government or ruling Workers' Party of Ethiopia. The right to habeas corpus, which was already ineffective, was formally suspended for six months from August onwards, and no limit was set on the time detainees could be held without charge. The Vice-Minister of Justice was appointed Special Prosecutor. No detainees had been charged by the end of the year,
After the regional assembly elections in June, the EPRdf security forces detained almost 20,000 suspected olf armed personnel. It did not disclose their identities but some, including women and children, were believed to be unarmed civilians. They were held in three military camps at Dedessa near Gimbi, Blatta in Sidamo region, and Hurso in Hararghe region. The government said it had detained them in order to disarm and "re-educate" them politically, but few had been released by the end of the year. Arrests of olf political activists were reported throughout the year, but none was charged or tried.
Between February and May, 11 former army officers and civilians were arrested in the capital, Addis Ababa. The authorities said that they had plotted armed insurrection. Two of them publicly admitted this.
possibly under duress, but all 11 reportedly remained in detention wdthout charge or trial at the end of the year.
Kaafi Yusuf Ali, a prominent member of the Ogaden National Liberation Front (onlf), which had called for a referendum on independence for Ethiopia's southeastern Ogaden area, was arrested in Kebre Dahar in eastern Ethiopia in January. He died in detention in July, reportedly as a result of beatings and ill-treatment. Several other ONLF supporters were believed to be in custody at the end of the year.
In June over 20 suspected members of the opposition Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Party (eprp) were arrested in Gedaref in eastern Sudan, where most had lived for several years as refugees. They were immediately forcibly returned to Ethiopia. Tadelle Demeke, who was visiting Sudan for academic research while a refugee in the United Kingdom, denied that she was an eprp member and was released six weeks later. Most Of the others were released shortly afterwards, but four eprp members remained in detention without charge or trial at the end of the year. Four eprp leaders including Tsegay Gebre-Medhin, who were detained in August 1991 when eprp armed opposition collapsed, remained in detention throughout 1992.
Some 2,000 officials of the former government, armed forces and ruling party in Ethiopia remained in detention throughout the year without charge or trial. They had been arrested in 1991 and accused of human rights violations, war crimes or abuse of power (see Amnesty International Report 1992). They were mostly detained in Sendafa Police College and Holeta military academy near Addis Ababa, and Tolay military camp in Wollega region. They were allowed to receive visits from relatives. In August the final 900 former Ethiopian armed forces officers who had been captured in Eritrea in May 1991 were handed over to the Ethiopian Government and joined the others who had been detained.
It appeared that a number of opponents of the eprdf or tplf who had been detained by them before May 1991 were still held throughout 1992, although there was no official confirmation of this. They included Hagos Atsbeha, brother of a prominent defector from the tplf, who had been abducted from Sudan in 1988 by the tplf
ESTONIA/ETHIOPIA AND ERITREA
and detained in tplf-held territory in Ethiopia. Brigadier-General Beretta Ger-mamew and Colonel Getahun Wolde-Ghiorgis, who were captured in 1989 by the tplp and later fought with it against the government, were allegedly kept in secret detention from May 1991 onwards for opposing the new eprdf government.
In January three leaders of the National Democratic Union (ndu) who had been arrested in Addis Ababa in November 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992) were released without charge.
There were reports of torture and ill-treatment of some prisoners, in particular of olf members.
Many areas were affected by political violence and government soldiers reportedly extrajudicially executed scores of unarmed civilians. In the east, eprdf soldiers shot dead two leading onlf members in January: Mohamed Sheikh Mohamoud Iraad, a member of the onlf central committee, in Dega Bur: and Abdirashid Sulub Anshur, editor of an onlf magazine, in Kebre Dahar, In the regional elections campaign, some people were reportedly killed for supporting the olf. In Watar, a town near Dire Dawa, eprdf troops shot dead scores of olf supporters in March during a demonstration. In April olf troops killed over 150 olf opponents in Bedeno town near Dire Dawa; their bodies were later recovered from a ravine. Ethnic and religious tensions led to intercommunal killings as well as killings of members of ethnic minorities in some areas. In Harar and Dire Dawa in the east, dozens of members of the Amhara minority were killed in early 1992, allegedly by olf supporters. In Arba Gugu village in Arsi region, armed militias of the Oromo People's Democratic Organization (opdo), part of the coalition government, allegedly killed scores of Amhara civilians in June.
Inquiries into some of these killings were carried out by the Council of Representatives. Its inquiry into the killings in Watar called for clearer guidelines on the use of lethal force by eprdf soldiers, noting though that they had faced violence from anti-government demonstrators. The Council's inquiry into the killings in Bedeno urged the olf to punish its members who were responsible, but no such action was known to have been taken by the olf.
Groups opposed to the government coalition were also responsible for human
rights abuses, including torture and deliberate killings of scores of unarmed civilians. In an olf camp in the east, several opponents were reportedly tortured or killed in early 1992. olf armed units were also alleged to have deliberately killed unarmed members of ethnic minorities in predominantly Oromo areas. Three other opposition groups, including the Islamic Front for the Liberation of Oromia (iflo), also reportedly committed deliberate and arbitrary killings of suspected opponents.
The bodies of thousands of people who "disappeared" or were extrajudicially executed under the Mengistu government were discovered and exhumed for proper burial. They included several detained former officials summarily executed in November 1974; former Emperor Haile Selassie, killed in custody in his palace in 1975; Patriarch Tewoflos, former head of the Ethiopian Orthodox Church, the Reverend Gudina Tumsa, former head of the Ethiopian Evangelical Mekane Yesus Church, and Kassa Wolde-Mariam, a former university president and government minister, all of whom "disappeared" from detention in 1979; and thousands of students, workers and farmers who were extrajudicially executed during the "Red Terror" campaign in the late 1970s (see Amnesty International Report 1978).
In Eritrea, over 200 people, including opponents of the provisional Eritrean government, were detained without charge or trial, and without reference to the law. Information about them was particularly difficult to obtain, as the authorities disclosed no details. Many of the detainees had been arrested in mid-1991 because they were alleged to have violated human rights or committed criminal offences as employees or supporters of the former Mengistu government. Ali Higo Mohamed, a former regional governor, remained in detention after having been abducted from Addis Ababa in May 1991, although the government denied holding him. Other detainees were also believed to be held in secret, such as Tekle-Berhan Gebre-Tsadik and Wolde-Mariam Bahibi, officials of the armed opposition elf-rc, who were alleged to have been abducted from Kassala in eastern Sudan in April 1992, forcibly retiuned to Eritrea and secretly detained there. In October the government announced the release of 90 detainees, but disclosed no details about them or the
ETHIOPIA AND ERITREA/FIJI/FINLAND
reasons for their imprisonment.
Secret bm'ial grounds of execution victims were also discovered in Asmara and other places in Eritrea, where thousands of Eritreans suspected of supporting the eplf's armed struggle for Eritrea's independence from Ethiopia had been extrajudicially executed during the previous two decades or more.
There were no reports of any death sentences passed by courts or judicial executions during 1992 in either Ethiopia or Eritrea.
Amnesty International continued to appeal to the Ethiopian authorities to end the arbitrary detention of officials of the previous government and opponents of the present government, and to ensure that they were formally charged with recognizably criminal offences and given fair and prompt trials within a reasonable time, or released. It called for independent inquiries into reports of torture and extrajudicial executions and for steps to be taken to prevent extrajudicial executions. The organization criticized human rights abuses by the Olf and other opposition groups.
Amnesty International also appealed to the Eritrean authorities to ensure that detainees held for offences under the former Ethiopian government or for their opposition to the eplf received fair and prompt trials or were released.
