CHAD
Hundreds of unarmed civilians and prisoners were victims of extrajudicial executions by government security forces. More than 400 opponents of the government, including prisoners of conscience, were detained; most were released by the end of the year. Although some were charged,
CHAD
none was brought to trial. Most detainees were held incommunicado: many were tortured or ill-treated and several dozen died as a result. Some detainees who "disappeared" in security force custody remained unaccounted for. Two people were sentenced to death.
Gross human rights violations occurred during sporadic fighting between forces loyal to President Idriss Déby and armed opposition groups. Armed clashes between government forces and the opposition Mouvement pour la démocratie et ¡e développement (mdd), Movement for Democracy and Development, which had begun in late 1991, continued intermittently in the Lake Chad region. The mdd was reportedly composed of fighters loyal to former President Hissein Habré, who was overthrown in 1990. An agreement between the government and the mdd to end hostilities, signed in June, did not hold and fighting resumed in October.
There was also fighting with former government supporters who resorted to armed opposition after being accused of disloyalty or failing in their political objectives. Early in the year there were armed clashes in Guéra prefecture between government forces and an armed group loyal to Mal-dom Bada Abbas, former Vice-President of the ruling Mouvement patriotique du salut (mps), Patriotic Movement for Salvation. He had been detained in October 1991 with several dozen members of his "Hadjerai ethnic group and accused of mounting a coup attempt (see Amnesty International Report 1992). Maldom Bada Abbas and most of the others were released in January and he was then appointed President of an interim legislative body known as the Provisional Council of the Republic,
In February Lieutenant Moïse Nodji Ketté, a senior member of the mps, led a group of soldiers into armed opposition, initially in the capital, N'Djamena, and later in southern Chad. A peace accord signed in July broke down in August when government troops killed about 150 civilians around the southern town of Doba (see below), but in September Lieutenant Ketté's group reached a peace agreement with the government.
In June Abbas Kotti, a government minister, left the government and his supporters fought with government troops in western Chad before he left the country. In mid-December he and three of his Chadian
supporters were detained in Cameroon after the reported discovery of an arms cache near the border with Chad. They were still held without charge or trial in Cameroon at the end of the year.
The government also faced non-violent opposition. A series of strikes was .organized by trade unions protesting at unpaid salaries and redundancies, and by political parties calling for a National Conference to debate Chad's political future and introduce a multi-party system. Nearly 30 political parties had been formed by the end of the year.
In May a Commission of Inquiry into crimes committed by the former government of President Habré, including human rights violations, published its findings. The Commission concluded that some 40,000 people had been victims of extrajudicial execution or "disappearance" during President Habré's eight years in power. The report described how prisoners wfere tortured, shot, burned alive, poisoned or starved to death in detention. The Commission identified some of those responsible and recommended their dismissal from similar posts and their prosecution. However, no dismissals or prosecutions had occurred by the end of the year.
Several hundred people were extrajudicially executed during the year in various parts of the country by members of the security forces. Some of those killed, for example, in Ouaddai region, were apparently executed because they refused to hand over their property to soldiers. In January several dozen civilians in Guéra prefecture were reported to have been executed extrajudicially by soldiers because they failed to disclose the whereabouts of rebels loyal to Maldom Bada Abbas.
About 100 people were executed extrajudicially by the security forces in the N'Djamena area in January and February. The victims included Joseph Behidi, a lawyer and Vice-President of the Chadian Human Rights League. Joseph Behidi was apparently targeted because of his criticism of the government's human rights record and because he was defending a newspaper in a defamation case brought by the army. Those responsible for his death were not identified, despite substantial evidence that they were linked to the armed forces. No progress in police investigations into his death had been reported by the end of the year.
CHAD
In February several dozen civilians in N'Djamena and about 50 soldiers awaiting demobilization at Boudouloum, south of N'Djamena, were executed extrajudicially by members of the Republican Guard. They were apparently killed as a reprisal for an attack by rebel soldiers loyal to Moïse Ketté on Chagoua police station in N'Djamena.
Seven people, including Faky Ahmat Ali. a Quranic teacher, were killed and about 14 others wounded on 1 August when gendarmes opened fire on members of the Ouaddai community in a mosque at Diguel-Est, north of N'Djamena. Faky Ahmat Ali was being sought for arrest in connection with a land dispute. The gendarmes fired tear-gas into the mosque and shot down people, including children, as they ran out. The authorities claimed that the victims had tried to attack the gendarmes. but this was denied by other sources.
In mid-August more than 100 unarmed civilians were executed extrajudicially during reprisals taken against southern Chad-ians by members of the Republican Guard in the town of Doba in the south. The killings took place after clashes between rebels loyal to Moïse Ketté and government troops, in which about 20 government soldiers were reportedly killed.
The security forces were not held accountable for any of the extrajudicial executions committed during the year and were in efiect allowed to kill with impunity. The government did not respond to appeals to launch independent public inquiries following any of the incidents. In some cases it claimed killings were justified, but in most cases it said that the killings were not condoned by the government and were the work of undisciplined soldiers. However, it took no steps to discipline them.
Hundreds of suspected government opponents, including prisoners of conscience, were imprisoned early in the year, but most of them were released by August. In January eight members of the opposition Rassemblement pour ¡a démocratie et le progrès (rdp). Rally for Democracy and Progress party, were held for several weeks in N'Djamena on unsubstantiated suspicion of supporting the .mdd. They appeared to be prisoners of conscience. They were reportedly arrested by armed members of the seciuity police known as the Centre de recherche et de coordination de renseigne-
ments (crcr), Centre for Research and Coordination of Intelligence, and by agents of other branches of the security forces. Three rdp members were killed at the time of the arrests, including Bisso Mamadou, former director general of Chad's water and electricity company. The killings, which appeared to be extrajudicial executions, were not independently investigated. The eight detainees were released without charge at the end of January, together with most other political detainees held since October 1991, although some remained unaccounted for. Fifteen detainees who had been arrested at the end of 1991 and severely ill-treated were released in February.
Two journalists, Samba Aiwo Akonso and Makaila ka Yamarke, both leaders of the Syndicat des professionnels de la communication, Communication Professionals' Union, were detained for two days in September by members of the crcr. They were released after the Procuracy declared their detention illegal. There was, however, no procedure for reviewing detentions systematically and checking on their legal basis.
Some of the hundreds of political detainees were accused of fighting for or supporting one or other armed opposition group. However, many were detained without any evidence or investigation. More than 200 Chadian nationals living in Nigeria's northwest Bomo State were forcibly returned to Chad and handed over to the Chadian authorities in February. They included members of the mdd. They were held incommunicado in military barracks without charge or trial, together with about 60 mdd combatants captured in Chad. They were first held in N'Djamena and later transferred to Iriba and Abéché in the northeast. The captured combatants were released at the beginning of July under an agreement between the mdd and the government; the others were released at the end of the month following intervention by a representative of the Paris-based Fédération internationale des droits de ¡'homme (fidh) International Federation for Human Rights, and an emissary of the French Government.
More than 100 civilians and soldiers suspected of supporting Lieutenant Moïse Ketté because they came from southern Chad were arrested in February. The arrests took place after an armed attack on Chagoua police station in N'Djamena. The
chad/chile
detainees were apparently charged with endangering the security of the state but not tried. They were released in July.
More than 40 soldiers," including Captain Amine Youssouf Oumar, deputy commander of the Republican Guard, and several civilians were arrested in June on suspicion of supporting Abbas Kotti. Two civilians, Ibrahim Kossi and Bichara Doudoua, were held at the headquarters of the Renseignements généraux intelligence service until November, when they were released without charge or trial. They appeared to be prisoners of conscience. The soldiers were first detained at the Camp des martyrs military barracks in N'Djamena. In September the authorities said the detainees had been transferred to Faya detention centre in northern Chad. However, there were fears for the lives of Amine Youssouf Oumar and at least four others.
Torture and ill-treatment of detainees, most of whom were held incommunicado, were widespread, leading to deaths and "disappearances". None of these incidents was independently investigated. Reports from former detainees and other sources indicated that most detainees were routinely beaten at the time of their arrest and while being interrogated. For example, some of the people forcibly returned from Nigeria were reportedly given electric shocks and had their arms, tied tightly behind their backs and two sticks tied tightly on both sides of their heads. Both methods of torture had been used extensively in the 1980s when President Habré was in power. At least two of these detainees, Issa Gorane and Goukouni Guet, who were held at the Presidential Palace, reportedly died there from torture. A third, Mahamat Saker, was reportedly tortxrred and then executed extrajudicially at the headquarters of the crcr.
There were reports of detainees dying from starvation, thirst, asphyxiation and exhaustion. More than a dozen suspected members of the mdd died at the former Presidential Palace in March and April. Others died at Iriba and Abéché.
Several detainees "disappeared" in the custody of the security forces, including Assali Adil, a computer scientist employed by the Chadian Water and Electricity Company.
Two members of the seciu'ity forces were convicted of murder in August by a
special military court set up in 1991. The killings had not been committed in the course of military or security operations. The two soldiers were sentenced to death, with no right of appeal. However, no executions were announced during the year.
Amnesty International called for a full, impartial and independent inquiry into alleged extrajudicial executions and "disappearances" and urged the government to take steps to end incommunicado detention without charge or trial, and torture. It appealed for the two death sentences imposed to be commuted. Amnesty International representatives visited Chad in September and discussed the human rights situation in the country with the President and other government and security officials. In October Amnesty International published a report entitled: Chad: Extrajudicial executions in Doha.
In an oral statement to the United Nations (un) Commission on Human Rights in February Amnesty International included reference to its concerns in Chad. In April Amnesty International submitted updated information about its concerns in Chad for uN review under a procedure, established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728F/1503, for confidential consideration of communications about human rights violatipns.
