MOLDOVA
Government forces reportedly beat detainees from the self-proclaimed Dnestr Moldovan Republic (dmr) and extrajudicially executed at least one person. Fifteen people were awaiting execution at the end of the year. At least one political prisoner was said to have been denied access to a defence lawyer of his choice by the dmr authorities. Security forces under omr control were alleged to have been involved in the abduction, torture and murder of non-combatant civilians.
Moldova became independent following the break-up of the Soviet Union. Headed by President Mirca Snegur, it joined the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe in January and became a member of the United Nations in March.
Armed clashes continued between the
Moldovan authorities and forces of the dmr, an area in the northeast of the country opposed to calls for reunification with Romania. Hundreds of people, including civilians, were reported killed. However, the security situation had stabilized by the end of the year following the introduction of peace-keeping forces, including Russian troops.
In April the Moldovan parliament amended the criminal code to abolish the death penalty as a possible punishment for six peacetime offences. It was retained for premeditated, aggravated miu-der; rape with serious consequences or rape of a minor aged under 14; attempt on the life of a police officer; and for various military crimes defined as serious. Under the amendment women were exempted from the death penalty.
Government forces were said to have subjected detainees from the dmr to beatings and ill-treatment, dmr militiaman Vladimir Serdyukov, for example, alleged that he was detained in Bendery in June and subsequently severely beaten by Moldovan volunteers and police officers who carved three stars and the letter "V" on his body. Volunteer forces fighting for the Moldovan Government were also allegedly responsible for extrajudicially executing a man named Velichko and raping his wife in the Dubasari district in June.
Death sentences passed on 15 people had not been carried out by the end of the year owing to the lack of facilities. Previously, prisoners had been sent for execution to two neighbouring republics of the former Soviet Union.
At least one political prisoner, ethnic Moldovan Stefan Uritu, was reportedly denied access to a lawyer of his choice following his arrest in June in the omr for alleged terrorist offences, which carry a possible death sentence. He was released pending trial in August. He and another man arrested on the same charge were reportedly beaten in custody, and a third was said to have faced mock executions.
Members of the police and so-called Republican Guard in the dmr were reported to have been involved in the abduction, torture and murder of civilians. Gheorghe Bejenari, for example, an ethnic Moldovan bus-driver outspoken in his opposition to the proclamation of the dmr, was reportedly detained in Dubasari in March by local police who were said to have told his
moldova/mongolia/morocco and western sahara
wife that he would not leave their hands alive. His mutilated body was found in April,
Before Stefan Uritu's release Amnesty International urged officials in the dmr to ensure that he had adequate access to the defence lawyer of his own choosing in line with international fair trial standards. The organization also called on them to take immediate steps to initiate full and prompt inquiries into all allegations of tortiure and murder by security forces under their control: to make the findings public; and to bring to justice the perpetrators. The dmr public prosecutor replied that Stefan Uritu had himself initially refused a defence lawyer as he did not recognize the legality of the dmr investigatory body. The public prosecutor reported that an investigation was under way into one of the murders raised: the others, he said, took place in areas not at that time fully under the control of the dmr.
Amnesty International welcomed the abolition of the death penalty for a number of peacetime offences, and the reduction in its scope, but continued to press for complete abolition and publication of full statistics on its application.
