THAILAND
Fif)y-two unarmed demonstrators were killed, hundreds injured and scores "disappeared" when demonstrations were violently suppressed by the security forces in May; over 3,000 people, many of them prisoners of conscience, were briefly detained and many were tortured or ill-treated. At least one prisoner of conscience was held throughout the year. Four Burmese nationals "disappeared" from police custody. At least two people were sentenced to death but no executions were reported.
Elections were held in March. In April General Suchinda Khraprayun was appointed Prime Minister by the ruling coalition of five pro-military political parties. General Suchinda was Commander-in-Chief of the army and one of the leaders of the 1991 military coup that overthrew the previous elected government.
Protests at the appointment of General Suchinda, who was not an elected member of parliament, began in April and gathered strength through May. Major-General Cham-long Srimuang, a member of parliament and former governor of Bangkok, went on hunger-strike for several days and led numerous peaceful protest rallies. There were almost daily demonstrations of over
THAILAND
100,000 people in Bangkok between 4 and 10 May.
On 17 May an estimated 200,000 protesters tried to march towards Government House. They were met by armed security forces who used water cannons and truncheons in unsuccessful attempts to disperse them. Early in the morning of 18 May troops opened fire with automatic weapons directly on the crowd, killing several unarmed protesters and injuring dozens. The violence continued throughout the day; in the evening troops in full combat gear were filmed shooting directly into the crowd at head height. There were also widespread reports of people being deliberately shot by police and soldiers in side streets near the demonstrations. Dozens of people were killed, including possible victims of extrajudicial executions, and hundreds were injured both by gunshot and truncheon beatings. A state of emergency was declared in Bangkok and surrounding provinces.
On the morning of 19 May troops stormed the Royal Hotel where demonstrators were seeking refuge. They kicked and beat dozens of the protesters as they lay prone on the ground. Between 2,500 and 3,000 people were arrested during the day, many of whom were reportedly beaten while being transported to detention centres. Peaceful anti-government protests spread to many other parts of Thailand.
On 20 May the constitutional monarch, King Bhumibol Adulyadej, appealed on television for General Suchinda and Major-General Ghamlong to negotiate a settlement to the crisis. Major-General Ghamlong and some 3,300 others were released from detention. General Suchinda promised to support a constitutional amendment
requiring the prime minister to be an elected member of parliament and Major-General Ghamlong publicly appealed for a halt to street demonstrations.
On 23 May General Suchinda announced a sweeping amnesty decree which apparently exonerated not only demonstrators but also members of the security forces who had perpetrated human rights violations. The decree was ruled to be constitutional by a Constitutional Tribunal in July. In October the newly elected House of Representatives unanimously overturned the amnesty decree. However, the new government again submitted the decree to the Constitutional Tribunal, which ruled in November that it was legally binding.
On 24 May General Suchinda resigned as prime minister and the state of emergency was lifted two days later, Compensation for victims of the violent suppression was ordered in late May. Interim Prime Minister Anand Panyarachan dissolved parliament in June and called elections for September. The elections were won by an anti-military coalition and Chuan Leekpai, leader of the Democrat Party, became Prime Minister.
According to official reports, 52 people were killed and 696 others were injured during the suppression of the demonstrations between 17 and 20 May, and 84 people "disappeared" after being detained. Unofficial sources, however, suggested the true niunber of "disappeared" was considerably higher. Troops fired directly at demonstrators on at least two occasions: at 4.15 am and at 10.30 pm on 18 May. Many of those killed or injured were shot in the back. There were also fi?equent reports of individuals being shot by members of the security forces in side streets in various areas of Bangkok during the series of demonstrations. Some of these reports were corroborated by forensic evidence showing that victims had been shot at point-blank range, and indicated that many of those killed may have been victims of extrajudicial executions.
At least 3,300 demonstrators were detained between 17 and 20 May. many of whom appeared to have been prisoners of conscience. Among the detainees were Major-General Ghamlong and other demonstration leaders. Detainees were held in Bangkhen Police Academy, where witnesses saw prisoners being beaten by police commandos, and at Lad Yao Prison.
THAILAND
All were released uncharged by 21 May.
In the weeks after the military crackdown in Bangkok, pro-democracy activists received death threats and were harassed in other ways. For example, demonstration leader Prateep Ungsongtham Hata received letters and telephone calls threatening that her home and office would be bombed. An army spokesman denied that military hit squads were tracking the movements of pro-democracy leaders, but the military did not publicly condemn the death threats.
Two committees were set up by the government to investigate the events of 17 to 20 May and determine the whereabouts of the "disappeared". However, they were not given the power to subpoena witnesses and were therefore obliged to rely on the military officials and others involved to cooperate. Repeated but unconfirmed reports alleged that troops had removed the bodies of protesters and buried them at secret sites in military installations and elsewhere. Dr Pradit Charoenthaithawee, Rector of Mahidol University, who chaired a subcommittee to investigate the fate of missing people, received death threats after saying he had information about secret mass graves at military installations. The threats stopped once he resigned ft'om the subcommittee.
The parliamentary and government committees found that military commanders had exercised poor judgment and used excessive force in controlling the demonstrations. Another committee set up by the Ministry of Defence to investigate the role of military commanders submitted findings to the interim Prime Minister in July. Several senior military leaders were subsequently transferred from their posts, as were commanders directly in charge of troops in Bangkok in May.
At least one prisoner of conscience, Ghana Srikiatsak, was held throughout the year (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
A warrant was still being pursued for the arrest of prominent social critic Sulak Sivaraksa on charges of lese-majesty after a speech in 1991 in which he described members of the Royal Family as "ordinary people" (see Amnesty International Report 1992). He would be considered a prisoner of conscience if arrested.
In August the Criminal Court acquitted 13 members of the Patiwat (Revolutionary) Council charged with inciting unrest in
1989, including Prasert Sapsunthom (see Amnesty International Reports 1991 and 1992).
Four Burmese nationals were reported to have "disappeared" from police custody in Ranong. Than Soe, Aung Kyaw and two others were arrested by police in May on suspicion of being illegal immigrants from Myanmar (Burma). The bodies of two unidentified people, believed to be those of Than Soe and Aung Kyaw, were later found outside Ranong; they bore marks of violent injury. No official investigation was known to have been carried out.
No further information came to light about the "disappeared" labour leader Thanong Po-arn (see Amnesty International Report 1992). A government-appointed committee concluded in August that there was no evidence that he was still alive.
At least two death sentences were imposed: one on a man convicted of murder and another for drug-trafficking. The death sentence on another man, Thonchai Tikham, sentenced to death for murder in
1988,	was upheld by the Supreme Court in July: this was subsequently commuted to life imprisonment by a Royal Pardon Decree. Fifty other prisoners had their death sentences commuted to life imprisonment under a royal amnesty in August to mark the Queen's birthday. A total of 108 convicted prisoners were then reported to remain under sentence of death. No executions were known to have been carried out.
Ten Chinese asylum-seekers were detained and reported in August to be in imminent danger of being forcibly returned to China, where they would be at risk of serious human rights violations. Eight had been arrested in April on charges of illegal entry into Thailand. Li Maolong and Li Suwen were detained by police in Bangkok on 3 June as they prepared to hold a ceremony to commemorate the third anniversary of the Tiananmen Square massacre. All 10 were members of a dissident political group, the China Alliance for Democracy (cad), and had been active in the pro-democracy movement in China in
1989.	One of them, Lin Jingze, was forcibly returned to China in September. At the end of the year, Li Maolong and Li Suwen remained in detention but the fate of the others was not known,
Amnesty International appealed on 18 May for the release of Major-General Cham-long and other prisoners of conscience and
THAILAND/TOGO
for the government to instruct the security forces not to use unnecessary force against unarmed demonstrators. It continued to express its concern about the excessive use of force in suppressing the demonstrations and to appeal for prompt and thorough investigations. On 27 May it welcomed the release of some 3,000 people imprisoned for their peaceful political activity din-ing the May demonstrations, and urged that no amnesty should be granted which would preclude the bringing to justice of those responsible for human rights violations.
Amnesty International representatives visited Thailand in June and met government officials to express concern about the human rights violations committed by security forces during the May demonstrations. Amnesty International urged the goverrunent to bring to justice those responsible for extrajudicial executions, torture and "disappearances", and to ensure that the amnesty decree issued by former Prime Minister Suchinda did not allow human rights violators to evade justice. Amnesty International welcomed the establishment of investigative committees, but urged that they should be empowered to subpoena witnesses, enter military installations and other official premises, and obtain all the information they required.
In October Amnesty International published Thailand: The Massacre in Bangkok, which described the May events and subsequent related human rights developments. It set out a series of recommendations for preventing such human rights violations in the future.
Amnesty International also urged the authorities to clarify the cases of "disappearance" of Burmese nationals; not to return the 10 Chinese asylum-seekers to China against their will; and to commute all death sentences.
