GUATEMALA
At least 200 people were alleged to have been extrajudicially executed by the security forces and their civilian agents. Death threats and harassment increased dramatically, and several people were abducted by unidentified armed men believed to belong to the security forces. There were a number of "disappearances". Torture and ill-treatment by police officers and civilians apparently acting in connivance with them were widely reported.
Talks between the government and representatives of the armed opposition coalition Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca (urng), Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unity, continued without reaching agreement, A preliminary agreement not to create new Patrullas de Auto-Defensa Civil, civil defence patrols, unless specifically requested by the population, was reached in August. The Human Rights Attorney was given responsibility for verifying whether patrols were voluntary.
Armed conflict continued despite the peace talks. The army's counter-insiu'gency tactics included aerial bombings and attacks on Comunidades de Población en Resistencia (cprs). Communities of People in Resistance, which led to civilians being injured. The cprs are communities which fled army counter-insurgency operations in the early 1980s and refused to live in areas controlled by the army. A commission to investigate their situation, includ-
ing church representatives, local human rights and grassroots groups and the Human Rights Attorney, described them as civilian non-combatants and produced evidence of army bombings.
In May Guatemala acceded to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
In July Human Rights Attorney Ramiro de León Carpió was re-elected by Congress for a further five years.
In September Congress passed a law which provides the death penalty for drug-trafficking acts resulting in death. This contravenes the American Convention on Human Rights, to which Guatemala is party, which states that the application of the death penalty shall not be extended to crimes to which it did not apply at the time of the ratification of the Convention. Congress also adopted a new code of penal procedure, to become effective in 1993, which provides for trials in the defendant's own language, makes the Public Ministry responsible for criminal investigations, and grants the Human Rights Attorney and relatives of victims special facilities to conduct their own investigations into alleged extrajudicial executions and "disappearances".
In October the government and Guatemalan refugees in Mexico reached an agreement guaranteeing some 45,000 returning refugees physical safety, the rights to freedom of movement, association and organization, and access to land. It also provided for their return to be monitored by United Nations (un) and other international observers.
Human rights violations by military personnel and their civilian agents, sometimes acting in the guise of "death squads", continued unabated throughout 1992. The victims, often indigenous people, included the displaced, human rights activists, trade unionists, suspected members of the armed opposition, members of popular movements, journalists and judges.
Members of the Consejo de Comunidades Etnicas "Runujel ¡unam" (cerj). Council of Ethnic Communities "We are all Equal", an organization working for indigenous peoples' rights, continued to suffer abuses, tXRj President Amilcar Méndez Urfzar received repeated death threats and in May a grenade exploded outside his home. cerj member Esteban Tojín from Cruzché II, El Quiché department, reportedly "disappeared" in Guatemala City in
GUATEMALA
May. He had received repeated death threats from local civil patrollers because of his opposition to civil defence patrols.
Others opposed to civil defence patrols were singled out for abuse. In April Pedro Raguez, who had refused to participate in patrols, was stabbed and shot dead, reportedly by two patrol leaders in Xoljuyú, San Pedro Jocopilas, El Quiché. In August Catarino Chanchavac Larios from San Pablo hamlet, San Pedro Jocopilas, was stabbed to death. He had received numerous death threats because he would not participate in patrols.
Human rights monitors came under attack. In January Rosa Pú Gómez, a member of the Coordinadora Nacional de Viudas de Guatemala (conavigua), National Coordination of Guatemalan Widows, was threatened at gunpoint by a man who asked her about several grassroots leaders and her "disappeared" husband. A police officer made no effort to arrest the man. conavigua members received numerous death threats accusing them of links with the armed opposition. In May José Nerio Osorio of the Centro de Investigación, Estudio y Promoción de los Derechos Humanos (qeprodh), Centre for the Investigation, Study and Promotion of Human Rights, was stabbed by two men after cieprodh staff had received death threats. The car driving indigenous leader Rigoberta Menchú to Quetzaltenango in July was rammed by men in another car and she suffered further harassment and death threats diu'ing her visits to Guatemala.
In October a bomb exploded near the entrance of the Grupo de Apoyo Mutuo por el Aparecimiento con Vida de Nuestros Familiares (gam), Mutual Support Group for the Appearance of Our Relatives Alive. Days later Kakchikel indigenous teenagers Cristina Par and Matea Par, members of the Coordinadora Maya Majawil Q'ij, Mayan Coordination "The New Dawn", were beaten and stripped naked in the street by two men and a woman who accused them of being guerrillas because they were wearing indigenous clothes. The assailants had identified them at the march celebrating Rigoberta Menchú's Nobel Peace Prize award.
Trade unionists were also targeted for attack. In March, at a time of industrial conflict within the government-owned electricity industry, Perfecto Us, of the Sindicato de Trabajadores de! Instituto
Nacional de Electrificación (stinde). Electrical Workers' Union, was abducted by armed men who threatened to kill him if he continued his union activities. He was beaten and left tied up beside a road. In May the 10- and 13-year-old sons of stinde conflict secretary Victor Hugo Alvarez were abducted by two unidentified men while walking home after school in Chimalten-ango. They were forced into a van and released about 36 kilometres away.
Also prominent among the victims of human rights abuses were the internally displaced and peasants. José Jiménez, leader of the Consejo Nacional de Desplazados de Guatemala (condeg), National Council for the Displaced in Guatemala, in Huehuetenango department, reported receiving threats from a civil patrol leader in February. In August condeg member Marco Antonio Diaz was killed in Crique Grande, Izabal department, by unidentified civilians. Witnesses accused local military commissioners - civilian army representatives.
Attacks on the University of San Carlos (usac) continued. Bombs exploded in the offices of the Asociación de Estudiantes Universitarios (aeu). University Students' Association, of usac in January, after two aeu-sponsored seminars on peace talks, and in October after death threats to those involved in a lawsuit against the Hunapú security force unit (see below). There were at least three other bomb attacks on usag premises.
At least five students and four academics were apparently extrajudicially executed and many others were subjected to death threats and intimidation. In February professor Manuel Estuardo Peña, who had worked with the displaced and was well known for his left-wing ideas, was shot dead outside his home by two men in plain clothes. On 10 April student Julio Cue Quim was killed and seven others wounded by members of the security force unit Hunapú, made up of the National Police, the Treasury Police and the Military Police. He was shot dead when Hunapú agents opened fire on unarmed students after an argument, Legal proceedings were brought against 31 Hunapú agents but students involved in the case and their relatives received death threats warning them to stop. In November six Hunapú agents from the National and Treasury Police were convicted for the killing and wounding and
GUATEMALA
each sentenced to 12 years six months' imprisonment. Hunapú agents from the Military Police were tried in a military court, which had not given its verdict by the end of 1992.
Members of the press were also attacked and threatened. Radio journalist Ricardo Castro, producer of a current affairs program, was shot and wounded by a man in plain clothes driving a maroon pick-up van. In October a bomb exploded at the offices of Tinamit magazine, which had published articles critical of the government. Many others received death threats.
Members of the armed opposition, and suspected members, were targeted for abuse. Teacher Maritza Urrutia was abducted in July by armed men who she said were military agents. She said she was interrogated about her activities and threatened with the abduction of her son, aged four. She was released a week later. Maritza Urrutia said she had been warned that her family would suffer if she complained about her abduction.
Some active members of the armed opposition were killed in circumstances suggesting they may have been extrajudicially executed. In September the army announced the death in combat of three guerrillas in Sacatepéquez department. Photographs of the bodies, however, showed that all three had been killed by a single shot to the head.
Torture and ill-treatment by the police were widely reported. Several secondary students, many of them minors, were tortured or ill-treated by police in April after demonstrations demanding better conditions in schools. After the demonstrations, National Police agents entered two schools, arresting some 170 students. Among those reportedly tortured was 13-year-old Amado López Hernández, who was forced by a police officer to drink bleach. In July a peaceful march by peasants from Cajolá, Quetzaltenango, was violently dispersed by anti-riot police. Several peasants, including a pregnant woman, were beaten. Several weeks later, uniformed policemen reportedly tried to abduct two Cajolá peasants in Guatemala City.
Street children and those working on their behalf continued to be shot at, beaten and threatened, both by uniformed policemen and by civilians apparently working with them.
Most human rights violations, including
thousands of extrajudicial executions and "disappearances" over the previous 15 years, remained uninvestigated and unpunished. However, in a few cases investigations or criminal proceedings were pursued. In April the four policemen convicted of the murder of 13-year-old street child Nahamán Carmona López, whose convictions had been overturned {see Amnesty International Reports 1991 and 1992), were retried and again found guilty. In July the Supreme Court set all their sentences at 12 years six months' imprisonment. A private police agent accused of murdering street child Francisco Chacón in 1991 was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment.
Criminal proceedings in human rights cases were generally flawed and subject to long delays, and judicial officials reported receiving death threats. Among them were appeal judges Mario Guillermo Ruiz Wong, Napoleón Gutiérrez Vargas and Héctor Hugo Pérez Aguilera, who stated in July that they had been receiving threats, in part because of their involvement in judicial proceedings against the military. Two civil patrollers accused of killing Juan Perebal Xirum and Juan Perebal Morales and wounding Diego Perebal León (see Amnesty International Report 1992) were acquitted despite ample evidence against them. The trial of an army sergeant for the killing of anthropologist Myrna Mack in 1990 reached the sentencing stage in October, but no sentence was pronounced in 1992.
Cases where evidence reveals the involvement of active military personnel are referred to military courts. However, in the few cases investigated by military courts, investigations and proceedings appeared to be irregular or delayed. In September, five soldiers were sentenced to 30 years' imprisonment for the 1990 killing of United States citizen Michael Devine in El Petén department but the chief of intelligence at a nearby army base was acquitted despite consistent court testimony that he had ordered the killing. The Attorney General appealed against the official's acquittal. In August the Supreme Court confirmed the death sentences imposed by a military court on soldiers Nicolás Gutiérrez Cruz and Eliseo Suchité Hernández for the murder of a displaced family in Ciudad Peronia, Solalá. The two escaped in June, but Nicolás Gutiérrez was later recaptured.
GUATEMALA/GUINEA
The sentence had not been carried out by the end of 1992.
There were allegations that opposition urng forces were responsible for the deliberate and arbitrary killing of Ernesto Rivera, military commissioner of La Prima-vera, El Pet6n department, in May. He was reportedly taken from his house, forced to reveal the addresses of other local military commissioners and then taken to a urng public meeting and accused of being an army informant. He was then released, but as he was walking away he was shot dead.
Throughout the year Amnesty International repeatedly called on the government to investigate the many reported incidents of human rights violations and to bring those responsible to justice. In September Amnesty International representatives visited Guatemala and held talks with government officials, human rights groups and others.
In oral and written statements to the un Commission on Human Rights in February and to the Working Group on Indigenous Peoples of its Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns about human rights violations in Guatemala and the government's failure to end the abuses. In October Amnesty International published Human eights violations against the indigenous peoples of the Americas, which included concerns in Guatemala.
