KENYA
Hundreds of government critics, many of them prisoners of conscience, were detained for short periods. Over 30 were charged with political offences and freed on bail. Four long-term prisoners of conscience and more than 20 other political prisoners were released. There were reports of torture by the police and beatings of peaceful demonstrators. Over 700 people were killed in ethnic clashes allegedly instigated or condoned by the government. Some 350 people were under sentence of death, including over 30 convicted during 1992, but no executions were reported.
After 12 years of one-party rule, several opposition parties and human rights groups were allowed to campaign openly, but they still encountered considerable harassment. Elections in late December, which were marred by electoral irregularities, returned to power President Daniel arap Moi and the ruling Kenya African National Union (kanu), but opposition
KENYA
parties won almost half the seats in parliament.
Kenya became a party to the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights in February.
Hundreds of members of opposition parties, journalists and peaceful demonstrators were arrested during the year, including students and members of the Release Political Prisoners (rpp) campaign group. Many were prisoners of conscience. Most were soon released without charge, but at least 30 were charged with political offences and later released on bail. None had been tried by the end of the year.
Among those charged were 11 prominent members of the Forum for the Restoration of Democracy (ford) party, who were arrested in January after giving a press conference in the capital, Nairobi, expressing fears that a pro-government military take-over was imminent and that government opponents would be assassinated. They were charged with "publishing false rumours", then released. Sheikh Khalid Salim Balala, an Islamic preacher and a leader of the prohibited Islamic Party of Kenya (ipk), was arrested in Mombasa in July after giving an open-air sermon. He was charged with treason, which carries a mandatory death penalty, for "imagining the death of the President". He was still awaiting irial at the end of the year.
Eleven journalists, all prisoners of conscience, were briefly detained and interrogated by police about articles critical of the government. Six staff of Society magazine, including its editor Pius Nyamora and his wife, were arrested in Nairobi in May and charged with sedition in connection with articles alleging government involvement in political killings. Njehu Gatabaki of Finance magazine, and the Reverend Jam-lick Miano of a church magazine, fitegemea (Self-Reliance), wpre also charged with sedition. None of the journalists, who were all released on bail within a few days, had been tried by the end of 1992.
All 22 known political prisoners serving prison terms imposed after unfair trials in previous years (see Amnesty International Report 1992) were released during the year. They included George Anyona, a former member of parliament, and three other prisoners of conscience serving seven-year sentences for sedition, who were freed on bail in February. The High Court, with the prosecution's consent, lifted the remaining
part of their sentences in June. George Anyona later sued the state for wrongful imprisonment and ill-treatment.
Koigi wa Wamwere, a former member of parliament, remained in custody throughout the year without being tried, together with his relative Geoffrey Kuria Kariuki, a farmer, and Rumba Kinuthia and Mirugi Kariuki, both lawyers. They had been arrested in 1990 and charged with treason (see Amnesty International Report 1992). Four other co-defendants were released in June when the state withdrew charges. Koigi wa Wamwere and the other three appeared in court several times during the year to complain about torture after their arrests, subsequent ill-treatment in prison, and violations of their constitutional rights. A court ruled in November that Rumba Kinuthia, who doctors testified was too ill to stand trial, should be tried separately when he was medically fit, but it did not investigate his complaint of torture and ill-treatment.
Cases of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners in police custody, including rape of women, were reported during the year. Riot police in the General Service Unit severely beat peaceftil demonstrators on several occasions. In February they assaulted women belonging to the Release Political Prisoners group who were demonstrating in a Nairobi park. They beat four women unconscious, including Professor Wangari Maathai, chairperson of the Green Belt Movement, an environmental pressure group. By the end of the year, none of these cases had been independently investigated.
Conditions in Kenyan prisons were generally harsh, particularly in Kamiti prison near Nairobi and Langata women's prison in Nairobi. Rumba Kinuthia, who was in hospital for most of the year with high blood pressure and other complaints, was kept chained to his bed for between 14 and 23 hours a day, in violation of the United Nations (un) Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners.
Hundreds of Somali refugees and asylum-seekers were arbitrarily detained in August. One reportedly died after being beaten by police. They were held for several days in makeshift camps without proper shelter, food or medical treatment and were denied access to relatives and officials of the un High Commissioner for Refugees.
Political violence claimed the lives of
KENYA/KOREA (DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF)
some 700 people in western and central Kenya in inter-ethnic clashes in the first half of the year. Credible evidence was published following a church-sponsored investigation in June, and later in a parliamentary committee report, indicating that one group responsible for many of the killings was supported and financed by senior government and kanu officials. The group was nicknamed "Kalenjin warriors", Kalenjin being President Moi's ethnic group. However, the full parliament, composed solely of kanu members, voted in October to reject the committee report. No further action was taken by the authorities to bring to justice any government officials alleged to have been responsible for killings.
No judicial action was taken into the reportedly deliberate killing by police of three people at the time of a demonstration and rioting against arrests of ipk leaders in Mombasa in May. The three people killed were reportedly not involved in the rioting.
Further evidence emerged of high-level government involvement in the murder of former Foreign Minister Robert Ouko in 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1992). After President Moi stopped a judicial inquiry in December 1991, Jonah Anguka, a former official, was charged with the murder, At his trial which started in November, the prosecution named as his accomplice the former head of the security service, who had died of natural causes earlier in 1992.
More than 30 people were sentenced to death for murder or armed robbery. A total of over 350 people, including seven women, were under sentence of death, but there were no reports of executions.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience and for other political prisoners to be brought to trial promptly and fairly. It called for impartial inquiries into allegations of ill-treatment or torture of prisoners and also into assaults on peaceful demonstrators. It called for independent investigations to establish responsibility for political killings where government involvement had been alleged, and appealed for commutation of all death sentences. In June Amnesty International representatives were able to visit Kenya for the first time since 1987. They discussed the organization's concerns with the Attorney General and met human rights activists, including lawyers.
