MALAYSIA
Over 80 political activists, including seven prisoners of conscience, continued to be detained without charge or trial under the Internal Security Act (isa). Caning was imposed as a punishment for criminal offences. At least 28 people were sentenced to death. Some 200 Acehnese asylum-seekers were in danger of being forcibly returned to Indonesia where they
MALAYSIA
risked possible torture and extrajudicial execution.
In September the government of Sabah state reimposed a rule requiring Malaysians from the rest of the country to carry passports when visiting Sabah. The measure was promptly opposed by the federal government which threatened to abolish it. This added to the continuing tension between the two governments.
Seven prisoners of conscience remained in detention without charge or trial on suspicion of advocating the secession of Sabah state from Malaysia. All were said to be supporters of the main ruling party of Sabah. the Parti Bersatu Sabah, United Sabah Party. They were held under the isa, which permits detention without charge or trial for up to two years, renewable indefinitely. The detention orders of four of the detainees who had been held since 1990 - Abdul Rahman Ahmad, Benedict Topin, Wencelous Damit Undikai and Albinus Yudah - were renewed during the year. The other three - Vincent Chung, Ariffin Haji Hamid and Jeffrey Kitingan -continued to be held under their initial detention orders issued in 1991.
In December the Home Ministry Parliamentary Secretary told parliament that a total of 126 people were in detention under the isa. Their identities were not disclosed. Among them 74 were communists who had voluntarily renounced their involvement in armed opposition and surrendered to the authorities in December 1989.
Caning remained a supplementary punishment to imprisonment for dozens of crimes including drugs offences, rape and attempted rape, kidnapping, firearms offences, attempted murder, causing grievous injiuy, child abuse, robbery and theft.
Amnesty International believes that caning constitutes a cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment prohibited by international law. Shaari Abdullah, a fisherman, was sentenced in May to 10 years' imprisonment and 10 strokes of the cane on conviction of raping a 17-year-old girl. In August Lee Kim Sen, a welder, was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment and six strokes of the cane after being convicted of causing grievous injury to a waitress.
At least 28 people were sentenced to death: 25 for drugs offences, two for murder and one for a firearms offence. The Supreme Court confirmed the death sentences on 12 people. Their last recourse was an appeal to the Pardons Board of the state where the offence was committed. Eight Filipinos and two Pakistanis remained under sentence of death (see Amnesty International Report 1992): they had reportedly been tortured in custody and convicted of drugs offences in Sabah state after unfair trials. It was not known whether any executions were carried out.
Some 200 Acehnese asylum-seekers were in danger of being forcibly repatriated to Indonesia where they would be at risk of serious human rights violations, including torture and extrajudicial execution. Deputy Prime Minister Abdul Ghafar Baba said in July that the Malaysian Government had received assurances from the Indonesian authorities that the asylum-seekers could return safely and that there was "no reason to believe that the situation is that bad in Indonesia". However, the Deputy Prime Minister added that the Acehnese would not be asked to leave the country immediately.
Amnesty International appealed throughout the year for the release of the seven prisoners of conscience from Sabah and called for the prompt trial or release of the political prisoners detained under the isa. It called for the commutation of all death sentences and urged the government not to forcibly return the Acehnese asylum-seekers to Indonesia.
