EGYPT
Thousands of suspected opponents of the government, including possible prisoners of conscience, were arrested and detained without charge or trial under state of emergency legislation. Political detainees were reportedly tortured in security police custody. At least 45 people were sentenced to death and at least five, sentenced to death in previous years, were executed. At the end of the year dozens of prisoners remained under sentence of death.
The state of emergency, reintroduced in 1981 and extended for a further three years in 1991, remained in force (see previous Amnesty International Hepoits). Emergency legislation empowers the Minister of the Interior to order the administrative detention without charge or trial of political suspects and to contest court decisions to release untried political detainees. Amendments to the Criminal Procedure Code, introduced in July, give the police additional powers of arrest and increase the length of time a detainee may be held by the police before referral to the procuracy. These measures, introduced in the absence of new safeguards, increased the likelihood of the torture of detainees. Amendments to the Penal Code promulgated at the same time increased the number of offences punishable by death for "terrorism", although the exact nature of "terrorist" offences was not defined.
Throughout the year increasingly violent clashes took place between Islamic militant groups and the security forces, especially in Asyut, Dayrut, Sanabu and Fayoum, resulting in deaths on both sides. There were also violent attacks by Islamic groups on Christians. In one incident, 13 Christians and one Muslim were killed in Sanabu in May. During the second half of the year there were several armed attacks by Islamic militant groups on foreign tourists in Upper Egypt, in which one tourist was killed and five others were injured.
During the year thousands of people were arrested for political reasons under the emergency legislation. Most were members or sympathizers of banned Islamic militant groups such as al-Gama'a al-Islamiya (Islamic Group) and Gihad (Holy War). The authorities made public only limited details about arrests and detentions, although in late November the Minister of the Interior indicated that 1,123 people were being detained at that time under emergency provisions.
In February the owner and two employees of a Cairo-based computer company were arrested. They were accused of being members of the Muslim Brothers, a banned but tolerated organization, and of preparing to overthrow the government. They denied the charges against them and claimed they had been arrested for their non-violent beliefs or activities. Shortly after their arrests the authorities claimed to have
EGYPT
uncovered a conspiracy to establish an Islamic state. In September a Cairo court ordered the detention of the three men for a further 45 days while investigations into their case continued. All three had been released by the end of December. Sixteen others, however, who were arrested in connection with the same case in late October, were still held without charge or trial at the end of the year.
In March a former Ambassador and Commander of the Egyptian armed forces, Sa'd al-Din al-Shazli, was arrested on his return to Egypt after 14 years in self-imposed exile. He had been tried in absentia in 1983 and sentenced to three years' imprisonment for disclosing military secrets about the Arab-Israeli War of October 1973 in a book published in 1981. His whereabouts remained unknown for several weeks after his arrest. In August the (Emergency) Supreme State Court ruled that the sentence imposed in 1983 should be suspended. However, within days of this decision the Supreme Military Court upheld the three-year prison sentence. At the end of the year the Higher Constitutional Court was still examining the two conflicting verdicts and Sa'd al-Din al-Shazli remained held in isolation in the hospital of a military prison near Cairo.
Suspected opponents of the government, including possible prisoners of conscience, were rounded up and arrested on numerous occasions during the year, often after clashes between the security forces and Islamic militant groups. For example, nearly 150 members of Islamic groups were arrested following the assassination in March of a State Security Intelligence officer in Fayoum. Nine of those detained were on trial at the end of the year; the rest were released shortly after arrest.
Forty alleged members of the Muslim Brothers were arrested in Zagazig in June while attending a meeting with 'Abd al-Rahman al-Rasad, a former member of the People's Assembly. They were initially accused of membership of an illegal organization but were reportedly released uncharged in August.
There were also mass arrests in June of members and sympathizers of banned Islamic groups following the killing of the writer Farag Foda, allegedly by two members of al-Gama'a al-lslamiya (see below). Large demonstrations in Cairo followed these arrests, during which at least 13
others were detained. During one week in December more than 700 suspected members of Islamic groups were arrested in Imbaba, a district of Cairo. At the end of December at least 145 others were arrested in 'Ain Shams, another Cairo district.
The role and independence of the judiciary continued to be undermined by the executive authorities. There were many reports that courts' decisions were not respected, particularly those ordering the release of political detainees held under emergency legislation. In many reported cases, detainees whose release had been ordered by the courts were transferred to remote police stations or detention centres, held for several days or even weeks, then served with new detention orders and transferred to other places of detention. This practice resulted in some detainees being held for up to three years without charge or trial.
Major political trials continued before (Emergency) Supreme State Security Courts whose verdicts are not final until approved by the Prime Minister and which provide for no right of appeal. Among defendants still being tried at the end of the year were those accused of the murder of Dr Rifa'at al-Mahgoub, former Speaker of the People's Assembly (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
On 3 December a military court in Alexandria sentenced eight alleged members of Gihad to death after an unfair trial. Seven of the eight were tried in absentia; only al-Sharif Hassan Ahmed was present. Thirty-one co-defendants received sentences ranging from life imprisonment to one-year prison terms. Nine were acquitted. Charges against the defendants included membership of an underground organization which calls for the overthrow of the government, possession of weapons and theft. The court apparently applied for the first time the new amendments to the Penal Code, and there was no right to appeal against the sentences. At least five defendants - Ahmed Ibrahim 'Abd al-Galil, Qassim Ibrahim Qassim Qettish, al-Sharif Hassan Ahmed, Mohammad Sa'id Mohammad 'Abdu and 'Ala' al-Din Isma'il 'Abbas Ramadhan - said they were tortured after arrest: official forensic medical doctors who examined the defendants found physical scars consistent with the alleged tortiue.
The cases had been referred to a military
EGYPT
court in October by a presidential decree. On 8 December, five days after the defendants had been sentenced, the Higher Administrative Court ruled that the presidential decree vi^as invalid as the cases had no connection with the armed forces and that the defendants should be tried before a state security court, On 10 December the goverrunent challenged this ruling.
The eight-year prison sentences imposed by the (Emergency) Supreme State Security Court in December 1991 on the novelist 'Ala' Hamed and two co-defen-dants (see Amnesty International Report 1992) had still not been approved by the Prime Minister by the end of the year. In June 'Ala' Hamed was sentenced to a further one-year jail term by a court in Cairo, following publication of his novel, al-Firash (The Bed), which discusses sex. He was released pending an appeal.
Political detainees continued to be tortured. The most common methods reported were beatings, suspension, burning with cigarettes, electric shocks and psychological torture. For example, Mahmoud Guhayni al-Sa'dawi, an office employee at the University of Asyut, was reported to have died as a result of torture in the Lazoghly Square headquarters of the security police in May, five days after his arrest. An inquiry by the procuracy established that his death was due to circulatory and respiratory depression, but apparently did not shed light on the circumstances surrounding his death.
'Amer 'Abd al-Mun'im, a journalist working for the opposition al-Sha'b newspaper, was arrested in July and detained for a month. He was accused of possessing anti-government leaflets and was reportedly tortured at the Lazoghly Square headquarters of the security police. He alleged that he had been beaten and subjected to electric shocks on different parts of his body, in particular his left hand. A forensic doctor reportedly confirmed that his scars were consistent with the methods of torture he described. His lawyer lodged an official complaint of torture with the procuracy but by the end of the year no investigation was known to have been carried out.
At least 45 people were sentenced to death. Eight were sentenced to death for political reasons in Alexandria (see above). Nineteen, including 15 foreign nationals, were convicted in separate cases of drug
smuggling into the coimtry. One death sentence was passed for selling drugs. All the others were found guilty of murder. At least five people, sentenced to death in previous years, were hanged, including two in Tanta Prison in September and one in al-Hadhra Prison in Alexandria in July.
On 8 June Farag Foda, a writer and vocal opponent of Islamic militant groups, was shot dead by two men; responsibility for the killing was claimed by al-Gama'a al-lslamiya. Two other people were wounded in the attack, including the writer's 15-year-old son. Amnesty International condemned the assassination as a deliberate killing by an armed opposition organization. It also lu^ed that those arrested following the murder be hiunanely treated in custody.
Amnesty International repeatedly called for an end to the widespread practice of torture of detainees. The organization urged the authorities to conduct prompt, thorough and impartial investigations into allegations of torture, and to end the long-term detention without charge or trial of government opponents, particularly when their imprisonment was unlawful or contrary to court orders.
During the year Amnesty International appealed on several occasions to President Hosni Mubarak to commute death sentences. It also urged that Egypt ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
In January Amnesty International published a report, Egypt: Security police detentions undermine the rule of law, which focused on the long-term pattern of arbitrary detentions. In May the organization called for a retrial of General Sa'd al-Din al-Shazli in accordance with internationally recognized fair trial procedures.
In May Amnesty International representatives visiting Egypt were received by President Mubarak and also discussed human rights concerns with the President and ministers. The President expressed Egypt's commitment to human rights and stated that Amnesty International was welcome in Egypt as long as its work was fair and non-partisan. Shortly afterwards the government sent a 20-page response to recent Amnesty International reports on human rights violations in Egypt, which failed to allay the organization's human rights concerns. Amnesty International continued to raise its concerns, particularly
EGYPT/EL SALVADOR
torture, prolonged detention and the death penalty. Throughout the year the authorities responded to inquiries on specific cases.
In oral statements to the United Nations (un) Commission on Human Rights in February and to its Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns about torture and prolonged detention under the state of emergency in Egypt.
In March Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns regarding torture in Egypt to the un Committee against Torture, pursuant to Article 20 of the un Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
