SINGAPORE
Three former prisoners of conscience continued to be subject to government orders restricting their freedom of expression and association. Criminal offenders were sentenced to caning. At least seven people were sentenced to death and three were executed.
The restriction order on Chia Thye Poh, a former member of parliament detained without charge or trial under the Internal Secxu-ity Act (isa) from 1966 to 1989, confining him at night to an offshore island (see Amnesty International Reports 1991 and 1992) was amended in November to allow him to live on the main island of Singapore. Restrictions on his freedom of association and expression continued to be imposed.
Restriction orders on two other former prisoners of conscience, Vincent Cheng and Teo Soh Lung, limiting their freedom of expression and association, were renewed in June. Vincent Cheng's order was renewed for a further two years and Teo Soh Lung's for one year. Similar restrictions on three other former prisoners of conscience were not renewed (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
Caning, which constitutes a cruel, inhuman or degrading form of punishment, remained a mandatory punishment for some 30 crimes, including armed robbery, attempted murder, drug-trafficking, illegal immigration and rape. In July Lee Seek
SINGAPORE/SOMALIA
Hing, a car tyre dealer, was sentenced to three strokes of the cane and one yeeir's imprisonment after being convicted of breaking the arm of another motorist. There was no information about the damages claim made in coiut in March 1991 by Qwek Kee Chong, a convicted prisoner, for "grievous injury" caused by caning (see Amnesty International Report 1992].
At least seven people were sentenced to death. They included Tan Chee Kwee and Joseph Soon Kim Liang who were sentenced to death in July by the High Court after being convicted of murder and robbery, and Mazlan Maidin whose death sentence imposed for murder was upheld by the Court of Criminal Appeal in October. At least three people were executed: all had been convicted of drugs offences. Tan Toon Hock was executed in February. Lim Joo Yin and Tan Chong Ngee were executed in April. Sim Ah Cheoh, a woman under sentence of death for the same drug-trafficking offence as Lim Joo Yin and Tan Chong Ngee, was granted clemency by President Wee Kim Wee in March and her sentence was commuted to life imprisonment. This was only the fourth such commutation in 30 years.
Amnesty International urged the authorities to lift the restrictions on the three former prisoners of conscience, to end caning and to commute all death sentences.
