KOREA
(republic of)
Over 200 political prisoners were detained and charged or convicted for alleged national security offences and about 200 others imprisoned on similar
grounds in previous years continued to be held. Some were prisoners of conscience, others were serving sentences imposed after trials which were believed to have been unfair. Dozens of prisoners were reportedly tortured or ill-treated by the police and the Agency for National Security Planning (ansp). Nine people were executed and about 50 prisoners were believed to be under sentence of death.
The Agreement on Reconciliation, Non-Aggression and Exchanges and Cooperation Between the South and the North came into force in February (see Amnesty International Reports 1991 and 1992). In September agreement was reached on its implementation, although practical arrangements for this had not been worked out and the government refused to revise or repeal the National Security Law (nsl) to reflect the changes in inter-Korean relations. A presidential election held in December was won by Kim Young-Sam of the Democratic Liberal Party.
The Constitutional Court made several rulings strengthening human rights protection. In January it ruled that law enforcement officials should not be present at or record conversations between prisoners and their lawyers. A ruling in February effectively reduced the scope of the Military Secret Protection Law: it said the law's definition of military secrets had been too broad and had possibly restricted freedom of information and expression. In April the court ruled that it was unconstitutional to detain suspects for interrogation under the nsl for up to 50 days before formal charges were brought (suspects under other laws may be held for up to 30 days before indictment). However, the court said that detention for 50 days should be allowed for
KOREA (REPUBLIC OF)
the most serious offences under the law, such as espionage or membership of an "anti-state" organization.
The government introduced to the National Assembly draft legislation to amend the Penal Code, which proposes to abolish the death penalty for 10 offences where death is caused unintentionally.
Hundreds of people were arrested during the year on account of their political activities, some of whom were prisoners of conscience. Over 200 people were arrested under the nsl which prohibits "anti-state" activities and contacts with "anti-state" organizations. Others were arrested for participating in unauthorized or violent demonstrations or for breaking restrictive trade union laws.
Those arrested included nine members of the preparatory committee of the Korea Labour Party, all of whom were prisoners of conscience. Four of them - Chu Dae-hwan, Lee Yong-son, Chun Song and Min Yong-chan - were arrested in January and charged under the nsl for attempting to form an "anti-state" organization "which praises and benefits North Korea". They were brought to trial but released in June and July after receiving suspended prison sentences.
Thirty-nine members of Sanomaeng, Socialist Workers' League, were arrested in April and charged under the nsl with belonging to an "anti-state" organization which seeks to establish a socialist government through armed uprising. Many of them were tortured or ill-treated diu-ing interrogation. The organization's leader, Baik Tae-ung, denied that Sanomaeng espoused an armed uprising. He was given a life sentence in October. At the end of the year some 100 members of Sanomaeng arrested since 1990 remained in prison (see Amnesty International Report 1992). They were possible prisoners of conscience.
In August and September, 62 people were arrested under the nsl for their alleged involvement in a spy-ring operated by the North Korean authorities. Charges against them included meeting and passing information to alleged North Korean spies, setting up or joining a South Korean chapter of the North Korean Workers' Party and failure to report alleged spies. Their trials had not concluded by the end of the year and it was not clear what evidence existed to support these accusations or whether some might be prisoners of conscience.
Former military conscript Yoon Sok-yang was arrested in September and sentenced the following month to three years' imprisonment for desertion. A possible prisoner of conscience, he had been in hiding since making a "declaration of conscience" in October 1990. In this he had made public his moral objection to the forced recruitment of students, including himself, by the military to inform on fellow student activists and had exposed the illegal surveillance of civilians by the army's intelligence wing, the Defense Security Command (dsc). Following a public outcry at these disclosures, the authorities had announced in 1990 that the dsc would in future reft-ain from collecting information on civilians. There were some 40 other army conscripts serving sentences on national security charges, some of whom also appeared to be prisoners of conscience.
Several leaders of various political and labour organizations who had been sentenced following anti-government protests in April and May 1991 remained in prison (see Amnesty International Report 1992). They included Hyon Ju-ok, acting Chairman of Cbonnobyop, Korean Trade Union Congress, and Lee Su-ho, Vice-President of Cbunkyojo, Korean Teachers' and Educational Workers' Union. Both were serving two-and-a-half-year prison terms and were possible prisoners of conscience. Im Su-kyong and Father Moon Kyu-hyun were the only prisoners of conscience released on parole in a presidential amnesty on 24 December. They were serving sentences of five years' imprisonment for an unauthorized visit to North Korea in 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
In July the Supreme Court upheld a three-year sentence passed in December 1991 on Kang Ki-hun, a staff member of Chonminnyon, National Democratic Alliance of Korea. He had been arrested in June 1991 and convicted of aiding and abetting the protest suicide of another Chonminnyon member, a charge which he denied. The evidence against him consisted exclusively of a contested analysis of the handwriting in the suicide note. Amnesty International believes that Kang Ki-hun was wrongly convicted after an unfair trial and is a prisoner of conscience.
In all, more than 200 prisoners convicted of national security offences in previous years remained in prison. Many had
KOREA (REPUBLIC 0F)/KUWAIT
I
been sentenced to long prison terms for alleged contacts with North Korean agents or espionage. Some were prisoners of conscience; others appeared to have been convicted after unfair trials and claimed that they had been forced to confess under torture (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 and 1991). Some of these long-term prisoners were denied early release on parole because they refused to recant their political views.
Torture and ill-treatment of prisoners continued to be reported. In March several members of Chunkyojo reported that they had been tortured or ill-treated by police in custody. They had been arrested after a protest meeting on 2 March and taken to Yongdeungpo and Nambu police stations in Seoul. All were later released. Pae Choon-il, Vice President of Chunkyojo, stated that he had been beaten and threatened by police officers. Kim Sang-chol alleged that he had been beaten unconscious. Five Chunkyojo members filed official complaints with the police.
Some of the 62 prisoners arrested in August and September for involvement in an alleged North Korean spy-ring claimed they were tortured and ill-treated during incommunicado detention by the ansp. Most prisoners were denied visits by their families for over 22 days, and lawyers had to obtain'court orders to force the ansp to allow them access to some of the prisoners. Many prisoners reported that they had been deprived of sleep for long periods and some said that they had been beaten, threatened, or forced to do repeated strenuous physical exercises. Song Hae-suk was said to have been beaten and threatened in front of her three-year-old son. Chun Hee-sik was held without warrant for 48 hours, during which he says he was beaten under interrogation and deprived of sleep. He filed a complaint about his ill-treatment.
Prosecutions of law enforcement officials for torturing or ill-treating political prisoners were rare: Amnesty International knew of only three cases between 1986 and 1992. In January a Seoul court awarded compensation to a former prisoner of conscience, Kim Keun-tae, for the torture he had suffered in 1985. Four police officers had been sentenced in 1991 to prison terms ranging fi-om two to five years for their involvement in his torture.
Nine prisoners convicted of murder were executed in December. About 50 pris-
oners were said to be under sentence of death.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience and urged the government to bring the nsl and other laws used to hold political prisoners fully into line with international standards relating to basic human rights such as freedom of expression and association. The organization called for a review of the cases of political prisoners convicted after apparently unfair trials, urged that prisoners should be safeguarded against torture and ill-treatment and called for impartial investigations of all torture allegations. Amnesty International also appealed for the commutation of all death sentences and abolition of the death penalty.
In October Amnesty International delegates visited South Korea and discussed human rights concerns with Ministry of Justice officials. In December Amnesty International wrote to all presidential election candidates urging them to commit themselves publicly to the protection and promotion of human rights.
