YEMEN
Over 1,000 people, among them prisoners of conscience, were arrested following anti-govemment demonstrations, the majority of whom were released by the end of the year. At least 27 other government opponents, including two prisoners of conscience and several possible prison* ers of conscience, were still held at the end of the year. Most had been convicted after unfair trials. Torture and ill-treatment of detainees were widespread and flogging continued to be used as a form of
judicial punishment. Prison conditions were harsh. At least 16 people were killed in circumstances suggesting they were victims of extrajudicial executions. Several hundred cases of "disappearance" which occurred in previous years remained unresolved. Five people were executed and 31 other death sentences were ratified by the Presidential Council. Hundreds of other prisoners were believed to be under sentence of death.
General elections scheduled for November were postponed until April 1993.
The Penal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedxu"es of unified Yemen had not been promulgated by the end of the year and the legal systems of the former People's Democratic Republic of Yemen (pdry) and the Yemen Arab Republic (yar) remained separate.
One person arrested in April on charges of apostasy was a prisoner of conscience. 'Ali 'Abdul-Fattah Hashim, a school teacher, was held at Sana'a Central Prison; his trial had not been concluded by the end of the year.
Another prisoner of conscience remained under sentence of death after more than nine and a half years' imprisonment. Mansur Rajih, a member of the former National Democratic Front (ndf), the main opposition group in the former yar, was arrested in July 1983. He was tortured during interrogation and convicted of a murder he did not commit after an unfair trial. His death sentence was pending ratification by the Presidential Council at the end of the year. It was not possible to confirm the continued detention of 'Ayesh 'Ali 'Ubad, another prisoner of conscience, and of 15 other suspected nof members (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 to 1992].
In December over 1,000 people, including prisoners of conscience, were arrested following violent anti-government demonstrations in Ta'iz, al-Hudaida and Sana'a. The demonstrations were held in protest against rising prices of basic commodities and the government's general economic policy. The arrests were carried out by al-'Amn al-Siyassi (Political Security), al-'Amn al-Markazi (Central Security) and the army. Some of the detainees were arrested in their homes or in the street after the demonstrations had ended. Many of those held were students, but they also included civil servants, labourers and military
YEMEN
personnel. The majority were released uncharged within days, but at least 50 remained in detention at the end of the year. Among them were Muhammad Yahya al-Sabri and Sarhan al-Muhayya, both officers in the air force, who were held incommunicado in the military intelligence detention centre in Sala in the city of Ta'iz. Many of the detainees were allegedly subjected to beatings and electric shocks.
Three people arrested after violent anti-govemment protests in Sana'a in 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992) were tried and sentenced to prison terms in March. Insufficient information was available to Amnesty International to assess whether they received a fair trial. Fourteen others arrested at the same time were released uncharged at the beginning of 1992.
At least 25 political prisoners, among them possible prisoners of conscience, continued to be held throughout the year. All were suspected members of the ndf who had been arrested between 1981 and 1989 in the former yar. Two continued to be held without charge or trial and a third remained in Sana'a Central Prison despite having been tried and acquitted in 1988. Eight had been sentenced to prison terms or to paying diyya (a fine imposed in accordance with tribal tradition). Fourteen were under sentence of death following unfair trials. Those convicted had reportedly been denied prompt access to lawyers, been given inadequate time to prepare their defence and had been found guilty of murder, kidnapping and other charges on the basis of contested "confessions" and witness testimony. All the sentences were pending appeal or ratification by the Presidential Council.
In April and May, 27 other ndf members were released following a decision by the Presidential Council. Most had been sentenced to prison terms after unfair trials in previous years. Mahdi Naji al-Awadi, an ndf member who had remained in custody although he had been acquitted when brought to trial in 1988, was also released in May.
Torture and ill-treatment of prisoners remained widespread. In one case at least 14 untried detainees were tortured in the Criminal Investigations Headquarters in al-Soor, al-Hudaida, between December 1991 and January 1992. They were allegedly arrested in connection with a land dispute but were tortured to force them to "con-
fess" to having committed murder or to implicate others. Among them was Fatima Zayd Saleh Ali, a housewife who was detained with her two children. She suffered a broken arm and a fractured jaw as a result of repeated beatings, and was allegedly threatened with rape. While she was being interrogated, her one-month-old baby was left alone in the cold on the roof of the building. Three members of the group were still held at the end of the year; the remaining 11 were released uncharged in December.
At least five detainees were tortured in al-Amri police station in Sana'a in December. Among them was Abo Muhammad Fath, a nine-year-old boy accused of theft, who was burned with cigarettes and beaten all over his body while suspended by the wrists ft'om a high window. Following a strike by lawyers in protest against the abuses committed at the police station, the government ordered the release of the five detainees and the commander of the police station was arrested pending the outcome of a judicial investigation. Reports were also received of the torture and ill-treatment of Somali refugees, including the rape and attempted rape of five women in al-Hudaida Central Prison and of two others in Madinat al-Sha'b refugee camp in Aden.
The judicial punishment of flogging continued to be imposed. It was not possible to gauge the overall extent of its use in the country; however, between January and March, 77 prisoners were flogged in Sana'a and Dhamar Central prisons alone.
Conditions in prisons at times amounted to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. In May Sufîyan Hammoud Muhammad Affan, a political prisoner, died in Ta'iz Central Prison; he had been held there for over nine years. Although seriously ill, he was apparently denied proper medical care during his imprisonment.
During the year several political activists were deliberately killed, apparently for political reasons. Those targeted were principally members of the Yemeni Socialist Party (ysp). Among them was Colonel Majid Murshid Sayf, a member of the Central Committee of the ysp. In June he was wounded after resisting attempts to abduct him at a military check-point in Sana'a. He was allegedly then taken to the headquarters of al-Amn al-Markazi in the city
yemenaugoslavia (federal republic of)
and killed. No investigation was known to have been held into his death.
In December at least 15 demonstrators were killed in Ta'iz and Sana'a during anti-government demonstrations (see above) in circumstances suggesting that some at least may have been victims of extrajudicial executions. According to reports, military and security forces brought in to disperse demonstrations did so using a level of force out of all proportion to any threat posed, including the firing of anti-aircraft guns and other heavy weaponry. The government subsequently listed the names of 12 people said to have been killed, but the real figure was believed to be higher. The official list did not include, for example, Hammud al-Halimi, a labourer who was killed in Ta'iz. A parliamentary inquiry into the killings was set up, but it had not been concluded by the end of the year. No judicial inquiry was known to have been initiated.
The fate of hundreds of detainees who "disappeared" in previous years in the former yar and pdry remained unknown, although Amnesty International received new information about hundreds of cases. Most had been detained in the 1970s or in January 1986 in the former pdry but 11 had "disappeared" in the former yar between 1978 and 1985 (see previous Amnesty International Reports]. Those who had "disappeared" in the former pdry included 'Abdul-Rahman 'Umar Baljun, a writer and General Director of Aden Television.
In May and December, five people convicted of premeditated murder were executed in Sana'a, Ibb and Hajja. Thirty-one other prisoners convicted of the same offence had their death sentences ratified by the Presidential Council in early December. Hundreds of other prisoners were believed to be under sentence of death.
Amnesty International urged the government to release unconditionally two prisoners of conscience, Mansur Rajih and 'Ali 'Abdul-Fattah Hashim. The organization also called for the fair trial or release of other political detainees and for judicial review of the cases of political prisoners sentenced after unfair trials. In March Amnesty International urged the government to establish an inquiry into allegations of torture of detainees at the Criminal Investigations Headquarters in al-Hudaida. In September the organization submitted details of 140 "disappeared" prisoners to
the government and again called for an independent inquiry to be initiated to clarify their cases. However, no such inquiry had been established by the end of the year. In December Amnesty International appealed to the government not to carry out the death sentences ratified by the Presidential Council.
In December the government reiterated its denial that political prisoners were being held in Yemen. It asserted that the officer responsible for the torture of detainees at the Criminal Investigation Headquarters in al-Hudaida had been "dismissed from his job and punished for the crimes he committed".
