ITALY
Allegations of torture and ill-treatment in police custody and prisons continued and were more frequent than in previous years; some appeared to have been inadequately investigated.
Draft legislation reforming the existing system of conscientious objection to compulsory military service (see Amnesty International fieporfs 1989 to 1992) gained parliamentary approval in mid-January. However, it was rejected by the then Presi-
dent of the Republic, Francesco Cossiga, and returned to parliament for further consideration; this had not been completed by the end of the year.
There were numerous complaints of ill-treatment against the police, carabinieri and prison guards; many concerned immigrants from outside Europe and people held in connection with drugs-related offences.
Daud Addawe Ali, a Somali asylum-seeker, was arrested in March following a disturbance at the aliens' registration office attached to a Rome police station. Inside the station foiu police officers allegedly struck him to the ground, beat him with batons and knocked his head repeatedly against a wall until he lost consciousness. Members of the public reported hearing his cries for help. He was transferred to hospital, where doctors diagnosed a head injury and bruising to the left leg and chest. Some hours later he was taken to prison, accused of resisting arrest and of insulting and injuring a police officer. Shortly after his release into provisional liberty some 17 days later, a medical examination found injuries consistent with his allegations. Members of parliament called for an inquiry into his treatment and he reportedly made a judicial complaint. In April a government delegation told the United Nations Committee against Torture that he had been involved in a violent struggle with the police preceding arrest.
Carmelo La Rosa, a heroin addict, alleged that he and 17 fellow drug addicts in Gazzi prison were beaten by prison guards using batons. On 24 June, during Messina Appeal Court's hearing of his appeal against an eight-year prison sentence for possession of heroin, he removed
ITALY/JAMAICA
his clothing, claiming that the injuries visible on his body had been inflicted by prison guards. The court recorded that there were clear signs of violent blows caused by a blunt instrument on his chest and shoulders. It requested the Public Prosecutor to order his medical examination by the director of Gazzi prison clinic immediately on his readmission to prison. After receiving a two-year reduction in his sentence, Carmelo La Rosa returned to prison but the Public Prosecutor apparently neglected to order his medical examination. He was found dead during the night of 24 to 25 June, hanging by the neck from a belt tied to his cell window. His lawyer made a signed declaration to the Public Prosecutor describing his client's allegations of ill-treatment and his claim that, after his last beating prior to his court appearance, prison guards had threatened to hang him if he denounced them. The Public Prosecutor's office opened an investigation into the circumstances surrounding the death.
Numerous transfers of prisoners held in connection with Mafia-related offences took place from July onwards as part of a series of anti-Mafia measures launched by the government. Allegations of ill-treatment concerning several prisons affected by the transfers, including Poggioreale prison and the island prisons of Asinara and Pianosa, were made by inmates, their relatives and lawyers and several members of parliament.
It was reported that over 60 prisoners transferred to the "Agrippa" high security section of Pianosa prison during July and August were held under a provision of the so-called "anti-Mafia" law introduced in June by government decree and converted into law in August. This allows the Minister of Justice to suspend - for public order and security reasons - all or part of the normal prison rules regulating the treatment of prisoners for those held in connection with organized crime and terrorism. From mid-August onwards, when prisoners were allowed their first visits from lawyers and relatives since transfer, there were reports that many prisoners appeared dirty and undernourished and that they had been punched, kicked, subjected to arbitrary beatings with batons, repeatedly threatened and insulted, and had been forced to run continuously during exercise periods. The majority of prisoners' relatives making
such allegations did not identify themselves by name, saying that they feared retaliation against the prisoners concerned, although the wives and lawyers of two prisoners did make formal complaints to the judicial authorities.
In September the magistrate of surveillance responsible for monitoring the treatment of Pianosa inmates sent the Minister of Justice the findings of his August visit to the prison. His report appeared to lend credibility to a number of the allegations emanating from the "Agrippa" section. He concluded that criminal acts had possibly taken place there and also described several incidents involving "gratuitous and illegal brutality" against detainees in the ordinary sections of the prison.
Amnesty International made inquiries throughout the year about official steps taken to investigate allegations of torture and ill-treatment and the outcome of inquiries opened into such allegations. The Minister of Justice sent a partial response to a few of the cases of alleged torture and ill-treatment described in the memorandum which Amnesty International had presented to the government in October 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992]. In March Amnesty International replied, requesting more comprehensive information on all the cases in its memorandum and expressing concern about several new cases of alleged ill-treatment reported during the first three months of 1992, including that of Daud Addawe Ali. Amnesty International also wrote to the Minister asking for details of the regime in force in the "Agrippa" section of Pianosa prison and of the steps taken as a result of the magistrate of surveillance's findings. The authorities did not respond to any of these inquiries.
