SUDAN
Hundreds of suspected opponents of the government, including dozens of prisoners of conscience, were imprisoned at any one time. Most were detained without charge or trial for weeks or months. Many political detainees were tortured, often in secret detention centres. Prisoners convicted of criminal offences were flogged. Hundreds of prisoners "disappeared" or were extrajudicially executed in the war-affected areas of southern and western Sudan. At least three prisoners were executed and at least four others sentenced to death. Both factions of the armed opposition Sudan People's Liberation Army (spla) were responsible for deliberate and arbitrary killings.
Gross human rights violations were committed in the context of continuing armed conflict in southern and western Sudan between the ruling National Salvation Revolution Command Council (nsrcc), headed by President Omar Hassan al-Bashir, and the spla. In the Nuba mountains of South Kordofan tens of thousands of Nuba civilians were displaced after their villages were deliberately destroyed by government forces. Between March and May, the government captured several towns held by the spla in southern Sudan, displacing tens of thousands of civilians. In July, after spla assaults on the government-controlled city of Juba, government forces demolished densely populated suburbs, rendering thousands of people homeless.
Outside the war zones, the authorities continued to detain and torture suspected opponents including members of banned political parties, trade unionists, civil ser-
vants, students, and people from southern Sudan and the Fiu: and Nuba communities. A state of emergency remained in force, effectively allowing indefinite administrative detention without charge or trial. There were fewer cases of long-term administrative detention in civil prisons, but hundreds of instances of detention without charge for periods of a few weeks to several months in secret detention centres known as "ghost houses". Many of the detainees were tortured and ill-treated. Although the government had said that detainees would be routinely referred to the judiciary, in practice most detainees were held exclusively on the authority of security agencies. In July, 110 prisoners were released in a presidential amnesty. More than half were military officers convicted of treason after unfair military trials over the previous three years.
At any one time hundreds of suspected opponents of the government, including dozens of prisoners of conscience, were in prison. Among the prisoners released during the year was Ahmad Osman Siraj, a prisoner of conscience and prominent critic of the government who had been arrested in 1990. He was released in July under the presidential amnesty. Eleven others convicted of treason with him after an unfair trial in December 1990 were also released. However, the fate of 28 soldiers arrested at the same time was unknown (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
Other prisoners of conscience arrested in previous years remained in prison throughout 1992. Among them was Mokhtar Abdullah Ahmad, a trade unionist and Communist Party member, detained without charge since August 1990. Also still held was 'Abd al-Rahman 'Abdallah Nugdallah, a former government minister and member of the Umma Party, who was sentenced to life imprisonment for treason after an unfair trial in October 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992). In July his sentence was commuted to 10 years' imprisonment.
Hundreds of members of banned political parties were arrested during the year. Tirab Tindal Sultan, a member of the Umma Party, was arrested in January with two other men and held uncharged until September. Members of the Democratic Unionist Party (dup) detained in "ghost houses" included Mirghani Abdel Rahman Suleiman, a former government minister
SUDAN
who was arrested in March and released in November. Hassan Osman and two other men, all apparently suspected communists, were arrested in April for distributing a banned newspaper. They were still in detention at the end of the year. Thirteen members of the Ba'ath Arab Socialist Party were arrested in Khartoum in May; four were released in July, but the joiu-nalist Mohamed Sid Ahmad Atiq and eight others were held without charge or trial in a "ghost house" until their release in December.
Scores of trade unionists were arrested before elections to trade unions' councils in September. At least five were still held incommunicado at the end of the year. The majority, however, were released within three or four days. The authorities then made them report daily to security offices, where they were generally required to remain all day, This practice became common during 1992; hundreds of suspected government opponents were restricted in this way.
Hundreds of people suspected of supporting the spla were detained in western and southern Sudan, including scores of men from the Dilling area of the Nuba mountains. Ahmad Adlan Ibrahim, a teacher, was among at least five men who reportedly remained in detention at el-Obeid Prison at the end of the year, seven months after their arrest. In the south, at least 15 civil servants and local politicians were arrested in October in the government-controlled town of Malakal. Criminal charges were brought against five of them, eight were reportedly released uncharged in December, and two remained unaccounted for at the end of the year.
Torture and ill-treatment of political detainees was common in "ghost houses", in the security headquarters in Khartoum and in provincial security offices. Prisoners were beaten, whipped and forced to stand for long periods. Some were shackled and suspended from cell walls, sometimes upside-down, and then beaten on their testicles or kidneys. There were reports of prisoners being subjected to electric shocks.
Suspected government opponents arrested in the war zones were at particular risk of torture in military detention centres. For example, seven wounded spla soldiers captured in Juba in June were bound, suspended from the ceiling, beaten and had
chilli pepper rubbed into their wounds before they were shot dead.
Cruel, inhuman and degrading punishments were imposed by the courts in northern Sudan, Unlicensed street vendors or people caught brewing alcohol - many of them displaced people from war zones -were frequently flogged in public after summary trials by Public Order Courts. In October eight men, including a former High Court judge, were publicly given 20 lashes in Khartoum for drinking alcohol.
At least one possible extrajudicial execution took place in Khartoum. In October Abu Bakr Mohy al-Din Rasikh, a known opponent of the government, was shot dead by a security officer in an apparently targeted assassination. The security officer was arrested by police but at the end of the year it was unclear whether he remained in custody.
There were dozens of reports of extrajudicial executions and "disappearances" of suspected spla supporters in the war zones. In February the government announced that Daoud Yahya Bolad, an spla commander from the Fiu community who was captured in January, had been shot in Darfur while trying to escape. There were allegations that he had been extrajudicially executed. There were also many extrajudicial executions in the Nuba mountains. For example, in July troops were reported to have extrajudicially executed five men and a woman following an attack on the village of Oma.
After spla assaults on Juba in June and July, government troops arrested hundreds of southern Sudanese civilians, soldiers, policemen and paramilitary agents. Many of those arrested "disappeared": the majority were believed to have been extrajudicially executed. Following the first assault in June, 40 soldiers were extrajudicially executed after their commanding officer and several colleagues defected to the spla. After the second assault in July, around 200 unarmed civilians were reportedly killed by government soldiers during a house-to-house search of a densely populated suburb.
By the end of the year the government had failed to provide any information on the whereabouts of most of those arrested in Juba. However, officials admitted that Andrew Tombe, a Sudanese employee of the United States Agency for International Development, and Mark Laboke Jenner,
SUDAN
who worked for the European Commission, had been executed in Juba in mid-August. Officials said they had been sentenced to death by a military court for treason, but there was no independent confirmation that they had received a trial, let alone a fair trial. In November the government established a committee chaired by a High Court judge to investigate the incidents in Juba in June and July. It had not made any findings public by the end of the year.
At least one man was executed for a criminal offence. Colonel 'Abd al-Rahim Mohamed Salih was executed by firing-squad in March after being sentenced to death in 1990 for embezzling funds from the army.
At least fom people were sentenced to death for politically motivated offences. Nasr Hassan Bashir Nasr was sentenced to death for espionage by a military court in May. In September three men were sentenced to death by a criminal court in ad-Daien after being convicted of waging war against the state and illegal possession of firearms. One of the three, Zo al-Noon al-Tigani, was additionally sentenced to public crucifixion after death. It was not known whether they were executed, nor whether any death sentences were passed for ordinary criminal offences.
Both factions of the Spla, which had split in two in August 1991, were responsible for gross abuses of human rights. In January, 40 prisoners arrested after disputes within the spla in previous years were released by the Torit faction, led by John Garang de Mabior, but at least 21 other prisoners were still held in June. In September, five of them were released after a mutiny: one, Malath Joseph Luath, was shot dead but the others escaped into Uganda where they were detained by the Ugandan authorities. The spla's Nasir faction, led by Riek Machar, was reported to be holding prisoners suspected of loyalty to the Torit faction but few details were available.
Both factions were responsible for deliberate and arbitrary killings and executions of prisoners. In January forces loyal to the Nasir faction raided the village of Pagarau in Bahr al-Ghazal and killed at least 87 civilians, including patients at a leprosy hospital. In May there were reports that Torit faction forces were responsible for the arbitrary killing of civilians of Toposa ethnic origin in villages around ICapoeta. In
September spla soldiers deliberately and arbitrarily killed four foreign citizens: three aid workers and a journalist. The Torit faction blamed mutineers but reports suggested that forces loyal to the leadership were responsible.
spla leaders of both factions executed their own soldiers. For example, in July the Torit faction was reported to have executed at least seven soldiers in Ikotos in Eastern Equatoria.
Amnesty International repeatedly appealed to the Sudanese government on behalf of prisoners of conscience, political detainees denied the right to a fair trial, victims of torture, "disappearance" and extrajudicial executions, and those sentenced to death. In some instances the government responded to Amnesty International's appeals, but not in a substantive marmer.
In public statements in August the security authorities denied the existence of "ghost houses". In the same month an army spokesman denied that torture was taking place and said that any detainee was ft'ee to complain to the courts but that none had done so.
Amnesty International urged both factions of the spla to respect human rights. In June representatives of the spla Nasir faction visited the organization's International Secretariat and were urged to investigate allegations that their troops had committed deliberate and arbitrary killings and executed prisoners.
In March Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Sudan for United Nations (un] review under a procedure, established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728F/1503, for confidential consideration of communications about human rights violations. In oral statements to the un Commission on Human Rights in February and to its Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns in Sudan. In March and October Amnesty International submitted information about violations of human rights guaranteed by the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights to the African Commission established under the Charter. In December the un General Assembly adopted a resolution expressing deep concern at serious human rights violations in the Sudan and
SUDAN/SURINAMEySWAZILAND
called on the government fully to respect human rights. President Omar Hassan al-Bashir responded by dismissing allegations of human rights violations as "baseless".
