SOMALIA
Thousands of unarmed civilians were deliberately killed by political groups fighting in the civil war which had destroyed central government and fragmented the country since early 1991. Victims were apparently targeted on account
of their membership of a particular clan. Most captives were summarily executed. At least two political armed groups tortured and mutilated prisoners. Some of the other armed groups imprisoned civilian opponents.
The civil wars which began in early 1991, shortly after the overthrow by the United Somali Congress (use) of former president Mohamed Siad Barre's 21-year dictatorship (see Amnesty International Report 1992], continued throughout 1992. Fighting was widespread throughout most of the country as different armed groups, generally based on particular clans or sub-clans of the Somali ethnic group, disputed control of different areas. Civilians not involved in the fighting, including children, were often deliberately killed because they belonged to an opposing clan. In the capital, Mogadishu, hundreds died and thousands were wounded in the first three months of the year during artillery shelling by two rival use factions based on Hawiye clan sub-divisions, one loyal to Ali Mahdi, named in 1991 as interim President, and the other to General Mohamed Farah Aideed. The daily bombardment subsided in April 1992 when the United Nations (un) negotiated a cease-fire. The city remained divided into areas held by these and other armed groups. In the absence of a recognized government or any central authority able to impose law and order, a high level of violence persisted throughout the year with killings, rape and looting committed by heavily armed gunmen belonging to these groups. Much of the killing was arbitrary and impossible to attribute to any organized force.
At least 300,000 people, mostly children, died of starvation caused by the fighting, breakdown of government, famine and obstruction of the flow of international relief aid. Nearly a quarter of the six million population fled the country. A large part of the famine relief supplies brought into the country was stolen at gunpoint by armed groups, some linked to clan-based political groups, who killed anyone presumed to be opposing them, including relief agency workers.
During 1992 the un Security Council passed several resolutions on the situation in Somalia and sent 50 unarmed cease-fire monitors to Mogadishu in July, and 500 troops later to protect the distribution of relief food and medicines. Successive un
SOMALIA
Special Representatives for Somalia met the w^arring groups to try to secure relief channels and to seek political reconciliation. As the situation deteriorated, on 3 December the un Security Council authorized a United States-led military operation to "establish a secure environment for humanitarian relief operations". The resolution referred to the threat posed by the crisis to international peace and security, and widespread violations of international humanitarian law, for which individuals who were responsible would be held accountable. "Operation Restore Hope" began the next day, with 28,000 us troops moving into Somalia and contingents from other countries following. It appeared to achieve its aim of reducing levels of violence by the end of December, and was due to give way to a un peace-keeping operation when its objectives had been achieved.
In other parts of the south outside Mogadishu, there was fighting between different forces. In April the Somali National Front (snf), comprising soldiers from former President Mohamed Siad Barre's army and members of his Marehan clan, advanced from Gedo region in the southwest towards Mogadishu. They were pushed back by General Aideed's forces and most fled to Kenya together with the former President. By October, however, the snf had recaptured most of Gedo region. Both the snf and use forces killed, tortured and mutilated civilians of opposing clans. The snf killed and committed gross human rights abuses against members of the Hawiye and Rahanwein clans. In the town of Bulohawo on the border with Kenya, General Aideed's forces rounded up members of the Darod clan-family (which included the Marehan and other clans) in April, and executed dozens of people, including children. They also publicly tortured and mutilated many civilians and raped women. Similar abuses were perpetrated by the snf as it pushed the use forces back. In a rare exception to this pattern of revenge killings, General Aideed's forces transferred to Mogadishu 300 Marehan clan members, including soldiers and civilians, whom they had taken prisoner, and allowed the International Committee of the Red Cross (icrc) access to them.
In the southwest, control of the port of Kismayu fluctuated between opposed alliances centred on the use and snf respectively. Forces of the Somali Patriotic
Movement under Colonel Omar Jess, part of General Aideed's forces, reportedly killed over 100 Darod clan members in Kismayu in April in reprisal for a defeat in Gedo region. In August they abducted at gunpoint 11 Darod clan members whom the icrc was protecting in Kismayu, including five Somali icrc employees. They were never seen again and were believed to have been executed. Later, in early December, as us forces were about to take control of Kismayu, Colonel Omar Jess' forces massacred at least 100 and possibly many more members of Darod clans opposed to General Aideed. Those killed included clan elders, women and children.
The northeast, inhabited mainly by members of the Darod clan-family, was controlled for most of the year by the Somali Salvation Democratic Front (ssdf). A new political group, the Islamic Union, attacked Bosasso and Garowe in June, capturing many ssdf leaders. After brief but heavy fighting in which hundreds of fighters and civilian opponents were killed by both forces, ssdf forces regained control, defeating the Islamic Union force and ft'ee-ing the imprisoned ssdf leaders. They reportedly pardoned captured Islamic Union fighters and allowed their leaders to leave the region.
In the northwest, the Somali National Movement (snm), centred on the Issaq clan, headed a coalition of other clan-based groups in the former British Somaliland, which the snm had unilaterally declared independent in May 1991 as the Somaliland Republic, although it did not gain international recognition. In January 1992 there were hundreds of casualties in fighting between armed groups belonging to two opposed Issaq sub-clans in the towns of Berbera and Burao. Political tensions and general insecurity and violence, erupting at times into sustained fighting, held back moves to establish a central government authority in the self-declared territory and obstructed development and relief activities.
Amnesty International was deeply concerned at the continuation during 1992 of a pattern of apparently uncontrollable gross human rights abuses. It was generally difficult to document specific cases, owing to the fragmentation of the country, the absence of public order and communications, and the general economic breakdown. It was often impossible to determine
SOMALIA/SOUTH AFRICA
who was responsible for the abuses, particularly since gunmen often appeared to operate independently of the main political factions.
After receiving details of killings of prisoners in the southwest. Amnesty International published a report, SomaUa: A human rights disaster, in August. The organization appealed to all Somali armed political groups to halt the spiral of abuses and build respect for human rights. It called on their leaders and supporters alike to work to end the deliberate and arbitrary killings. It urged all forces to observe minimum humane standards, as set out in the Geneva Conventions, in particular to treat civilians and wounded or captured combatants humanely, and to prevent and punish extrajudicial executions, mutilation or torture. It also appealed to the international community to help in the search for effective solutions to end the horrendous cycle of human rights abuses in Somalia.
