MALDIVES
A journalist was sentenced to six months' imprisonment; he was a prisoner of conscience. Four other prisoners of conscience were serving sentences of banishment for periods ranging between four and seven years. A group of political prisoners arrested on criminal charges were sentenced to long terms of imprisonment or banishment after trials which fell short of international standards for fair trial. There were reports of ill-treatment at Dhoonidhoo detention centre.
Hassan Shakir, a journalist, was arrested in April and sentenced to six months' house arrest, apparently as a result of his writing for Maavashi, a magazine banned by the government before publication of its first issue. Four other prisoners of conscience continued to serve sentences of banishment imposed by police courts presided over by police officers. They had been among seven people sentenced in May 1990 to banishment for up to seven years for distributing leaflets criticizing alleged irregularities in elections held in 1989. Although police courts were abolished in 1990, the sentences passed by them still stand.
Twelve people were sentenced to prison terms of up to 15 years under the Prevention of Terrorism Act (pta), which was applied retroactively. They included people arrested in connection with an alleged conspiracy to explode home-made petrol bombs during the Fifth South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (saarc) summit of heads of government in November 1990. Some of the prisoners were also accused of planning to fire marine signal
flares into the Presidential Palace. At the time of the saarc conference two homemade bombs had exploded, causing minor damage but no injury. The goverrunent told Amnesty International that the "enormity of the crime planned remains unchanged and the effect on the people of such misdeeds urged the government to take action" (see Amnesty International Reports 1991 and 1992).
Towards the end of the year, the sentences of several political prisoners were reduced to terms of banishment or house arrest, and two of them were released as a result of appeals for clemency to President Maumoon Abdul Gayoom.
Little information was available on the procedures followed during the trials. Amnesty International's representatives were refused access to the courts to observe trials or to speak with judges.
Under the law, prisoners can be held in police custody for up to 45 days, in circumstances which may facilitate ill-treatment or torture. A prisoner held for questioning on Dhoonidhoo island, a detention centre run by the police division of the National Security Service, complained of prison conditions amoimting to ill-treatment. He said that he had been held for over nine months in solitary confinement, and that for over 45 days he had been kept in handcuffs joined by a single hinge, allowing only extremely restricted movement.
Amnesty International called for the release of prisoners of conscience and sought information about legal procedures relating to their banishment or imprisonment and that of other political prisoners. In May Amnesty International submitted a memorandum to the government setting out its concerns about unfair political trials and the cases of individual political prisoners.
In November Amnesty International representatives visited the Maldives to discuss these concerns with government officials. They also discussed issues relating to judicial independence, legal representation for political prisoners and the retroactive application of penal law. They sought but were denied access to prisoners held in Dhoonidhoo detention centre and Gamadhoo prison, where most political prisoners sentenced under the pta are held.
