CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Two prisoners of conscience were tried and convicted; both had been released by the end of the year. In August a prominent political activist died after being severely beaten by gendarmes.
The government of President André Kolingba continued to face pressure from opposition parties and trade unions to allow a sovereign National Conference to debate the country's future. Most of the pressure came from a coalition of political parties and trade unions known as the Concertation des forces démocratiques (cfd), Coalition of Democratic Forces. The President refused to convene a National Conference but instead held a Grand débat national, Grand National Debate, to discuss political issues. Only goverrmient supporters participated in the "debate", which began in August, as it was boycotted by opposition parties. The "debate" concluded in early September and President Kolingba announced that delegates had adopted recommendations for democratic reforms and had set up a committee to monitor their implementation by the government, Presidential and parliamentary elections were announced for October but were suspended following reports of
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC/CHAD
widespread irregularities and violence, and later rescheduled for 1993.
The authorities used the security forces to prevent or disperse meetings and press conferences organized by the opposition to call for a National Conference. In one case a prominent government opponent died from injuries inflicted when gendarmes violently dispersed a CFd demonstration.
Two prisoners of conscience were tried, one in May and the other in July, and sentenced to prison terms. Joseph Bendounga, President of the Mouvement démocratique pour la renaissance et l'évolution de Cen-trafrique. Democratic Movement for the Rebirth and Development of the Central African Republic, was arrested in May after writing an open letter to the President demanding a sovereign National Conference. He was tried five days later, found guilty of insulting the Head of State and sentenced to eight months' imprisonment. He was acquitted on appeal and freed in October. He had previously been arrested and convicted in similar circumstances in 1991, when he received a one-year suspended sentence (see Amnesty International Report 1992), which he was not made to serve.
In June Bachir Walidou, a member of the Association pour la démocratie et le développement, Association for Democracy and Development, was arrested for writing an open letter critical of the President. In it he alleged that the government was inciting violence against certain nomadic communities in the country (one of them his ovm ethnic group), which were widely rumoured to be responsible for a series of robberies and murders of travellers. He alleged that these communities had been victimized as a result of government incitement. He was tried in July, found guilty of insulting the Head of State, and sentenced to eight months' imprisonment. He was released on 1 December following a presidential amnesty.
A prominent government opponent died in hospital after being assaulted and arrested by gendarmes during a demonstration on 1 August. Dr Claude Conjugo, leader of an opposition party, the Alliance pour le progrès, Alliance for Progress, and a former prisoner of conscience, was assaulted by gendarmes diu-ing an opposition demonstration to protest at the opening of the Grand National Debate. The gendarmes reportedly singled out a group of demon-
strators which included Dr Conjugo, apparently because, as editor of an opposition journal, Le Progrès, he was known to have published articles criticizing the government. Dr Conjugo and five other demonstrators were beaten with rifle butts during their arrest and taken to a gendarmerie post. Dr Conjugo was later transferred to hospital, where he died as a result of the beatings. The government initially claimed that he had died as a result of inhaling tear-gas. It later announced an inquiry to establish the cause of his death. However, it was unclear at the end of the year whether any inquiry had been held or any action taken against the gendarmes responsible for his death, Dr Conjugo had been one of several dozen members of the Comité de coordination pour la convocation de la conférence nationale, Coordination Committee for the Convening of the National Conference, detained between September 1990 and early 1991 for holding political meetings (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
Amnesty International appealed for the immediate and unconditional release of prisoners of conscience Joseph Bendounga and Bachir Walidou. The organization also urged the authorities to order an independent inquiry into the death of Dr Conjugo. The government did not respond to the appeals.
