SYRIA
New arrests of political prisoners were reported and thousands of others, including prisoners of conscience, remained held. Some were serving prison sentences but the majority were held without charge or trial under state of emergency legisla-
tion in force since 1963. Other political prisoners were held beyond the expiry of their sentences. Up to 1,500 political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, were released. Torture was reported and two political detainees were alleged to have died as a result of torture and lack of medical care. Six people were executed.
Hundreds of political detainees, including prisoners of conscience, were reported to have been transferred to prisons in or near Damascus in preparation for trial before the Supreme State Security Court. More than 150 appeared before the court. This apparently represented a shift in the policy of President Hafez al-Assad's government towards ending the long-standing practice of holding political suspects indefinitely without charge or trial. The Supreme State Security Court is a special court which does not conform to Syrian law relating to criminal procedure or international human rights standards for fair trial. By the end of the year, only one trial had been concluded.
Scores of new arrests of political suspects were reported and several thousand political prisoners, including at least 195 prisoners of conscience, remained held. More than 200 Syrian Kurds were reportedly arrested in October and November after the joint leadership of three Kurdish political groups in Syria issued a leaflet on 5 October to mark the 30th anniversary of a law which stripped tens of thousands of Kurds of their Syrian nationality. At least 30 of them remained in detention at the end of the year, including 'Ala'uddin Hamam Ahmad and Ibrahim Wiso Buzan. Most of the others were released after interrogation.
Ten of the 195 prisoners of conscience
SYRIA
were serving prison sentences of between five and 10 years, but the overwhelming majority of political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, were detained without charge or trial.
The 10 sentenced prisoners of conscience were among at least 17 people arrested between December 1991 and January 1992 in connection with the Committees for the Defence of Democratic Freedoms and Human Rights in Syria (cdf), a banned voluntary organization (see Amnesty International Report 1992). The 17 were tried by the Supreme State Security Court between 29 February and 17 March. The trial was held mainly in camera and defence lawyers were reportedly denied prior consultation with the defendants. The evidence produced by the prosecution consisted mainly of confessions, said to have been extracted under torture, and copies of a cdf leaflet issued in 1991. Three of the 17 were acquitted and released. Four were convicted of withholding information by failing to inform the authorities about cdf activities. They were sentenced to three years' imprisonment, but were released in May. The remaining 10 were convicted of disseminating false information (in a cdf leaflet which criticized the government's human rights record and the procedure used for reelecting President al-Assad) and of receiving funds from abroad (reportedly referring to money sent to one of the defendants, Aktham Nu'aysa, by a brother in Europe). They were sentenced to between five and 10 years' imprisonment with deprivation of civil rights. No appeal was allowed as the Supreme State Security Court's decisions are final.
The several thousand other political prisoners included suspected members and sympathizers of prohibited organizations, members of professional associations and former government officials and their supporters. Virtually all were held without charge or trial. Some were arrested in 1992 but most had been held for many years.
Fourteen prisoners of conscience, all former members of the official Ba'th Party, including government ministers, continued to be detained without charge or trial (see previous Amnesty International Reports). All were reported to be in poor health. However, three others from this group of detainees, including Dr Nour al-Din al-Atassi, a former head of state, were
released during the year, reportedly because they were seriously ill. Dr al-Atassi died of cancer in December, three months after his release. Up to 40 other supporters of the official Ba'th Party, as well as members of Hizb al-Ba'th al-Dimuqrati al-Ishtiraki al-'Arahi, the Arab Socialist Democratic Ba'th Party, a prohibited political organization, remained in prison without trial. One of them, Ahmad Suwaidani, has been held since 1969 (see Amnesty International Report 1990). The others were arrested in the 1970s and 1980s.
At least 250 members and sjnmpathizers of Hizb al-Amal al-Shuyu'i, Party for Communist Action (pca), including prisoners of conscience, remained in detention: they had been arrested at various times between 1980 and 1992 (see previous Amnesty International Reports). More than 150 of them were charged with membership of or links with a secret organization, the pca, and brought before the Supreme State Security Court between July and December. They were represented by 12 lawyers chosen by their relatives, but the lawryers were said to have been denied access to the defendants before the trial. Access to the hearings was apparently limited to one family member per defendant. Some of the defendants were reported to have protested against their long-term detention without trial, their appearance before a special court, and the denial of their right to a fair trial. The hearings had not been concluded by the end of the year and were scheduled to continue in 1993 and to include the defendants in the case who had not yet appeared before the court.
About 12 other suspected pca members were arrested during 1992, including Rozit 'Isa, who was arrested in February. She was held in incommunicado detention and her whereabouts were unknown. She had previously been detained between 1978 and 1980 in connection with the pca. Her husband, Akram al-Bunni, has been detained without charge or trial since 1987.
At least seven members of Nasserist groups were imprisoned. Ahmed Ma'tuq, an employee of Damascus City Council, and Marwan Ghazi, owner of a publishing house, were arrested in March reportedly in connection with al-Tanzim al-Sha'bi al-Dimuqrati al-Nasiri, the Nasserist Democratic Popular Organization (ndpo), and held incommunicado. The others were believed
SYRIA
to be held in 'Adra Civil Prison. They had been arrested between 1981 and 1987 in connection with Hizb al-Ittihad al-'Arabi al-Ishtiraki fi-Suriya, the Arab Socialist Union Party in Syria, and the ndpo.
Some 35 members of al-Hizb al-Shuyu'i al-Maktab al-Siyassi, Communist Party Political Bureau (cppb), and dozens of members of professional associations were believed to be still held without trial. It was reported that some of these detainees were being interrogated in preparation for trial before the Supreme State Security Court, but none was known to have been tried by the end of the year. The cppb members held included many of the party's leaders, including the First Secretary, Riad al-Turk, who has been held incommunicado since 1980. Detained members of professional associations were mainly doctors and engineers arrested in 1980 and 1981 following a one-day strike by various professional associations calling for political reforms (see previous Amnesty International Reports). The whereabouts of most of them were unknown.
Several thousand suspected members of the banned Muslim Brotherhood, al-'Ikhwan al-Muslimun, remained held. Most were arrested in the 1970s and early 1980s following violent clashes between the organization's armed wing and government forces (see previous Amnesty International Reports). Many were apparently not involved in violent activities and were arrested solely as suspected members or sympathizers of the organization. Others were said to have been arrested because of their family links to active members of the Muslim Brotherhood. All were believed to be held without charge or trial, and most of them were apparently denied access to the outside world. The fate and whereabouts of many remained unknown. For example. al-Hakam Karkoukli, a former student arrested in 1977, had not been seen by his family since 1979, when he was in al-Mezze Military Prison. Until 1990, when his family was told by former prisoners that he was being held in Saidnaya Prison, they had no knowledge of his whereabouts.
Scores of Lebanese and Palestinians arrested in Lebanon or Syria as suspected members of Lebanese and Palestinian organizations were held. Some were arrested in 1992, but the majority had been detained for years, some since the mid-1970s. The Lebanese detainees included Samih Abd
al-Rahman Muneymana, a businessman who was reportedly abducted from West Beirut in June 1976. His whereabouts remained unknown until April 1992, when a former detainee informed his family that he was in a prison in Damascus. He was apparently suspected of having links with the pro-Iraq wing of the Ba'th Party in Lebanon. Among the Palestinian detainees was a 65-year-old woman, Shaykha Salim 'Abd al-Khaliq al-Hayek, and her daughter Yusra, held since 1986. They were arrested in Damascus reportedly on suspicion of having links with the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Other political prisoners continued to be held beyond the expiry of their sentences. Among them was Khalil Brayez, a former captain and intelligence officer in the SjTian army whose 15-year prison sentence expired in 1985. He was believed to be held in al-Mezze Military Prison.
Up to 1,500 long-term detainees, including some prisoners of conscience, were released diu-ing the year. Hundreds were released at the beginning of the year as a result of a presidential amnesty in December 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992) and 1,154 were released in April and December following two presidential amnesties. Among those released were Palestinians, Lebanese, and members and sympathizers of the pca, cppb, the pro-Iraq wing of the Ba'th Party and the Muslim Brotherhood. Also released were two Jewish brothers, Eli and Selim Swed, who were serving prison sentences (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
Torture of political detainees in incommunicado detention was reported. For example, two of those sentenced in early 1992 in connection with the cdf, Aktham Nu'aysa and Nizar Nayyuf, were reported to have been tortured in pre-trial incommunicado detention: as a result Aktham Nu'aysa was admitted to hospital. Independent observers at the trial said Aktham Nu'aysa was unable to walk into the courtroom unaided.
Two political detainees were alleged to have died in custody as a result of torture or ill-treatment combined with lack of medical care. Munir al-Ahmad, a poet and writer aged 60, died in January after six months in detention. Rifat bin Ahmad Rajab, an electrician, reportedly died in 'Adra Civil Prison in April of a heart condition brought on by torture and lack of med- I
SYRIA/TADZHIKISTAN
ical treatment. He had been detained as a suspected ndpo member since 1986. No inquiries into the two deaths in custody or other tortiare allegations were known to have been carried out by the government.
Six people were executed by hanging; four in April, one in August and one in November. Two had been convicted of murder and rape, three of murder, and one of murder and armed robbery. No details about their trials were available.
Amnesty International continued to call for the immediate and unconditional release of all prisoners of conscience, and for the fair and prompt trial or release of all political detainees. It welcomed the releases of up to 1,500 political detainees under presidential amnesties and asked the authorities for details of those released, but without response.
Diu-ing the year Amnesty International urged the government to end the use of the death penalty and torture, and appealed for urgent investigations into new allegations of torture and the two deaths in custody.
Amnesty International made several appeals to the government to respect detainees' rights, in accordance with international standards, and urged the immediate and unconditional release of all those held solely for the non-violent expression of their beliefs. In March the Office of the Vice President told Amnesty International that the 17 cdf members tried before the Supreme State Security Court were being prosecuted not because they were members of the cdf, "...but because of their involvement with an underground organization that adopts violence and terrorism as means to achieve its goals." However, no such charges were known to have been brought against any of the defendants.
In February Amnesty International sought authorization to send observers to the trial of the cdf members, but this was not granted. However, in December two Amnesty International delegates visited Damascus to observe the trials which were taking place before the Supreme State Security Court. The hearings were postponed before the delegates arrived, but they obtained information about the cases from government officials, the court judges, defence lawyers and relatives of some of the defendants. At the end of December, Amnesty International was studying the delegates' findings with a view to communicating its concerns and recommendations
about the proceedings to the government.
In July Amnesty International published a report, Syria: Long-Term Detention and Torture of Political Prisoners, which described the pattern of gross violations of prisoners' rights under state of emergency legislation.
In oral statements to the United Nations (un) Commission on Human Rights in February and to its Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns about detention provisions under the State of Emergency Law and the practice of indefinite incommunicado detention in Syria. In April Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Syria for un review under a procedure established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728f/1503, for confidential consideration of communications about human rights violations.
