BAHRAIN
Approximately 70 political prisoners, including possible prisoners of conscience, who had been sentenced after unfair trials in previous years remained in prison throughout 1992. Three people accused of membership of an unauthorized political organization were sentenced to prison terms by the Supreme Civil Court of Appeal, whose procedures fall short of international human rights standards. Scores of Bahraini nationals were forcibly exiled, apparently for exercising their right to freedom of opinion and expression, although restrictions preventing the return of more than 120 others were lifted.
The State Security Measures of 1974, which permit administrative detention without charge or trial for renewable periods of up to three years (see Amnesty International Report 1990), remained in force. However, they were rarely applied in 1992. Several members of the majority Shi'a Muslim community were detained under this law, but in contrast to previous years they were released within several days and no reports of torture were received.
About 70 political prisoners, including possible prisoners of conscience, who had been sentenced after unfair trials in previous years remained in prison throughout 1992. Almost all were held in connection with banned Islamic groups such as Hizballah, Party of God. and the Islamic Front for the Liberation of Bahrain. Among them were Salah al-Khawaja, serving a seven-year sentence, who was arrested in Saudi Arabia in 1988 and handed over to the Bahraini authorities; and Mohammad Jamil 'Abd al-Amir al-Jamri and 'Abd al-
bahrain/bangladesh
Jalil Khalil Ibrahim, who were sentenced in March 1990 to 10 and seven years' imprisonment respectively (see Amnesty International Reports 1989 to 1991). Charges against all three included membership of an unauthorized organization. About 50 of the long-term political prisoners were serving 15 or 25 years' imprisonment, imposed after an unfair trial, in connection with an alleged coup attempt in 1981 (see Amnesty International Reports i989 to 1991).
The trial of 11 alleged members of the banned Islamic Front for the Liberation of Bahrain resumed in February (see Amnesty International Report 1992). Hearings took place before the Supreme Civil Court of Appeal, whose procedures allow for convictions based solely on defendants' confessions and provide for no right of appeal. The group on trial were arrested in June 1990; most were reportedly tortured or ill-treated to make them confess while held in prolonged incommunicado detention. In October 1991 all were released on bail. The prosecution reportedly demanded the death penalty for Sadiq Ja'far Mohammad 'Ali. In December the court sentenced him to three years' imprisonment on charges of membership of an unauthorized political organization and inviting others to join it. Two others were sentenced to one year's imprisonment; the remaining eight defendants were acquitted.
In May Dr Abd al-Latif Mahmoud Al Mahmoud, a Sunni scholar and associate professor of Islamic studies, was acquitted of charges related to a lecture about the Gulf Cooperation Council which he had given in Kuwait (see Amnesty Internationa} Report 1992). He had been detained for two weeks in December 1991 on his return to Bahrain.
Scores of Bahraini nationals resident abroad were refused entry when attempting to return to Bahrain. Following interrogation on arrival at the airport, they were forcibly exiled from the country, They included Dr 'Abd al-Hadi Khalaf, a research fellow at the Human Rights Program of the University of Lund in Sweden. However, two amnesties were declared by the Amir of Bahrain, al-Sheikh 'Isa Bin Sulman Al Khalifa, in April and June, allowing the return of a total of 121 Bahraini nationals living abroad, although the identities of those concerned were not made public. Following these amnesties, those who were allowed to return to Bahrain included
some of the families of 73 political prisoners sentenced in connection with an alleged coup attempt in 1981, many of whom had fled to Iran or Syria at the time.
Amnesty International expressed concern to the government about cases of detentions and forcible exile. It welcomed the government's decision to permit some Bahraini exiles to return but remained concerned about the continuing forcible exile of others. The Interior Minister responded on most cases, providing details and offering assurances of Bahrain's commitment to human rights.
At the end of 1991 Amnesty International had been planning to send a delegation to Bahrain early in 1992 in response to an invitation from the Minister of the Interior (see Amnesty International Report 1992). However, the Minister indicated that it was not convenient for the visit to take place in January, as proposed, and that he would "be in touch . . . concerning the matter in due coiorse". No further communication on this was received from the government and the proposed visit, to discuss Amnesty International's concerns, had not taken place by the end of the year.
In April Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Bahrain for United Nations review under a procedure, established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728f/1503, for confidential consideration of communications about human rights violations.
