VIET NAM
At least 70 prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience remained imprisoned throughout 1992. Five prisoners of conscience were released, as were over 100 former officials and military personnel of the pre-1975 government who
had been detained without trial in "reeducation" camps for up to 17 years. At least 20 suspected critics or opponents of the government were reportedly arrested during the year. At least 14 other political prisoners, including possible prisoners of conscience, were tried during the year; their trials appeared to fall short of international fair trial standards. Three people were reported to have been sentenced to death but it was not known whether there were any executions.
In April the National Assembly adopted a new Constitution which introduced guarantees for fundamental rights, including freedom of expression, association and movement. Former General Le Due Anh became President and Vo Van Kiet was reelected Prime Minister following elections in July.
Five prisoners of conscience were released during the year. They were Le Van Tien, a writer, Thadeus Nguyen Van Ly, a Catholic priest. To Thuy Yen, a poet, Nguyen Khac Chinh, a lawyer', and Tran Xuan Tu, a Protestant pastor. However, more than 70 prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience remained in prison throughout 1992, including Dominic Tran Dinh Tu, an 86-year-old Catholic priest; Thich Tri Sieu, a Buddhist monk; Nguyen Dan Que, a doctor; and Tran Mai, a Protestant pastor. Tran Mai was reportedly arrested in October 1991 in Ho Chi Minh City, accused of "pursuing religious activities without permission" and using such activities "to fight the government". He was also accused of "abusing religious powers" and of having maintained links with overseas Christian organizations along with Pastors Dinh Thien Tu and Tran Dinh Ai (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
At least 20 suspected critics or opponents of the government were reportedly arrested in 1992. They included possible prisoners of conscience. Nguyen Si Binh, a nuclear engineer and businessman with United States (us) citizenship, was arrested with 16 others, including his sister and step-brother, in April and accused of attempting to overthrow the government. Nguyen Si Binh had reportedly returned to Viet Nam to do market research on behalf of some us companies. He and the others had not been tried by the end of the year. Nguyen Ly Tuong, a former parliamentarian and newspaper editor, was arrested
VIET NAM
in June near the Thanh Da church in Ho Chi Minh City. Although not formally charged, he was apparently detained under Article 73 of the Criminal Code for alleged "actions aimed at overthrowing the People's Government". He had earlier been detained without trial in a "reeducation" camp from January 1975 to February 1988.
Buddhist monks Thich Khong Tanh and Thich Tri Luc were arrested in October in Ho Chi Minh City and charged with "travelling without permission". The real reason for their arrests appeared to be thefr possession of documents signed and issued by Thich Huyen Quang, a Buddhist leader and prisoner of conscience held under house arrest in Quang Nghia village in Nghia Binh Province since 1982 (see Amnesty International Reports 1986, 1967 and 1988]. Some of the documents, which were addressed to the Vietnamese authorities and distributed to Buddhist followers in Viet Nam and abroad, were critical of the government's treatment of and policies towards Buddhist monks and nuns. The documents urged the authorities to return all confiscated church properties and release all those, including monks, imprisoned or under house arrest for opposing government policies and regulations on religion. They also called for an end to divisions among Vietnamese Buddhists and urged the government to allow the Unified Buddhist Church (ubc) to function independently, Thich Huyen Quang and his followers are members of the ubc and oppose the government-sponsored Viet Nam Buddhist Church.
At least 14 critics or opponents of the government were tried and convicted in several trials under provisions of the 1986 Criminal Code. The trials appeared to fall short of international standards for fair trial in several respects, including the lack of independent legal representation. Doan Thanh Liem, a lawyer and a prisoner of conscience, was tried in May in Ho Chi Minh City. He had been arrested with several other people in 1990 for alleged espionage and involvement in the drafting of an unauthorized constitution (see Amnesty International Reports 1991 and 1992). He was sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment on a charge of spreading "anti-socialist propaganda", an offence under Article 82 of the Criminal Code. A co-defendant, Nguyen Tri, was sentenced to eight years' imprison-
ment at the same trial. Other opponents of the government were convicted of plotting against the government and sentenced to long prison terms.
It was reported in May that Doan Viet Hoat, an academic and a prisoner of conscience held since November 1990, and several others arrested with him, would be tried in Ho Chi Minh City. However, no date for the trial was given and it was not known to have taken place by the end of the year. Doan Viet Hoat had previously been detained without trial from 1976 to 1988 for peacefully expressing his political opinions.
More than 100 former officials and military officers of the former Republic of Viet Nam (rvn) were released between January and May. They had been held in "re-educa-tion" camps since 1975 under Resolution 49/tvqh, which provides for indefinite detention without charge or trial (see Amnesty International Report 1992]. Those released reportedly included two former senior officials, ei^it former generals, nine former colonels and 11 former intelligence officers. Nguyen Thanh Long, a lawyer and a former officer in the Army of the Republic of Viet Nam (arvn), was one of 38 prisoners released on 15 January. He had reported for "re-education" in June 1975 and had subsequently been held in a camp in Nam Ha, Ha Nam Ninh Province. Nguyen Kim Tay, another former arvn officer who had been held since 1975, was released on 10 February along with 37 other former military personnel.
Three people were reportedly sentenced to death after being convicted of offences including murder, theft and arms trafficking, but it was not known whether there were any executions.
Amnesty International welcomed the releases of prisoners of conscience and long-term political detainees, but continued to press for the release of all prisoners of conscience and for the fair trial or release of political prisoners. Amnesty International also expressed its concern that the trials of some political prisoners may have fallen short of international fair trial standards.
In April Amnesty International published a report, Viet Nam: Continued detention of members of religious organizations, which expressed concern about the continued detention of people for the peaceful expression of their religious
VIET NANVYEMEN
beliefs. In June Amnesty International published a further report, Viei Nam: Arrests of political prisoners 1990-1991.
In September the Vietnamese Government responded to a submission by Amnesty International concerning the case of Nguyen Dan Que (see Amnesty International Reports 1991 and 1992] to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights Working Group on arbitrary detention. The government wrote to the President of the Working Group denying that Nguyen Dan Que was a political prisoner and that he was being subjected to arbitrary detention. The government stated that he had been accused of "activities aimed at overthrowing the government" under Article 73 of the Criminal Code and had subsequently been tried and sentenced by a court of law in Ho Chi Minh City in November 1991. Amnesty International continued to appeal for the immediate and unconditional release of Nguyen Dan Que, whom it considered to be a prisoner of conscience held solely for the peaceful expression of his political beliefs and activities for the promotion of human rights.
