CHILE
At least 50 cases of torture and ill-treatment by the security forces were reported. Two journalists were briefly detained for publishing articles accusing the police of corruption. Dozens of political prisoners arrested under the former military government were released, but more than 10
CHILE
remained in prison at the end of the year. The Supreme Court continued to approve the transfer of investigations into past human rights violations to the military courts; most cases remained unresolved and none of those responsible was convicted. At least three people died in circumstances suggesting they may have been extrajudicially executed. Five people were sentenced to death but their sentences were commuted; one political prisoner remained under a recommended death sentence.
In February a law was passed creating the Corporación Nacional de Reparación y Reconciliación, National Corporation for Reparation and Reconciliation, and providing compensation for relatives of people "disappeared" or killed as a result of human rights violations under the former military government. The role of the Corporation, which was set up in July, included investigating 641 cases about which the Comisión Nacional de Verdad y Reconciliación (cNvyR), National Commission for Truth and Reconciliation, could reach no conclusions; opening investigations into hundreds of new complaints of past human rights violations; and promoting recommendations in the CNvyR's 1991 final report (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
A proposal to extend the scope of the death penalty was introduced by the Senate in January and was still being considered in Congress at the end of the year.
The Movimiento Juvenil Lautaro, Lautaro Youth Movement, an armed opposition group, claimed responsibility for the killing of three police officers in the capital, Santiago, in September. The killing of Senator Jaime Guzman in 1991 remained unresolved (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
In May Chile acceded to the first Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
At least 50 cases of torture by the security forces were reported, more than twice the number in 1991. Mirentchu Vivanco Figueroa was arrested without warrant in March by uniformed police. She was reportedly held incommunicado in a Santiago police station for three days, deprived of sleep, threatened with death and forced to remain standing for long periods. Those allegedly responsible remained at large by the end of the year.
In April, 15-year-old Germán Andrés
Vargas Armijo was arrested by uniformed police in Santiago, charged with attacking police officers. He was reportedly hit with rifle-butts while being arrested, then beaten, given electric shocks and nearly drowned in custody. Those responsible had not been brought to justice by the end of the year.
Evaristo Godoy, a member of the Socialist Party and former political prisoner, was arrested in September by members of the criminal investigations police in Santiago. He was reportedly beaten by police, given electric shocks and threatened with death. He was released without charge a week later. An investigation into his complaints had not concluded by the end of the year.
Those responsible for the death under torture of Ricardo Parra Flores in October 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992) remained at large at the end of the year.
In November Andrés Lagos, director of El Siglo magazine, and Francisco Herreros, a journalist on the magazine, were detained for one day in Santiago on the orders of a military court. They were charged with "inciting sedition" because of an article published in 1991 accusing the uniformed police of corruption. They were released and were awaiting trial at the end of the year.
Dozens of political prisoners were released, but more than 10 were still imprisoned at the end of the year, despite repeated announcements that the authorities intended to resolve the cases of those arrested under the former government, whose trials were marred by serious irregularities. In September, nine political prisoners in Santiago began a 40-day hunger-strike to demand the release of those still imprisoned.
No one was convicted during the year for past human rights violations. The military courts continued to claim jurisdiction over human rights cases in civilian courts and to close cases covered by the 1978 Amnesty Law (see Amnesty International Report 1992). The Supreme Court continued to support the transfer of investigations from civilian courts to military courts. For example, an investigation by a civilian judge into the 1974 abduction, torture and "disappearance" of Alfonso Chanfreau Oyarce was halted after being transferred to military jurisdiction in November. The Supreme Court upheld this
chile/china
decision, claiming that the case had occurred at a time of internal war.
Progress was reported in some cases of past human rights violations not covered by the 1978 Amnesty Law. In May Alvaro Corbalán, former operations chief of the disbanded Central Nacional de Informaciones (cni), state security police, was arrested in connection with the killings of union leader Tucapel Jiménez in 1982 (see Amnesty International Report 1983] and of carpenter Juan Alegría in 1983. He remained in detention at the end of the year. In November General Manuel Contreras and Brigadier Pedro Espinoza, director and chief of operations respectively of the disbanded Dirección de Inteligencia Nacional (dina). Directorate of National Intelligence, were formally indicted with having planned the murder of Orlando Letelier in 1976, the only case to be exempted from the 1978 Amnesty Law. Both defendants remained free on bail at the end of the year (see Amnesty International Repori 1992). In November the Supreme Coiul dropped the charges against General César Mendoza Durán, former director of the cni, who had been indicted by a lower court for covering up the abduction and killing of three communist leaders in 1985 (see Amnesty International Report 1986). However, nine members of the security forces remained in prison awaiting trial in this caçe at the end of the year. The judge in charge of the case reportedly received repeated death threats.
Investigations to establish the identity of 127 bodies exhumed in 1991 in a Santiago cemetery were still continuing at the end of the year (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
At least three people died in circumstances suggesting that they may have been extrajudicially executed, On 30 January Alexis Muñoz and Fabián López, members of the Frente Patriótico Manuel Rodríguez Autónomo, Autonomous Manuel Rodríguez Patriotic Front, were reportedly killed after surrendering to police in Santiago. Although the police claimed they died during a shoot-out, a forensic report established that Alexis Muñoz died 50 minutes after the alleged shoot-out. On 12 October 17-year-old Rodrigo Briones was reportedly killed by uniformed police. According to witnesses, he was beaten during his arrest in the streets of Santiago and was shot at close range while he lay
wounded crying for help. An investigation into his death had not concluded by the end of the year.
Five people were sentenced to death, four of whom later had their sentences commuted to life imprisonment by President Patricio Aylwin. Three Peruvian citizens convicted of murder had their sentences commuted in August and a political prisoner sentenced to death in August for kidnapping had his sentence commuted in November. Juan Domingo Salvo Zúñiga, whose death sentence for murder was confirmed on appeal by the Supreme Court in November, remained on death row at the end of the year awaiting presidential clemency. A recommendation for the death sentence by the prosecution continued to stand against Hugo Gómez Peña (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
Amnesty International continued to call for full investigations into human rights violations and for those responsible to be brought to justice. The organization also continued to call for the abolition of the death penalty.
In July the organization published Chile: "Extreme Cruelty": the plight of the Mapuche Indians during the years of military rule to highlight the human rights violations suffered by indigenous peoples under the military government. In October Amnesty International published Human rights violations against the indigenous peoples of the Americas, which included concerns in Chile. In an oral statement to the United Nations Working Group on Indigenous Populations of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in July, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns about past human rights violations against indigenous peoples in Chile and the lack of accountability of those responsible.
