NIGERIA
Five prominent government critics were arrested and held incommunicado for several weeks before being released on bail; they were prisoners of conscience. Several people were arrested and four charged with subversion after protesting against the postponement of the return to civilian rule; they were prisoners of conscience. More than 240 Chadian nationals were arrested and held without charge or trial; over 200 were forcibly returned to Chad where dozens were reportedly tortured, at least three were extrajudicially executed, and about 40 died in harsh prison conditions. Nine army officers convicted in unfair trials remained held incommunicado, although 11 civilians held for almost two years in connection with the same case were released. No executions were known to have been carried out but at least seven death sentences were passed. Twelve death sentences were commuted. No action was taken against police involved in the extrajudicial execution of 80 villagers in 1990.
Steep price rises led to widespread riots and demonstrations against government economic policies in May. Hundreds of people were arrested in Lagos and elsewhere and several deaths were reported. In addition, hundreds of people were killed in religious and ethnic violence in various parts of the country.
In the process of transition to civilian rule, due to be completed in mid-1993, elected civilian state governors took office in January. In legislative elections in July, contested by two parties created by the military government of President Ibrahim Babangida, the Social Democratic Party
won majorities in the House of Representatives and the Senate over the National Republican Convention. In October the government postponed presidential elections due to take place in December 1992 after primary elections of party candidates were flawed by widespread corruption. It also banned all presidential candidates from further involvement in the elections.
Five prominent critics of the government were arrested in May and June. Dr Beko Ransome-Kuti, President of the Committee for the Defence of Human Rights and Chairman of the newly formed pro-democracy coalition, Campaign for Democracy (cd), was arrested at gunpoint by some 200 riot police at his home in Lagos on 19 May. Two other cd members - Femi Falana, President of the National Association of Democratic Lav^^ers, and Baba Omojola - were also arrested that day. After filing legal actions to have the detainees produced before the High Court, human rights lawyer and cd member Chief Gani Fawehinmi was himself detained on 29 May. Olusegun Mayegun, President of the National Association of Nigerian Students, was arrested two weeks later. He was reportedly beaten and kicked at the time of his arrest and during interrogation, and deprived of food for 10 days in detention.
The five were held incommunicado in Abuja, the new capital, despite several orders by the Lagos High Court requiring the authorities to produce the detainees in court. The Minister of Justice alleged publicly that the five had plotted subversion and had exacerbated recent civil unrest. They were finally brought before a magistrate's coiul on 15 Jime and charged with "conspiracy to commit treasonable felony", an offence which carries a maximum penalty of life imprisonment. On 29 June the five were released on bail and the case was adjourned in October to 1993. On 1 July the Lagos High Court ordered the government to pay Dr Ransome-Kuti 50,000 Naira (usS2,700) in damages for illegal arrest and detention.
In December four people in Kano, north-em Nigeria, were arrested and charged with subversion after protesting against the postponement of the return to civilian mle. They included Wada Abubakar, a former deputy governor of Kano State, and Wada Waziri, an aide to one of the banned presidential candidates. Several members of
NIGERIA
human rights organizations which campaigned for a civilian transitional government were briefly detained.
More than 240 Chadians, some of them resident in Nigeria, were arrested in the northeastern city of Maidugiui between October 1991 and March 1992 and detained without charge or trial at a military camp. They were arrested at the request of the Chadian authorities who suspected them of supporting an armed opposition group which had clashed with Chadian government forces in Chad in January. Over 200 were forcibly returned to Chad in the following months, in secret and outside the terms of any legal procedure. At least three of them, including Goukouni Guet and other leaders of the opposition Afouve-ment pour ¡a démocratie et le développement (mdd). Movement for Democracy and Development, were tortured to death or extrajudicially executed by the Chadian authorities. About 40 others died from thirst and exhaustion in March and April while detained in Chad. In July the Nigerian authorities arrested and forcibly repatriated two more Chadians and in November a further 15.
Eleven civilians who had been held for almost two years in connection with a coup attempt in April 1990 were released in March. Nine of them had been detained without charge or trial, apparently because they were related to people sought by the authorities (see Amnesty International Report 1992). The other two had been convicted with nine army officers after a grossly unfair secret trial before a Special Military Tribunal on charges of treason and concealment of treason (see Amnesty International Report 1992). The nine army officers continued to be held incommunicado.
The decline in reports of executions noted in 1991 continued and no executions were known to have been carried out in 1992. However, seven death sentences were reported, including those passed on three brothers convicted in July by a Robbery and Firearms Tribunal in Port Harcourt, southeastern Nigeria. New information was received about death sentences and executions in previous years. All the condemned prisoners were believed to have been convicted by Robbery and Firearms Tribunals, special courts whose procedures do not satisfy international fair trial standards and from which there is no right of appeal. For example, information
was received about four men who were executed publicly in their home towns in Imo State in 1990 and 1991, all for armed robbery, and five men who were executed at a military barracks in Ibadan in 1991.
In June death sentences imposed on 12 young men in 1988 were commuted to 10 years' imprisonment by the Lagos State authorities. One of the 12, Augustine Eke, was aged only 14 at the time of his arrest in 1984. Another had died in prison in 1990. The 12 were convicted by a Robbery and Firearms Tribunal after a trial which a senior Nigerian legal official has described as "full of procedural irregularities and overt bias against the convicts". The defendants stated that they had been beaten and threatened with death by the police while in pre-trial custody.
A further death sentence was passed in December in connection with violent clashes in Kaduna State in May between Christians belonging to the Kataf ethnic group and Muslims belonging to the Hausa community, Dozens of people were subsequently brought to trial before special courts - Civil Disturbances Special Tribunals which were established in 1987 and over which a judge presides. These courts had previously tried cases arising from religious and ethnic riots in northern Nigeria. Zamani Lekwot, a retired army general, and other Kataf leaders were detained without charge until 29 July when six of them were charged with unlawful assembly. They were acquitted on 18 August, but were immediately rearrested. Zamani Lekwot and six others were charged on 4 September with culpable homicide, which carries a possible death sentence, and other offences. In October they attempted to obtain a ruling in the High Court that their fundamental human rights were being denied because the special tribunal trying their case, whose members were predominantly Muslim and included no member of the Kataf community, was biased against them. However, the government promulgated a decree in December confirming that the tribunal's proceedings could not be challenged in the ordinary courts. In another case before the same special tribunal, a death sentence was passed on 4 December. Also in December, while one of the tribunal's members was absent for medical reasons, two defendants were sentenced to 18 years' imprisonment for unlawful assembly and rioting despite insufficient
NIGERIA/NORWAY
evidence to support the prosecution's case. There was no right of appeal to a higher independent court - decisions of the tribunal can only be referred to the military government for confirmation or disallowal.
Prison conditions remained harsh, particularly for over 80 per cent of inmates who were awaiting trial. They were commonly held in overcrowded and insanitary cells, many for several years. According to official figures, 5,300 prisoners had died in 1991 from disease and lack of food and medical care.
In October the January 1991 findings of a judicial commission of inquiry into a police massacre were leaked to the press. Eighty demonstrators in Umuechem village, in Rivers State in southeast Nigeria, had been shot dead, victims of extrajudicial executions, and 500 houses razed in October 1990 when villagers protested at inadequate compensation for thefr land and environmental damage by a multinational oil company. The commission recommended prosecution of named police officers responsible for the attack, but its findings were not made public by the government and no police officers were brought to justice. The police unit was apparently disbanded following the shooting of another protester. However, no other action was known to have been taken by the authorities.
Amnesty International urged the government to release all prisoners of conscience and protested about its forcible return of Chadian detainees to Chad. It welcomed the release of 11 prisoners held in connection with the April 1990 coup attempt but called for the nine army officers still held incommunicado to be allowed to appeal to a higher court and to be given access to family and lawyers.
Amnesty International urged the government not to use the death penalty and appealed for the commutation of all death sentences.
