BRAZIL
Military police killed 111 prisoners while quelling a disturbance in a Sao Paulo prison: many were apparently extrajudicially executed. Hundreds of street children were killed and others ill-treated by death squads and the police. There were new reports of torture and ill-treatment of people in police custody, in some cases leading to death. Human rights workers and others received death threats. Rural leaders, peasants and members of indigenous communities continued to suffer death threats and attempts on their lives and some were ill-treated by the police.
In December President Fernando Collor de Mello resigned shortly before he was impeached by the Senate on grounds of corruption. Vice-President Itamar Franco was then appointed President: he had been acting President since early October when President Collor was suspended from office pending impeachment proceedings,
In January Brazil acceded to both the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, and in September to the American Convention on Human Rights.
On 2 October 111 prisoners were killed and 35 others wounded at the House of Detention in Sao Paulo, after military police were called in to quell a disturbance in Block 9. Evidence from prison staff suggested that the police invasion was ordered before negotiations with the prisoners had been attempted. The then Secretary of
BRAZIL
Public Security reportedly told the press that in cases of such disturbances, police are ordered to shoot to kill and that there was nothing absurd about police using machine-guns against prisoners. Police alleged that the prisoners had guns, but this was denied by inmates. A Ministry of Justice investigation into the killings suggested that firearms later found in the prison had been "planted" by military police.
An Amnesty International delegation, including a forensic doctor, interviewed and examined surviving prisoners and inspected cells in Block 9. They found considerable evidence to suggest that the majority of prisoners had been extrajudicially executed after surrendering. The evidence was also consistent with survivors' testimonies that their cell-mates had been killed while lying or sitting down with hands on or behind their heads. Survivors
said they had been forced to strip and run a gauntlet of police, who beat them, Some had also been bitten by police dogs. A number of the wounded were allegedly told they were being taken for treatment and were then extrajudicially executed. Some survivors hid among the dead bodies: police bayoneted the bodies and allegedly shot those who cried out. Some prisoners who were ordered to collect the bodies from the cells were allegedly executed subsequently.
Several official inquiries were set up to investigate the massacre. An investigation by the Federal Ministry of Justice's Human Rights Council concluded in December that "the military police killed 111 people in state custody without any justification". It said this was "a natural result of the violent public security policy of the government of
Sao Paulo" in which summary executions, arbitrary aggression and torture were part of police working methods. The Sao Paulo state legislature concluded that there were some "excesses" by the military police, but no massacre. However, military police, who are answerable only to special military courts, have rarely been successfully prosecuted for fatal shootings. Official figiu-es reported 1,264 fatal shootings by military police in Sao Paulo in the first nine months of 1992. Amnesty International was concerned about reports that many of these killings may have been extrajudicial executions. A number of the officers commanding the police operation at the House of Detention had reportedly been implicated in previous multiple summary killings on the streets and in detention centres without being convicted or losing rank. The use of lethal force to quash prison disturbances is common practice in Brazil and Amnesty International was not aware of any cases where those responsible for death in such circumstances had been convicted.
In February, seven prisoners were killed by military police shock troops at the Aníbal Bruno prison in Recife, Pemam-buco, during a police operation to regain control of the prison from rioting inmates who had killed a hostage. At least some of the seven prisoners were killed in circumstances suggesting that they may have been extrajudicially executed after surrender.
Hundreds of street children were killed by the police or by death squads which often included off-duty police officers. Hundreds of others were ill-treated. A report by a Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry of the Federal Chamber of Deputies stated that civil and military police participation in the killing of children and adolescents was "far from exceptional".
The authorities indicated that between January and July, 667 children and adolescents were killed in the states of Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro alone. During the year the Federal PoHce reported that 4,611 children and adolescents had been killed between 1988 and 1990, of whom 82 per cent were black. In many cases no police inquiry was completed or sent to the judiciary.
On 5 May Erivan José da Silva, aged 14, and José Fernandes de Almeida, aged 15, were forced off their bicycles and into a car in the town of Lagarto, Sergipe, by three
BRAZIL
men, two of whom were allegedly military police officers. Witnesses said that one of the abductors shouted that this was the last time the children would be seen alive. The bodies of Erivan José da Silva and José Fernandes de Almeida were found the following evening under a bridge on a road between Lagarto and Sao Domingos. Their hands were tied behind their backs and both had been shot three times. One of the military police officers allegedly involved was detained shortly afterwards, but later escaped. Another officer and a civilian were detained and remained in police custody awaiting trial at the end of the year.
In April Roberto Carlos da Costa, aged 18, was detained by a military police patrol in Sao Paulo city, on suspicion of robbery. He was reportedly beaten and given electric shocks in the patrol car to make him revéal the whereabouts of goods he had allegedly stolen. The beatings lasted for several hours. He was then taken to Police District 70, where he was allegedly subjected to further beatings and electric shocks. The day after his release, Roberto Carlos da Costa denounced the torture and beatings to the Public Prosecutor for Children and Adolescents of Sao Paulo, and was medically examined. A police inquiry into the incident was opened but no progress was reported. In August Roberto Carlos da Costa told a human rights worker that he had been shot at from an unidentified black car. On 10 September he went missing together with a friend, 16-year-old Natalino José Batista. Neither was seen again. Their relatives searched for them in hospitals, police stations and relatives' homes without success.
On 11 November, 13-year-old Jean Alves da Cunha, a local leader in the National Movement of Street Boys and Girls in Espirito Santo, and other street children were detained by four Justice Officers attached to the Juvenile Court. All were questioned and released that afternoon. Jean Alves da Cunha, however, was reportedly rearrested the same evening. Two days later his body was found dumped on a hill in the city, with two gunshot wounds in the head. A few weeks before his killing, Jean Alves da Cunha had expressed fear for his life after he had publicly accused the police of forcing street children to commit crimes and share the proceeds with them. A police inquiry into his death was initiated in late 1992.
Deaths, torture and ill-treatment of people in police custody were reported. In April Luiz Alexandre da Silva, a builder, was detained by the Sao Paulo state military police near his home in Itapevi. Three hours later he was taken to the Itapevi police station, which is run by civil police, where he later died. An autopsy by the official Legal Medical Institute reportedly found multiple bruises, superficial injuries to the limbs and extensive internal bleeding caused by the rupture of the heart and major blood vessels. A police inquiry was opened into the case.
Human rights workers and people who denounced human rights violations were repeatedly threatened with death. In January the mothers of some of the 11 people, including six minors, who had been abducted in July 1990 from a farm in Magé, Rio de Janeiro (see Amnesty International Report 1991], reportedly received death threats from some of the military police officers alleged to have been involved in the abduction. The women had been campaigning for an investigation into the case. Between April and June human rights workers ft'om the Dom Maximo Biennes Human Rights Centre in the city of Caceres, Mato Grosso, were allegedly subjected to repeated death threats and intimidation. The centre was broken into and dociunents were stolen. Members of the centre were reportedly followed by armed people in cars and the centre's secretary was forced into a car and then beaten and threatened.
In September Caco Barcellos, a journalist and author, reportedly received death threats from members of the Sao Paulo military police after publishing a book denouncing killings by members of the military police in the city. On 31 August around 15 military police officers named in the book reportedly threatened Caco Bar-cellos and guests attending the book's launch. Later that day Caco Barcellos was reportedly followed by some of the same officers in two police vehicles. Following further threats after he made a broadcast about the House of Detention massacre, Caco Barcellos left the country temporarily fearing for his safety.
Peasants, rural leaders and members of indigenous communities continued to suffer killings, assaults, threats and attempts on their lives by private gunmen. The persistent failure of the authorities to identify those responsible for such abuses and bring
brazil/brunei darussalam
them to justice helped to create a climate of impunity that encouraged further violations of human rights. Cases of ill-treat-ment by the police were also reported. In January two peasants, Domingos Mendes Cardoso and a man known as Joao reportedly "disappeared" in the region of Pimenteira, near Maraba. Para. Local people reported that they had seen armed guards from a nearby estate detaining two peasants, tying them up and taking them to another estate. Other people living in the vicinity reported hearing two gunshots and later seeing two bodies being taken away by gunmen. Police reportedly refused to act for two days and had failed to find the bodies of the alleged victims by the end of 1992.
In April José Alves de Souza, a member of the Rural Workers' Union of Sitio Novo, was shot at by an unknown gunman and seriously wounded in the neck and chest. It was the third time an attempt on his life had been made. To Amnesty International's knowledge no one had been brought to justice for the attack.
On 29 January Damasceno Segundo, a Macuxi Indian, was detained during an unauthorized police raid on Gaviao village near Normandia, Roraima. He was reportedly beaten, handcuffed and taken to a land claimant's house, where he was chained to a beam. He escaped and went into hiding for two weeks. When he reappeared he was reportedly still bruised and one of his ear-drums had been perforated. The incident occurred during a raid on five Macuxi villages in the Raposa-Serra do Sol area by a joint force of military and civil police officers, accompanied by land claimants with whom the Macuxi were in dispute.
During the year Amnesty International urged the federal authorities and various state authorities to investigate reports of torture and ill-treatment of people in police custody, death threats against human rights workers and attempted killings of rural leaders. In April and July Amnesty International published reports on the killing of street children in Rio de Janeiro and Sergipe and urged the national and state authorities to investigate fully the killings and to implement effective measures to end such abuses. In October Amnesty International published Human rights violations against the indigenous peoples of the Americas, which included concerns in Brazil. The same month the organization
called on the authorities to undertake a thorough and impartial investigation into the killings in the House of Detention and to bring to justice those responsible.
In an oral statement to the United Nations Sub-Commission Working Group on Indigenous Populations in August, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns in Brazil.
