CUBA
Between 300 and 500 prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience were believed to be in detention. Peaceful opponents of the government were frequently taken in for questioning by the security forces or harassed by government-sponsored gangs. Trials in political cases fell far short of international fair trial standards. Reports of ill-treatment, in isolated cases amounting to torture, increased and several prisoners died in custody, allegedly as a result of ill-treatment. Prison conditions were harsh. At least three people were executed.
The government of President Fidel Castro responded swiftly to two alleged "counter-revolutionary" incidents near the start of the year. On 29 December 1991 three Cuban residents of the United States of America were captured as they landed on the Cuban coast, reportedly carrying weapons and incendiary devices. On 9 January 1992, nine people were arrested and accused of killing four security officials during an attempt to flee Cuba. In response to the two incidents, which coincided with a wave of arrests of leading dissidents, senior government officials suggested that harsher measures should be introduced to
deal with "counter-revolutionary" crime. No such new measures were introduced but three of those detained in connection with the two incidents were executed (see below) and peaceful government opponents continued to face harassment and arrest throughout the year. Attacks by members of the Destacamentos Populares de Respuesta Ràpida, People's Rapid Response Detachments, which had been set up by the authorities in 1991 to counter signs of dissent (see Amnesty International Report 1992], became more frequent.
Freedom of expression, association and assembly, including independent monitoring of human rights, continued to be severely limited. No independent international human rights monitors were known to have been allowed to visit the country. Despite such restrictions, there were grounds to believe that political prisoners numbered at least 600 and possibly 1,000 or more.
In March the United Nations (un) Commission on Himian Rights designated the Special Representative appointed in 1991 by the un Secretary-General as its Special Rapporteur to review and report on the situation of human rights in Cuba. The Cuban Government refused to co-operate in any way with the Special Rapporteur.
Reforms to the 1976 Constitution which were introduced in July included the removal of all references to the former Soviet Union while retaining a commitment to communism, New paragraphs guaranteeing religious freedom and prohibiting discrimination on the grounds of religious belief were introduced and new constitutional powers were granted to the President, including the right to declare a state of emergency.
There were believed to be between 300 and 500 prisoners of conscience in detention, possibly more, at the end of 1992. Dozens of prisoners of conscience were detained during the year because of their activities as members of unoffîcial political, trade union, religious or human rights groups. They were most commonly charged with offences such as "enemy propaganda", "disrespect" and "illegal association". Scores of others were imprisoned for trying to leave the country illegally.
Prisoner of conscience Sebastián Arcos Bergnes, Vice-President of the unofficial Comité Cubano Pro Derechos Humanos (ccpdh), Cuban Committee for Human
CUBA
Rights, was arrested with two other leading members of the committee, including his brother Gustavo, in January. Their addresses were prominently displayed during a television program purporting to link them with the three Cuban exiles who had entered the country illegally in December 1991. Crowds of government supporters went to their homes, where the three were arrested by police. While the other two were released with an official warning after 24 hours, Sebastián Arcos Bergnes was kept in detention by the Departamento de Seguridad del Estado (dse). Department of State Security, initially on a charge of "rebellion", later changed to the lesser offence of "enemy propaganda". He was tried in October and sentenced to four years and eight months' imprisonment on the grounds that he had disseminated abroad information about hiunan rights abuses which the authorities said was false.
José Luis Pujol h-izar. President of the unofficial Proyecto Apertura de la Isla (pais), Project for Opening Up the Island, was arrested while a pro-government crowd besieged his home in March. Two other leading dissidents - Elizardo Sánchez Santa Cruz, President of the unofficial Comisión Cubana de Derechos Humanos y Reconciliación Nacional, Cuban Commission of Human Rights and National Reconciliatfon, and Lázaro Loreto Perea, acting President of the Asociación Defensora de ¡os Derechos Políticos, Association for the Defence of Political Rights -were also arrested on their way to his house. The three were led by police through the hostile crowd which attacked them, causing minor injuries to Elizardo Sánchez. He and Lázaro Loreto were released the next day, but José Luis Pujol was kept in detention and sentenced in September to three years' imprisonment for "disrespect" on the grounds that he had criticized President Castro in a letter sent abroad.
Dozens of other political and human rights activists were arbitrarily arrested for short periods or harassed. In Havana on 10 December, the anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and for several days after that, several people were arrested or harassed. For up to 10 days, crowds of pro-government supporters besieged the homes of at least six people belonging to different organizations. Elec-
tricity and water supplies were cut off in some cases. On 15 December Rolando Prats, a leading member of the Corriente Socialista Democrática Cubana (csdc), Cuban Social-Democratic Current, was beaten up in the street by three civilians. He was taken to hospital by police and then transferred to a police station before being released on payment of a fine for disrupting public order. Four days earlier he had been stopped by five people who threatened him with death if he did not give up his activities and leave the country.
Several activists were arrested during this period, including Elizardo Sánchez and Rodolfo González, a leading member of the ccpdh. Elizardo Sánchez, who was beaten almost unconscious at the time of arrest, was released on bail on 28 December pending trial on a charge of "disrespect". Rodolfo González reportedly remained in detention at the Havana headquarters of the dse at the end of the year under investigation on a charge of "enemy propaganda".
Prisoners of conscience Marco Antonio Abad Flamand and Jorge Crespo Díaz, who had been detained since November 1991 for making a film that insulted President Castro and which had been shown abroad, were both sentenced in November to two years' imprisonment on charges of "enemy propaganda" and "disrespect".
Politically motivated arrests were reported throughout the country. Although in most cases information was scant, many of those arrested were thought to be prisoners of conscience. For example, three members of the unofficial Movimiento Cristiano "Liberación". "Liberation" Christian Movement, who had been gathering signatures for a petition to change the Constitution, were arrested in Santiago in early 1992 and charged with "enemy propaganda". One was sentenced to six years' imprisonment and the other two to five years each.
Scores of people, possibly 200 to 300, who were believed to be prisoners of conscience, were reported to have been imprisoned for trying to leave the coimtry without permission. Most were arrested after putting out to sea in small boats or on home-made rafts. Detailed information was available on only a few such cases. They included Michael Pérez Pérez and 10 others picked up from a raft near Mariel in March. In May Humberto Colón and several others were intercepted by coastguards
CUBA
in a boat off the coast of Matanzas; at least one man is said to have died after the authorities opened fire on the vessel.
Several prisoners of conscience were released during the year. Esteban Gonzalez, Manuel Pozo Montero and Manuel Regueiro, who had been convicted in 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1991], were released in April but only on condition they left Cuba. Arturo Montané Ruiz, whose sentence was due to expire in September, refused to accept such conditions but was released in July. Three members of the Movimiento Pacifista Solidaridad y Paz, Solidarity and Peace Pacifist Movement (see Amnesty International Report 1992), were released either upon or shortly before expiry of their sentences.
Trials in political cases and in cases involving the possible application of the death penalty continued to fall well short of international standards of fairness, particularly with regard to the right of defence. Prisoners of conscience Yndamiro Restaño Díaz, President of the unofficial Movimiento de Armonía (mar). Harmony Movement (see Amnesty International Report 1992], and mar member Maria Elena Aparicio were sentenced to 10 years' and seven years' imprisonment respectively on a charge of "rebellion" at their trial in May. They reportedly had only limited access to lawyers shortly before the trial took place.
The number of reports of ill-treatment at the time of arrest or while in police or prison custody increased. In isolated instances, the reported treatment amounted to torture. For example, in Alambradas de Manacas Prison in June, Bienvenido Martinez Bustamante, a possible prisoner of conscience, was reportedly beaten unconscious by three guards while his hands were tied. He was said to have received no immediate medical attention. Reports were received in November that two prisoners were in poor health. Luis Alberto Pita Santos (see Amnesty International Report 1992), a prisoner of conscience serving a five-year prison sentence for "disrespect", "illegal association" and "clandestine printing", and political prisoner Arturo Suárez Ramos had reportedly been beaten by guards while on hunger-strike in Boniato Prison.
Several deaths in detention were reported as the apparent result of medical neglect, hunger-strikes or ill-treatment. Political prisoner Alain Hermida Oviedo,
aged 17, was said to have died in Combinado del Este Prison in the first half of the year after being beaten by a prison guard while handcuffed. Francisco Diaz Mesa reportedly died in Alambradas de Manacas Prison in February after being beaten by guards because he had banged on his cell bars seeking medical attention.
General prison conditions were said to have seriously deteriorated during the year, in part owing to the grave economic situation facing the country. Serious shortages of food, medicines and other necessities were reported in many prisons. In some cases political prisoners were apparently transferred unnecessarily to prisons far from their families, where transport shortages made it extremely difficult for relatives to visit and take additional supplies. In some cases prisoners were reportedly deprived of food and medicines as a form of punishment. Several prisoners with aids were said to have been held in punishment cells where their food quota was cut and the diet and treatment recommended by doctors withdrawn.
At least three executions took place during the year, after trials which fell far short of international standards for fair trial. The trials, concerning the two incidents around the start of the year, took place very shortly after arrest in a highly charged political atmosphere. Access to defence lawyers was reported to have been extremely limited. Eduardo Díaz Betancourt, who had been captured on the coast, allegedly carrying weapons, was executed on 20 January after being convicted of planning acts of terrorism and sabotage. The entire process from arrest through trial and appeals procedures to execution took only 23 days. Two others convicted with him had their death sentences commuted to 30 years' imprisonment. In February Luis Miguel Almeida Pérez and René Salmerón Mendoza were executed after being convicted of killing four security officials, apparently after capturing them and tying them up, when they were attempting to leave the country illegally.
Throughout the year Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to release prisoners of conscience and sought further information about other concerns. In January the organization expressed concern at the execution of Eduardo Díaz Betancourt and publicly urged the government to halt further executions. In July Amnesty
cuba/cyprus
International sought permission to visit Cuba. No response was received to the request or to other communications sent during the year. In December the organization sent a series of recommendations to the government. These included the immediate and unconditional release of all prisoners of conscience, adherence to international standards pertaining to trials and prison conditions, the protection of human rights monitors, the disbandment or strict regulation by law of the People's Rapid Response Detachments, impartial investigations of allegations of unlawful killings, ill-treatment and deaths in custody, the introduction of legislation to abolish the death penalty, and access to political prisoners by appropriate international humanitarian monitoring bodies.
