PORTUGAL
There were allegations of torture and ill-treatment by police and prison ofiicers. Judicial and administrative inquiries into these allegations were frequently slow and inconclusive.
Allegations of ill-treatment were made by criminal suspects and by people who were subsequently released without charge. They cited prison officers, officers in all branches of the police and in the Guarda Naciona! Republicana (gnr). Republican National Guard. Some of the allegations referred to incidents in previous years.
José Paulo Ferreira Portugal was arrested by gnr officers on a street near Almada in August 1991, He had queried the action of a gnr officer who had fined him for a traffic offence. He claimed that approximately nine officers seized him, threw him head first against their jeep and assaulted him before taking him to their station and beating him once again. He was then taken in handcuffs to a hospital where a certificate was issued describing injuries to his head, jaw, eyes and back. He was subsequently charged with disobeying gnr orders and assaulting an officer. He made a formal complaint against the officers.
In December 1991 an officer of the Policio de Seguranza Pública (psp), Public Security Police, in Setúbal stopped Alexandre Luis Marques Pires Gravanita, a Portuguese citizen bom in Angola, and asked for his identity card. After examining the card, the officer ordered Luis Gravanita to accompany him to the police station where the officer allegedly kicked him, punched
PORTUGAL
him, and racially abused him. Eventually, details of his identity were taken and he was released without charge. He subsequently received hospital treatment for general cuts and bruising, especially to his face and right eye. He made a formal complaint against the officer.
Orlando Correia, a French citizen of Portuguese parentage, was arrested and imprisoned in September. On 9 September officers of the Poh'cia ¡udicidria (pj). Judiciary Police, went to Guarda Prison to take a statement from him but he refused to comply unless his lawyer and an interpreter were present, as provided for by law. The officers then reportedly assaulted him before witnesses. He was later taken to the pj offices where he claimed that he was verbally abused and beaten by pj officers; a pistol was inserted in his mouth and he was tied, spread-eagled, to a railing. He was admitted unconscious to Guarda Hospital that afternoon. The hospital recorded bruising and scratches to his chest and back but a sworn statement ft'om an eyewitness reported in the press alleged that there were noticeable injuries all over his body, that his lips were black and very swollen and that he had a large bruise over his left eye. On 14 September Orlando Correia made a formal complaint to the Public Prosecutor accusing the pj officers of beating him, insulting him and threatening his life. The officers were reported as saying that these were self-inflicted injuries. His lawyer applied to the court on four occasions for a full forensic medical examination of his client but this was not carried out until 1 October. A disciplinary investigation was opened into his allegations.
Judicial inquiries, complemented by internal police and prison inquiries, were usually opened into allegations of ill-treatment. However, inquiries opened in previous years were often excessively long and inconclusive.
Isidro Albuquerque Rodrigues made a formal complaint in October 1990 alleging that pj officers had beaten him, whipped him with a metal hose-pipe and forced a bottle into his anus (see Amnesty International Report 1992). Over two years later he had received no news regarding the inquiry into his allegations.
An inquiry into the alleged ill-treatment by the psp in Sintra in July 1991 of Pedro Mariz Pires Neves Martins had not concluded by the end of the year (see Amnesty
International Report 1992).
There were also long delays in inquiries conducted by Military Tribunals. Domin-gos do Couto died in hospital in Chaves in August 1984. Foiu- days earlier he had been arrested following an altercation with a gnr officer. He alleged that he was kicked, punched and beaten with truncheons in custody. The autopsy showed he had four fractured ribs, weals in the heart region and extensive bruising of the chest, apparently caused by blows fi:om a truncheon. A complaint made to the Public Prosecutor by his family was passed to the gnr in November 1984 for action by the relevant Military Tribunal. After eight years there was still no result.
Antonio Rodriguez Louro, a seaman, alleged that he was severely beaten by noncommissioned officers with a rubber hosepipe in the Naval Prison of Alfeite in April 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992). At the end of the year there was still no news as to whether an inquiry, requested by his father, had ever been opened by the Naval Tribunal.
In June a court in Oporto convicted a psp officer of causing bodily harm to a youth in October 1990 (see Amnesty International Reports 1991 and 1992). The youth had been thrown through a plate-glass door and required 59 stitches for injuries to his right arm. The officer was given a suspended sentence of six months' imprisonment and later amnestied. A second officer was acquitted.
A criminal judicial inquiry was still open into allegations that prisoners in the security wing of Linhó Prison had been ill-treated (see Amnesty International Reports 1990. 1991 and 1992). An internal inquiry into allegations of ill-treatment made by prison inmate José Paulo Santos Silva in September 1991 said that his complaint was ill-founded (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
In April the Minister of Justice replied to Amnesty International about cases of alleged ill-treatment involving pj and prison officers which the organization had raised with the authorities in April 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1992). The Director General of Prison Services also replied on several occasions giving information on individual cases.
Amnesty International called on the authorities to establish serious and prompt inquiries into allegations of torture and ill-
PORTUGAU/QATAR/ROMANIA
treatment and asked to be informed about the progress of such inquiries already under way.
