MALI
Several suspected opponents of the government remained in detention without charge or trial. The former President and other government officials were brought to trial on charges of murder and complicity to murder. Fourteen death sen-tences were passed and later commuted to life imprisonment. Several dozen mem-bers of the Tuareg community were extrajudicially executed by the army.
In January a new constitution was approved in a referendum and multi-party presidential elections were held in April. In June the transitional government, which had ruled Mali since the overthrow of a 23-year dictatorship in March 1991, handed over power to President Alpha Oumar Konare and a civilian government.
Following a truce in February, the government signed a peace agreement on 11 April with the Azawad Unified Movements and Fronts, an umbrella organization of four Tuareg opposition groups. The government released 25 prisoners and the Tuareg groups released more than 30 captives. A commission of inquiry into human rights violations committed during the conflict of the previous two years, to be set up under the peace accord, was not known to have been established by the end of the year.
However, human rights abuses continued to be perpetrated by both the armed forces and by dissident Tuareg groups which did not agree with the peace accord. Between April and September about 60 people, mostly civilians, were reportedly killed either in attacks by Tuareg armed groups or in reprisals taken against members of the Tuareg and Moor communities
by the army and local people. Thousands of refugees fled into neighbouring countries.
Major Lamine Diabira, former minister of the interior, and seven other army officers arrested in July 1991 in connection with an alleged conspiracy to overthrow the government, were still held without trial at the end of the year, having been allowed to see their lawyers for the first time only in late 1991. Their cases were reportedly still under investigation by the examining magistrate. It was alleged that the real reason for their detention was because Major Diabira had sought the prosecution of officers he claimed were responsible for the killing of some 150 demonstrators in March 1991.
On 1 June the authorities announced that a plot by air force troops to overthrow the government had been foiled and the mutineers arrested. No names or numbers of detainees were given. They were not known to have been charged or released by the end of the year.
The trial of General Moussa Traor6, the former President, started on 4 June but was adjourned after lawyers withdrew from the court because of insufficient protection from angry spectators. It recommenced on 26 November and had not finished by the end of the year. Former President Traor6 faced charges of murder and complicity to murder with three of his senior security officers and 29 former government ministers and officials of the former ruling party. The charges related to the killing of demonstrators by the army before his government was overthrown in March 1991. It appeared that further charges of corruption would be heard at a later trial. On 5 June, foiar children and the grandson of former President Traor6 were released uncharged from house arrest and allowed to leave the country. However, the eldest son, who was charged in May 1992 with embezzlement of public funds, as well as the former President's wife and other relatives, all remained in custody.
In February, 13 men and a woman were convicted and sentenced to death for murder and complicity to murder after the hasty trial of 31 people on various charges in connection with the killing of a customs officer during disturbances in Yanfolila in January. Another 15 defendants were sentenced to prison terms and two were acquitted. They were convicted mainly on
MALI/MAURITANIA
the basis of confessions allegedly given under duress after they were beaten in custody, and defence lawyers said that key witnesses had not been interviewed by the investigating magistrate. In April the Head of State commuted the death sentences to life imprisonment with hard labour.
Army reprisals against Tuareg civilians for attacks by armed Tuareg groups were reported up to mid-1992. In February the army was reported to have extrajudicially executed at least 25 civilians. In the Timbuktu Region soldiers reportedly killed 20 people, including 11 children, at Zouera near Bintagoungou, and five others, including three children, at the Imemalen Well near Farach.
On 16 May the army arrested and extrajudicially executed 10 Tuareg civilians in reprisal for an attack on Gossi a few days earlier by an armed Tuareg group which killed five people. On 17 May soldiers reportedly killed more than 20 Tuareg and Moor stockbreeders, including Mauritanian nationals, in encampments at Foita, near the border with Mauritania. These extrajudicial executions were apparently in reprisal for an attack by an armed group believed to have entered Mali from a refugee camp in Mauritania.
Attacks by armed Tuareg groups on towns and villages in the north continued throughout the year, although it was not always possible to distinguish between armed attacks by politically motivated groups and banditry. Dissident Tuareg groups which opposed the April peace accord deliberately killed civilians and stole vehicles, on several occasions from foreign aid agencies and tourists. For example, in March an armed Tuareg group reportedly killed 18 civilians in a village near Tonka. In May an armed group took one person prisoner diu"ing an attack on Gossi and took three further captives in an attack on a bus on the L6r6-Nampala road near the Mauritanian border. Several attacks in various parts of the country by Tuareg groups were reported in June in which eight people were killed. Members of the Front islamique arabe pour ¡a Jibera-tion de I'Azawad (fiaa), Arab Islamic Front for the Liberation of Azawad, one of the groups which signed the April peace agreement, were briefly detained by the Mauritanian authorities in July, apparently because they were suspected of involvement in attacks across the border into Mali
(see Mauritania entry). In July a Tuareg group reportedly killed one person and took two captives in an attack on Dioura in the Mopti region.
In August the government estimated that there had been about 40 attacks by armed groups since the April peace agreement. In October it said that there had been 120 attacks by armed groups since April but that the perpetrators could not always be identified.
Amnesty International urged the government to take action to halt and investigate alleged extrajudicial executions and to bring to justice those found to have been responsible for such abuses.
