MOZAMBIQUE
Scores of people were detained without trial on suspicion of committing crimes on behalf of the armed opposition Resist-encia Nacional Mogambicana (renamo), Mozambique National Resistance, before an agreement to end the 16-year conflict was signed in October. One person was acquitted of plotting to overthrow the government: the trial of 13 others had not concluded when a law passed in October granted amnesty to all political prisoners. Members of the security forces ill-treated civilians. One soldier was
sentenced to a long prison term for the extrajudicial execution of captured renamo fighters. There were new reports of renamo soldiers mutilating and killing civilians.
A General Peace Agreement signed by President Joaquim Chissano and renamo's leader, Afonso Dhlakama, came into force in October. It provided for the release of all political prisoners and for fundamental human rights to be respected. It included a cease-fire and the confinement of both sides' troops to specified assembly areas in readiness for either demobilization or incorporation into a new national army. The agreement also provided for the return of refugees and for humanitarian assistance to those who had been displaced and reduced to starvation as a result of the 16-year conflict. Multi-party elections were to be held within a year. A United Nations Operation in Mozambique (onumoz) was to monitor the agreement and chair the Supervisory and Monitoring Commission (sMc), which was responsible for implementing the agreement. Subsidiary commissions were set up to monitor the neutrality of the police and administration. The smc was to reach decisions by consensus between the government and renamo -a practice which, in similar agreements in other countries, had prevented investigation of politically motivated killings and other human rights violations. The October amnesty law covered all politically motivated and military crimes committed during the conflict, including human rights violations committed by the security forces: this appeared to reduce still further any possibility that the authorities would account for the hundreds of prisoners who had "disappeared" since independence in 1975.
The cease-fire was violated within days of its entry into force when renamo forces occupied villages and goverrunent troops counter-attacked. Before the agreement there were reports that renamo soldiers abducted, mutilated and killed civilians. Victims included two people who had their hands cut off in Zambézia province in February and a Roman Catholic missionary who was killed in Nampula province in August. After the agreement there were reports of renamo soldiers beating civilians and abducting others whom they forced to act as porters.
At the beginning of the year scores of
MOZAMBIQUE/MYANMAR (BURMA)
people were detained without trial on suspicion of committing crimes on behalf of renamo. Most continued to be held until the October agreement, when the government released about 400 such people who had been arrested either in 1992 or in previous years, and was reviewing the cases of around 20 others to see if they qualified for release. The government said these were all the political prisoners it held. The releases were monitored by the International Committee of the Red Cross (icrc). In contrast, renamo declared that it was holding no prisoners and that all captured government soldiers had joined renamo ranks. However, many prisoners remained unaccounted for, including prisoners taken by both sides during the armed conflict. They also included scores of government opponents who "disappeared" in detention in the years following independence in 1975 (see previous Amnesty International Reports).
Fourteen people who had been arrested in 1991 and accused of plotting to overthrow the government (see Amnesty International Report 1991] were brought to trial. Charges against one other person were dropped in January. Colonel-General Sebastiao Mabote, a former army chief of staff, went on trial in August and was acquitted in September. He was tried by the Supreme Court because of his status as a Deputy in the Assembly of the Republic (Mozambique's Parliament). The trial of the other 13 before the Maputo City Court began in September but the defendants were released under the October amnesty law.
There were numerous reports of beatings or other assaults on civilians by soldiers, often to back up demands for money. In at least two cases, soldiers fired on protesters in questionable circumstances. In August four prisoners were shot dead and 13 wounded when soldiers opened fire to quell a riot by prisoners in Maputo Central Prison and another person was shot dead when soldiers suppressed a violent demonstration of war veterans near Maputo. An inquiry into the killings was initiated by the Maputo procuracy, but no findings were announced. However, one soldier was sentenced to 22 years' imprisonment by Zambezia Provincial Military Court in July for ordering the extrajudicial execution of six captured renamo fighters in September 1991.
Amnesty International appealed in
August to President Chissano and to the renamo leader, Afonso Dhlakama, to include specific measures to protect human rights in the peace agreement. In February Amnesty International wrote to renamo about four people held by the group since 1988. renamo replied they would look-into the cases but had provided no further information by the end of the year.
