UZBEKISTAN
Several prisoners of conscience were detained. Opponents of the government and independent journalists were assaulted by unidentified attackers, possibly with the complicity of the authorities.
Uzbekistan's independence, declared in August 1991, was recognized internationally following the dissolution of the Soviet Union. Headed by President Islam Kari-mov, Uzbekistan became a member of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe in January and the United Nations in March.
Prisoner of conscience Babur Shakirov was arrested in August and charged with "calling for the overthrow of the state and social order" under Article 60 of the Criminal Code. The charge related to his involvement in forming a non-violent social organization called MilH Mejlis, National Council. He had previously been a prisoner of conscience for 10 years under the Soviet government. In December, two other organizers of Milli Mejlis - Khazratkul Khuday-berdi and Odanazar Arifov - were arrested on the same charge as Babior Shakirov. The same month human rights activist Abdu-mannob Pulatov was abducted by Uzbek
uzbekistan/venezuela
security officials from a human rights conference in Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan, and forcibly repatriated to Uzbekistan where he was charged with "infringement upon the honour and dignity of the President" under the Criminal Code.
Short-term "administrative arrest", which can be imposed by a judge for up to 15 days without trial or right of appeal, continued to be used to detain people seeking to exercise non-violently their rights to freedom of expression and association. In April, for example, Yusuf Narov, a member of the opposition party Erk (Freedom), was placed under "administrative arrest" for five days for taking part in an unsanctioned demonstration. In July Mikhail Ardzinov served 10 days' "administrative arrest" in connection with his activities as deputy chairman of the Human Rights Society of Uzbekistan.
Pulat Akhunov, a probable prisoner of conscience, was sentenced in December to 18 months' imprisonment following conviction on criminal charges which had allegedly been fabricated to punish him for political activities. A deputy chairman of the officially registered opposition movement Birlik (Unity), he was arrested in July and charged with assault. Sources claimed that the alleged assault victim should have been serving a custodial sentence for rape and robbery at the time of the alleged assault, and had named Pulat Akhunov as his assailant at the prompting of police.
There were at least seven incidents of serious physical assault on opposition leaders or independent journalists by unidentified attackers. In June Birlik chairman Abdurakhim Pulatov needed emergency hospital treatment for skull fractures after four men attacked him and a companion with metal bars as they left an interview at a police station in the capital, Tashkent. It was alleged that local law enforcement authorities looked on while the attack took place.
The Uzbekistan Criminal Code retained the death penalty for 19 peacetime offences. However, senior officials stated in April that regulations introduced in December 1991 had reduced the number of offences which in practice still carried the death penalty to four; treason; premeditated, aggravated murder; murder of a minor; and aggravated rape, No death sentences were known to have been passed.
Amnesty International appealed for the
release of Babur Shakirov, Khazratkul Khu-dayberdi, Odanazar Arifov and Abduman-nob Pulatov. It sought further information from the authorities about the case of Pulat Akhunov. In July Amnesty International urged the authorities to ensure that the assaults on opposition figures and journalists were fully investigated and every effort made to identify and bring to justice those responsible. Amnesty International continued to press the authorities to abolish the death penalty.
In April Amnesty International representatives visited Uzbekistan for the first time. They met government ministers and other officials and discussed the death penalty and prospects for constitutional and legislative reform.
