SLOVAKIA
SLOVAK REPUBLIC Head of state: Rudolf Schuster Head of government: Mikulas Dzurinda Death penalty: abolitionist forall crimes International Criminal Court: ratified
There were reports that the police did not protect Roma adequately from racist violence or investigate theircomplaints effectively Provisions of the Penal Code which imposed excessive restrictions on the right to freedom of expression were abolished.
Roma
Members of the Romani community faced discrimination in all fields of life.There were a number of reports that members of the Romani community were subjected to racist violence and that law enforcement officers failed to protect them. The police also failed to investigate some of the reported incidents of racism effectively.
Q In February in the village of Ganovce-Filice in Poprad district, a dispute arose in a pub between Martin Kocka, who is of ethnic Romani background, and the landlord. Three hours later, approximately 15 young men holding baseball bats, cudgels and iron bars came to the local Romani neighbourhood. They shouted "Come out gypsies!" as they threw stones at windows and broke down doors with baseball bats. Martin Kocka was attacked by three or four men outside his home. They beat him with baseball bats as he lay on the ground, shouted racist abuse and threatened to kill him, Martin Kocka's arm was broken as a result of the beating. At least nine other people were injured by the attackers who entered people's homes and beat men and women indiscriminately. One of the victims was able to call the police on his mobile telephone. Shortly afterwards the attackers left.
The police reportedly arrived an hour later, briefly questioned some of the victims and left. Three days
220
Amnesty International Report 2003
SOL
later the the Director of the Poprad Police Investigation Bureau reportedly told a national daily newspaper that a racial motive in the incident had been excluded. The following day a lawyer for the League of Human Rights Advocates (LHRA), a non-governmental organization, publicly stated that the Police Director's assessment was unethical and unprofessional as no investigation had been carried out. Ten days later the Director of the Poprad Police Investigation Bureau publicly accused the LHRA lawyer of obstructing the investigation.
The police initiated an investigation against unknown perpetrators for trespassing, wilful damage to property, and causing bodily harm. In May, the investigation was terminated because the perpetrators could not be identified. Following an appeal, the police acknowledged that there may have been a racial motive; however, in June the investigation was terminated again on the same grounds. Q In February, an officer at the Jarovnice police station asked journalist Denise Havrlova, of ethnic Romani background, to show him her "hygienic certificate" after she offered to shake hands with him as a sign of appreciation for assisting her on an article she was writing. Denise Havrlova reportedly filed a complaint with the Kosice Police Inspectorate. In March the Inspectorate reportedly rejected the complaint. Denise HavrlSva then filed another complaint, following which the Presov County Investigator brought charges against her for offending a public official because she had called the officer a racist. The charges were dropped and in May the Central Police Inspectorate in Bratislava found Denise Havrlova's complaint against the officer to be "partially justified": his behaviour was not found to be racist, but was considered to be in breach of his legal duties as a police officer.
Freedom of expression
In January the Constitutional Court suspended provisions of Articles 102 and 103 of the Slovak Penal Code concerning defamation of the Republic and of public officials, stating that their enforcement may be a threat to the right to freedom of expression. A number of parliamentarians had filed the petition with the Court after President Rudolf Schuster initiated criminal proceedings in July 2001 against a journalist who was critical of his state of the nation speech to the National Council. In June 3002 the National Council adopted a law abolishing Articles 102 and 103 of the Penal Code and the Court terminated its review of these provisions.
