SWAZILAND
KINGDOM OF SWAZILAND
Head of state: King Mswati 111
Head of government: BarnabusSibusiso DIamini
Death penalty: retentionist
International Criminal Court: not signed
The independence of the judiciary and the authority of the courts were seriously undermined by government officials and police in a number of cases. The security forces continued to enforce longstanding restrictions on freedom of assembly and association. Journalists were ill-treated and harassed when reporting on gatherings viewed by the authorities as political. Women were denied access to social and economic rights through discriminatory lawsand practices. Asylum-seekers, Including children, were detained In harsh conditions.
Background
The country experienced a major food crisis; UN agencies estimated that 265,000 people (just over a quarter of the population) were at risk of starvation. The government decided to purchase a private Jet for the King at a cost of US$44.6 million, more than double the annual health budget. The decision was opposed by members of parliament and civil society organizations and triggered a two-day protest strike by labour unions in December,
The Constitutional Drafting Committee appointed by the King completed a draft new constitution by November, but the King did not make it public before the end of 2002.
Threats to the rule of law
On 30 November all the judges of the Court of Appeal resigned in protest at the government's public refusal to abide by two of their judgments. Despite widespread condemnation, the government refused to reverse its position.
Q On 30 October the Attorney General (AG), an appointee of the King, together with the chiefs of staff of the army, police and prisons services, instructed the Chief Justice and two High Court judges to stop hearing the case of a young woman secretly taken from school by agents of the King (see below). When the judges continued to hear the case, the AG ordered them to resign. The Chief Justice lodged a complaint with the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP), but the AG refused to appear in court to answer the charges. On 12 November government officials ordered the DPP to withdraw the case against the AG or resign. He refused. Government officials then raided and searched the DPP's office and prevented him from regaining access to his files.
Q On 22 November the Court of Appeal upheld a court ruling that the Commissioner of Police and another senior officer were in contempt of court and must serve
Amnesty International Report 2003
235
SWA
a 30-day prison sentence. Police had repeatedly obstructed Madeli Fakudze and others from returning to their homes in Macetjeni, despite a Court of Appeal ruling in June that they must be allowed to return. Madeli Fakudze and other members of his community had been evicted from their homes in 2000 by the security forces. Both the Commissioner of Police and the Prime Minister declared their refusal to submit to the November ruling.
Q In November the Court of Appeal ruled that a King's Decree under which pre-trial prisoners were denied the right to apply for bail was invalid. The Prime Minister stated that the government would not abide by the ruling.
Political triais
On 22 August Mario Masuku. President of the People's United Democratic Movement (Pudemo), was acquitted by the High Court on a charge of sedition and released. He had been in prison since October 2001 in connection with statements he had allegedly made at protest rallies in 2000. The evidence of state witnesses, who were mainly police officers, was contradictory and there was no evidence that Mario Masuku had advocated violence. An Al representative attended part of the trial.
Violations of women's and children's rights
Discriminatory laws and practices continued to put women and girls at risk of sexual and domestic violence and the effects of the HIV/AIDS pandemic. More than a third of women attending ante-natal clinics were HIV positive, according to government statistics. Q In October the practice of forced marriage was challenged in the High Court by the mother of a young woman, Zena Mahlangu, who had been taken from school by agents of the King to become the King's tenth wife. Lindiwe Dlamini applied to the High Court for an order compelling the King's agents to return her daughter. The Court appointed two lawyers to interview her, but officials repeatedly blocked access to her. Lindiwe Dlamini reluaantly postponed her court application on 5 November after the King presented her daughter in public as his fiancée. At least one other girl, Noliqhwa Ntentesa, was taken away from school by agents of the King without the knowledge of her family. Months later they were still denied access to her. Q In October, two high school students lodged complaints with the police against a teacher who allegedly gave them 48 "strokes" on their buttocks. Corporal punishment of school students is a widespread practice. Police in Lobamba briefly detained 15 members of the Swaziland Association of Students following their protests over the case. At least one of the students withdrew charges, reportedly under pressure from her family.
Refugees
Asylum-seekers, including children, from the Democratic Republic of the Congo and several other African countries were detained at Sidwashinl prison in overcrowded conditions for up to six months. They
were detained after they protested at the lack of provisions following the closure of the office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees in Swaziland. In November the government stated that it intended to deport them.
Death penalty
At the end of 2002 there were at least 12 prisoners under sentence of death. There were no executions.
Ai country reports/visits Reports and statements
■ Policing to protect human rights: A survey of police practice in countries of the Southern African Development Community (Al Index: AFR 03/004/2002)
•	Swaziland: Acquittal of Mario Masuku is an opportunity to end persecution of the opposition (AI Index; AFR 55/002/2002)
•	Swaziland; Grave concern at attack against High Court Judges seeking to protect the rights of women (AI Index; AFR 55/004/2002)
•	Swaziland; Continuing attacks on the independence of judges and lawyers (AI Index: AFR 55/005/2002)
•	Swaziland: Subversion of the rule of law gravely endangers protection of human rights and jeopardizes the constitution reform process (AI Index: AFR 55/006/2002)
Visit
An Al delegate visited the country in August.
236
Amnesty International Report 2003	236
