UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
Head of state: Al-Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al-Nahyan Head of government: Al-Sheikh Maktum bin Rashid Al-Maktum
Death penalty: retentionist International Criminal Court: signed
New and broader security provisions facilitated the arbitrary arrest and Incommunicado detention of up to 250 United Arab Emirates (UAE) nationals. Most remained in detention at the end ofthe year. The arrests, which began towards the end of 2001, were carried out In the context of combating "terrorism". Some of those detained were reportedly Ill-treated. Dozens of people employed by the ministries of justice and education were forcibly retired or transferred as part of an ongoing policy of limiting freedom of expression and association. Asylum-seekers, scores ofwhom may have faced persecution In their country of origin, were forcibly returned or expelled, some on grounds of national security. Ill-treatment by the authorities was reported during unrest In a prison In Dubai. Sentences of death
260
Amnesty International Report 2003
UNI
penalty and flogging continued to be imposed and one execution was reported.
Political arrests and ill-treatment in detention
Scores, perhaps hundreds, of UAE nationals, including police and teachers arbitrarily arrested by the State Security following the ii September 2001 attacks in the USA, remained in detention without charge. Most were reportedly held incommunicado, Al repeatedly expressed its concern about their detention to the authorities. While Ministry ofjustice officials denied the detentions to AI delegates visiting the country in September, Ministry of Information officials acknowledged the arrest of a large number of people, stating that "it was for their own good". No steps had been taken to bring charges by the end of the year.
There were unconfirmed reports that detainees had been beaten and otherwise ill-treated, including in Khor Fakkan and Ras al-Khaimah. Many were reportedly ordered to sign "undertakings" not to associate with certain groups as a condition for release. Some were reportedly obliged to provide weekly reports detailing their activities for security officials, and members of their families were kept under surveillance.
Q 'Ali "Amlsh, one of five Libyan nationals detained between May and August 2(ïôi, was released and, along with one of the others detained, was forcibly expelled from the UAE. He said he had been subjected to various forms of torture: sleep deprivation; repeated beating with a wooden stick, electric cable or a hose; and suspension by his hands and feet followed by beating on various parts of his body. Another of those detained, 'Abdullah Abu al-Qaslm al-Ghazal, died in September 2001 in the custody of security officials. No information was received about the fate of the two other Libyan nationals, 'Ali Bashir and Ahmad Ramadhan Hussain Qanud. The reason for the arrest of the five remained unclear but appeared to be linked to their suspected political activities.
Freedom of expression and association
In July, in an administrative measure widely seen as punitive, 10 judges and 33 teachers were forcibly retired, 24 teachers were transferred to other ministries, and at least two university lecturers were prohibited from teaching. No reason was given for these actions, but AI w^as concerned that it was linked to the political opinions of those affected.
Refoulement
In February hundreds of Afghan nationals, some of whom had been detained for up to a year, were reported to have been forcibly returned from Dubai to Afghanistan despite an appeal from the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to halt their deportation. Their fate following their return to Afghanistan was not known. There was no judicial review of the decision to expel them and UNHCR was denied access to them. Also in February the authorities forcibly expelled two Libyan nationals. One of them, Ahmad Muhammad "Ali 'Ak'ak, was
reportedly detained for four hours at the airport on his arrival in Libya before being allowed into the country.
In April authorities at Dubai airport arrested Sabrina Imtiaz Syed, a Pakistan national aged 25 and a resident of the UAE, who was returning from a trip to Germany. She was taken to an "immigration jail". Her father, who met her in the Jail, had reportedly requested that her visa be revoked and that she be sent to Pakistan, where family members had reportedly threatened to kill her for marrying someone in Pakistan against family wishes. She was released and reportedly taken to Pakistan by her mother on 12 May.
Intergovernmental organizations
In March the UAE submitted a report to the UN Security Council Counter-Terrorism Committee detailing measures intended to combat "terrorism". These mainly related to financial controls and Increased cooperation with international policing bodies, but also referred to the UAE's accession in iggg to the Arab Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism. Al believes that provisions of the Arab Convention violate international human rights standards.
In May the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child examined the UAE's initial report in respect of its obligations as a state party to the UN Children's Convention. Injune, in its Concluding Observations, the Committee welcomed various measures undertaken by the UAE to promote children's rights, but recommended that the government withdraw its reservation to Article 14 of the Convention, under which state parties are to respect the right of the child to freedom of thought, conscience and religion. The Committee also called on the government to raise the minimum age of criminal responsibility in accordance with the principles and provisions of the Convention; abolish the imposition of flogging and other forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment and punishment on people who have committed crimes when they were under 18, and ensure that the system of juvenile justice includes juvenile courts and fully integrates the provisions of the Convention. The Committee also expressed serious concern at "the hazardous situation of children Involved in camel racing" (see below).
Ill-treatment in prison
Disturbances in Dubai's male prison in February reportedly resulted in injuries to several people. The authorities denied reports that prisoners had died. On 30 July, following a dispute mainly between prisoners, the authorities reportedly ill-treated prisoners to restore order. An Iranian prisoner reportedly died as a result.
Child labour
In July, in a move to enforce a 1993 law banning the use of boys as camel jockeys, the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs reportedly announced that children under the age of 15 would be banned from camel
261	Amnesty International Report 2003

UNI
racing. Boys as young as four have reportedly been used as jockeys and some have been seriously injured or killed during races.
Death penalty and cruel judicial punishments
in March a Yemeni national was reportedly executed in Dubai after he was found guilty of killing four of his relatives. In April an appeal court in Dubai upheld the death sentences of Andre Seefred, a Ukrainian natipnal aged 28, and Sergei Doboni, a Russian national aged 24, who had been convicted in February of murdering an Indian national in July 2001. At least 20 Individuals were sentenced to be flogged.
AI country reports/visits
Visits
AI delegates visited the UAE in February and September. In September the delegates held talks with government and judicial officials.
