SPAIN
KINGDOM OFSPAIN Head of state: King Juan Carlos I de Borbón Head of government: José María /\znar López Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes International Criminal Court: ratified
The armed Basque group Euskadi Ta Askatasuna (ETA), Basque Homeland and Freedom, carried out a series of bombings and shootings, some of which were fata I. Allegations of torture and ill-treatment by police officers and Civil Guards were frequent and included complaints by immigrants and other people of foreign origin as well as people held incommunicado, mainly as ETAsuspects. Deep concern about incommunicado detention was expressed by the UN Committee against Torture. Allegations were made of ill-treatment in prisons and of inhuman and degrading treatment in detention centres for newly arrived immigrants. Unaccompanied foreign minors, mainly of Moroccan origin, claimed that they were ill-treated and sexually abused in some reception centres. Some law enforcement officers were convicted of torture or ill-treatment, including acts of sexual assault on immigrant women, but were at liberty pending appeals. The judicial resolution of some cases continued to raise concerns about effective impunity.
Background
Five people were killed by ETA, including a Socialist Party (PSOE) councillor, juan Priede Pérez, who was shot dead at Orio (Guipúzcoa) in March, and Silvia Martinez Santiago, a girl aged about six who died in a car bomb explosion at a Civil Guard barracks at Santa Pola (Alicante) in August. Up to 90 people were injured in various ETA attacks. In September ETA announced that offices and organized meetings of the Popular Party and PSOE would be viewed as "military targets", and threatened the lives of party activists, A series of initiatives against ETA was taken against a background of increased cross-border cooperation with France. Many ETA suspects were arrested.
In August an investigating judge of the National Court ordered the suspension for three years, extendable to five, of the political and economic activities of the Basque nationalist coalition, Batasuna. The coalition had operated as a legal parliamentary group but, according to the judge, formed an intrinsic part of ETA. This was denied by Batasuna. The Spanish government, at the request of parliament, applied to the Supreme Court to make Batasuna illegal. The Attorney General separately issued a request to the Supreme Court for the dissolution of Batasuna. The order to suspend Batasuna followed the entry into force earlier in the year of a revised law on political parties, according to which a political party would be declared illegal if it
Amnesty International Report 2003
227
SPA
failed to respect democratic principles and constitutional values.
In November the Defence Minister cited "massive illegal immigration" among alleged threats to national security, A reported Increase in crime was also linked by government authorities to illegal immigration.
In November the Spanish parliament for the first time condemned the regime of General Franco {1939-1975) and backed initiatives to uphold the memory of the victims of the 1936-1939 Civil War, including the exhumation of the common graves of over 30,000 people, most thought to be Republican.
Race-related torture and Ill-treatment
In April Al launched a campaign calling on the authorities to adopt a national strategy against racism. A major report published simultaneously concluded that complaints of race-related ill-treatment were frequent and widespread. Despite the existence of laws and codes guarding against discriminatory or arbitrary conduct, racial profiling was common and the discriminatory use of identity checks led to ill-treatment and abuse by public officials of people of foreign origin. Undocumented foreign women were particularly vulnerable to rape or serious sexual assault in custody. Immigrants subject to expulsion procedures were not treated with dignity or transparency, while impunity affected ethnic minorities and foreign nationals in a specific way.
The Interior Minister assured Al of the absolute commitment of the government, judicial system and law enforcement agencies to combating racism, effectively denying that there was any problem of racism by public officials. He made no substantive response to Al's report. In June the Minister appeared before a pariiamentary committee to answer extensive questions about the report. The Minister admitted there were some cases of ill-treatment, but said that they were "isolated". Some deputies urged the government to respond to the report's recommendation to establish a national plan to combat racism, as well as many of its more specific recommendations.
In November the UN Committee against Torture, which examined Spain's fourth periodic report on its implementation of the UN Convention against Torture, expressed concern about reports of race-related ill-treatment of Immigrants, as well as reports of rape and sexual abuse. It recommended that the motives by which torture was defined in the Spanish Penal Code be extended to include "discrimination of any kind". Q Claudia Peña Ureña and her sister Brunilda Ureña Ureña, nationals of the Dominican Republic, alleged that they were assaulted and racially abused in March by two National Police officers called to a disturbance at birthday celebrations in Torrejón de Ardoz. Several small children were present. Claudia Peña was reportedly kicked in the face and head after being thrown to the ground and subsequently trampled. Their father said that when he tried to lodge a complaint with the police, he was told he could not do so and was forcibly evicted from the station, after being reportedly
abused, threatened, kicked and punched. A medical report on Claudia Pena referred to "multiple contusions". In May a court acquitted the two women of "disobedience to authority". A separate court hearing scheduled for September, to try the complaints of ill-treatment brought by the two women, was postponed, reportedly because the officers were on holiday. In December the officers were acquitted on grounds of insufficient evidence, including failure of some witnesses to appear at the hearing. Q In March a National Police officer was sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment for the sexual assault of "J", a Colombian woman, at Valladolid in 2001, and in April a National Police officer was sentenced to four years' imprisonment for the sexual assault of Miriam Rosa VerâsteguiTemplo, a Peruvian woman, in 1998. In respect of "J", the court remarked that, given her irregular situation in Spain, she was in an especially vulnerable position vis-à-vis the police officer. Both officers lodged appeals against the sentences, which were not definitive; they therefore remained at liberty.
Incommunicado detention
Many people held Incommunicado as ETA suspects alleged they were tortured or ill-treated by Civil Guards or police officers. In August and September several people arrested in connection with the Basque "kale borroka"{"urbàr\ struggle") campaign, which has been linked to ETA, were reportedly held incommunicado for up to four days. Several detainees alleged that they were beaten, sexually harassed, exhausted by forced physical exercises and subjected to asphyxiation by the "do/sa"technique (hooding with, and tightening of, plastic bags around the head).
In November the UN Committee against Torture expressed deep concern about the way in which incommunicado detention facilitated torture. The Committee recommended, among otha- things, the introduction of video recording of police and Civil Guard Interrogations, which would have to be made available to the competent judge. The Committee also recommended joint examination of detainees held incommunicado by an officially appointed forensic doctor and by a doctor trusted by the detainee. Q Lawyers acting for Unal Romano Igartua, who alleged that he had been tortured in September 2001, appealed against a decision in July to dismiss the case against three Civil Guards. While held incommunicado, Unai Romano's head swelled to a point where he became virtually unrecognizable and temporarily lost his sight, apparently as a result of severe beatings by Civil Guards. The Civil Guards claimed that the injuries were self-inflicted.
Q In March an investigating judge ruled that ETA suspect Iratxe Sorzabal Diez had not been physically tortured by Civil Guards the previous year, although she might have been threatened and harassed. Iratxe Sorzabal lodged an appeal.
Unaccompanied foreign children
In May Al publicly expressed its deep concern about a declaration by the government of the autonomous city
228
Amnesty International Report 2003	228
SPA
of Mel illa that it would not in future extend its protection to unaccompanied foreign children entering the city. The organization reiterated earlier appeals to the Spanish, regional and autonomous governments to abide by international standards on the care and protection of unaccompanied children. In June the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child stated that it was "deeply alarmed about the conditions of unaccompanied foreign children". It recommended that the Spanish authorities take nine urgent measures to improve the children's conditions, including prevention of irregular expulsions and effective investigation of ill-treatment allegations.
Following adverse publicity about the situation of Moroccan children, and an appeal by the prosecutor attached to the High Court of Justice of Málaga to annul many of the expulsions from Melilla on grounds of illegality, such expulsions diminished considerably during the year. Improvements were also reported in conditions at some reception centres. However, in June and July there were allegations about the abusive use of a "punishment cell" at the Fuerte de la Purísima centre in Melilla. Some children said they had been beaten for disciplinary offences and shut in the cell, which was tiny, dirty and windowless. A teacher and a security guard were accused of beating children inside the cell, and of encouraging oldeTchildren to commit acts of violence. The Málaga prosecutor subsequently ordered the closure of the "punishment cell". Judicial investigations were opened into the allegations and into individual complaints by children that they had been physically ill-treated and sexually harassed.
In December. La Montaneta reception centre in Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, reportedly described as "hellish" by a public prosecutor, was closed after complaints by several children that they had been ill-treated, raped and sexually abused by older inmates. Attacks on carers and te.achers were also reported. There was concern that the conflictive situation in reception centres in the Canary Islands - including that of Puerto del Rosario (Fuerteventura)-was fuelling political pressure to resume repatriations of children against their will.
Prisons and detention centres
There were reports of growing tension in prisons, inter-prisoner violence and ill-treatment by prison staff. Salto del Negro (Las Palmas de Gran Canaria) was among prisons reported to be suffering from gross overcrowding. In May the prison of Quatre Camins in Cataluña was the scene of serious disturbances, involving up to 130 prisoners. Six inmates and five prison officers were reportedly injured. In June Al asked the Catalan government for information about individual allegations of ill-treatment and about measures being taken to alleviate overcrowding. The Catalan authorities replied in October that there had been a "spectacular increase" in the prison population of Cataluña - as elsewhere in Europe - caused partly by a national penal policy and partly by the "incessant increase of foreign nationals", who constituted about 28 per cent of the prison population. The Catalan
government said that it had agreed to spend large sums of money on penitentiary construction.
Throughout the year the continuing arrival of African immigrants on Canary Island shores caused humanitarian concern. In March, seven organizations, including Al, expressed concern about "unacceptable conditions" and difficulties in obtaining access to lawyers at the detention centre for immigrants at the old airport terminal at Fuerteventura. New facilities were later opened to alleviate overcrowding, but these also appeared inadequate. The authorities accepted that the centres posed serious problems, and were planning new measures.
Right to peaceful protest
On the eve of two European Union summits held in Spain—the first in Barcelona in March, the second in Seville in June-Al called on the authorities to ensure that policing of demonstrations respected the right to peaceful protest. It was also concerned that the authorities had blocked the borders to prevent entry into the country of some protesters with apparently peaceful intent thus violating their rights to freedom of expression and assembly.
In September, following the suspension of Batasuna, an investigating judge issued a court order that appeared to widen the scope for the prohibition of "any gathering or demonstration" held with reference to the Basque nationalist coalition or its suspension. A further court order reportedly stated that demonstrations by other parties or individuals were not covered by the prohibition. However, the precise scope of the prohibition remained unclear. Al urged the Spanish and Basque authorities to ensure that recent legal moves did not undermine the rights to freedom of expression and peaceful protest in the Basque Country.
Al country reports/visits Reports
•	Spain: Crisis of identity - race-related torture and ill-treatment by state agents (Al Index: EUR 41/001/2002)
•	Spain: A Briefing for the UN Committee against Torture (Al Index: EUR 41/012/2002)
•	Spain: A Briefing for the UN Committee against Torture-Update (Al Index: EUR 41/014/2002)
•	Concerns in Europe, January-June 2002: Spain (Al Index: EUR 01/007/2002)
Visits
Al representatives visited Spain in April and October for the launch of the report, Crisis of identity, and to attend meetings.
Amnesty International Report 2003
229
