CHILE
70
REPUBLIC OF CHILE
Head of state and government: Ricardo Lagos Death penalty: abolitionistforordinary crimes International Criminal Court: signed
Harsh prison conditions and ill-treatment of inmates, including minors, continued to be reported. There were further confrontations between police and indigenous people in the context of land disputes; one person was killed. Proceedings against former President Augusto Pinochet weredismissed, but other investigations into past human rights violations continued.
Background
In September there were reports in the press that a secret organization known as the Comando Conjunto (Joint Command) was being revived. This organization, which was accused of involvement in past human rights abuses, was reported to be regrouping in order to obstruct judicial investigations into past human rights violations.
In October, the Third Criminal Court ordered the trial of former Air Force General Patricio Campos Montecinos. The Court found that he had withheld and destroyed information in relation to five people who "disappeared" during the military government and so "benefitted those responsible for these crimes and harmed the administration of justice".
In August, the non-governmental human rights organization Agrupación de Familiares de Derenidos Desaparecidos (AFDD), Association of Relatives of Disappeared Detainees, demanded new forensic tests on the remains of victims of "disappearances" who had been returned to their relatives for burial. The demand followed the disclosure of a 1995 forensic report prepared by the Department of Forensic Medicine and Science of the University of Glasgow in connection with the identification of remains found in the Santiago General Cemetery, Plot 29. The report had been sent to the Chilean Medical Forensic Service, a unit within the Ministry of Justice, which had failed to forward the report to the court in charge of the investigation or to inform the relatives of the findings. A judicial investigation was initiated and the reorganization of the Medical Forensic Service was announced by the Minister of Justice.
Ill-treatment
Harsh prison conditions and ill-treatment of inmates, including minors, continued to be reported. Q In January detainees at the Alfa high-security wing of Colina II prison initiated a protest against ill-treatment and poor conditions in the prison by injuring themselves with sharp objects. At the end of January, the Fifth Chamber of the Appeals Court of Santiago ordered the closure of the Alfa high-security wing. The
Amnesty International Report 2003
CHI
decision of the Court followed the submission of a habeas corpus writ on behalf of 25 detainees who complained of beatings and other ill-treatment by prison guards (Gendarmería). The ruling of the Court stated that the detainees had been subjected to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. Q In October, the Santiago Appeals Court reportedly ordered an investigation into allegations of ill-treatment by prison guards of a prisoner convicted of criminal charges held in the punishment cells of the Former Penitentiary prison. The Court ruled that conditions in the punishment cells amounted to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment and ordered that its use be restricted until individual isolation cells had been provided. Children
In September, the Santiago Appeals Court found that the authorities had violated the UN Children's Convention by allowing minors under the age of i8 years to be detained together with adults and by holding them in punishment cells. According to reports, following the Court's decision, the director of the Gendarmería ordered that children held in prisons be segregated from adults and that the use of punishment cells be stopped.
Past human rights violations
'Caravan of Death'
In July the Second Chamber of the Chilean Supreme Court dismissed the case against Augusto Pinochet in relation to proceedings connected with the "Caravan of Death"—a military operation in which 75 people were killed in 1973. The ruling stated that Augusto Pinochet was mentally unfit to stand trial and that his condition was incurable. Following the decision, Augusto Pinochet resigned from his position as senator for life-Immunity as a former president of the country was automatically granted to him.
In September a civil suit against Augusto Pinochet was submitted by the daughter of Benito Tapia, a trade union leader who was one of the victims of the "Caravan of Death". The Prats investigation
In July an Argentine judge requested the lifting of Augusto Pinochet's presidential immunity to interrogate him about the killing of Chilean general Carlos Prats and his wife in the Argentine capital, Buenos Aires, in 1974. In November the Supreme Court upheld the Santiago Appeals Court decision rejecting the request. Other cases
Some progress and new judicial initiatives were registered during the year in a number of cases of past human rights violations. These included the judicial investigation into the killing of two children, eight-year-old Jim Christie Bossy and seven-year-old Rodrigo Javier Palma Moraga, in December 1973, and the trial against seven former members of the Dirección de Inteligencia Nacional(DINÑ. National Intelligence Directorate, accused of kidnapping about 20 people from Villa Grimaldi, a secret detention centre in Santiago, between 1974 and 1975. The fate and whereabouts of those abducted remain unknown.
Indigenous people
There were further confrontations and reports of excessive use of force by carabmeros {uniformed police) in the context of continuing disputes over land rights in the south of the country. Q In November, Edmundo Alex Lemun, a 17-year-old member of the Mapuche community, died in hospital after being shot in the head. He had reportedly been shot by carabineros during a clash between Mapuche indigenous people and carabinerosin Ercilla, ÍX Region. An investigation into the incident was initiated but had not been completed by the end of the year.
Al country reports/visits
Statements
•	Chile: An independent justice system and equality before the law are the pillars of a fair society (Al Index: AMR 22/002/2002)
•	Chile: Pinochet case- Supreme Court ruling should not exert influence upon other trials (Al Index: AMR 22/006/2002)
Visit
In May Al sent an observer to hearings of Augusto Pinochet's appeal in relation to the "Caravan of Death" case.
