SWITZERLAND
SWISS CONFEDERATION
Head of state and government: KasparVilliger Death penalty: abolitionist forall crimes International Criminal Court: ratified
There were further reports of police officers ill-treating detainees and using excessive force. Asylum-seekers and other foreign nationals were among the alleged victims. A number of official investigations were under way into such allegations. A conscientious objector to compulsory military service wasa prisoner of conscience.
Background
In March the UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination welcomed the progress made by the country but said: "The persistence of hostile attitudes towards black people, Muslims and asylum-seekers" was of "utmost concern" and recommended that Switzeriand continue its efforts to prevent and combat such attitudes.
A national referendum in November voted by an extremely narrow margin against an initiative to alter the country's asylum legislation. The Swiss People's Party, a member of the four-party government coalition, sponsored the initiative, which was, however, opposed by the government. The initiative was severely criticized by organizations working for refugees' human rights, including the office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and AI. UNHCR stated that the initiative "would transform the country's asylum system into one of the most restrictive in the industrialized world" and that Switzerland would have "more or less shut its doors to people fleeing persecution". There was also strong criticism of the frequently xenophobic tone and misleading content of the campaign in support of the initiative.
Ill-treatment on arrival and deportation
There were allegations that police officers on duty in the transit zone of Zurich-Kloten airport ill-treated and
racially abused asylum-seekers. In a report published in March concerning its 2001 visit to various places of detention in Switzerland, the Council of Europe's Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) said it had gathered allegations of racist abuse, threats and ill-treatment involving police at the airport, usually aimed at persuading foreign nationals to accept voluntary repatriation or not to lodge an asylum application. The CPT said that the manner of forcible deportation operations under police escort presented a manifest risk of inhuman and degrading treatment. It reported that in August 2001 it had asked for a moratorium on forcible deportations under heavy restraint, pending the outcome of a domestic working group on forcible deportations, and called on the group to take into account certain guiding principles for deportation operations. These included the banning of restraint methods involving obstruction of the airways and the introduction of procedures to minimize the risk of positional asphyxia.
In its response to the CPT, also published in March, the government said it had rejected a moratorium because the CPT's recommendations had already been implemented to a targe extent and relevant instructions were being prepared by the working group on deportations. The working group aimed, among other things, to establish cross-cantonal guidelines on restraint methods and a specific training program for relevant officers. In April the Conference of the Directors of the Cantonal Justice and Police Departments endorsed detailed recommendations issued by the group. The guidelines on deportation contained many of the key recommendations made previously byAI and Council of Europe bodies, including the CPT AI welcomed them as a positive step towards safeguarding human rights during forcible deportation, but regretted that they contained no explicit ban on the wearing of masks or hoods by officers involved in deportations, and that the risk of unauthorized use of irritant or incapacitating sprays was not addressed. AI queried whether provisions on the circumstances in which sedative drugs might be administered were in line with relevant international and domestic standards regarding medical ethics. AI urged that the guidelines be urgently implemented at the cantonal level and that they become legally binding as soon as the legislative process allowed. Update
Q In March Valais Cantonal Court dismissed an appeal lodged by the family of Nigerian asylum-seeker Samson Chukwu against a September 2001 decision that no criminal investigation should be opened against two police officers who had used dangerous restraint methods during an attempt to forcibly deport him. An autopsy had concluded that Samson Chukwu's death in May 2001 could be attributed to positional asphyxia, resulting from the restraint methods used. The court's decision was based on police statements maintaining that the officers had not violated standard procedures and had not been trained in, and were unaware of the dangers of, such restraint methods. Further appeals lodged with the Federal Court were rejected in July.
238
Amnesty International Report 2003
SWI
Ill-treatment in police custody
There were regular reports of ill-treatment and use of excessive force by police, often accompanied by racist abuse and often in the context of identity checks.
The UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, expressing concern at such allegations, noted that many cantons lacked "independent mechanisms for investigation of complaints regarding violence and abuse by the police" and that sanctions against responsible officers had been "rare". It recommended that such independent mechanisms be established in all cantons, and that efforts be made to recruit members of minority groups into the police and to train officers on racial discrimination issues.
The CPT reported that the great majority of people detained by the police whom it had met during its 2001 visit to law enforcement establishments in four cantons had indicated that they had been treated correctly. Where allegations of ill-treatment had been collected, they principally concerned disproportionate use of force at the time of arrest.
The CPT welcomed a project under way aimed at unifying the 26 cantonal codes and three federal laws of penal procedure. It said that the existing draft text met some of its key recommendations concerning safeguards against ill-treatment in police custody. However, it asked that other recommendations be taken into account, including the introduction of a right of access to a lawyer from the beginning of deprivation of liberty by the police, and the establishment of an independent monitoring body for places of detention operated by police.
Q In May, following public revelations about a series of cases of alleged misconduct and ill-treatment by members of the Zurich Municipal Police, the City Council pledged additional resources for the judicial authorities, in order to expedite the relevant criminal investigations. It also announced the appointment of a prominent lawyer to head an independent complaints mechanism to receive complaints of police misconduct and use of excessive force, as well as complaints from police officers. It indicated that the lawyer's initial brief, assumed in June, would last until the end of 2002 when it would be re-evaluated. Q A Cameroonian woman detained with her five-week-old baby in August, after a dispute over a bus fare, alleged that Geneva police officers subjected her to physical and racial abuse and strip-searched her in the presence of male officers. The police denied the woman's allegations. A criminal investigation was opened by the Geneva Attorney General following a complaint lodged by the woman in September and a police report accusing her of obstructing them in the performance of their duty.
Q In November, following information passed on by the Bern police authorities, the local Judicial authorities opened a criminal investigation against four cantonal police officers suspected of using disproportionate force during identity checks and interrogations. Update
Q In October, four Bern police officers were committed for trial in connection with the ill-treatment
and death in July 2001 of Cemal Gome?, a Turkish-Kurd refugee. All four were charged with attempted grievous bodily harm, and two of them were also charged with causing his death through negligence.
Police ill-treatment of minors
In May the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child stated that it was "deeply concerned" about allegations of "ill-treatment by law-enforcement officers against foreign children and at the prevalence of abuse". It endorsed the recommendation made by other UN treaty bodies that independent mechanisms be set up in all cantons to receive complaints of police ill-treatment. It also recommended the establishment in all cantons of child-sensitive mechanisms to receive such complaints and the systematic training of police in the human rights of children. Update
Q A criminal investigation into a complaint lodged against Geneva police officers by the father of "Visar", a 14-year-old Kosovan refugee detained in 1999 following a street disturbance, concluded in January. The boy said that he was an innocent bystander but that police ordered a police dog to attack him, that the dog bit his thigh, and that police officers ill-treated and verbally abused him. In February the Geneva Attorney General stated that the investigation had not produced evidence supporting the allegations against the police officers but concluded that the police dog intervention was disproportionate. He found the officer who had ordered the dog's intervention guilty of bodily harm. The officer challenged the decision but in October the Geneva Police Tribunal endorsed the Attorney General's verdict.
Prisoner of conscience
Marino Keckeis began a five-month prison sentence in January for his refusal to perform compulsory military service. Although he had applied for alternative civilian service, his application and subsequent appeals were refused on the grounds that he had failed to demonstrate to the satisfaction of a civilian commission that he held conscientious beliefs causing a conflict of conscience with military service, thus failing to meet the requirements of the legislation relating to civilian service. Al believed Marino Keckeis' refusal of military service was the result of his conscientiously-held ethical and religious convictions, and called for his immediate release as a prisoner of conscience. Marino Keckeis was granted early release in April on grounds of good conduct.
Al country reports/visits
Reports
•	Concerns in Europe, January-June 2002. Switzerland (Al Index: EUR01/007/2002)
•	Switzerland: Amnesty International urges the immediate release of conscientious objector Marino Keckeis (Al Index: EUR 43/002/2002)
239	Amnesty International Report 2003
