TURKMENISTAN
TURKMENISTAN
Head of state a nd government: Sa pa rmurad N iyazov Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes International Criminal Court: not signed
An armed attack on the President in November triggered a newwaveof repression. Atrial of opposition leaders following the attack was grossly unfair. A civil societyactivistwas arrested for exercising his right to freedom of expression. There were concerns about the health of long-standing political prisonerMukhametkuliAymuradov. Conscientious objectors continued to be imprisoned. Credible reports of torture and ill-treatment continued.
Background
An attack on Saparmurad Niyazov's motorcade in the capital, Ashgabat, on 25 November was considered by the authorities to be a failed assassination and coup attempt. State-organized demonstrations throughout the country called for severe punishment of those the authorities claimed were implicated in the attack; there were calls for the reintroduction of the death penalty.
Concerns raised by the international community about reported human rights violations following the attack included statements made by the European Union, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) and the USA. On 20 December, the participating states in the OSCE invoked paragraph 12 of the Moscow 1991 document, providing for the establishment of a fact-finding mission of rapporteurs to investigate matters of concern regarding the conduct of the investigations following the November attack.
Throughout the year numerous senior officials were demoted, dismissed or imprisoned in what appeared to be a politically motivated purge. Turkmenistan requested the deportation of several members of the opposition in exile. In April the OSCE's Representative on Freedom of the Media issued a report condemning Turkmenistan for what he called "absolute lack of any freedom of expression". Further attempts to limit independent information entering the country included a ban on importing newspapers from the Russian Federation.
Clamp-down on government critics and their families
The clamp-down on dissent dramatically increased following the November attack. Scores of family members of government critics whom the authorities implicated in the attack on the President faced detention, harassment and eviction from their homes. Many of them were reportedly targeted solely because of their family relations with government opponents. The arrests were accompanied by credible reports of torture and ill-treatment of many of the detainees. The Turkmen authorities did not disclose comprehensive information about the whereabouts of detainees or the charges against them.
Q Twenty-one-year-old student Aili Yklymov and his 31-year-old brother Esenaman were arrested the day of the attack on the President. According to credible sources, on 5 December Aili Yklymov was beaten so severely in the basement of the Ministry of National Security in Ashgabat that he was unable to walk and had to be taken for questioning on a stretcher. Esenaman Yklymov was ill-treated in custody the day he was arrested. Reportedly, his ears were bleeding as a result. Both brothers received no treatment for their injuries while in custody.
0	On 29 December, at least four opposition leaders accused of masterminding the November attack- Boris Shikhmuradov, Nurmukhammet Khanamov, Khudayberdy Orazov and Saparmurad Yklymov—were reportedly sentenced to 25 years' imprisonment by the Supreme Court at a trial that fell far short of international standards; the latter three were sentenced in absentia. The sentences were increased to life imprisonment the following day by the Khall< Maslaldiaty, Turkmenistan's supreme legislature. In Boris Shikhmuradov's televised "confession", which was believed to have been dictated to him, he stated: "I and my allies... are not opposition members but ordinary criminals and drug addicts... there is not a single decent person among us; we are all thugs...
1	am not a man able to rule a state. ..lama criminal able
256
Amnesty International Report 2003	256
UCA
only to destroy the state," In a statement posted on his website on 26 December, one day after the authorities reported his detention, Boris Shikhmuradov denied involvement in the November attack. Q Long-standing political prisoner Mukhametkuli Aymuradov remained held throughout the year. He was convicted in 1995 of charges including "attempted terrorism", and sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment after a reportedly unfair trial. In December 1998 he had been sentenced to an additional 18 years' imprisonment in connection with an alleged prison escape attempt. He was reported to have been denied appropriate medical treatment for a heart attack, a gastric ulcer and recurring inflammation of the kidneys, bladder and gall bladder. Unofficial sources also said that Mukhametkuli Aymuradov's eyesight had deteriorated. A regulation, reportedly in force since January, permitted his wife to visit him once every three months for 20 minutes.
Civil society
Civil society activists continued to face pressure from the authorities. No human rights groups could function openly in Turkmenistan. Q Civil society activist and ecologist Farid Tukhbatullin was arrested on 23 December in his home town of Dashoguz in northern Turkmenistan. He was flown to Ashgabat the same day and taken to the Ministry of National Security, where he was kept incommunicado for three days. On 26 December Farid Tukhbatullin was reportedly charged with Illegally crossing the Turkmen-Uzbek border and concealing a serious criminal act. The latter charge referred to his participation in a conference, held at the beginning of November in Moscow, that had been organized by human rights groups. He was accused of refusing to disclose information about plans of exiled opposition groups to carry out an armed coup that, according to the authorities, were discussed at the conference. Al -whose delegate attended the conference - believed that the charges against Farid Tukhbatullin were brought to punish him for exercising his right to freedom of expression and for his peaceful activities as a civil society activist. The organization regards him as a prisoner of conscience.
Freedom of religion
Conscientious objectors served prison terms during 2002. A Baptist prisoner was released following International pressure. Members of religious minorities continued to face harassment, deportation and imprisonment.
Q Twenty-one-year-old Nikolay Shelekhov, a Jehovah's Witness, was sentenced to 18 months' Imprisonment for refusing to serve in the army on religious grounds; this was his second sentence for the same offence. His appeals were rejected by Ashgabat City Court and the Supreme Court in August and October respectively. Nikolay Shelekhov was still suffering from illnesses, including kidney problems, contracted during his previous imprisonment between August 2000 and December 2001.
Al country reports/visits Reports
•	Concerns in Europe, January-June 2002: Turkmenistan (Al Index; EUR 01/007/2002)
•	Turkmenistan: Government must seek justice not revenge (Al Index; EUR 61/005/2002)
