DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
Head of state and government: Hipólito Mejfa Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes International Criminal Court: signed
Killings in disputed circumstances by police and military lessened somewhat following the appointment of a new head of the National Police. However, such killings continued to be reported. Some of those killed were reportedly shot during demonstrations in protest at electricity shortages while others were killed in alleged "exchanges of gunfire" with security forces. In January information emerged that the Supreme Court of Justice had just set an important precedent by ratifying the decision that the prosecution of a police officer for the killing of Pedro Manuel Contreras came under the jurisdiction of the civilian rather than the police courts. The debate over the issue of prison reform intensified following the death of 30 inmates in a fire started during a riot at La Inmaculada Concepción Prison in La Vega in September.
Background
Former President and head of the Partido Reformista Social Cristiano, Social Democratic Reform Party, Joaquin Balaguer, died at the age of 96. Several dissidents had been killed or had "disappeared" during his several terms in office from 1966 onwards, Including Orlando Martinez and Narciso González. As part of investigations into their cases {see below), Joaquin Balaguer had been summoned several times to appear in court as a witness; he had consistently failed to appear.
The National Police
In January MaJor-General Jaime Marte Martínez replaced Pedro de Jesús Candelier as head of the National Police. He made a number of statements
emphasizing the importance of human rights and criticizing the excessive use of force by police officers. However, there were several reports of the torture of detainees and of killings in disputed circumstances, some of which were described by witnesses in terms suggesting that they may have been extrajudicial executions. Police were believed to have used excessive force to disperse demonstrators on several occasions.
Q On 25 May, Alejandro Peña Diaz was reportedly shot several times while in the custody of police officers who had arrested him in Bonao. After the shooting, witnesses reportedly saw the officers remove Alejandro Pena's body from the scene. According to some sources, police were believed to have thrown his body from a moving police truck to give the appearance that he died while trying to escape. His body was subsequently found in a different location from that in which he was reportedly shot. According to press reports, the outcome of an internal investigation launched into the case established that a senior officer and two police agents were responsible for the killing of Alejandro Peña. They were dishonourably discharged.
Q On 7 June, Ramón Ureña, a 23-year-old man said to be suffering from mental illness, was allegedly shot in the head and killed by a police officer in the Los Gandules area of the capital, Santo Domingo. The killing occurred in the context of demonstrations against electricity cuts in the capital. The victim's family claimed that he had not been participating in the protest when he was shot.
Police tribunals
The police and the military are governed by their own codes of justice which grant jurisdiction over certain human rights related investigations to police or military rather than civilian courts. A bill on the Reform of the Police approved in November by the Chamber of Deputies, left this unchanged.
However, in a landmark ruling, the Supreme Court of Justice stated that proceedings against two police officers charged in connection with the killing of Pedro Manuel Contreras in September 2001 should be heard by a civilian rather than a police court. The Supreme Court stated that soldiers should only be removed from civilian jurisdiction in exceptional circumstances and that police tribunals are not competent to try such cases in peacetime.
Harsh prison conditions
Despite some reforms, including the reported construction of new wings in existing prisons to alleviate overcrowding, reports indicated that prison conditions did not improve substantially during the year.
The main problems were highlighted on 20 September when 30 inmates died in a fire in La Inmaculada Concepción prison in La Vega. A group of prisoners allegedly set fire to mattresses and other items in order to prevent the prison authorities from searching them for weapons and other prohibited
Amnesty International Report 2003
91
ECU
goods. The prison, which had been built to accommodate 120 people, was said to house around 600 prisoners at the time of the fire. According to some reports, one of the inmates who died was a minor who had been imprisoned with adults; several of those who died were detained awaiting trial and others had reportedly completed their sentences but remained held because they could not pay their fines. The commission investigating the riot and subsequent deaths, including those of two members of the armed forces, recommended that six prisoners be tried on charges including culpable homicide; that two prison officials be detained for 30 days; and that a number of soldiers, whom the tribunal accused of negligence, be transferred.
Forced repatriation
The security forces continued to forcibly return people thought to be Haitians without proper documentation who were apprehended during police sweeps. Migration authorities of the province of Dajabón reported having forcibly repatriated over 7,000 Haitians between January and June 2002. According to reports, the authorities often failed to give people the opportunity to demonstrate their status and as a result a number of Dominican nationals of Haitian origin were expelled from their own country. Those returned may have included people at risk of human rights violations in Haiti. There were also reports of police brutality during repatriations.
Pending trials
On 5 November the Court of Appeal in Santo Domingo revoked the convictions and 30-year prison sentences of four men, including two high-ranking military officers, involved in the 1975 killing of Journalist Orlando Martinez, because of procedural errors. At the end of the year the case was before the Supreme Court of Justice which was considering a petition by representatives of the victim that the Court of Appeal judges had not been impartial.
The case of journalist and university lecturer Narciso González, who "disappeared" in 1994, following his reported arrest on the streets of Santo Domingo by members of the army, was still pending in the Court of Appeal at the end of the year.
