CEORCIA
GEORGIA
Head of state and government: Eduard Amvrosiyevich Shevardnadze
Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes International Criminal Court: signed
There were continued allegations of torture and ill-treatment in custody. Members of minority faiths were attacked, and the authorities reportedlydid little or nothing to protect them. Official investigations into both torture and attacks on religious minorities were reportedly inadequate and allowed the perpetrators to operate with impunity.
Background
Two senior members of the government reportedly committed suicide during 2002. Local elections, which had been postponed from 2001, were held in June, and there were widespread reports of irregularities.
The disputed regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia remained out of the control of the Georgian authorities and peace talks to regulate their status made little progress. However, an agreement between Georgia and Abkhazia in April led to the withdrawal of Georgian troops from the Kodori Gorge in Abkhazia. The announcement in February that US special forces would be deployed in Georgia to provide training and equipment led to a worsening of relations between Georgia and the Russian Federation, The Russian government pressed Georgia to clear the Pankisi Gorge near the border with Chechnya of Chechen fighters. US officials similarly called on Georgia to rid the area of "Afghan militants" and suspected members of al-Qa 'ida. There were reports that Russian warplanes bombed the Pankisi Gorge in August. Georgian forces reportedly carried out at least two operations designed to clear the gorge In January and December.
Torture and ill-treatment
There were persistent reports of torture and ill-treatment in police custody. The aims of such treatment included discouraging the use of lawyers and securing confessions.
â On 7 April, Mamuka Rukhadze was arrested by the local Criminal Investigation Department of the Ministry
of the Interior in Gldani-Nadzaladevi, a district of Tbilisi. His lawyers reported seeing blood on his head and ears at their first visit, and that he had difficulty moving his limbs and speaking. At their second visit, his condition appeared worse and one of his legs was completely numb. He was then transferred to the central prison hospital where he stayed for two months. An official medical report concluded that injuries to his left leg and foot were due to electric shocks. Q On 20 April, Aleksandr Guguneishvili was detained by a group of police officers in Rustavi, a town some 30 kilometres south of Tbilisi. At the police station, the police allegedly tortured him for 11 hours to make him confess to several robberies. First, they allegedly hung him on an iron bar fixed between two tables for five or six hours. Then they allegedly beat him with a gas mask over his head, covering the eye-openings so that he could not see anything. Finally, they allegedly subjected him to several rounds of electric shocks. An examination conducted by a forensic expert at the Ministry of Justice concluded that his injuries were consistent with his account, including details as to timing.
Death in custody - update
Mamuka Rizhamadze was found hanged in his cell in a preliminary detention facility in Kutaisi in May 2000. A post-mortem carried out by the state forensic service concluded that he had committed suicide, rebutting allegations that he had died as a result of torture and ill-treatment. However, a second post-mortem by an independent forensic expert concluded that he had died as a result of a brain injury caused by a heavy blunt object. In February, the Public Defender of Georgia (Ombudsperson) informed AI that a further postmortem had confirmed the original conclusion of death by hanging. However, there remained, in her opinion, considerable doubt about the case, although she did not feel that it was within her power to pursue it further.
Public Defender of Georgia (Ombudsperson)
During 2002, the Public Defender published a report on human rights in the second half of 2001. The report highlighted widespread torture of detainees by police; violent attacks on members of minority religious groups and the lack of action by the authorities to take serious action against the perpetrators; the failure to implement the law providing a civilian alternative to military service; and inadequate legal mechanisms and funding for the Public Defender's work, restricting its effectiveness.
UN Human Rights Committee
In April, the UN Human Rights Committee issued observations on Georgia's compliance with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. AI had previously provided the Committee with a written briefing outlining its concerns. The Committee's concerns included: "widespread and continuing" torture and ill-treatment of prisoners; lack of rights for detainees; an increase in religious intolerance; lack of effective rights to freedom of thought, conscience and
Amnesty International Report 2003
109
GER
religion; discrimination against conscientious objectors; lack of women's rights; harassment of nongovernmental organizations, especially those defending human rights; and limitations on the powers of the Public Defender.
Attacks on human rights defenders
On 10 July, a group of men armed with truncheons and knuckledusters attacked the Liberty Institute, a nongovernmental human rights organization in Tbilisi. Six members of staff were injured and the premises were ransacked. Witnesses, who included three Council of Europe members on a fact-finding mission, remarked on the systematic and unhurried nature of the attack, which fuelled concern that they were acting without fear of apprehension. Nearby police reportedly ignored a call for help and did not arrive until well after the attackers had left. A hostile demonstration outside the Institute two days before the attack had called for it to becloseddown. By the end of 2002, one person had reportedly been arrested in connection with the assauh.
Attacks on members of religious minorities
Radical supporters of the Orthodox Church continued to attack minority faiths, such as the Jehovah's Witnesses and the Baptists. In many cases, the police reportedly failed to take steps to prQtect the victims of such attacks.
Q On 3 February, about 150 people broke into a Baptist warehouse in Tbilisi and burned thousands of books including Bibles. On 15 August, a smaller group broke into and vandalized a house where a Jehovah's Witness congress was due to take place in the western town of Kaspi. Both attacks were associated with Basil Mkalavishvili who, togetherwith another alleged leader of such attacks, was charged in 2001 with minor offences. During 2002, court proceedings in the case were repeatedly delayed, either because the prosecutor failed to appear or because police reportedly failed to protect witnesses from hostile Orthodox radicals who were packing the courtroom.
Extraditions
A number of detainees faced extradition to destinations where they might be in danger of human rights abuses.
Q In October, a number of Russian citizens of Chechen origin had their extraditions to Russia delayed until the European Court of Human Rights had examined the case. In November, the Court lifted the stay on these extraditions in the light of guarantees given by the Russian Federation authorities that the rights of those extradited, such as access to appropriate medical treatment and legal advice, would be observed, despite the widespread violations of such rights within the Russian Federation.
AI country reports/visits
Report
• Concerns in Europe, January-June 2002: Georgia (AI Index: EUR 001/007/2002)
Visit
In May. two AI delegates visited Tbilisi and met lawyers, government and state officials and members of nongovernmental organizations-
