SWEDEN
KINGDOM OF SWEDEN
Head of state: King Carl XVI Gustaf Head of government: Goran Persson Death penalty: abolitionist forall crimes International Criminal Court: ratified
Trials took place in connection with demonstrations during the 2001 European Union (EU) summit in Gothenburg. The Osmo Vallo Commission reported on its findings. International monitoring bodies expressed concern about some aspects of Sweden's human rights record. Proposed "anti-terrorism" legislation was very broad in scope and lacked adequate human rights safeguards.
International scrutiny
In March the UN Human Rights Committee expressed concern about several cases of serious injury or death as a result of excessive use of force by police. Among the Committee's recommendations were independent investigations of incidents, including the policing of the Gothenburg summit; better human rights training for police; and discontinuing the use of life-threatening equipment during demonstrations. The Committee also expressed concern about reports of racism, xenophobia and neo-Nazi activism.
In May the UN Committee against Torture expressed concern about several deaths in custody as a result of excessive use of force by police or prison personnel, and about the large number of complaints of ill-treatment arising from the policing of the Gothenburg summit.
Refugees
Both the Human Rights Committee and the Committee against Torture also expressed concern about expulsions of asylum-seekers suspected of "terrorism". The Human Rights Committee asked the authorities to provide information on the issue within one year, especially what steps were being taken to monitor individuals after expulsion. The Committee against Torture noted possible breaches of the principle of non-refoulementm such cases and the absence of any right to appeal against expulsion decisions under "antiterrorism " legislation.
Q Al continued to express concern and ask for information from the authorities about two Egyptian asylum-seekers, Muhammad Muhammad Suleiman Ibrahim El-Zari and Ahmed Hussein Mustafa Kamil Agiza, who were forcibly returned to Egypt in 2001.
In June, Al stated that a 199B decision to allow homosexuals to be returned to Iran if their sexual orientation was not overtly manifested was discriminatory.
Q In May the Committee against Torture decided that returning Chedli Ben Ahmed Karoui to Tunisia would expose him to a substantial risk of torture, in breach of the UN Convention against Torture.
2001 EU summit in Gothenburg
By the first anniversary of the Gothenburg summit in June, investigations into the actions of the demonstrators had led to the conviction of 58 individuals, many of them on charges of rioting. Some of the sentences of imprisonment imposed were long, and apparently harsher than the average for analogous offences. Most of those convicted were sentenced to prison terms of one to two years. On appeal, of 35 cases heard, in 18 the sentences were reduced, in 13 they were upheld and in four they were increased. In four cases which went to the Supreme Court, the sentences were reduced.
Several of those charged in connection with the summit disturbances were reportedly held in prolonged solitary confinement during pre-trial detention and denied prompt access to legal counsel.
The first and only prosecutions of police officers in connection with human rights violations during the Gothenburg summit resulted in the acquittals in December of four police officers charged with misconduct. The prosecuting authorities did not appeal against the acquittals. The officers tried were in charge of the police operation at Schillerska school, where people were allegedly arbitrarily detained and ill-treated by police officers. However, there was public concern about the fact that criminal charges were not brought against the commanding officer. The Parliamentary Ombudsman reopened an investigation into police actions at Hvitfeldska school. One police officer was under investigation on suspicion of misconduct.
The Gothenburg Committee investigating the disturbances surrounding the summit was due to report in early 2003.
O The investigation into the police shooting of Hannes Westberg, one of the demonstrators seriously injured by police, was reopened in November. Hannes Westberg was himself prosecuted for throwing stones at the police. At his trial, it was alleged that police had tampered with video evidence, adding sound effects to make his actions appear more threatening.
Osmo Vallo
The Commission established to examine the procedures used to Investigate Osmo Vallo's controversial death in May 1995 in police custody published its report in April. The Osmo Vallo Commission confirmed many serious concerns about Osmo Vallo's death and the subsequent severely flawed investigation by the authorities. However, the Commission did not consider other cases of disputed deaths in custody, thereby not addressing broader issues about how the authorities address controversial deaths in custody. Its recommendations did not refer to restraint methods or to training in restraint techniques. The report failed to clarify questions arising from discrepancies in the findings of various forensic pathologists involved in the case. No one with forensic medical expertise was appointed to the Commission, reinforcing the perception that another opportunity had been missed to address issues such as whether the failures in Osmo Vallo's case were systemic. Al called on the government to establish a
Amnesty International Report 2003
237
SWI
mechanism capable of ensuring full public scrutiny of the authorities' actions, as required by Article i of the European Convention on Human Rights.
AI country reports/visits Reports
•	Concerns in Europe, January-June 2002: Sweden (AI Index: EUR 01/007/2002)
•	Sweden: Osmo Vallo Commission - further action needed (AI Index: EUR 42/001/2002)
