UZBEKISTAN
REPUBLICOF UZBEKISTAN Head of state: Islam Karimov Head of government: Otkir Sultanov Death penalty: retentionist International Criminal Court: signed
There were a number of positive measures during the year, including the registration of an independent human rights group, the conduct of two trials to bring torturers to justice, an invitation to the UN Special Rapporteur on torture to visit Uzbekistan, the commutation of at least eight death sentences, and the formal abolition of the press censor's office. However, the human rights situation remained dire, and human rights defenders were themselves harassed and imprisoned. Several thousand political prisoners remained in jail and the crack-down on political and religious dissent continued, increasingly extended to include women.
Unfair trials, torture and ill-treatment were routinely associated with these cases. Relatives of political prisoners continued to face harassment and ill-treatment because of their family relationship with the prisoners. The Special Rapporteur on torture concluded that torture was "systematic" in Uzbekistan after a visit to the country. At least five men died in custody or shortly aftertheir release, reportedly as a result of torture. The death penalty continued to be used widely and families of death row prisoners were subjected to a form of mental cruelty. Freedom of expression continued to be stifled as newspaper editors reportedly inherited censorship functions from the press censor's office.
Background
Uzbekistan provided the US-led coalition with military bases for flights into Afghanistan. The "international war against terrorism" was used by the Uzbek authorities to justify the clampdown on religious and political dissent.
A referendum conducted on 27 January provided for the presidential mandate to be extended from five to seven years and the establishment of a two-chamber parliament. The authorities stated that the extension of the presidential term of office would come into effect after the next presidential elections.
Human rights defenders
The Independent Human Rights Organization of Uzbekistan (NOPCHU) was registered in March, giving it the right to function legally. Other human rights groups that applied for registration remained unregistered. Human rights defenders continued to face harassment, intimidation, forcible psychiatric confinement and imprisonment.
Q Yuldash Rasulov, who worked with the unregistered Human Rights Society of Uzbekistan (OPCHU), was arrested on 24 May in his home town of Karshi in Kashkadarya region and transferred to a solitary confinement cell in the basement of the Ministry of Internal Affairs in Tashkent the next day. On i7îeptember Yunusabad District Court in Tashkent sentenced him to seven years' imprisonment in a strict regime colony, after convicting him of "religious extremism" and membership of a criminal organization. The investigator had allegedly typed a "confession" and forced him to sign it. There were strong indications that Yuldash Rasulov was imprisoned for his work with OPCHU, which included gathering information on arrests and the imprisonment of members and alleged members of Hizb-ut-Tahrirand independent Islamist congregations in Karshi.
Q Two women, Larisa Vdovina and human rights defender Elena Uriaeva, were reported to have been forcibly confined in a psychiatric hospital to stop their human rights activities. They were detained on 27 August during a demonstration outside the Ministry of Justice building to protest against alleged government human rights abuses. They were transferred to Tashkent City Psychiatric Hospital the next day. Elena Uriaeva was released at the end of December. However, a court case to consider her mental state remained pending.
Amnesty International Report 2003
269
UZB
Freedom of religion
Q Marat Mudarisov, a 26-year-old Jehovah's Witness, was summoned to the National Security Service of Akmal Ikramovsky District of Tashkent in July. The officers confiscated religious literature he had on him, which they deemed illegal. When Marat Mudarisov refused to write a confession and an undertaking that he would not hold religious meetings in the future, a {Xtlice officer reportedly beat him and put a gas mask over his head, squeezing tightly the air supply. When he continued to refuse to confess, the policeman forced his mother to write a report about her son's religious activities, which she said was dictated to her. The indictment issued in September stated that "the dissemination of all types of printed material... that propagates the faith of the organization 'Jehovah's Witnesses' as the only true religion among other religious faiths is illegal." Marat Mudarisov was given a suspended sentence of three years' imprisonment by Akmal Ikramovsky District Court on 29 November. Al believed that the charges were brought solely to punish Marat Mudarisov for peacefully exercising his religious beliefs and his right to freedom of expression.
Political prisoners
Supporters and alleged supporters of Hizb-ut-Tahrir and members of independent Islamic congregations and their families continued to face imprisonment, detention and intimidation. In a move to increasingly target women, several women were sentenced to up to four years' imprisonment or suspended prison sentences following reportedly unfair trials. Wives of political prisoners demonstrated in several cities and towns to protest against the imprisonment and ill-treatment of their relatives. The demonstrations were dispersed by police and several women were detained for short periods. Police regularly visited wives of political prisoners urging them to sign undertakings that they would not participate in future demonstrations.
UN Special Rapporteur on torture
The UN Special Rapporteur on torture visited a number of detention facilities indifferent parts of the country in November and December, but was denied access to the detention facility of the National Security Service in Tashkent and expressed concern that he was prevented from visiting Jaslyk prison colony in Karakalpakstan Autonomous Region "in a satisfactory and comprehensive manner ". At the end of his visit he declared that torture was "systematic" in Uzbekistan and that "many confessions obtained through torture and other illegal means were then used as evidence in trials, [including! in trials that are leading to the death penalty or to very severe punishment".
UN Committee against Torture
In June, after examining Uzbekistan's second periodic report under the UN Convention against Torture, the Committee against Tonure noted some positive developments since it had considered the country's initial report in 1999. These included efforts to draw up a new definition of torture in line with the Convention,
and the introduction of a draft law to allow citizens' complaints with regard to torture. However, the Committee also expressed serious concerns, such as the "numerous, ongoing and consistent allegations of particularly brutal acts of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment committed by law enforcement personnel". It criticized the heavy reliance on confessions, unacceptable prison conditions, and inadequate access by detainees to a lawyer, a doctor of their own choice and family members. It regarded the judiciary as insufficiently independent and said the way the procuracy functioned gave rise to serious doubts about its objectivity. It urged Uzbekistan to make declarations recognizing the competence of the Committee under Articles 21 and 22 of the Convention. This would enable the Committee to receive and consider communications from another state party and from individuals alleging they have been tortured or ill-treated by state agents.
Torture and deaths in custody
There were continuing reports of torture and ill-treatment in pre-trial detention and places of imprisonment as well as allegations that many such reports were not promptly and impartially investigated. At least five men died in custody or shortly after their release, reportedly as a result of torture. However, in two separate cases in January and June respectively, seven law enforcement officers were sentenced to prison terms ranging from five to 20 years for torture. Q Three police officers who tortured to death 32-year-old Ravshan Haitov at Sabir-Rakhimovsky District Police in Tashkent on 17 October 2001 and beat his 27-year-old brother Rasul the same day to such an extent that he needed intensive care in hospital, were sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment each by Tashkent City Court on 30 January. The policemen were charged with "premeditated infliction of bodily harm that caused death". Ravshan and Rasul Haitov had been arrested on accusations including membership of Hizb-ut-Tahrir. In April the criminal case against Rasul Haitov was formally closed due to "lack of evidence". He received no compensation for his treatment or injuries. Q The bodies of Muzafar Avazov, a 35-year-old father of four, and Khusniddin Alimov, aged 34, were brought from Jaslyk prison in the Northern Karaklapakstan region to their families in Tashkent on 8 August. Muzafar Avazov was reportedly tortured to death; an eyewitness said the body showed signs of burns on the legs, buttocks, lower back and arms. Reportedly, there was a large wound on the back of the head, bruises on the forehead, and the hands had no fingernails. The authorities reportedly restricted viewing of Khusniddin Alimov's body.
Death penalty
At least 22 people were sentenced to death and 11 executed. Two men were executed despite interventions by the UN Human Rights Committee urging the Uzbek authorities to stay the executions. At least eight death sentences were known to have been commuted or reversed.
270
Amnesty International Report 2003	270
VEN
The authorities continued to treat the death penalty as a state secret so that official information on the numbers of sentences passed and executions carried out was not available publicly. In all cases that came to AI's attention, prisoners were executed in secret. Their families were often only informed months later; they were not informed of the place of the execution and were not told where their relative was buried. As a result, the families were subjected to a form of mental cruelty that may amount to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment prohibited under international law. Q On 28 November Tashkent City Court sentenced Iskandar Khudoberganov to death. Five co-defendants were sentenced to prison terms of between six and 16 years. The men had been put on trial on serious "anti-state' charges, including "attempting to overthrow the constitutional order" and "setting up an illegal group". Iskandar Khudoberganov was additionally charged with "terrorism" and "premeditated, aggravated murder", and accused of having trained in military camps in Chechnya and Tajikistan with the aim of overthrowing the Uzbek government by violent means. The trial was believed to be grossly unfair. Iskandar Khudoberganov's lawyers, for example, were denied access to him for at least two months. There were strong indications that the convictions were largely based on evidence extracted under torture. Although the three men reported the torture in court, no investigation into the allegations was opened. Iskandar Khudoberganov reportedly signed a confession after he suffered various forms of torture, including beatings, kicking, sleep and food deprivation, and threats of rape of his female relatives. The families of some of the defendants reported they had suffered torture, threats of torture and rape, and harassment to force them to incriminate their relatives. Q On 12 February relatives of 21-year-old Refat Tulyaganov were informed that he had been executed on 18 January. They were not told in advance the date of the execution, and when Refat Tulyaganov's mother went to see him on 24 January, prison personnel reportedly told her she should return the next day. The UN Human Rights Committee had urged the Uzbek authorities on 24 December 2001 to put on hold the execution of Refat Tulyaganov. He had been sentenced to death by Tashkent City Court on 5 July 2001 for "premeditated, aggravated murder". The sentence was upheld by the Appeals Committee of Tashkent City Court and the Supreme Court on 21 August and 4 October 2001 respectively. There were allegations that Refat Tulyaganov had been severely beaten in detention to force him to sign a "confession". /
Al country reports/visits Report
• Concerns in Europe, January-June 2002: Uzbekistan
(Al Index: EUR 001/007/2002) Visit
AI delegates visited Uzbekistan in July.
