ARGENTINA
ARGENTINE REPUBLIC
Head of state and government: Eduardo Duhalde Death penalty: abolitionist for ordinary crimes International Criminal Court: ratified
Hundreds of people were arrested during massive and widespread demonstrations and demonstrators were killed by police in circumstances that suggested thattheyhad been extrajudicially executed. Human rights defenders, journalists and social activists were reportedly harassed and assaulted. Reports of killings and ill-treatment by police continued. During a mass raid on an indigenous community, police ill-treated and racially abused indigenous people. Judicial decisions in Argentina and new initiatives abroad to investigate past human rights violations were announced.
Background
The economic situation continued to deteriorate as the government tried to satisfy international lending agency conditions. The peso was devalued, cash withdrawals from banks were severely restricted and unemployment rose sharply. There were massive and repeated demonstrations around the country against government policies and public trust in state institutions reached its lowest ebb. The year saw the emergence of new social groups actively involved in public protests, including labour activists, associations of the unemployed and neighbourhood groups. Hundreds of demonstrators were arrested for short periods around the country, scores were injured and two demonstrators were killed by police.
Two laws which obstructed Judicial investigations into thousands of "disappearances" that took place in the late 1970s and early 1980s - the Full Stop Law and the Law of Due Obedience - remained in force. However, in August the Attorney General supported earlier judicial decisions that they were unconstitutional. A final ruling by the Supreme Court was pending at the end of 2002. In November the Minister of Defence publicly supported the constitutionality of the laws and indicated that the Supreme Court would be taking risks if it agreed that the laws were unconstitutional.
Demonstrations
In June, two protesters were killed by provincial police during a demonstration in Avellaneda, Buenos Aires Province, in what appeared to be extrajudicial executions. Around 90 demonstrators were injured when hundreds of protesters tried to cut off the main road into the capital, Buenos Aires. Demonstrators claimed that police shot at them indiscriminately. Q Dario Santülán was shot inside the Avellaneda railway station while he was trying to help Maximiliano Kosteki who had been shot a few minutes earlier. Both
34
Amnesty International Report 2003	34
ARC
men died of their injuries. An investigation was initiated, two police officers were arrested and several suspended from active duty, after photographs clearly showing police involvement were published nationwide. The photographer, Sergio Kowalewsky, and his family were subjected to death threats. Claudio Pandolfi, the lawyer acting on behalf of the families of the victims, also received death threats.
Indigenous people
In August, members of the provincial police raided homes in the indigenous Toba community in Formosa, Formosa Province, after the death of a policeman and the injury of another in disputed circumstances. According to reports, about loo police officers carrying firearms destroyed belongings, beat and ill-treated individuals including children and racially abused members of the community. They reportedly had no search warrant, although members of the judiciary were present. Those arrested, including a 74-year-old man, were allegedly tortured or ill-treated.
Past human rights violations
Judicial rulings
In September, federal judge Claudio Bonadio ordered the preventive detention of former General Leopoldo Fortunato Galtieri and 25 former members of the armed forces and ordered their assets to be frozen. They were accused of responsibility for the kidnapping, illegal detention, torture, "disappearance" and murder of 20 members of the Aionroneros armed group in 1978 and 1980. In his ruling judge Bonadio stated that the Full Stop and Due Obedience Laws, passed in 1986 and 1987 respectively, were unconstitutional and void. Trial of a human rights defender In July, Sonia Torres de Parodi, a 73-year-old member of the Grandmothers of Plaza de Mayo, who has been searching for her "disappeared" daughter and grandchild since 1976, was brought to trial in Córdoba, Córdoba Province. She faced charges of defamation and slander brought by a former member of staff at the Manuel Belgrano Business School. According to a press interview given by Sonia Torres de Parodi, this member of staff had given the security forces information about students who later "disappeared". In August Sonia Torres de Parodi was acquitted. New investigation
In October, the US-German car maker DaimlerChrysler set up a commission to examine the conduct of Mercedes-Benz and its officials in Argentina between 1975 and 1978. The commission was expected to investigate the "disappearance" of about 14 workers from the Mercedes-Benz factory—now owned by DaimlerChrysler - at González Catán, Buenos Aires Province, in 1976 and 1977.
Attacks on human rights defenders
Journalists, lawyers, human rights activists, witnesses and relatives of victims were repeatedly harassed, threatened and attacked during the year. Q In September, a group of unidentified men attacked the home of Estela Carlotto, President of the
Grandmothers of Plaza de Mayo and President of the La Plata Provincial Remembrance Commission. She was inside the house when it came under a hail of bullets. A few days earlier, she had submitted to the provincial Supreme Court a report about abusive practices by the provincial police including torture and "trigger-happy" killings. An investigation into the attack was initiated.
Ill-treatment, torture and killings
There were repeated public complaints of ill-treatment of detainees in detention centres, including ill-treatment of minors. There were also killings by police in disputed circumstances.
Children
Committee on the Rights of the Child
In September the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child expressed concern about the administration of juvenile justice; national legislation on children dating backto 1919; and the frequent failure of provincial legislation to comply with the UN Children's Convention. It raised concerns about institutional violence and reports of torture and ill-treatment of children in police stations, which in some cases had resulted in death. It also raised the issue of "trigger-happy" killings, which had led to the deaths of many children. The Committee recommended that Argentina bring laws and practices governing the juvenile justice system at national and provincial level into full compliance with the Convention. It urged Argentina to enforce a national plan to prevent and eliminate institutional violence; to investigate in an effective manner reports of killings, torture and ill-treatment of children; and to provide programs to rehabilitate, reintegrate and compensate child victims of torture or ill-treatment.
Al country reports/visits
Reports
•	Argentina; Action plan and respect for human rights (AI Index: AMR 13/002/2002)
•	Argentina: The rights of the child in Argentina (AI Index: AMR 13/018/2002)
•	Argentina; Will the long search by the Plaza de Mayo Grandmothers be undermined by the courts? (AI Index: AMR 13/008/2002)
•	Argentina: Unacceptable interference by the executive in support of impunity (Al Index: AMR 13/017/2002)
Visits
In February Al delegates visited Argentina to meet government officials, representatives of nongovernmental organizations and to gather information. InJuly an Al observer attended hearings related to the trial of a member of the Grandmothers of Plaza de Mayo.
Amnesty International Report 2003
35
