NICARAGUA
Army troops reportedly killed at least 12 peasants suspected of collaborating with armed opposition groups known as the contras in some of the zones affected by armed conflict. In March the government initiated investigations into some of these cases and others dating from earlier years. Some soldiers and security personnel found responsible for abuses were convicted and sentenced to prison by military courts. The government failed to clarify the whereabouts or fate of several prison-ers alleged to have "disappeared" in 1987 and 1988. Six prisoners of conscience or possible prisoners of conscience were released after appeal hearings by civilian courts or government pardons. In March the government pardoned and released 1,649 alleged former members of the National Guard of the previous government of Anastasio Somoza Debayle; they had been convicted by special courts, many of them for gross human rights abuses. The procedures of these courts had been subject to serious irregularities. Thirty-nine alleged former guardsmen
NICARAGUA
were excluded from the pardon and continued to serve their sentences. The government continued to hold 1,268 other prisoners alleged to be members or supporters of the contras. Most had also been convicted by special courts whose procedures failed to guarantee a fair trial. There were isolated but serious reports of ill-treatment of prisoners.
The human rights situation in Nicaragua was influenced by agreements reached between the presidents of Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua on measures to find peaceful settlements to the armed conflicts in the Central American region. In February, at a meeting of the presidents in Costa Del Sol, El Salvador, Nicaragua's President Daniel Ortega agreed to hold elections no later than 25 February 1990 and to invite international observers, including representatives of the United Nations (un) and the Organization of American States (oas). The presidents agreed to draw up a joint plan for the demobilization of contra forces which were based in Honduras and supported by "humanitarian" aid from the United States (us) Government. The contra combatants and their families were to be repatriated to Nicaragua or relocated in third countries. In August, pursuant to a further agreement at Tela. Honduras, an International Commission of Support and Verification was established under the auspices of the un and the oas to supervise the demobilization. A few days before the Tela meeting, the Nicaraguan Government reached an agreement with opposition parties on reforms of electoral procedures, media laws and penal legislation. It also agreed to a broad and unconditional amnesty for political prisoners, to be put into effect when the demobilization plan had been implemented, Although the plan was scheduled to be completed in December, by the end of the year few contras had taken up the demobilization offer and it was extended into 1990.
Contra activity in rural areas continued to be reported throughout the year despite assiurances by contra commanders that they would respect the cease-fire regularly and unilaterally renewed by the government since April 1988. On 1 November President Ortega announced that, in response to mounting contra attacks during October, the government would not renew the ceasefire unless the us Government ceased all
further support for the contra forces. Given the continuation of such assistance, the cease-fire was not renewed and military activity subsequently intensified. Reported killings and summary executions of civilians by contra units became more frequent in the last months of the year.
At least 12 peasants were reportedly killed by soldiers or security officers in circumstances suggesting that they had been summarily executed as suspected contras collaborators. They included Sergio Molina Monge, an evangelical preacher, alleged by the government to be a messenger for the contras. He was reportedly abducted by soldiers from his home in Uló, Matagalpa department, in February. Witnesses to his arrest heard shots fired and the next day his body was found nearby with the throat slit. The Comisión Nacional de Promoción y Protección de los Derechos Humanos (cnppdh), National Commission for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights, the govern-ment-sponsored human rights organization, reported in August that two soldiers had been sentenced to 16 years' imprisonment for the murder. Two other soldiers and two civilians were sentenced to eight years' imprisonment as accomplices. Adolfo Chavarría Blandón, said to be a former contra who had been granted a government amnesty in November 1987, was killed in June allegedly while in the custody of the police or the Dirección General de Seguridad del Estado (ijgse). General Directorate of State Security. He was arrested by police officers in Esquipulas, Matagalpa department, on 2 June and his body was found on 14 June, reportedly bearing signs of beating. There was no information as to whether the case had been investigated by the government. Eight soldiers were tried and sentenced to imprisonment in connection with the killing of six civilians in La Gateada, Chontales department, in January, In two further cases, the government said that those responsible were civilians.
In March military prosecutors initiated a series of investigations into killings of civilians reportedly carried out by government troops since 1987, particularly in the departments of Matagalpa, Jinotega, Zelaya and Chontales. Celso del Socorro Herrera Carvallo was allegedly captured and killed by army troops on 11 July 1988 near El Ventarrón, Fantasma, Jinotega department
NICARAGUA
(see Amnesty International Report 1989). In July a military court concluded that he had been killed in cross-fire during a combat. However, it was unclear from court records provided by the government on what evidence this conclusion was reached. Information published by the cnppdh in August indicated that soldiers and dgse officials had been sentenced to prison by military courts for the killing of five civilians in 1988, In three other cases, the cnppdh said that although military suspects had been identified, those alleged responsible had evaded arrest. In December the government informed Amnesty International that investigations into four of 11 killings in Ubú, Zelaya department, in 1987 had been closed owing to insufficient evidence. In only one of the remaining cases was a military suspect identified, and he was said to be in hiding.
Government investigations failed to clarify the whereabouts or fate of at least five people who are alleged to have "disappeared" after their arrest in 1987 and 1988, They included Félix Pedro Herrera Carvallo, the younger brother of Celso del Socorro Herrera Carvallo. He was reportedly detained in El Ventarrón, linotega department, on the day that his brother was killed (see Amnesty International Report 1989). Trial proceedings were opened in April against the officer allegedly responsible for the "disappearance" of José Francisco Martinez Murillo in Chontales in 1987.
Prisoner of conscience Mario Baldizón Avilés, a former government employee who had been sentenced by a military court in 1986 to 10 years' imprisonment for treason, was released on parole in March and officially pardoned in April. He had been accused of helping his brother, Alvaro Baldizón Avilés. a former employee of the Ministry of the Interior, to leave Nicaragua and seek asylum in the United States of America (usa— see Amnesty International fîeporf 1988). The government submitted his case for review by the cnppdh, which found his conviction to have been unsound. The government also pardoned Maria Auxiliadora Rivas Urbina. who had been sentenced by a Tribunal Popular Antisomocista (tpa). Popular Antisomo-cista Tribunal, to seven years' imprisonment in March 1986 for recruiting for the coniras. She appeared to have been convicted on the basis of a fabricated confes-
sion (see Amnesty International Report 1988). She was allowed home on parole in February and pardoned in April. Economists Mario Alegría Castillo and Nora Aldana Centeno were released in April. They had been sentenced by an ordinary court in June 1988 to 16 years' imprisonment for allegedly passing "secret" economic data to officials of the us Embassy (see Amnesty International Report 1989). They and the two other defendants in the case, losé Adrian Espinales Rodriguez and Pedro Pablo Su Olivas, were released after the Third Region Appeals Court upheld their appeal and urged the government to introduce legislation regulating the definition of official secrets. Thirteen government opponents, including opposition party leaders Agustín Jarquín Anaya, Myriam Arguello Morales, Roger Guevara Mena and Carlos Huembes Trejos, who had been given suspended prison sentences in December 1988, had their sentences revoked in April by the Fourth Region Appeals Court. In a highly publicized case, the lower court had held them responsible for an outbreak of violence during an opposition protest rally in Nandaime on 10 July 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989). There appeared to be no evidence that the convicted leaders had themselves participated in or instigated violence. The Appeals Court concluded that the charges could not be sustained.
On 14 March the National Assembly passed a decree pardoning 1,894 prisoners who had been convicted by special courts between 1979 and 1981 for crimes allegedly committed by them as members of the National Guard under the previous government of Anastasio Somoza Debayle. The procedures of the special courts had involved serious irregularities which had aroused international concern (see Amnesty International Report 1981 and 1982). The government pardon, which followed a review of the trials by the Inter-American Commission of Human Rights (iachr), was agreed by President Ortega at the summit meeting of Central American presidents in February. On 16 March, 1,649 prisoners, all but 39 of the alleged National Guard still in prison (some 245 had already been allowed home under the prison rehabilitation program), were released. Some of the released prisoners were reportedly subsequently harassed and threatened by
NICARAGUA
government security officers.
There was concem that the exclusion of the 39 prisoners from the pardon was based on factors other than an objective and impartial assessment of the fairness of their trials. In its 1988 to 1989 report, the lachr published a list of the excluded prisoners, all of whom were said to be suffering from illnesses. It considered that there was no valid evidence that any of them had committed atrocious crimes, and reiterated its hope that the 39 would be pardoned and released.
In August the govemment acknowledged holding 1,268 other prisoners who had been convicted for belonging to or supporting the contras. Most had been tried by TPAs, special government-appointed courts whose stmcture and procedures were inconsistent with intemational standards of fairness and impartiality. They severely restricted the time available for defence and appeals against verdicts could be made only to the TPAs' own appeals court. The TPAs were dissolved in January 1988. Although more than 230 alleged contra collaborators were reportedly released in August, the block release of most of the remaining prisoners, which President Ortega had stated would be carried out in early September, had not been implemented by the end of the year.
A group of more than 20 prisoners were reportedly ill-treated in El Chipote, the DGSE detention centre in Managua, after prison authorities suppressed a hunger-strike at the Model Prison in Hpitapa in Febmary. Several prisoners alleged that after being transferred to El Chipote they were kept handcuffed and naked for five days, given no water and made to sleep on a cement floor without a mattress. Other prisoners who were not transferred were alleged to have been beaten by guards and prison officials and forced to maintain painful positions for long periods. The prison authorities denied any ill-treatment had occurred.
In October the National Assembly repealed the Law for the Maintenance of Public Order and Security, which had been in force since 1981, and under which the majority of political prisoners had been tried, including some prisoners of conscience or possible prisoners of conscience (see Amnesty International Report 1962). The National Assembly also passed amendments to the Law of Jiurisdictional Fimc-
tions of the Sandinista Police, ending police powers to use summary procedures to impose prison sentences for minor offences, without trial or rights of defence or appeal. During 1988 numerous opposition party members had been sent to prison for short periods by police magistrates for public order offences during protest demonstrations (see Amnesty International Report 1989]. Both reforms were a result of the agreement reached in August between the govemment and opposition parties.
Amnesty Intemational received no reply to a memorandum which it had submitted to the government in July 1988, summarizing its concems under the state of emergency. However, cases raised in that document and Amnesty Iirtemational's current concerns were discussed with govemment authorities in Febmary and March 1989, when Amnesty Intemational representatives visited Nicaragua. In May Amnesty International met President Ortega and Foreign Minister Miguel D'Escoto in London. President Ortega took note of Amnesty Intemational's concems and promised that they would be promptly investigated. In the following months Amnesty International received detailed information from the government on the results of official inquiries into several of the cases it had raised. It was also informed that following representations from Amnesty Intemational, cubicle-sized cells, known colloquially as chiquitas (the small ones), had been dismantled in DGSE detention centres in two regions. Persistent reports had been received that cells of this type, which were dark, unventilated and too small to sit down in, had been used to hold prisoners for days while they were undergoing interrogation (see Amnesty International Report 1988 and 1989).
In November Amnesty Intemational published a report, Nicaragua: the Human Rights Record 1986-1989. It welcomed progress in several areas of human rights protection, including the release of prisoners who had received unfair trials, greater legal protection for detainees, and the identifying and bringing to justice of those responsible in some cases of human rights violations. However, Amnesty Intemational expressed concern about persisting reports of killings of non-combatants by army troops and of "disappearances". It urged the govemment to take further measures to halt these abuses. A letter was received in
NICARAGUA/NIGER/NIGERIA
response to the report from the President of the CNPPDH, on behalf of the government. The letter welcomed the positive effort made by Amnesty International to analyse the human rights situation objectively, but considered that the report did not give due weight in its conclusions to government efforts to bring those responsible for human rights violations to justice.
