HAITI
Scores of people were arrested without warrant and detained without charge or trial for short periods. Those held included peasants and members of grassroots organizations apparently arrested for their peaceful activities or criticism of the authorities. Many detainees were reportedly tortured or ill-treated. Prison conditions continued to be harsh.
In March the 1987 Constitution, revoked in June 1988, was restored by presidential decree with the exclusion of 37 articles. Among the excluded articles was the provision stating that military personnel responsible for common crimes should be tried by civilian courts.
In April officers from the Léopards battalion, a special military unit, staged an uprising against President Prosper Avril. The insurgents were overpowered by troops loyal to the President, and their leaders were arrested and deported, A second uprising took place three days later in the Dessalines barracks in Port-au-Prince to protest the deportations and the dismissal of other officers, and to demand President Avril's resignation. Troops loyal to the President, however, regained control. The Léopards battalion was dissolved and the Dessalines barracks closed.
In September the government announced the creation of the Office pour la protection des citoyens, Office for the Protection of Citizens, to document and investigate human rights violations. No information about its activities had been received by Amnesty International by the end of the year.
The level of street crime and violence increased after the April uprisings. Members of the security forces were reportedly involved in a number of crimes, including robberies, assaults and murders. Although some officers were said to have been prosecuted for these offences, security forces' involvement in such incidents continued to be reported throughout the year in many parts of the country.
In the countryside, there were frequent reports that members of the security forces and chefs de section (rural police chiefs) intimidated, arbitrarily arrested and ill-treated peasants in the context of conflicts over land ownership, particularly in the Artibonite area in central Haiti. At least six
HAITI
peasants were reported to have been killed by local authorities in such disputes.
Scores of political and common-law prisoners were detained for several months without charge or trial and were denied access to relatives or legal counsel. The reasons for detention were often unknown to the detainees.
Scores of members of grassroots organizations throughout the country, and journalists sympathetic to them, were subjected to intimidation and arbitrary short-term arrest. In January two members of the Assemblée nationale des organisations populaires (anop). National Assembly of Popular Organizations, were arrested in Port-au-Prince as they distributed pamphlets protesting the high cost of living. They were held without charge and released after three days.
Rock Mondésir, a member of the Coordination des associations de la Cité Soleil (cass), Coordination of Associations of Cité Soleil, arrested in November 1988 and held without charge (see Amnesty International Report 1989), was released in January. However, 23 members of a neighbourhood vigilance brigade linked to cass were arrested in late April and early May and detained without charge for about one month.
In May Jean-Claude Duperval was arrested by the police in Port-au-Prince, following the killing of two of his brothers by armed robbers. He was reportedly arrested at the scene of the crime after he criticized the inability of the police to end the ongoing wave of violent crime. He was allegedly beaten, handcuffed and taken to the headquarters of the Service d'investigation et de recherches anti-gang. Anti-gang Investigation Service, where he remained in incommunicado detention without charge until his release in September. He was reportedly ill-treated during the initial days of his detention.
Another organization whose members came under attack was the Mouvement des jeunes de Labadie (mjl), Labadie Youth Movement, a peasant development organization and repeated target of human rights violations (see Amnesty International Report 1989). At least 13 of its members were arrested in the Artibonite department in July and August and reportedly ill-treated. They had all been released by the end of August. Throughout the year mjl members were harassed and threatened
with beatings by local officials if they continued their activities.
Also in July, 10 members of Têt Kole, Heads Together, a grassroots peasant group, were arrested and reportedly ill-treated in the Jean-Rabel area apparently because they were putting up posters or wearing T-shirts commemorating the second anniversary of a peasant massacre (see Amnesty International Report 1988). They had all been released by the end of August.
In November Evans Paul, Jean-Auguste Meyzieux and Etienne Marin eau, well-known political leaders, were arrested, allegedly severely ill-treated, and charged with plotting against the security of the state and illegal possession of firearms. After the arrests, the government issued a list of other people accused of plotting against the government, including former army sergeant Patrick Frantz Beauchard, who was arrested in December and reportedly ill-treated.
Torture and ill-treatment of political and common-law prisoners were widespread. Among the methods used were repeated beatings with fists and sticks and the technique known as the djak — a baton is wedged under the thighs and over the arms of the victim who is then beaten repeatedly. Jean-Robert Lalane, a member of the Assemblée populaire nationale (apn), Popular National Assembly, arrested in Cap-Haïtien in early August after he criticized the government on local radio, said he was subjected to severe beatings and to the djak. He was released the day after his arrest, but was taken to hospital because of the injuries he sustained in detention.
Extremely poor conditions continued to be reported in detention centres and prisons throughout the country. Many inmates were reported to be in bad health owing to malnutrition and poor hygiene conditions. Medical treatment was practically nonexistent in detention centres and prisons.
In June the government informed Amnesty International that it had dismissed from the army two soldiers found responsible for the death of Jacques Fabien in April 1988 as a result of ill-treatment during his detention at the barracks in Petit-Goâve. Also in June, the government announced that disciplinary sanctions had been imposed on two soldiers found responsible for the ill-treatment of Ernst Louisdor in Port-au-Prince in January 1988.
In March the government set up a
HAITI/HONDURAS
cominission of inquiry to investigate the killing of four mjl members in August 1988. However, the commission included local officials whom the MJL had identified as responsible for abuses against its members. Shortly after the commission's visit to the Artibonite area, threats were issued against mjl members by local officials. Details of the inquiry had not emerged by the end of the year.
Amnesty International was not aware of any progress in the announced investigations into the 1988 killing of human rights lawyer Lafontant Joseph, the 1988 massacre at St Jean Bosco church apparently carried out by official forces, or the 29 November 1987 election day killings (see Amnesty International Report 1988 and 2989).
Throughout the year Amnesty International called for people who appeared to have been arbitrarily arrested to be released if not charged with a recognizably criminal offence. The organization called on the authorities to treat detainees humanely.
In April Amnesty International wrote to President Avril raising cases of human rights abuses since he took power in September 1988, requesting details of any inquiries and expressing concern at the apparent absence of progress in investigations of past human rights violations. No response was received.
HONDURAS
Torture of detainees being held incommunicado after arrest by the police and army was frequently reported. The fate of two people who "disappeared" was unknown at the end of the year. A student leader, a trade unionist and a university director were murdered; two of them had reportedly been under police surveillance, and the killings coincided with death threats against other leaders of trade
unions and popular organizations, and human rights workers. Government opponents and human rights workers were frequently intimidated and harassed, allegedly by military intelligence agencies acting as civilian political groups. Extrajudicial executions of some criminal supects by the police continued to be reported.
National elections were held on 26 November, Rafael Leonardo Callejas, the opposition National Party presidential candidate, won just over 50 per cent of the vote. He was due to succeed President José Azcona in January 1990.
Armed anti-govemment activity was reported occasionally. Armed opposition groups claimed at least one political killing. In January Gustavo Alvarez Martinez, former commander-in-chief of the armed forces, was shot dead outside his home in Tegucigalpa by gunmen who ambushed his car. His driver was also killed. The Movimiento Popular de Liberación — Cinchoneros (mpl-c), Popular Liberation Movement — Cinchoneros, claimed responsibility, In July the same group was believed responsible for the killing of Pablo Flores García, reportedly a former member of the group who had turned informer. There were several bomb attacks on United States (us) armed forces personnel and other us targets. Responsibility for some of these attacks was claimed by previously little-known left-wing armed opposition groups, including the Frente Patriótico Morazanista (fpm), Morazanist Patriotic Front and the Movimiento Revolucionario Hondureno (mrh), Hon-duran Revolutionary Movement.
Political detainees were ft'equently held incommunicado for days and sometimes weeks despite constitutional provisions that all detainees be brought before a court within 24 hours of arrest. Tortxire and ill-treatment of detainees held in these circumstances were reported persistently. Student Mario Roberto Martinez Ortiz was arrested near Las Manos on the Nicaraguan border on 12 January. He was reportedly detained at the headquarters of the Dirección National de Investigaciones (dni), National Directorate of Investigations, in Danli and at the Ninth Infantry battalion barracks before being released without charge on 23 January. He was allegedly tortured, including being beaten, hooded, repeatedly kicked and threatened with
