BURUNDI
Several prisoners of conscience were released, but more than 40 people arrested at the time of intercommunal killings in northern Burundi in August 1988 were detained without charge or trial throughout 1989. Some of those detained appeared to have played no role in the killings. About 15 people accused of conspiring against the security of the state were arrested in March: no formal charges were brought against them during the year. Some 20 lehovah's Witnesses were reportedly detained on account of their religious beliefs. At least 30 prisoners were under sentence of death. No executions were reported.
In May a commission appointed by the government in October 1988 to study the question of national unity issued a report on the origins of conflict between the country's majority Hutu and minority Tutsi ethnic groups and proposed various remedial measures. In June President Pierre Buyoya asked the commission to prepare a "charter for national unity" to define each citizen's
BURUNDI
responsibilities in relation to national unity and rights to security and equality, In July Burundi ratified the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights.
In January the government released at least 10 Hutu who had been detained without charge or trial since September 1988, including six prisoners of conscience - all signatories to an open letter to President Pierre Buyoya which blamed government soldiers for the August 1988 killings and called for greater participation of Hutu in national affairs (see Amnesty International Report 1989). The six included three university teachers: Aloys Habonimana, Léonce Ndikumana and Augustin Nsanze.
At least 40 other Hutu prisoners were said by the government in June to be awaiting possible prosecution on murder charges arising from the August 1988 killings. However, none had been formally charged or brought to trial by the end of the year. Most were held either at Mpimba prison in the capital Bujumbura, or at Rumonge prison in southwest Burundi. It appeared that some were imprisoned on account of their leading role in their community, not because of any direct involvement in the intercommunal killings of August 1988. For example, Marc Ntahondereye, a development project director and leader in Kirundo province of the ruling Union pour le progrès national (UPRONA), Union for National Progress, appeared to be held because of his social and political prominence among the Hutu. The authorities reportedly said that he was held because the development project with which he was involved had distributed machetes to local villagers. However, this apparently occurred several months before the inter-communal killings and there appeared to be no evidence that the machetes were intended for anything other than agricultural use.
Another Hutu, Enunanuel Habintore, was arrested in September 1988 in Bujximbura apparently because he was suspected of organizing civil unrest in Ntega district. However, there appeared to be no evidence to substantiate this and he remained in detention without charge or trial at the end of 1989.
Manara Elonga Nsamba, a Zairian national employed by the Burundi Government, was arrested in lune in Bujumbura. The authorities claimed that he had been found in possession of "anti-
Burundi" tracts, the contents of which were not revealed. He was still held without charge or trial at the end of the year.
About 15 soldiers and civilians were arrested in March and accused of conspiring against the government. Despite reports that they were being held incommunicado in poorly lit isolation cells without any bedding, the government refused to reveal their identities or the places of their detention. No formal charges were known to have been brought against them by the end of the year,
Jehovah's Witnesses were reported to have been imprisoned in a number of provinces on account of their religious beliefs. At least 20 were reportedly arrested in June and held in prisons in Gitega and Miuamvya. Most of them were reported to have been released without charge by the end of the year. In August a government representative sought to justify official action against Jehovah's Witnesses in a speech to the United Nations Sub-Commission on the Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities. He said Jehovah's Witnesses had been "rejected" by the people of Burundi and were considered unpatriotic because they would not salute the national flag, recognize state authority, or work on days of prayer.
Three former government ministers imprisoned for corruption after the coup which brought President Buyoya to power in September 1987, and three other prisoners, were reportedly kept in isolation cells without any bedding for long periods and refused regular contact with their families. Isidore Nyaboya, one of the former ministers, was said to have been accused by the authorities of masterminding from his prison cell the conspiracy which the government said it had uncovered in March. Another former minister, Albert Muganga, was reportedly in danger of losing his sight owing to the poor conditions in which he was held.
Kabongo Ntambwe, a Zairian recognized as a refugee by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, was reported to have been forcibly repatriated in April to Zaire, where he was secretly detained until October and subsequently restricted to a hotel in Kinshasa. The Burundi authorities admitted detaining him briefly in November 1988 but denied any involvement in his repatriation to Zaire.
At least 30 prisoners convicted of
BURUNDI/CAMBODIA (KAMPUCHEA)
murder and other crimes were under sentence of death in mid-1989. One new death sentence was imposed in December by the Bujumbura Criminal Court on a man convicted of murder. The total number of death sentences passed by the courts during the year was not made public. Most of those sentenced to death had apparently not been assisted by legal counsel at their trials. The last known executions in Burundi took place in 1980.
Amnesty International welcomed the releases of prisoners of conscience and other imtried political detainees at the beginning of the year. It urged the government to release Jehovah's Witnesses imprisoned on account of their religious beliefs and to review the cases of other political detainees and either bring them to trial promptly on recognizably criminal charges or release them. Amnesty International also called on the government to investigate the circumstances of Kabongo Ntambwe's alleged forcible repatriation to Zaire.
In June an Amnesty International delegation visited Burundi and met President Buyoya, Prime Minister Adrien Sibomana, the Ministers of Justice, the Interior and External Relations and Cooperation, other officials and members of the judiciary and the security service. Amnesty International urged the government to ratify major international and regional human rights instruments and expressed concern at the government's refusal to investigate reports of thousands of extrajudicial executions by government security forces in August 1988. It also raised other outstanding concerns, including prisoner cases.
