GHANA
IWo prisoners of conscience were released and two others briefly detained without charge or trial. At least 50 political detainees, mostly military personnel arrested following alleged coup attempts between 1982 and 1985, continued to be held without charge or trial throughout the year. At least seven other members of the security forces were detained without charge on suspicion of conspiring to overthrow the govemment: one committed suicide in detention, according to the authorities. At least 11 death sentences were passed but no executions were known to have been carried out.
Akwasi Adu-Amankwah, a TVades Union Congress official, and Yaw Tony
Akoto-Ampaw, a former student leader, were released in May. Leading members of the New Democratic Movement, they had been held without charge or trial since 1987 when they were among at least eight prisoners of conscience who were detained. The others were freed before the end of 1988.
In June two leading officials of the Ghana Bar Association, Peter Adjetey and Nutifafa Kuenyehia, were arrested and held without charge for two and three weeks respectively. A Supreme Court judge was also reportedly held for a few hours. The Ghana Bar Association had planned to hold lectures to commemorate the murder of three judges in June 1982. The murders remain a sensitive subject with the military govemment, the Provisional National Defence Council (PNDC), headed by Fhght-Lieutenant J.J. Rawlings. An inquiry recommended that 10 people be prosecuted for the crime: several were, but two members of the PNDC among the 10, including the head of the security services, were not charged or brought to trial (see Amnesty International Report 1984].
In early October the govemment announced that five members of the security forces had been detained following allegations that they had "compromised" the security of the state. Despite persistent mmours that one of the detainees was already dead, possibly as a result of torture, no mention was made of any death in the annovmcement. A further official statement in November said that one of the detainees, Flight-Lieutenant William Kofi Domie, had hanged himself on 29 September after confessing to an active role in a conspiracy to overthrow the govemment. It also said that a pathologist's report and an inquiry by senior armed forces and police officers had "confirmed that he had taken his life". The statement did not indicate whether there was to be an inquest into the circumstances of his death or the reasons why he might have committed suicide.
The November statement summarized the findings of an inquiry by military and security officers into the alleged conspiracy and revealed that at least seven members of the security forces had been detained, one of whom had subsequently been released for lack of evidence. According to the statement, one of the leaders of the alleged conspiracy, Major Courage E.K. Quarshigah, told the inquiry that Flight-Lieutenant
ghana/greece
Domie had appeared to be mentally unstable. None of the detainees had been charged with any offence or released by the end of the year.
There have been several attempts to overthrow the PNDC, which itself seized power in a coup in 1981. In 1989 at least 50 people, mostly members of the armed forces arrested in previous years following alleged coup attempts or conspiracies against the government, remained in detention without charge or trial, They were reported to include Warrant Officer Joseph Mensah. said to be suspected of involvement in a coup attempt in June 1983; Sergeant George Aza Adongo and Corporal Abraham Kweku Botchwey, allegedly involved in a coup attempt in February 1985; and Lieutenant-Colonel Thomas Theophilus Kutin, held since 1986 apparently on suspicion of involvement in a conspiracy against the government. Others reported to be held without charge or trial for political reasons included Narh Tetteh, who was detained in 1983 or 1984; George Darkoh, who was detained in 1984; and Martin Kwaku Ababio Owusu, a naval seaman held since 1985.
None of those detained for political reasons during the year was charged with any offence or brought to trial. The Preventive Custody Law, pndc Law 4 of 1982, provides for the administrative detention without trial of any person suspected of threatening the security of the state. There has been no legal recourse against such detentions since the right to habeas corpus in these cases was removed in 1984.
Although no executions were known to have taken place during the year, 11 people were sentenced to death, one of them in absentia, following convictions for mmder and armed robbery. Most had been convicted by Public Tribunals — special courts which may impose death sentences for offences including those which in law do not carry the death penalty, such as armed robbery. Under the Public Tribunal Law, pndc Law 24 of 1982, a Public Tribunal may impose the death sentence for any crime specified a capital offence by the pndc or if the court considers that it is merited in a particular case. The offence of robbery, defined as stealing with force or threat of force, carries a maximum sentence of life imprisonment under the amended Criminal Code of 1960. However, more
than 20 prisoners are believed to have been executed for robbery since 1982.
During 1989 Amnesty International pressed for the release of the two New Democratic Movement leaders and the Ghana Bar Association officials, and urged the government to ensure that all other political detainees were either brought to trial promptly and fairly, or released. The organization appealed for those arrested on suspicion of threatening state security to be safeguarded against ill-treatment while in detention and inquired into the circumstances of Flight-Lieutenant Domie's death. Amnesty International also appealed for the abolition of the death penalty and for the commutation of individual death sentences. In September the government denied an Amnesty International staff member a visa to visit Ghana for research. A government-owned newspaper subsequently accused the organization of conspiring with the Ghana Bar Association to destabilize the government, an allegation which Amnesty International totally rejected.	'
