GREECE
Some 400 prisoners of conscience, all conscientious objectors to military service, were in prison. The vast majority of them were Jehovah's Witnesses. Most were serving sentences of four years' imprisonment. Several detainees alleged they had been ill-treated in police custody.
A draft law drawn up in 1988, providing for an alternative civilian service double the length of military service, had still not been debated in parliament by the end of the year (see Amnesty Internationa!
GREECE/GRENADA
Report J 989).
The majority of conscientious objectors continued to be sentenced to four-year prison terms. However, about 50 were serving sentences of up to five years' imprisonment.
Three conscientious objectors who had been sentenced in October 1988 to longer terms of imprisonment — two to 12 years and one to 13 years — had their sentences reduced to four years' imprisonment on appeal in February (see Amnesty International Report 1989].
Thanasis Makris, who had refused to perform military service on non-religious pacifist grounds, was sentenced in January to a further four months' imprisonment on charges of insulting a prison officer. In July he was released after serving 15 months of his 22-month sentence (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
One conscientious objector, Daniel Kokkalis, recognized by the Ministry for the Interior as a religious minister for Jehovah's Witnesses, was sentenced to four years' imprisonment in July despite the existence of Law 1763/88 exempting religious ministers and monks of a "laiown religion" from performing military service. In October his appeal against this sentence was rejected on the grounds that the Jehovah's Witness faith was not a "known religion".
Several detainees alleged that they had been ill-treated in police custody. For example Dimitris Voglis said that in May he had been beaten on the street by police after challenging them for assaulting an unconscious man. He was then taken to the Third Police Station in Thessaloniki where the police continued to beat him. Dimitris Voglis alleged that the police used wooden batons. A medical report certified bruising on various parts of his body, including the face and head. An investigation was ordered by the Public Prosecutor.
In November Amnesty International wrote to President Christos Sartzetakis requesting to be informed of the outcome of the investigation into Dimitris Voglis' allegations of ill-treatment. A response to letters concerning torture and ill-treatment sent to the authorities in previous years was also requested. By the end of the year no reply had been received.
Throughout the year Amnesty International appealed for the release of all imprisoned conscientious objectors. The
organization urged the government to introduce alternative civilian service and to amend the draft law so that alternative service would not be of punitive length.
