PHILIPPINES
More than 200 people, including human rights activists, church workers, trade unionists and peasants, were killed in apparent extrajudicial executions. Dozens of others reportedly "disappeared". At least 29 prisoners of conscience remained in custody at the end of the year, and some of the estimated 600 other political prisoners were also believed to be prisoners of conscience. Political detainees were allegedly tortured under interrogation to extract confessions. Legislation introduced in the Senate to restore the death penalty had not been passed by the end of the year.
In December President Corazon Aquino imposed a national state of emergency and Congress enacted legislation granting the President broad powers for a six-month period. The measures followed an attempted military coup, the sixth and most serious since President Aquino came to power in 1986. The President ordered that the captured coup leaders be tried swiftly by military tribunal and Defense Secretary Fidel Ramos urged that the death penalty be restored for rebellion.
Armed conflict between government forces and the New People's Army (npa), the armed wing of the outlawed
Communist Party of the Philippines (cpp), continued throughout the year. The authorities frequently labelled non-govemmental organizations, including human rights groups, as "fronts" for the cpp or the npa. Armed actions by the Moro National Liberation Front (mnlf), which seeks the independence of predominantly Muslim areas in the south, escalated towards the end of the year.
The government's counter-insurgency campaign used regular armed forces, official paramilitary forces known as the Citizens' Armed Forces Geographical Units (CAFGUs), and armed groups known as "vigilantes" which have no legal status. The CAFGUs, with some 62,000 members by the end of the year, were intended to replace the "vigilante" groups and the Civilian Home Defense Forces (chdf), a paramilitary force established under former President Marcos. Both the chdf and "vigilantes" were officially disbanded in 1988 because of their poor human rights record. However, in many areas "vigilante" groups continued to operate with the consent and cooperation of local military commanders, or their members were recruited into the new cafgu units. Cafgu forces were reportedly responsible for extrajudicial executions, torture and "disappearances".
The bombing and strafing of villages suspected of harbouring npa and mnlf guerrillas resulted in the evacuation of tens of thousands of people. Conditions in many of the evacuation centres were poor and hundreds of people, most of them children, died of disease. Harassment, ill-treatment and killing of evacuees by anti-communist paramilitary forces were frequently reported.
The npa was responsible for killing a large number of soldiers, police and non-combatant civilians. npa "sparrow" units -urban-based assassination squads - killed more than 60 soldiers, police officers and government officials during the year in Manila. The npa was thought to be responsible for the killing in April of United States Army Colonel James Rowe, a counter-insurgency expert. Government authorities claimed discovery of hundreds of bodies, allegedly people killed during an npa internal purge of military spies, hi June, 37 adults and children belonging to the anti-communist Itoman religious sect in Digos, Davao del Sur, were killed in an npa guerrilla attack on a church.


&%)&%*&%)&%*)&%*&%*)&%*&%*)
PHILIPPINES
The government took a number of measures to promote and protect human rights, including the creation of a special task force to investigate "disappearances" and the establishment of a Human Rights Committee to advise the President on the human rights situation. In December 1988-the Defense Secretary announced a new policy that would punish senior military commanders for the human rights violations committed by their subordinates. In August 1989 the government ratified the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
However, several factors impeded the investigation of violations and the prosecution of suspects. These included a lack of cooperation from local military authorities, long delays in the judicial process, witnesses' refusal to testify for fear of reprisals and limitations on the autonomy and effectiveness of the government-appointed Philippines Commission on Human Rights (pchr). Of 2,694 cases of human rights violations filed with the pchr between 1986 and August 1989, only 276 were resolved. The government claimed that some military officers had been punished for human rights-related offences, but it appeared that the stiffest punishment in practice was discharge from military service and that only three officers had received this under President Aquino's administration. In December President Aquino vetoed congressional legislation to repeal Presidential I3ecree 1850, promulgated under the administration of President Marcos, which protects members of the armed forces from prosecution in civilian courts.
Several military officers were tried during the year for human rights-related offences, but none was found guilty. In July, 23 soldiers charged with the February
1987	massacre of 17 villagers in Lupao, including six children and a couple in their eighties (see Amnesty International Report
1988	and 1989), were acquitted by a military tribunal. The tribunal reportedly ruled that the soldiers had "no criminal intent" when they fired on the villagers. In June a military investigating team cleared 28 Marines accused of torturing and killing nine Paombong fishery workers in April. The investigators said that the victims had been caught in the crossfire of an armed encounter: human rights groups and medical professionals claimed that some of the bodies showed visible signs of torture. The
victims included a man in his seventies and a girl aged 13.
More than 200 critics, opponents or suspected opponents of the government appeared to be victims of extrajudicial executions committed by government or gov-ernment-backed forces. The dead included church workers, trade unionists, human rights activists and members of various lawful non-govemmental organizations accused of being fronts for the cpp or npa. Dozens of villagers living in areas where the npa was active were deliberately killed by military and paramilitary forces. The authorities often claimed that the victims were npa members who died in "legitimate encounters", although the victims included elderly people and very young children killed in their homes,
In February Pedro and Encamación Pagao and their two children, 11-year-old Eduardo and seven-year-old Rosalia, were shot dead by troops of the 62nd Infantry Battalion in barangay (the village of) Carayman, Calbayog City, Western Samar. Four unidentified people were also killed at the time. The military claimed that the eight were npa rebels killed in an armed encounter In its case report, the pchr said that there was "no doubt" that 62nd Infantry Battalion personnel were responsible for the killings. It concluded that the Pagao family members were civilians and that the killing incident was "not an encounter but rather a strafing and massacre committed by military soldiers". Although the pchr recommended further investigations with a view to prosecutions, it was not known whether charges had been filed by the end of the year.
In March a joint counter-insurgency force of CAFGUs and the Philippine Constabulary (PC) in barangay Buena Vista, Santa Catalina, Negros Occidental, detained and killed three farmers and two young children. The children's father, Nicosio Opiar, was among the farmers killed. A fourth detained adult was wounded but escaped and reported that the others had been stabbed and shot in a military "safe-house". The farmers' wives witnessed the arrests and identified five of the perpetrators by name, but it was not known by the end of the year whether any of the suspects had been charged or tried.
At least six church workers known for their social and human rights work were killed by military or paramilitary forces.
PHILIPPINES
They included the Reverend Vizminda Gran, killed with her husband in Baliangao, Misamis Occidental in May. The killings occurred shortly after her name appeared on a "hit list" apparently prepared by the 44th Infantry Battalion.
Oscar Tonog, a human rights lawyer, was shot by unidentified armed men in March in Poblacion, Catarman, Northern Samar province. He died of his wounds the following day, becoming the sixth human rights lawyer killed since late 1987 in circumstances suggesting extrajudicial execution by military or paramilitary personnel. He had worked since 1980 for the Free Legal Assistance Group (flag), a network of lawyers which provides free legal aid to political prisoners and disadvantaged groups. According to his family, he had received death threats which he attributed to members of the military.
Other human rights lawyers and activists, trade unionists, church workers and journalists were also subjected to anonymous death threats and named on "hit lists" circulated by anti-communist "vigilantes" and CAFGUs, apparently with the consent and cooperation of local military commanders. In Negros Occidental province two "hit lists" labelled 25 people as "communist dogs" and "fraitors". The lists called on the local population to kill those named, including Antonio Fortich, the then Bishop of Bacolod and a well-known human rights advocate. Several other church workers, radio broadcasters, lawyers and labour leaders were also named on the lists.
Dozens of people active in civil rights and social welfare organizations, which the military and some government officials described as fronts for the gpp or the npa, reportedly "disappeared" during the year. According to the pchr, 37 people "disappeared" between January and August, but independent human rights groups in the Philippines placed the figure somewhat higher. The military and the government questioned the authenticity of "disappearance" reports, claiming that many of the "disappeared" were voluntarily in hiding or were victims of cpp or npa piurges. The authorities produced little evidence, however, to support these allegations,
Those who "disappeared" in 1989 included Maria Nonna Santa Clara, a social worker in the Legaspi area, and Angelina Llenaresas, a co-worker. They were last seen
on 26 April in the custody of military and cafgu personnel and were thought to be detained at the Headquarters of Regional Command 5 at Camp Bagong Ibalon in Legaspi City. The military denied holding them. Those who filed a habeas corpus petition on the women's behalf in June and witnesses who testified at the subsequent hearings received death threats which they believed came from members of the military.
Felix Cardano and Rodolfo Ubusan, both trade union leaders, reportedly "disappeared" following the dispersal of a May Day rally in Manila by security forces. Their legal trade union federation, the Malabon Labour Alliance-Kilusang Mayo Uno (kmu), was accused by the authorities of being a front organization for the cpp or the npa. Dozens of kmu members were victims of arbitrary arrest, ill-treatment and apparent exfrajudicial execution.
Twenty-seven prisoners of conscience were released in September and October, but at least 29 remained in custody. An estimated 600 other people were believed to be held for political reasons, some of whom may be prisoners of conscience. Most were accused of supporting the insurgency and charged under Presidential Decree 1866 with illegal possession of firearms in furtherance of rebellion, but some were apparently arrested for their non-violent activities in lawful non-governmental organizations. Many suspects alleged that they were detained without warrant and ill-treated or tortured to exfract confessions.
Eighteen people attending a meeting in Pampanga province at an office of the Alliance of Farmers of Central Luzon (amgl), a peasant organization critical of the government's land reform program, were arrested in March and charged with illegal possession of firearms in furtherance of rebellion. Six months later they were acquitted for lack of evidence and released. They denied possessing firearms and said that any weapons found must have been "planted" by those who arrested them. The "subversive literature" which they were accused of possessing consisted of pamphlets on agrarian reform and political literature available in shops and libraries. On 2 January 1990 two of the 18 reportedly "disappeared" after being detained by an armed group, including a man identified by witnesses as a pc sergeant.
Thirteen farmers active in the amgl in Nueva Ecija province, who were arrested in
PHILIPPINES/POLAND

June 1988 on charges of subversion and beheved to be prisoners of conscience, were still being tried at the end of the year. In October nine of the 13 were granted bail and conditionally released, but four remained in detention.
A 12-month trial of 25 farmers from Leyte province, charged with rebellion and other acts of violence, ended in February. However, no verdict had been delivered by the end of the year. The defendants, believed to have been arrested for publicizing human rights violations by "vigilante" groups, remained in prison. At least three of the farmers claimed that police beat them during interrogation. Several people closely associated with the case were subjected to threats or acts of violence. One of the defence lawyers. Attorney Alfonso Surigao, was shot dead in June 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989) and in 1989 a pc major was charged with the murder.
Torture and ill-treatment of political detainees during interrogation by police and military personnel were frequently reported. Military officials denied allegations of torture, labelling them as part of the cpp's "propaganda war". Govermnent officials admitted "isolated" instances of torture but denied that its use was government policy.
Raphael Olite was arrested in April in Pasay City on suspicion of belonging to an npa "sparrow" unit which had killed a police officer. He was reportedly taken to a military "safe-house" and tortured for 12 hours. He said that he had been stripped and that various parts of his body, including his genitals, had been rubbed with ice and then given electric shocks. He also said that a hose with running water was placed alternately in his nostrils and his mouth.
Medical professionals stated that at least 21 of 25 people detained by the military in July on suspicion of belonging to npa "sparrow" units had injuries and symptoms consistent with their allegations of "physical and mental torture". The detainees, held at Camp Bagong Diwa, the Capital Regional Command (capcom) headquarters, claimed that they were subjected to death threats, the "wet submarine" torture involving submersion of the head in water, burning with lighted cigarettes and beatings.
At least three new bills to reinstate the death penalty, provisionally abolished
under the 1987 Constitution, were introduced in the Senate (see Amnesty /nfernafiona/ Report 1989) but were not debated before the end of the year. Both President Aquino and the Defense Secretary urged Congress to restore the penalty for certain "heinous crimes", including rebellion and minder.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience, and called for independent and impartial investigations into reports of extrajudicial executions, "disappearances" and torture by members of government and government-backed forces. It urged the government to review the use of civilian paramilitary forces in the counter-insurgency campaign.
Amnesty International luged the government not to restore the death penalty. In April it published a report Philippines: Case Studies in the Use of the Death Penalty and in November testified at Senate hearings on the death penalty.
