ISRAEL AND THE OCCUPIED TERRITORIES
About 25,000 Palestinians, including prisoners of conscience, were arrested in connection with the intifada (uprising) in the Occupied Territories. Over 4,000 served periods in administrative detention without charge or trial. Several thousand others were tried by military courts. By the end of the year over 13,000 people were still in prisons or detention centres. At least 45 Israeli prisoners of conscience were held, most of whom were conscientious objectors to military service. Thousands of Palestinians were beaten while in the hands of Israeli forces or were tortured or ill-treated in detention centres. At least eight were reported to have died as a result. Over 260 unarmed Palestinian civilians, including children, were shot dead by Israeli forces, often in circumstances suggesting excessive use of force or deliberate killings. Others died in incidents where tear-gas was possibly
ISRAEL AND THE OCCUPIED TERRITORIES/ITALY
deliberately misused. Official investigations into abuses appeared inadequate. One person remained under sentence of death.
Palestinians continued to protest against the Israeli occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip with strikes, tax boycotts and demonstrations in which stones, petrol bombs and other missiles were thrown. Palestinians also killed over 130 people, most of whom were suspected of collaborating with Israeli security services. The authorities responded to the unrest with mass arrests, restrictions of movement, deportations and a use of force which was often excessive or indiscriminate. They also demolished or sealed up to 200 homes of alleged Palestinian activists, imposed possibly punitive curfews, and closed off areas as military zones, thus preventing access by independent observers.
Over 4,000 Palestinians, including prisoners of conscience, were administratively detained without charge or trial. Most administrative detention orders were imposed for periods of six months and several hundred were renewed, prolonging the period of imprisonment. In August military regulations extended the maximum duration of each administrative detention order in the Occupied Territories from six to 12 months. They also introduced an automatic judicial review of orders longer than six months.
Crucial information about the reasons for detention was almost invariably withheld by the authorities from administrative detainees and their lawyers. This seriously impeded any meaningful exercise of the right to challenge the detention. Appeals by detainees were heard weeks or months after arrest, and most resulted in confirmation or only slight reductions in detention periods.
Prisoners of conscience held in administrative detention included Sami al-Kilani, a writer and poet detained between April and October, and Faisal al-Husseini, a leading Palestinian political figure, who was released in January after 18 months' detention. Other administrative detainees included Badran Jaber, a teacher held under consecutive detention orders since March 1988 and Ribhi Haddad, a labourer held since March 1988 and released in November 1989.
Among the Israeli prisoners of conscience held during the year were four
editors of the newspaper Derech Hanitzoz, who were convicted in January of offences including membership of the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine. Three served their sentences in full and were released during the year; Yacov Ben Efrat ■remained imprisoned serving an effective prison sentence of 30 months. Amnesty International believed they had not used or advocated violence. In October, Abie Nathan, a well-known Israeli peace campaigner, received an effective six-month jail sentence for having breached legislation forbidding unauthorized contacts between Israelis and the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), During the year eight other Israelis were charged with similar offences and a further four were awaiting appeal hearings.
At least 41 Israelis were sentenced to one or more periods of up to 56 days' imprisonment for refusing on grounds of conscience to imdertake certain types of military service, such as duties in the Occupied Territories. Rami Hasson, a reservist, spent % total of 140 days in prison between 1988 and 1989. Amit Lewenhoif, a conscript, was imprisoned for a total of 103 days in 1989. Amnesty International considers such selective objectors to be prisoners of conscience.
Thousands of Palestinians were tried by military courts in the Occupied Territories. Some reportedly received sentences of up to five years' imprisonment for stone-throwing and up to nine years for throwing petrol bombs. Lawyers repeatedly went on strike to protest against aspects of the legal process. Their complaints included failure to inform detainees promptly about the reasons for their arrest; frequent and prolonged adjournments of hearings; remand hearings held without defence lawyers; and lack of adequate investigations into complaints of ill-treatment. A military court of appeal was introduced in the Occupied Territories in April.
Thousands of Palestinians were beaten by Israeli forces during the year. Many were pimitively kicked or struck with clubs or rifle butts. The victims included people who refused to clear road-blocks or delete graffiti, or who were suspected of having thrown stones. Many suffered severe injuries, particularly fractures, and at least six reportedly died. Fares Salha, a tailor, died in hospital in April three weeks after soldiers reportedly assaulted him in his
ISRAEL AND THE OCCUPIED TERRITORIES/ITALY
home in Jabalya refugee camp. The soldiers apparently hit him with a hoe and rifle butts and threw him down a staircase after he tried to stop them beating his sons.
There were reports of torture and systematic ill-treatment of political detainees, including beatings on various parts of the body, hooding, prolonged standing, sleep deprivation and confinement in coffm-sized cells. In October Sha'wan Jabarin — a human rights worker held in administrative detention — said in an affidavit that he had been severely beaten, burned with cigarettes, and jumped on several times by a soldier while he lay on the floor in a detention centre in Hebron.
Mahmud al-Masri died of a perforated stomach ulcer in Gaza Prison in March, while being held for interrogation by the General Security Service. An independent pathologist stated that the stress caused by the interrogation, including physical violence, and inadequate medical attention were contributory factors. Khaled Shaikh 'Ali died in the same prison in December. A second independent pathologist found that he died from internal bleeding from blows to the abdomen.
Conditions in the Ketziot detention centre in the Negev Desert remained harsh. About 4,000 prisoners, including the vast majority of administrative detainees, were held there by the end of the year. None received family visits and access to lawyers was inadequate. Detainees went on repeated hunger-strikes during the year to protest against conditions.
More than 260 unarmed Palestinian civilians were shot dead by Israeli forces using live ammunition and special types of plastic and other bullets. Several were also killed by settlers or Palestinians believed to be collaborating with the Israeli authorities. Almost half the victims were aged 18 or below and about 20 were aged 12 or below.
Although most killings appear to have taken place during demonstrations or riots, in many cases the victims did not appear to have been involved in life-threatening or even violent activities when they were shot. Unarmed Palestinians were also killed by soldiers or Israeli plainclothes personnel during operations ostensibly aimed at arresting them. After some shooting incidents, Israeli forces obstructed emergency medical care for the casualties.
Milad Shahin, aged 12, was shot dead in Bethlehem in May by a soldier at a look-out
post. The boy had apparently moved out from behind a wall to throw a stone. Yaser Abu Ghawsh, aged 17, was shot dead at close range in August in Ramallah by plainclothes men after a brief street chase. The men also reportedly prevented a doctor who arrived at the scene from administering first aid.
At least seven people reportedly died in incidents in which tear-gas was used, possibly deliberately, in confined spaces where it could be lethal. In January a three-week-old baby, Islam Abu Dalfah, died reportedly after inhaling tear-gas from a canister thrown into her home by Israeli forces.
During the year two soldiers were convicted and jailed after courts-martial for fatal shootings in 1988. One received an effective jail sentence of three months. The other was sentenced to an effective jail sentence of two years, under appeal at the end of the year. In May four other soldiers received effective jail sentences of up to nine months for beating a man in 1988. The man subsequently died in custody, apparently after further beatings by other soldiers. The sentences on the four were later reduced and all were released by September. No prosecutions were known to have taken place in relation to allegations of deliberate and lethal misuse of tear-gas or allegations of torture and ill-treatment of detainees. However, several hundred officers and soldiers were officially said to have been disciplined for various abuses. In September the Chief of Staff reminded soldiers that force should not be used as a punishment and directed them not to hinder medical assistance to casualties.
Mordechai Vanunu, an Israeli former nuclear technician, continued to be held in solitary confinement with severely restricted access to visitors. Arrested in late 1986, he was serving a sentence of 18 years' imprisonment for offences including treason. His appeal was heard by the Supreme Court in May, but the verdict had not been announced by the end of the year. An Amnesty International delegate was refused access to the appeal proceedings.
John Demjanjuk, convicted in 1988 of offences including crimes against humanity, remained under sentence of death. His appeal to the Supreme Court was rescheduled for 1990.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience and published a report detailing its concerns about
ISRAEL AND THE OCCUPIED TERRITORIES/ITALY
the use of administrative detention. It also expressed concern to the authorities about alleged torture and ill-treatment of prisoners and possible extrajudicial executions.
The organization was particularly concerned that guidelines on opening fire may have permitted unjustifiable killings. Further, although in practice these guidelines were reportedly often disregarded, the authorities did not appear to investigate fatal shootings adequately and to bring to justice those found responsible for abuses.
In January Amnesty International delivered an oral statement to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights about human rights violations during the period of the intifada.
The Israeli authorities, in correspondence and discussions with Amnesty International representatives, argued that administrative detention was necessary because of the security situation and that its use was in accordance with international law. They said that selective conscientious objection to military service was unacceptable. With regard to the editors of Derech Hanitzoz, they reiterated the view that "any form of membership in a terrorist organization constitutes, at the least, advocacy of the use of violence against the State". The authorities also responded to a 1988 Amnesty International report on the misuse of tear-gas by arguing that the organization's concerns in the matter "were without any basis". No substantive response was received on specific cases of alleged tortiu-e or extrajudicial execution.
In view of the close cooperation between Israel and the South Lebanon Army (SLA), Amnesty International also sought assurances from the Israeli authorities about the treatment of Suha Beshara, a Lebanese woman believed to be held by the SLA. The Israeli authorities replied that this was "strictly an internal Lebanese matter".
