THAILAND
Three prisoners of conscience were serving sentences for distributing leaflets critical of the Royal Family. The leader of a Buddhist religious sect and over 70 of his followers, possible prisoners of con-
TANZANIA/THAILAND
science, were arrested but later released on bail. Seven people arrested for political offences were held without charge or trial. Twelve prisoners standing trial for alleged "communistic activities" were released as a result of a government-sponsored amnesty bill, but other political prisoners convicted previously after unfair trials were still held. At least two criminal suspects alleged that they had been tortured and new information was received about torture and ill-treatment of prisoners in previous years which, in many cases, had allegedly resulted in death in custody. At least 17 people were sentenced to death, but no executions were reported.
A government-sponsored amnesty bill was passed by parliament in luly and came into effect at the end of August. The bill marked King Bhxmiibol Adulyadej having become the longest-reigning monarch in Thai history in luly 1988. The amnesty applied to those accused, tried or imprisoned on communist charges, and people convicted of offences endangering national security, provided the offences were committed before July 1988. Members of parliament had submitted five other draft amnesty bills calling for a wider amnesty, but these were unsuccessful.
Montrii Aksom-in, Chana Srikiatsak and Sanit Janduongsri remained in prison throughout the year. They had been arrested in luly 1988 and sentenced to between four and a half and three and a half years' imprisonment in November 1988 after a trial held in camera (see Amnesty International Report 1989). They were convicted of "lese majesty" for producing and attempting to distribute leaflets critical of the Royal Family. All three were considered to be prisoners of conscience.
In June Rak Rakphong, known as Phra Bodhirak, leader of the Santi Asoke
THAILAND
congregation of Buddhist devotees, was arrested by police for defying an order from religious authorities that he cease his activities as a priest. He was charged with violations of the Ecclesiastical Act but released on bail. His trial had not been completed by the end of 1989. Santi Asoke devotees advocate what they consider to be a pure form of Buddhism. Since 1975 they have reportedly practised their beliefs outside the authority of the official Ecclesiastical Council, which has legal authority to govern the monastic orders of Buddhism in Thailand. In August, 79 Santi Asoke monks were arrested for allegedly violating the Penal Code by dressing as clergymen when they had not been ordained according to procedures set down in the Ecclesiastical Act. All were released on bail, but they and 20 lay Santi Asoke devotees were charged with violations of the Penal Code. All faced possible prison terms if convicted and would be considered prisoners of conscience.
Six alleged Muslim separatists, including Pariya Samor, Kuyayor Janae and Medor Bulasor, were reportedly arrested in Yalaa province in February by security forces from the 43rd Police-Military-Civilian Headquarters. They were still held without charge or trial at the end of 1989. Suwan Taphcheuy, known as Sor Pitak, an alleged communist insurgent, was reportedly arrested in Traang province in April by troops of the Fourth Army Region. He too was still held without charge or trial at the end of the year.
Twelve people charged with insurrection and involvement in insurgent "communistic activities" were released following the September amnesty bill. They included Phirun Chatwanitkun and Rangsan sae Sii, who had been held since April 1984; Suwat Mungchoetchuutham, who was arrested in September 1986; and Nop Prasertsom and Chitchanok Soophonpaan, who had been held since April 1987 (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1985, 1988 and 1989). They were being tried before military courts, from which there is no right of appeal for such charges. Their trials had been repeatedly postponed because of the non-appearance of government officials called as prosecution witnesses.
Despite the amnesty measme, at least 22 political prisoners were believed to be still imprisoned at the end of 1989 under sen-
tences imposed after imfair trials before military coinrts in previous years. They included Surachai sae Dan. Adun Bunreuang and at least three others convicted of "communistic activities" or politically motivated acts of violence in connection with them, and 17 Muslims from south Thailand convicted of acts of political violence in connection with separatist activities.
At least two criminal suspects alleged they were tortured or ill-treated during police interrogation. Charan Phanduingtri, a student arrested in January, said police officers had beaten him, forced his head into a sink of water and applied electric shocks to his genitals to force him to "confess". In August Samnao Khamthaawee alleged that a senior police officer and five other police interrogators had applied electric shocks to his genitals while questioning him in connection with a fraud case. It was not known whether any official investigation was carried out into these allegations.
In February a spokesperson for the Coordinating Group for Religion in Society, a local organization advocating human rights protection, reported that the group had collected information on 30 possible cases of death in detention due to ill-treatment since 1987. He cited details of two cases in 1987 in which warders or police officers allegedly beat prisoners to death. In June relatives of Charoen and Pan Wianglor alleged the brothers had been killed by the police. They said that Charoen Wianglor had been beaten to death in October 1988 by police interrogators who accused him of stealing a Buddha image from a village temple. Pan Wianglor had apparently also been beaten while being interrogated about the theft, but had been released when he promised not to reveal the cause of his brother's death. However, his family alleged he was shot dead in June after he asked the Police Department and Minister of the Interior to investigate it.
At least 17 people were reportedly sentenced to death for murder, and the death sentence of another, who had been convicted of a drug offence, was reportedly finalized by the Supreme Court. No executions were known to have taken place.
In September Amnesty International wrote to Prime Minister Chaatchai Chunhawan to welcome the release in December 1988 of Wimon Choertchuuchon,
THAILAND/TOGO
Siifaa Sawaangyen, Wasuthii Sukkasang and the 12 other political prisoners freed as a result of the amnesty bill introduced in parhament by his government. The organization urged the immediate and unconditional release of Montrii Aksorn-in, Ghana Srikiatsak and Sanit Janduongsri and the restoration of the right of appeal to political prisoners tried before military courts; including those already convicted. The letter called for the commutation of all death sentences.
