MADAGASCAR
The government failed to investigate reports that hundreds of people in rural areas were extrajudicially executed by government forces in 1988. Over 100 pris-oners were reported to have died as a resuh of harsh prison conditions. Two people were sentenced to death but there were no executions.
President Didier Ratsiraka was re-elect-ed for a third seven-year term of office in March. The ruling L'Avant-garde de la révolution malgache (arema). The Vanguard of the Malagasy Revolution, increased its majority in the National People's Assembly following legislative elections in May. Both elections led to opposition allegations of fraud; in April clashes between police and demonstrators protesting against the outcome of the presidential election resulted in five deaths and at least 50 arrests.
No action was taken by the govemment to investigate summary killings of civilians by govemment security forces in 1988 or to punish those responsible. Several hundred farmers and villagers had been rounded up
MADAGASCAR/MALAWI
and summarily executed in the comse of operations against bandits and cattle thieves (see Amnesty International Report 1989). Some opponents of the government alleged in 1989 that the killings had been carried out to intimidate the rural population and stifle opposition in advance of presidential, legislative and local elections in 1989.
There appeared to be no improvement in the harsh conditions in prisons throughout the country (see Amnesty International Report 1988). Severe overcrowding, poor hygiene, malnutrition and inadequate medical facilities resulted in the deaths of more than 100 prisoners during the year in Antanimora, Arivonimamo. Nosy-Lava and Tsiafahy prisons. A Malagasy newspaper reported in June that an average of 10 people died each month in Antanimora prison on the outskirts of Antananarivo, the capital. Dysentery and other diseases were endemic in the prison where more than 2,500 prisoners were held in accommodation intended for less than half that number.
In July two people were sentenced to death by a criminal court in Fianarantsoa after being convicted of murder and armed robbery committed in 1988. It was not known if they appealed to the Supreme Court or petitioned the President for clemency, but no executions were reported during the year. Since independence in 1960 it appears that all death sentences have been commuted.
Amnesty International continued to urge the government to establish an inquiry into extrajudicial executions in 1988 and to identify those responsible and bring them to justice.
