ZIMBABWE
At least 15 people held without trial for periods varying from a few days to over a month appeared to be prisoners of conscience. Eight long-term untried political detainees were released, but at least four others were held throughout the year. It was reported that a suspected criminal was beaten and ill-treated by police officers, and new allegations were made about the torture of political prisoners by the Central Intelligence Organization (cio) in 1987. Four people were sentenced to death but there were no reports of executions.
In accordance with an agreement reached in December 1987, the ruling Zimbabwe African National Union-Patriotic Front (zanu-PF), headed by President Robert Mugabe, and the Zimbabwe African People's Union (zapu) merged at the end of 1989 to become one party. However, a new opposition party, the Zimbabwe Unity Movement (zum), was formed in April by Edgar Tekere, a former government minister.
ZIMBABWE
The Resistência Nacional Moçambicana (renamo), Mozambique National Resistance, the armed opposition group fighting the Mozambican Government, made incursions into eastern Zimbabwe and killed a number of civilians. Zimbabwean troops have been deployed in Mozambique in support of the Mozambican Government since 1982. Some asylum-seekers who entered Zimbabwe were said to have been forcibly returned to Mozambique, Other Mozambicans were reportedly detained incommimicado by the army in Zimbabwe, although details were difficult to obtain.
The government renewed the state of emergency which has been continuously in force since 1965. Under the state of emergency, the Emergency Powers (Maintenance of Law and Order) Regulations permit the Minister of Home Affairs to order the administrative detention without charge or trial of any person for an unlimited period. Such detainees must be allowed iirunediate access to a lawyer and informed in writing within seven days of the reason for detention. Thereafter, their cases are considered by a review tribunal within 30 days and then at six-monthly intervals, but the government is not bound to implement its recommendations.
New emergency regulations were introduced in August, following a strike by some doctors in May. They made it an offence punishable by up to two years' imprisonment for workers in "essential services" to strike, or for others to incite them to strike. Essential services were defined to include finance, industry and commerce. The new regulations were used almost immediately against 116 striking employees of the Posts and Telecommunications Corporation (ptc), who were arrested in late August. However, they were held only briefly and charges against them were dropped in October
In Jime the government amended the Prisons Act to abolish corporal punishment for adults, in accordance with a 1987 Supreme Court ruling that whippings were inhuman and degrading, and therefore unconstitutional. In 1989 the Supreme Court ruled that the whipping of juveniles was also unconstitutional.
In September the Protection of Wildlife (Indemnity) Act came into force. This granted indemnity to game-park rangers and scouts, the police, the security forces
and others from criminal liability resulting from any act carried out "in good faith" in connection with the suppression of poaching. At least 15 poachers were killed by anti-poaching units diu'ing the course of the year, two of them within 14 days of the new law coming into force.
Two student leaders, Arthur Mutambara and Enock Chikweche, were arrested in a police raid in October at the University of Zimbabwe in Harare. The university's Students' Representative Council (src) had published a statement condemning an earlier police action which broke up a meeting on the university campus to commemorate anti-corruption demonstrations in 1988. There were further student protests after the arrests of the two src leaders, who were both placed under administrative detention orders and were prisoners of conscience. The university was closed. The two students successfully challenged their detention orders in the High Court, but they were then charged with issuing a subversive document. Nine other students were charged with the Scune offence. All 11, together with four other students charged with public order offences, were released on bail before the end of October by the High Court, which set aside an instruction from the Minister of Home Affairs to deny the students bail. They were still awaiting trial at the end of the year.
Morgan Tsvangirai, Secretary-General of the Zimbabwe Congress of Trade Unions (zCTu), was also administratively detained without charge or trial after the zCTU protested against the closure of the university. He too was a prisoner of conscience. He challenged his detention in the High Court, which twice ordered his release. However, each time he was immediately redetained by CIO officials who accused him of being a South African intelligence agent. In November he was released unconditionally, shortly before his detention was again to be challenged in the Supreme Court.
Cornelius Watama, the zum provincial secretary for Mashonaland West, was also administratively detained in October for alleged links with the South African Government. When he challenged this, the High Court ordered his release. He had been arrested with 10 other zum members while travelling to Kariba to campaign in a by-election. Eight were released after a few days, but Cornelius Watama and two others
ZIMBABWE
were held until the High Court ordered their release in late October.
At least 12 untried political detainees arrested in previous years were still held at the beginning of 1989 because of alleged links with South Africa or for involvement in acts of violence. Eight were released diu*-ing the year, four in August and four in November. Those freed in August included Patricia Brown and Jack Levws-Walker. In both their cases, the review tribunal had recommended their release on three separate occasions. Among those still held without charge or trial at the end of 1989 was Leslie Lesia, a South African national suspected of involvement in a bombing in Harare in May 1987 (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
Sheikh Dawood Parker, the representative in Zimbabwe of the Muslim organization QibIa, was also detained without charge or trial as an alleged South African spy. He was arrested in April after refusing to leave Zimbabwe on the orders of the police, but was released in June. He was then redetained by the cio and was still held in administrative detention without charge or trial at the end of the year.
The alleged torture by police of a criminal suspect came to light at a trial in October. Veronica Matewere claimed that she had been forced to do physical exercises and had been beaten while under investigation by police in Harare for allegedly receiving stolen property. The Regional Magistrate hearing the case accepted her claims and warned the police against taking investigative "short cuts" through the use of torture. New claims that the cio had used tortiue in 1987 were made during 1989. Velapi Mbiwa, who was sentenced in February to nine years' imprisonment for spying for South Africa, alleged that he had been beaten on the soles of his feet and that his head had been immersed in water while he was being interrogated by ao officials.
Early in the year the police reported back to the High Court the results of their investigation into the "disappearance" of nine zapu supporters in 1985 (see Amnesty International Report 1988 and 1989), in accordance with a High Court ruling of June 1988. Their investigation did not clarify what had happened to the "disappeared" prisoners. The police officers conducting the investigation reportedly failed to interview all relevant witnesses or
to investigate the use of police and security force vehicles on the night the men "disappeared". In a separate case, the police acknowledged to the widow of Fraser Gibson Sibanda, who "disappeared" after his arrest by police in 1985, that he had been unlawfully killed. However, no action was known to have been taken against those responsible for his death. According to the Ministry of Home Affairs in July, the "disappearance" of Edward Moyo was also under investigation. He was one of two brothers who were not seen again after being taken into police custody in July 1985. However, neither the nature of the investigation nor its outcome had been disclosed by the end of the year.
Four people convicted of murder were sentenced to death in the High Coiut. Murder carries a mandatory death sentence unless there are mitigating circumstances. No executions were reported.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of Morgan Tsvangirai and other prisoners of conscience. It expressed concern about the continued detention of other political prisoners being held under administrative detention orders without being charged or given a prompt trial. Amnesty International also appealed to the government to abolish the death penalty.
