HONG KONG
Eight people were arrested for demonstrating in support of China's pro-democracy movement and charged with unlawful assembly. Four of them were allegedly ill-treated by police. Seven were acquitted of the charges. Detained Vietnamese asylum-seekers were reportedly ill-treated. At least 10 people were sentenced to death for murder. No executions were carried out.
A second draft of the Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (see Amnesty International Report 1989) was published in February for consideration by the people of Hong Kong. A final text was to be published in 1990 after approval by the National People's Congress, China's parliament, in Beijing.
HONG KONG
Vietnamese asylum-seekers continued to arrive in large numbers, swelling the total arrivals during recent years to over 53,000.
Four members of a group formed to support the pro-democracy movement in China were arrested in September. They had protested against a National Day celebration organized by China's official New China News Agency (ncna), which represents China's interests in Hong Kong. Police reportedly beat them and one protester apparently sustained a severe eye injiuy. Along with four other members of the group later arrested, they were charged with imlawful assembly under the Public Order Ordinance. One of them reportedly pleaded guilty. The other seven were acquitted in December. Hong Kong's Political Adviser reported the arrests to the ncna in October, stating that the government "had no intention of allowing Hong Kong to be used as a base for subversive activities against China".
In July more than 100 Vietnamese asyliun-seekers held at the Shek Kong Detention Centre, including children, were reportedly injured diuring beatings by police; one man died later. The incident apparently began when police tried to prevent asylum-seekers from receiving goods thrown over a fence to them from outside the centre. The government initiated an inquiry into the beatings but its outcome had not been made public by the end of the year. A separate investigation into the death was in progress.
Disturbances and instances of ill-treatment by police in other camps for Vietnamese asylum-seekers were also reported. Tension grew in some camps during the year amid overcrowding, poor sanitation and fears of forcible repatriation to Viet Nam. The screening procedure instituted in 1988 to evaluate individual claims for refugee status was seriously flawed. In mid-1989 the government said it would proceed with mandatory repatriation of people "screened out", or denied refugee status. A first group of 51 Vietnamese was forcibly returned to Viet Nam on 12 December.
At least 10 people were sentenced to death for murder, which carries a mandatory death penalty. No executions have been carried out since November 1966, following abolition of the death penalty in the United Kingdom (uk). The Governor of
Hong Kong has commuted most death sentences imposed since that time. Amnesty International luged the government to adopt legislation abolishing the death penalty.
In a memorandum to the Basic Law Drafting Committee, Amnesty International called for further changes in the Basic Law to ensure human rights protection. The organization urged guarantees that Hong Kong will remain bound, after it comes under Chinese rule in 1997, to international human rights treaties to which it is now party through ratification by the UK. Amnesty International also called for explicit guarantees in the Basic Law of the rights to life and protection from cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. It recommended adoption of a requirement that no legislation applied in Hong Kong after 1997, particularly during a state of emergency, may contravene the provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Amnesty International published its comments on the Basic Law in November.
Amnesty International also expressed concern to the Governor about the prosecution of protesters for unlawful assembly and about the alleged ill-treatment of some of them. The authorities replied in December that they could not comment on the ill-treatment allegations but that the defendants, who were on trial at the time, could present their allegations to the court hearing their cases.
An Amnesty International delegation visited Hong Kong in November to examine the situation of Vietnamese asylum-seekers. Delegates witnessed screening interviews, visited detention centres and talked both to Hong Kong officials and individual Vietnamese asylum-seekers. In December Amnesty International expressed concern to the authorities about flaws in the screening procedure and called for suspension of plans for the forcible repatriation of Vietnamese asylum-seekers until these flaws had been remedied. The organization cited the possibility that forcible repatriation could place individuals at risk of arbitrary imprisonment, torture or execution.
In addition. Amnesty International expressed concern about reports that detained asylum-seekers had been assaulted and ill-treated, and called for impartial investigations into all such allegations.
