INDONESIA/ EAST TIMOR
More than 100 opponents or suspected opponents or critics of the government were prisoners of conscience. At least 60 of them were sentenced to prison terms during the year in a series of trials for subversion. At least 18 political prisoners were released, some of them after more than 20 years in prison. In East Hmor at least 200 people, including prisoners of conscience, were arrested for political reasons. The majority were released without charge, but some remained in detention at the end of the year. There were serious doubts about the fairness of political trials; in some cases the courts accepted as evidence statements allegedly
obtained under duress during pre-trial custody. Political detainees and criminal suspects were reportedly tortured and ill-treated and a number of victims died in custody. At least 20 people were reported to have been unlawfully executed by members of the security forces in East Timor. President Suharto acknowledged that the deliberate killings of some 5,000 alleged petty criminals between 1983 and 1986 had been sanctioned by the government. Seven people were sentenced to death during the year and one execution was reported.
A clash between Islamic activists and security forces in February resulted in more than 100 deaths, according to unofficial soirrces. A crackdown on several Islamic groups ensued and the authorities arrested scores of suspected advocates of an Islamic state. Some of those arrested were tried on charges of subversion, which carries a maximum penalty of death. Armed riot police and military forces dispersed peaceful student demonstrations in April, July and August. Numerous arrests and injuries accompanied the dispersals. Most of those held werp released within a few days. At least 11 people remained in custody for more than four months, six of whom faced up to seven years in prison on charges of insulting a government official. Regional autonomy or independence continued to be an issue in Irian Jaya, where dozens of supporters of secession who staged a public ceremony in December 1988 were charged with subversion. Hundreds suspected of sympathizing with secession were reportedly detained briefly during the year.
In January the Indonesian Government announced the official "opening" of East Timor to tourism and commerce. However, serious human rights violations continued
INDONESIA - EAST TIMOR/IRAN
to be reported there. People who disseminated human rights information and suspected members or supporters of the Frente Revolucionaha de Timor Leste (Fretilin], which has been waging a guerrilla war for independence since 1975, were among the reported victims of these abuses. Bishop Carlos Ximenes Belo, the Apostolic Administrator of Dili, criticized Lidonesia's human rights record in the territory and called for a United Nations-supervised referendum on the political future of the territory. In October Pope John Paul II visited Indonesia and East Timor and appealed publicly for the protection of human rights.
Under a Ministry of Justice order of 15 April, certain categories of prisoners, including political prisoners convicted of subversion, were denied entitlement to benefits such as temporary home leave and parole normally granted for good behaviour
At least 24 of the dozens of Islamic activists detained after February were convicted of subversion in trials in Lampung, Jakarta, Bandung, Bogor, Bima, Aceh and Madma. Seven received life sentences and three, including a 16-year-old boy, were sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment: the rest were sentenced to terms of between three and 17 years. More than 20 others were being tried at the end of the year. Most were charged with subversion through undermining the state ideology, PancasHa, and attempting to establish an Islamic state. Some were also accused of isolated acts of violence, but the majority of those sentenced appeared to be prisoners of conscience.
Emeng Abdurachman, an Islamic activist tried in Bandung, was accused of giving lectures which criticized the government and Pancasila, and of attempting to set up an Islamic state. In September he was found guilty of subversion and sentenced to five years in prison. The court acknowledged that his activities had been nonviolent but found that his aims were subversive.
In December Haji Abdul Ghani Masykur received an 11-year prison sentence in Bima, West Nusa Tenggara province. He was accused of attending a meeting in February where there were discussions on the establishment of an Islamic state, and of contacting other Islamic activists. Zainal Arifin, who was said to have attended the same meeting and to have given lectures
criticizing the government's birth control program, was sentenced to nine years' imprisonment.
Despite an official policy of religious tolerance, people were arrested and sentenced to prison terms for practising their faith. A court in Wonogiri convicted two elderly Jehovah's Witnesses, Suyadi and Sukasmin, of undermining public order by disseminating the teachings of an illegal organization. At least 22 otiier followers of the faith, which was banned in 1976, were reportedly detained in other parts of the country. In East Timor eight members of the Association of Santo Antonio, a Christian sect, were convicted of belonging to an illegal organization. The eight were among the thousands of East Timorese reportedly arrested in November 1988, most of whom were released without charge (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
Bambang "Isti" Nugroho, the coordinator of the Palagan Study Group at Gajah Mada University, Yogyakarta, and Bambang Subono, a student there, were both convicted of subversion aid sentenced to eight and seven years' imprisonment respectively. Charges against them included holding illegal discussion meetings, possessing banned literature and criticizing government policies [see Amnesty International Report 1989). A third man, Bonar Tigor Naipospos, was arrested in Jakarta in June on related charges. He had not been brought to trial by the end of the year.
In Irian Jaya, 37 people were convicted of subversion for taking part in a peaceful flag-raising ceremony in December 1988 to proclaim the independent state of "West Melanesia"; all were believed to be prisoners of conscience. In September the leader of the group, Dr Thomas Wainggai, was sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment. Other members received terms of between four and eight years' imprisonment. This brought the number of political prisoners in Irian Jaya to over 100.
At least 300 Islamic activists imprisoned for subversion in previous years remained in custody throughout the year. At least 40 were prisoners of conscience, convicted of involvement with usrob groups, which advocate closer ties among Muslims and a stricter adherence to Muslim teachings (see Amnesty International Report 1988 and 1989).
More than 50 prisoners detained in the late 1960s were still held for alleged
INDONESIA - EAST TIMOR/IRAN
involvement in a 1965 coup attempt which the authorities attributed to the Indonesian Communist Party (pki). A massive purge of the formerly legal party and its affiliated organizations resulted in an estimated 500,000 deaths and about one million arrests after the coup attempt. The majority of those still in detention may be prisoners of conscience, held for their lawful left-wing political activities. Thousands of former "pki" prisoners were required to report regularly to local military authorities and suffered officially sanctioned discrimination in employment, and political and other fields.
At least 18 political prisoners were released. Pudji Aswati, aged 60, and Kartini, aged 65, were released in January after 20 years' imprisonment for their alleged involvement in the 1965 coup attempt. Sundari Abdulrachman, a former member of parliament imprisoned on similar charges, was released in August after serving over 20 years in prison. In addition to these three women who were "pki" prisoners, those released included two Islamic activists and three suspected members of the Free Papua Movement (opm), and at least 10 East Timorese political prisoners.
An estimated 200 people, including students and human rights activists, were arrested in East Timor on suspicion of sympathizing with Fretilin or other opponents of Indonesian rule in the territory. Most were held without charge or trial, reportedly tortured and ill-treated and subsequently released. At least 25 people were detained in October and November for their part in an apparently peaceful pro-independence demonstration during the visit of Pope John Paul II to East Timor in October. Some detainees were reportedly tortured with electric shocks and beaten while in detention. Unofficial sources reported that at least 10 untried detainees, most of them students, remained in custody in December.
Six university students arrested after a demonstration at the Bandimg Institute of Technology in August were charged with expressing "feelings of hostility, hatred or contempt toward the Indonesian Government". They faced a maximum penalty of seven years in prison. Five other students arrested for their alleged part in the demonstration were temporarily released in December. The lawyers of the students still held reportedly received
death threats, which they attributed to military sources, after publicly stating that some of their clients had been illegally detained and ill-treated in custody.
Serious doubts remained about the fairness of political trials conducted in 1989 and in previous years, particularly those held under the sweeping Anti-Subversion Law of 1963. Proceedings against alleged Islamic militants and student activists appeared to be political show-trials aimed at intimidating critics of the government. The legal basis and factual evidence for prosecutions were frequently obscure and a number of political prisoners were apparently convicted on the basis of uncorroborated statements obtained under duress. In July Husni bin Muhamad was tried without the benefit of legal counsel and sentenced to three years' imprisonment for subversion. Human rights lawyers said that he and two others arrested on similar charges in December 1988 had declined legal counsel after they were beaten and held in isolation cells at Bogor jail.
Torture and ill-treatment of both criminal suspects and political detainees were frequently reported, and some victims allegedly died as a result. Bishop Belo of Dili said that the torture and ill-treatment of detainees was commonplace in East Timor and condemned government denials of the practice. Three men involved in compiling information about human rights violations — Filomeno Gomes, Lazaro Ribeiro and Jaime dos Santos — were among dozens of political detainees reportedly tortured while held without charge. Detainees were subjected to electric shocks, beatings, burnings with lighted cigarettes, and several hours' immersion in water tanks.
Prisoners' relatives frequently alleged that deaths resulted from torture or ill-treatment, although police usually claimed that the prisoners had committed suicide, suffered accidents or died of sudden illness. In April Iwan Nirwana, a criminal suspect, died in police custody in Cianjur. Police suspected of torturing him reportedly offered his family unofficial financial compensation and a truck-load of vegetables. Another criminal suspect, Didin Tajudin, died in police custody in September. His corpse was reportedly covered with open wounds and bruises. Relatives said that he had complained of beatings by police; the police alleged that
INDONESIA - EAST TIMOR/IRAN
he had committed suicide. No official inquiries into these deaths were known to have been conducted.
Dozens of police and military officers were tried for allegedly tortiuing or ill-treating prisoners. At least five were convicted of causing prisoners' deaths, but most received short prison sentences. In September two police officers were jailed for seven and 10 months for beating to death a prisoner called Sutaji. In June two others convicted of beating to death 17-year-old Bakri Budi Santoso received sentences of two and a half and three and a half years.
Some prisoners died in custody as a direct result of prison conditions which appeared to constitute cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Gustav Tanawani, a political prisoner convicted of subversion in 1984. died in custody at Madiun jail in January. Prison officials had denied his repeated requests for medical treatment. Government authorities failed to provide his family vvith a death certificate, a postmortem report or the opportunity to view the corpse before burial. According to reports received in September, two prisoners had died and 15 were chronically ill because of harsh conditions at the Kalimantan Timur prison. A Ministry of Justice official said that the prison, designed to hold 500 inmates, held 800 people and lacked both a resident doctor and sufficient financial resources to feed prisoners properly.
At least 20 people were reportedly extrajudicially executed by members of the security forces in East Timor in late 1988 and 1989. Josefina Facundo was reportedly bound, raped and killed by army troops near Poros in January. Soldiers ostensibly searching for her husband, an alleged Fretilin supporter, had forced her to accompany them into the jungle, Parts of her mutilated body were later reportedly dropped at her village. In June three unarmed young men cutting wood outside the permitted timbering area near Ossu were reportedly killed by government forces. Soldiers apparently accused the three of being Fretilin spies, tied them together and immediately shot them. Their decaying bodies were discovered, still bound, several days later.
In an autobiography published in January, President Suharto said that the so-called "mysterious killings" of some 5,000
people during the "anti-crime" campaigns of 1983 to 1986 were officially sanctioned summary executions of suspected criminals (see Amnesty International Report 1984, 1985 and 1986).
Seven people convicted of murder were sentenced to death, bringing the total number on death row to at least 31. They included 13 people convicted of involvement in the 1965 coup attempt or of pki membership and believed to be in imminent danger of execution. Azhar bin Mohammad Safar, an Islamic activist convicted in 1982 of subversion and illegal firearms possession, received a temporary reprieve 10 hours before his scheduled execution in December 1988. The other 17 known to be held on death row were convicted of murder or drugs-related offences. Bambang Sispoyo, an Islamic activist accused of subversion and murder and sentenced to death in 1985, was reportedly executed in July.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience and for a review of other political cases involving unfair trials. The organization expressed concern about reports of torture and ill-treatment in both Indonesia and East Timor, and appealed for the commutation of death sentences and an end to executions. The Indonesian Government provided no substantive response to the organization's appeals.
Following a meeting with representatives of the Indonesian Government in February, Amnesty International submitted a formal proposal for a visit to Indonesia and East Timor later in the year. Despite assurances that the proposal was under consideration, no official reply had been received by the end of the year.
In August Amnesty International submitted information about human rights violations in East Timor to the United Nations Special Committee on Decolonization. It noted that despite the official "opening" of East Timor in January, there were still reports of serious human rights violations in the territory.
