SWITZERLAND
I I
A total of 534 people were sentenced to prison terms for refusing to perform military service. Of these, 261 based their refusal on religious, ethical or political grounds, according to statistics published by the Federal Military Department. However, as in previous years, there were claims that the total number of people who had refused on conscientious grounds was far higher than that reflected in the department's restricted categories. Many conscientious objectors served their sentences during 1989, including some who had been sentenced in previous years. All were considered prisoners of
SWITZERLAND/SYRIA
conscience. A large number had expressed their willingness to perform an ahemative civilian service.
Under Article 18 of the Constitution, there is a binding obligation to perform military service. Male citizens carry out a total of approximately 12 months' service between the ages of 20 and 50; there is no provision for alternative civilian service. Unarmed military service is available to conscripts able to prove that the use of arms would result in "a severe conflict of conscience" on religious or ethical grounds.
In a national referendum held in November, 64.4 per cent of those who voted were against a proposal to abolish the army. Parliament continued to examine a draft bill proposing changes in the penalties for certain categories of conscientious objection (see Amnesty International Report 1989). On 14 December the National Council approved the bill and passed it to the other chamber, the Council of States, for consideration. Under the bill, refusal to perform military service would remain a criminal offence. If a conscript were able to show that he could not reconcile military service with his conscience because of "fundamental ethical values", then he would be sentenced to a period of work in the public interest, ranging from one and a half times the total length of military service to two years. This would not result in a criminal record. Those objecting on other, unrecognized, grounds would continue to receive prison sentences and a criminal record.
Article 81 of the Military Penal Code allows military tribunals to sentence people refusing military service to up to three years' imprisonment. However, in practice sentences rarely exceed one year. Where a tribunal recognizes a conscript's "severe conflict of conscience" on religious or ethical grounds, a sentence of up to six months' imprisonment may be imposed. Such sentences are normally served in the form of arrêts répressifs or semi-détention, allowing prescribed or approved work outside the prison during the day.
Nils Phildius, a theology student, began a sentence of six months' arrêts répressifs in October after a military tribunal had recognized that his refusal of military service was motivated by sincere religious convictions and that he had suffered a "severe conflict of conscience". Denis
Laurent, a cook, served an eight-month prison sentence for refusal of military service and desertion. He had left barracks after his first shooting-practice, returning the next day to explain the moral and pacifist beliefs compelling him to refuse military service. He also informed the military tribunal hearing the case in November 1988 of his willingness to perform an alternative civilian service. The tribunal considered he had acted "for reasons of an essentially moral nature" but had not suffered a "severe conflict of conscience".
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the release of people imprisoned for refusing to perform military service on conscientious grounds. It pressed for the introduction of the right to refuse military service on such grounds and for the provision of a genuine alternative service outside the military system. The federal authorities replied that the introduction of such a service required an amendment to Article 18 of the Constitution and that national referendums in 1977 and 1984 had decisively rejected this.
