KOREA
(REPUBLIC OF)
About 800 people were imprisoned for opposition activities, including at least 100 prisoners of conscience. 'Thousands more were held briefly for trade union activities, street demonstrations or for seeking contact with or expressing views sympathetic to North Korea. Six long-term prisoners of conscience were still imprisoned, one of them after 18 years. All prisoners held in administrative detention without charge or trial under the Public Security Law were released afler its
KOREA (REPUBLIC OF)
repeal in May. Measures introduced in the previous two years to safeguard against incommunicado detention and torture were often disregarded and several political prisoners complained that they had been tortured. Two criminal suspects died in police custody, apparently as a result of beatings. Seven people sentenced to death on criminal charges were executed in August, after two years when no executions had been carried out.
A wave of political arrests followed attempts by dissidents to have direct contact with North Korea outside Republic of Korea government channels, prolonged strikes in key industries and a campaign by opposition groups to force President Roh Tae-woo to resign. On 3 April a Joint Public Security Investigation Headquarters was set up to link the police, prosecution authorities, the Agency for National Security Planning and the Defence Security Command. The headquarters had acknowledged the arrest of 317 people on political charges and had charged 126 others without detaining them by the time it was disbanded on 19 June. Thousands of other people were detained briefly. Arrests continued in the second half of the year, but were fewer in number.
In April a new Law on Assemblies and Demonstrations was introduced to replace a similarly named law which banned "demonstrations likely to cause social unrest" and under which prisoners of conscience had been imprisoned in the past. The new law provides for demonstrations to be held so long as "public order and security are protected". In May the National Assembly repealed the Public Security Law of 1975, under which the Minister of Justice had been able to order the administrative detention without
charge or trial of prisoners who had completed sentences under the National Security Law if he did not consider them "thoroughly anti-communist". It was replaced by the Social Surveillance Law, introduced in June, which also provides for restrictions to be imposed on the freedom of association, expression and movement of former National Security Law offenders: breaking such restrictions is punishable with imprisonment. The National Security Law remained in force, although all the main political parties had agreed in 1988 that it should be amended. No changes were made to reduce the role of military and civilian security agencies in the investigation of political offences.
Most political arrests, including those of prisoners of conscience, were carried out under laws relating to North Korea or restricting freedom of expression, peaceful assembly and trade union activity. According to unofficial reports, those arrested in the first eight months of the year included almost 300 workers arrested in connection with strikes (some of which involved violence); over 270 students, most of them arrested for participating in violent demonstrations or for "supporting North Korea"; around 60 teachers who had set up a trade union (thousands more were briefly detained); and dozens of members of dissident political groups, publishers and artists, street vendors and people who resisted evictions from urban areas due for redevelopment.
Five prisoners of conscience were tried under the National Security Law for visiting North Korea. Dozens of others were charged under the same law with assisting them, failing to report them to the authorities, or because they advocated or attempted themselves to establish direct contact with North Koreans. In April the Reverend Moon Ik-hwan and Yu Won-ho, a businessman, were arrested when they returned from a visit to North Korea, during which they had discussed Korean reunification with government officials. Both were sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment in October. Lee Yong-hee, a journalism professor and editor of the opposition newspaper. The Hankyoreh Shinmun, was also arrested in April for planning to send a team of journalists to North Korea and to visit the country himself. He was convicted in September and received a suspended sentence of 18 months' imprisonment. Three
KOREA (REPUBLIC OF)
co-chairpersons of Chonminnyon, the National Coalition for a Democratic Movement — Lee Bu-yong, Lee Chang-bok and Lee Jae-oh — were arrested in April. They were tried on charges relating to a Cbonwinnyon proposal for a conference where representatives of both Koreas would discuss reunification, and for supporting illegal demonstrations and workers on strike. They were each sentenced to one to two years' imprisonment.
In June Suh Kyung-won, an opposition member of the National Assembly, was arrested and charged with espionage and a foreign exchange offence, after he told the authorities that he had visited North Korea in 1988 and discussed reunification with officials. At his trial, which started in September, he denied espionage and said that he had been tortured to make him confess to this charge during pre-trial interrogation. In December Suh Kyung-won was convicted and sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment, although the court accepted that he had not divulged state secrets. Pang Yang-kyun, his secretary, was sentenced to seven years' imprisonment for committing similar offences under Suh Kyung-won's orders on the occasion of a visit to the Federal Republic of Germany. Nine other people, who were also tried for failing to report the member of parliament's visit to North Korea, were released on probation or on suspended sentences.
In August Im Su-kyong and Father Moon Kyu-hyun were arrested as they crossed the border with North Korea. Im Su-kyong had defied a government ban by attending the World Festival of Youth and Students in Pyongyang, North Korea, as a representative of Chondaehyop, the National Council of Student Representatives. Father Moon Kyu-hyun had joined her to support her attempt to return across the border. Their trial began in November and was still in progress at the end of the year. Around 20 people, mostly students, were arrested for helping to arrange the visit, as were three members of the Catholic Priests Association for Justice who had helped to send Father Moon to North Korea. The three priests were released on suspended sentences in December. More students had been arrested after participating in events to support Chondaehyop's participation in the youth festival. Four artists whose painting had been reproduced and displayed at the festival were
also arrested in July and August; three were released on suspended sentences in December but the trial of the fourth was still in progress at the end of the year.
Several dozen people were arrested for possessing or reproducing North Korean publications, which are prohibited to all but officially authorized scholars. Cho Song-u, director of the Peace Research Institute, was sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment in September for possessing books from the North Korean Social Academy. The authorities had denied him a licence to have North Korean material. Dozens of publishers were arrested but most were released almost immediately. However, some were held for a few months before being tried and released with suspended sentences. Dozens of students who wrote articles supporting North Korean ideology were also arrested, but the outcome of their trials was not known.
Hundreds of workers and labour activists were arrested for taking part in strikes, some of which involved violence, but little information was available on individual cases. Eight members of Sonohyop, Seoul Labour Council, a federation of 59 independent unions in the Seoul area, were arrested in April for illegal third-party involvement in strikes. Dan Byung-ho, the head of Sonohyop, was released on a suspended sentence in August, but it was not clear whether the others were also released.
Between mid-May and August thousands of teachers were arrested for participating in peaceful rallies and other activities to support their right to set up a trade union. The authorities declared Chonkyojo, the National Teachers' Union, illegal and accused its organizers of trying to introduce "leftist" ideology into schools and to seek to "change the country's democratic system". Although most were released without charge, around 60 teachers were tried for violating the Civil Service Law or the Private Schools Law. All except Yun Yong-kyu, the union's chairman, were released on suspended sentences. Yun Yong-kyu was sentenced to one year's imprisonment.
Over 200 people continued to be imprisoned for national security offences. Thirty-five were held without charge or trial under the Public Security Law because they had refused to "convert" to "anti-communism". Most had been held for between 10 and 13 years (see Amnesty
KOREA (REPUBLIC OF)
International Report 1989], but all were released by the end of October, following the repeal of the law in May. The others were serving long prison sentences: they had been convicted of being North Korean "spies" or "agents". Little was known about these long-term prisoners. Some were arrested in the 1950s and 1960s, and others were arrested in the 1970s or 1980s after a period abroad when they were alleged to have contacted supporters of North Korea. A few were considered prisoners of conscience.
The practice of interrogation during incommunicado detention was renewed. The Bar Association complained about restrictions on lav^ryers meeting their clients. Lawyers defending Reverend Moon Ik-hwan and Professor Lee Yong-hee were only allowed to meet them eight or nine days after their arrests after filing a complaint with the Prosecutor General. Lawyers representing Im Su-kyong could not see her until three weeks after her arrest, after securing a court order.
Several political prisoners alleged that they had been deprived of sleep and beaten while detained incommunicado by the Agency for National Security Planning. Hong Song-dam, one of the four artists arrested after their painting had been displayed in North Korea, said he was deprived of sleep, beaten about the face and otherwise ill-treated, A subsequent examination carried out at the request of the court trying Hong Song-dam concluded that injuries to his right leg and left ear had been inflicted while he was held by the Agency for National Security Planning,
Similar allegations of abuse were made by Suh Kyimg-won, Pang Yang-kyun and Yu Won-ho, who stated that they had been beaten and denied sleep while in pre-trial detention. The court reportedly said that "overnight interrogation [of Suh Kyung-won] was inevitable because of the importance of the case" and that "in Pang Yang-kyun's case, the court cannot rule out the possibility that he was tortured...by the Agency for National Security Planning".
The body of Lee Chol-kyu, a student activist in Kwangju wanted by the police because of an article he had written, was found in a reservoir on 10 May. Unofficial sources claimed that he had been tortured to death. An official autopsy concluded that he had died of accidental drowning.
In June two criminal suspects died from
police beatings. Seven police officers were prosecuted for causing their deaths, but Amnesty International did not know the outcome of the trial by the end of 1989. The trial began of four other police officers accused of torturing Kim Keun-tae, a former prisoner of conscience, in 1985. It had not been completed by the end of the year.
Korean newspapers seldom report death sentences imposed by the courts. In April, however, there was wide publicity about the imposition of the death penalty on Kim Hyun-hui, a North Korean. She was convicted of planting the bomb which blew up a Korean Airlines aircraft in November 1987, causing 115 deaths. Her death sentence was upheld by the Seoul High Court in July.
Seven prisoners were executed on 4 August. They had been convicted of murder, aggravated in some cases by rape, kidnapping or robbery. A Ministry of Justice official said the executions had been carried out in an effort to stem an increase in violent crime.
Amnesty International called for the release of prisoners of conscience and investigated the cases of possible prisoners of conscience. It called for the trial or release of prisoners detained without charge under the Public Security Law, all of whom were released by the end of October. Amnesty International also asked for information about prisoners serving long prison terms for allegedly being "spies" or "agents" for North Korea. The organization was concerned about their cases because the definition of espionage was broad and ambiguous and because in some well-docimiented cases prisoners of conscience had been convicted after unfair trials. Amnesty International called on the authorities to investigate all allegations of torture and expressed its concern about the seven executions in August.
The authorities informed Amnesty International in October that all prisoners held under the Public Security Law had been released and that six other prisoners of conscience — three publishers, one vvTiter, one journalism professor and one labour activist — had been released on bail or on suspended sentences at the end of 1988 or in 1989.
