FIJI
At least five critics of the government were briefly detained. The trials of other government opponents arrested but released on bail in 1988 were completed; some were convicted of sedition and others of unlawful assembly, but none was imprisoned. There were numerous reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees.
A draft constitution published by the government in 1988 included provisions for "positive discrimination" in favour of ethnic Fijians over Fijian citizens of Indian origin. Human rights activists and the former Prime Minister, Dr Tlmoci Bavadra, who died in October, said the proposed constitution would infringe fundamental hxmian rights. In September the government-appointed Constitution Inquiry and Advisory Committee issued a report which accepted the principle of "positive discrimination" and endorsed the draft constitution with minor revisions. There was speculation that Major-General Sitiveni Rabuka, who led two coups in 1987 and subsequently became Commander of the Armed Forces and Minister of Home Affairs, might stage a third coup in the face of mounting opposition to the draft constitution. Such speculation increased when a confidential military document detailing plans for the "neutralization" of civilian opposition leaders was leaked to the press. In October the Prime Minister announced that he would remain in office beyond December, when his interim government was due to complete its term, and Major-General Rabuka agreed to resign his civilian cabinet post.
In October at least five staff and students from the University of the South Pacific were detained for up to 24 hours by police and military officers and reportedly ill-treated by being kicked and beaten. Vijay Naidu, a Fijian citizen of Indian origin and a leading anti-nuclear activist, was arrested on 11 October and questioned about his political views and activities. He was reportedly denied access to a lawyer and subjected to racial taunts. He was released after several hours but was charged with illegal possession of a knife.
Dozens of people arrested on political grounds and released on bail in 1988 were
FIJI/FINLAND
brought to trial on charges such as unlawful assembly, arms-smuggling and sedition (see Amnesty International Report 1989]. In January, 18 anti-coup protesters who had been arrested in May 1988 were convicted of unlawful assembly but not imprisoned. In November eight chiefs from the island of Rotuma were found guilty of sedition and fined. The trial of 21 people detained in 1988 on suspicion of arms-smuggling was continuing at the end of the year, but treason charges against some of the defendants had been dropped.
There were numerous reports alleging torture and ill-treatment of criminal suspects. In January four men on trial for robbery testified that they had been assaulted in police custody and that their request for medical attention had been refused. One of the four appeared in court with blood stains on his shirt. While hearing this case, Chief Justice Apaitia Seru expressed concern about the frequency of "deliberate police assault" on suspects and called for an official inquiry. In September eight warders from Naboro Prison were convicted and sentenced to nine months' imprisonment for assaulting two escaped prisoners during their recapture in 1987 (see Amnesty International Report 1988]. The judge reportedly described the assault as savage, brutal and "a flagrant violation of human rights". A prison official charged with murdering one of the escaped prisoners was acquitted.
Amnesty International wrote to the Fijian Government expressing concern about the detention of prisoners of conscience and the ill-treatment of both political detainees and criminal suspects. It urged the government to ensure that all detainees were humanely treated and that all reports of torture or ill-treatment were impartially investigated. The government replied in December saying that the allegations of torture and ill-treatment would be investigated by the Ministry of Justice.
