HONDURAS
death, while being questioned about his previous political activity as a student. Victor Manuel Meza Elvir, a business student and member of an agricultural cooperative who was detained by the dni on 31 July, was allegedly held incommunicado in clandestine detention centres for five days. He was brought to court on 4 August, then transferred to the National Penitentiary in Tegucigalpa on arms-trafficking charges. He alleged that during the first five days after arrest he was repeatedly beaten on the head and on the soles of the feet with a rubber truncheon, punched in the chest and stomach, and given electric shocks. He was in prison awaiting trial at the end of the year.
On 2 February José Leonel Suazo Castillo, a student of physical education, "disappeared" after reportedly being detained in Tegucigalpa. A work colleague who was accompanying him testified that he was being followed at the time by several people in a white van without number plates and with tinted windows. Leonel Suazo was said to have had a dispute a few days earlier with a police officer, who threatened reprisals. Both the Fuerza de Seguridad Pública (fsp), the police force, and the dni denied having detained him. Three habeas corpus writs were filed on behalf of Leonel Suazo; a lawyer appointed by the courts inspected the headquarters of the fsp and the dm in Tegucigalpa, but did not find him. There were unconfirmed reports that he had been seen in fsp custody in early May, but his whereabouts were unknown at the end of the year. José Alfredo Diaz Amaya, a Salvadorian, was detained on 7 September at his home in La Esperanza, department of Intibucá, by army intelligence agents from the Tenth Infantry Battalion. He was apparently suspected of being a member of the Salvadorian armed opposition group, the Frente Farabundo Marti de Liberación Nacional (fmln), Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front. He was held at the battalion's base and was visited by his wife, who alleged that he had been tortured. However, on 9 November his wife was told by an officer of the battalion that he was no longer there. Despite repeated inquiries by human rights workers, José Díaz' wife was not informed of his whereabouts until December, when it was revealed that he had been deported to El Salvador on 19 October and released shortly afterwards.
A series of political killings occurred in July in the city of San Pedro Sula. On 4 July Edgardo Herrera, a leader of the Frente de Reforma Universitaria (fru), Front for University Reform, was shot dead by two men in plain clothes while a third man waited in a white pick-up truck. Salomón Vallecillo Andrade, President of the Honduran Tobacco Workers' Union, was killed two days later. He was shot while waiting for a bus, reportedly by two men who drove off in a white pick-up truck. Both Edgardo Herrera and Salomón Vallecillo were reported to have been under police surveillance and to have previously received death threats. On 11 July Roberto Ramón Caray, director of the extramural studies department of the Regional University Centre of the North was killed in similar circumstances outside his home. None of those responsible for these crimes had been brought to justice by the end of the year.
In August it was reported that the Supreme Court had ordered a review of the investigation into the murder in January 1988 of human rights leader Miguel Angel Pavón and union official Moisés Landaverde (see Amnesty International Report 1989], in view of the lack of progress in establishing the identity of the killers. No results of the investigation or of the findings of the Supreme Court review were known at the end of the year.
Honduran human rights groups claimed that criminal suspects were killed by the police in circumstances which suggested the impermissible use of lethal force or simuuary execution. Those killed included Norberto Flores Flores, a tailor who had previously served a prison term. He was detained on 28 March near his home in Tegucigalpa, apparently on suspicion of robbery, and taken to the dni headquarters. According to reports, he was taken from his cell during the night of 2 April. Two days later his body was found with bullet wounds on a road on the outskirts of Tegucigalpa. Police reportedly maintained he was shot attempting to escape while being taken to identify a hideout. However, friends said that they had taken him to hospital on the night of 3 April after he had survived an execution attempt and that dni agents had taken him away the next morning. His common-law wife was reportedly accosted and threatened by people in civilian clothes after she had registered a
HONDURAS/HONG KONG
complaint before a criminal coxirt against the director of the dni and two dni officers.
A campaign of defamation, harassment and intimidation of leading trade unionists and human rights workers, alleged by human rights groups to be instigated by the armed forces, persisted throughout the year (see Amnesty International Report 1989). Following the assassination of General Alvarez in January, Dr Ramón Custodio López, President of the Committee for the Defence of Human Rights in Honduras, Oscar Aníbal Puerto, its Vice-President, and three other prominent government critics were threatened with execution in a message broadcast on radio by a group calling itself the Alliance for Anti-communist Action (aaa). The group was one of several clandestine right-wing groups, believed to be linked to the armed forces, which mounted poster and graffiti campaigns slandering and threatening leading left-wing leaders and human rights activists. In July Gladys Lanza, President of the Electrical Workers' Union, and five other trade unionists and human rights workers reportedly received death threats by telephone. Further threats were said to have been made to the same people in November. Gladys Lanza escaped with minor injmies when a bomb exploded in her home on 15 November.
In January the Inter-American Court of Human Rights published its second decision on a Honduran "disappearance" case — that of Saúl Godínez Cruz, who "disappeared" in July 1982 reportedly after having been captured by a soldier and two men in plain clothes on the road between Choluteca and Monjarás. As in the case of Angel Manfredo Velásquez, the court found that the "disappearance" of Saúl Godínez was part of a systematic and selective practice of kidnappings and "disappearances" in Honduras from 1981 to 1984 (see Amnesty International Reports 1982 to 1965 and 1989). It held the government responsible for violation of his rights to life, personal freedom and humane freat-ment, and ordered it to pay fair compensation to his family. In July the court set compensation for the dependants of the two victims at a total of 1,400,000 lempiras (approximately USS700,000). The Inter-American Court also published its decision on the case of Costa Ricans Francisco Fairén Garbi, an economics student, and Yolanda Solxs Corrales, a teacher, who
allegedly "disappeared" in Honduras in December 1981 (see Amnesty International Report 1989). The court concluded that "numerous and insoluble difficulties" had prevented it from establishing whether the pair had "disappeared" in Honduras and whether the Honduran Government was responsible.
Amnesty International issued urgent appeals to the Honduran Government following reports of detentions, torture, alleged exfrajudicial killings, "disappearances" and death threats. It called on the government to guarantee the safety of prisoners, to carry out prompt and thorough investigations into reports of killings and "disappearances", and to bring to justice those responsible. It also urged that measures be taken to prevent further intimidation of members of opposition groups and human rights workers, and to ensure their safety.
