SAUDI ARABIA
At least 27 prisoners of conscience were imprisoned and other prisoners of conscience may have been among more than 70 detainees held without charge or trial. Some political detainees were held without trial in prolonged incommunicado detention. Torture was reportedly common and one death in custody may have been caused by torture or ill-treatment. Sentences of amputation and flogging continued to be imposed and carried out. At least 111 people were executed, 16 of them for political offences.
Information about political prisoners was limited because of strict official censorship and restrictions on freedom of movement within the country and access from abroad.
Suspected opponents of the government. including prisoners of conscience, were arrested by al-Mabahith al-'Amma, General Intelligence, and detained without trial. Most were Shi'a Muslims from the Eastern Province. Among them were suspected members or supporters of Munadhamat al-Thawra al-Islamiyya fil Jazira al-'Arabiyya, the Organization of
SAUDI ARABIA
Islamic Revolution in the Arabian Peninsula (oirap); Hizbul 'Amal al-Ishtiraki al-'Arabi-al-Jazira al-'Arabiyya, the Arab Socialist Action Party-the Arabian Peninsula (asap-ap); and Hizballah fil Hijaz, the Party of God in Hijaz.
At least 27 suspected oirap members or supporters wrere held without charge or trial at the General Intelligence Prison in al-Dammam. All were prisoners of conscience. Five of them were arrested in 1988 and the others between January and September 1989, principally in al-'Awamiyya, Senabes, al-Awjam, Safwa and Saihat in the Eastern Province. Among them were religious scholars, shopkeepers, company employees and university students. Sayyid Fadhil al-Sadda, a student, was arrested in Riyadh in January. He had been previously arrested in November 1979, at the age of 14, and held without charge or trial for a year. He was among 25 of the 27 detainees still held at the end of the year. The two released detainees were Sheikh Hassan Makki al-Khuwaildi, freed in April, and Sheikh Muhammad al-Silebi, released in September.
In March, six suspected members or supporters of asap-ap, who may have been prisoners of conscience, were arrested in Safwa and Riyadh. They too were detained without charge or trial in the General Intelligence Prison in al-Dammam. One was released in June, while the others remained in detention at the end of the year. Those still detained included 'Adil Salman 'Abdul-Hadi, a bank worker, and three employees of Saudi Arabian American Oil Company [Saudi aramco).
Four alleged members or supporters of Hizballah fil Hijaz were also detained without charge or trial, They were arrested in al-Ihsa', Saihat and al-Qatif in July and October and held in General Intelligence prisons in al-Ihsa' and al-Dammam. Sayyid 'Adnan Sayyid Muhammad al-Yusuf was one of these detainees. He was arrested when he returned to Saudi Arabia from Syria, reportedly after receiving an assurance from the Saudi Arabian embassy in Syria that he would not be arrested. He had also been detained without charge or trial in 1982 and in 1986.
Thirty-six other alleged Hizballah supporters were in detention at the beginning of the year They were arrested in April and August 1988 following explosions in al-Jubail petro-chemical complex and held at
the General Intelligence Prison in Riyadh (see Amnesty International Report 1989). Twenty of them were released in the first half of the year, while the others were still held without charge or trial at the end of 1989.
At least 28 other suspected opponents of the government were arrested and held without trial in Riyadh, al-Dammam and al-Ihsa'. They may have been prisoners of conscience. Twelve of them were released in October, while the others remained in detention. They included Ahmad Hassan al-Mutawa', a lecturer at King Fahd University in Dhahran. He was arrested in August after giving a lecture on Shi'ism on the occasion of 'Ashurh, a Shi'a religious observance, and held in the General Intelligence Prison in al-Dammam.
Several hundred pilgrims were reportedly arrested during the Hajj, or holy pilgrimage, following bomb attacks in Mecca in July. They included Kuwaiti, Omani and Pakistani nationals, most of whom were released after brief detention. Some of the 29 Kuwaitis held inconununicado in General Intelligence prisons in Jeddah and Mecca were later transferred to Riyadh. During their detention some were reportedly tortured. In September a Shari'a (Islamic law) court tried the 29 on charges of sabotage. The proceedings failed to meet international standards of fair trial. The defendants were not allowed legal representation and were convicted on the basis of "confessions" reportedly extracted imder torture. Nine of the Kuwaitis were acquitted, four were sentenced to between 15 and 20 years' imprisonment in addition to flogging, and 16 were sentenced to death.
Torture of political detainees, both during the year and in previous years, was reported. Former detainees alleged that the most commonly used methods included falaqa (beating on the soles of the feet), ta'liq (suspension by the wrists fi'om the ceiling or a high window), tas-hir (sleep deprivation), electric shocks and beatings all over the body. Detainees were usually held in solitary confinement until interrogation ended, in some cases for over six months.
Sheikh Muhammad al-Silebi, a religious scholar arrested in March on suspicion of links with the oirap, was held in solitary confinement for three months by General Intelligence in al-D^mmam. In June he was moved to hospital for a week, apparently
SAUDI ARABIA/SENEGAL
after being tortured, then retimied to soh-tary confinement in al-Dammam. In August his health deteriorated ftirther and he reportedly lost cognitive abilities. He was released in September.
Ln July Abdul-Aziz al-Faris, 'Ali al-Lail and Salah Nisfan, three university students, were reportedly tortured by members of the General Intelligence. Interrogators allegedly attempted to force them to confess to starting fires in the students' residence at King Saud University in Riyadh by subjecting them to falaqa and tas-hir. At the end of the year they remained in detention without charge or trial at the General Intelligence Prison in Riyadh, where they were denied access to legal counsel.
One death in custody was said to have been caused by tortm-e. Zahra' Habib Mansur al-Nasser from al-Awjam in the Eastern Province died in police custody three days after she and her husband were arrested in luly at al-Hudaitha checkpoint on the border between Saudi Arabia and lordan. She was apparently arrested because she possessed a photograph of Ayatollah Khomeini and a Shi'a prayer book. She was reportedly tortured at al-Hudaitha detention centre and her body allegedly bore marks of torture when returned to her family. Her husband was later released from custody.
Yasser Ali Muhammad al-Faraj, who was detained four times between April 1986 and December 1988, alleged he was tortured and ill-treated while in the custody of General Intelligence in al-Dammam. He said he was suspended by the wrists with chains and severely beaten, subjected to electric shocks and fa!aqa, burned with cigarettes and deprived of sleep for nine days. He was interrogated continuously for two months in 1986 and needed treatment for 15 days at al-Dammam Central Hospital.
Fourteen people convicted of repeated theft, including 11 Yemeni nationals, were punished by amputation of their right hands. At least 11 others were sentenced to floggings of between 150 and 900 lashes following conviction for theft and complicity in theft. Foiu- Kuwaiti nationals arrested in July in connection with bomb attacks in Mecca were sentenced in September to floggings of between 1,000 and 1,500 lashes.
In September, 16 Kuwaiti nationals were executed. The 16 had been on a pilgrimage to Mecca and were convicted of planting bombs there in July.
Between February and December, 95 Saudi and foreign nationals were executed for criminal offences, including murder and drug-trafficking. Among those executed were two brothers sentenced to death in 1970 for murder. They had remained on death row until their victim's eldest son, one month old at the time of the murder, reached the legal age of consent. Under Islamic law as practised in Saudi Arabia, the relatives of the murder victim may demand qisas (retribution) in the form of the death penalty or may waive such a claim freely or by financial settlement.
All executions were carried out publicly by beheading, except that of a Filipino housemaid who was publicly shot in Riyadh in March following her conviction for murder.
Amnesty International pressed for the release of prisoners of conscience, investigated the cases of people who may have been prisoners of conscience, and expressed concern to the government about the continued pattern of detaining political suspects without trial. The organization urged the authorities to investigate reports that political detainees were tortured and to establish an impartial inquiry into Zahra al-Nasser's death in custody. It urged that all sentences of flogging and amputation be commuted.
Amnesty International also informed the government of its concern about the dramatic rise in the number of executions carried out, reiterated its unconditional opposition to the death penalty and urged the commutation of all death sentences. No responses were received.
In March Amnesty International wrote to the government proposing that a delegation from the organization visit Saudi Arabia to discuss human rights concerns. No response had been received by the end of the year.
