NEPAL
Hundreds of political prisoners including journalists, students, teachers, members of political groups and human rights activists were detained during the year
under legislation allowing detention without charge or trial. Some were prisoners of conscience. Thousands of people were held briefly for participating in peaceful demonstrations. There were persistent reports that political prisoners were tortured.
In March a trade agreement with India dating from 1950 lapsed, resulting in the imposition of trade and transit restrictions by India on land-locked Nepal. Nepal suffered shortages of essential supplies and tension mounted between the two countries. Although all political activities remained officially banned under Nepal's non-party panchayat (assembly) system, the main opposition party, Nepali Congress, other political parties, students and journalists publicly criticized the government's handling of negotiations with India.
Two journalists, Gopal Gurung and Balaram Sharma, both prisoners of conscience arrested in mid-1988 for publishing material the authorities considered offensive, remained in prison throughout the year. They were held under the Treason Act and the Public Security Act - (psa) respectively.
During April and May a dozen other journalists were arrested and detained for up to four months for writing critically about the government's handling of the trade dispute. All were reportedly released without being brought to trial.
In April hundreds of students were arrested during peaceful demonstrations about the trade dispute and the government's closme of university campuses. Most were released after a few days, but others, including Ghanshyam Bhusal and Vijaya Subedi, were detained without charge or trial for several months under the
psa.
At least 22 prisoners of conscience were sentenced to between eight months' and six years' imprisonment for converting to Christianity or proselytizing. Both are offences under Nepal's legal code. For example, Krishna Bahadur Rai from Solukhumbu district in eastern Nepal was sentenced in February to six years' imprisonment for proselytizing.
In August at least 10 peaceful demonstrators, including Nepalese members of Amnesty International, were detained for several hours in Biratnagar during a march opposing the worldwide use of the death penalty.
NEPAL/NICARAGUA
In September, according to Nepali Congress, around 3,000 of its members and supporters were detained nationwide. Most were freed without charge within a week, but 21 were charged with disturbing the peace and seciu'ity for political gain. They were released on bail.
Hundreds of political prisoners were detained during 1989 and about 100 were in detention without having been tried at the end of the year. Many were detained under the Treason (Crime and Punishment) Act and the Organizations and Associations (Control) Act for criticizing or encouraging criticism of the monarchy or the non-party system. Some had been held for several years without trial. Others were held under the psa's provisions for detention without charge or trial for up to three years on broadly defined grounds of national security.
The psa was amended in August: the maximum period of detention was halved to 18 months and the powers of local officials to detain people were brought further under the control of local courts and the central government. An advisory board must now review cases after nine months' detention, but prisoners still have no access to legal representation at these boards and there is no judicial scrutiny of psa detentions. In the past, several people had been held for longer than the legally permitted three years. For example, Bhola Bohra, a student arrested in January 1984, was not released until May 1989. In September the Home Minister said that 19 people remained in detention under the psa. By the end of the year most of these had been released.
Torture was reported from several police stations and prisons, including severe beatings, insertion of pins under finger and toenails and sleep deprivation. In October a student who had been severely beaten by police was taken unconscious to hospital. Some detainees were reportedly tortured while held for up to three months in unacknowledged detention. Some unacknowledged detainees were reportedly released by order of the Supreme Court, but the police appear to have flouted other release orders and transferred detainees to other police stations. The health of many prisoners was reportedly jeopardized by overcrowding, inadequate sanitation, the prolonged use of fetters and the lack of medical facilities in many police
stations and prisons.
In August an amendment to the "li-eason (Crime and Punishment) Act abolished the death penalty for crimes against the state. It remains a punishment for attacking the royal family. No executions had taken place in Nepal since 1979.
Amnesty International urged the government to release prisoners of conscience and to release or charge and try more than 60 other political prisoners whose cases it was investigating. It also requested information about changes to the laws under which political prisoners are held. No response was received from the government.
