KENYA
Seven political detainees held without trial, including prisoners of conscience, were released in June. Other prisoners of conscience and people who may have been prisoners of conscience were among 34 political prisoners released after completing prison sentences imposed in previous years. At least 24 political prisoners were still serving prison sentences at the end of the year. Three of these prisoners were sentenced during the year. Several other short-term political arrests occurred. Over 36 death sentences were imposed, and up to 200 people were reportedly under sentence of death. No executions were known to have taken place. Asylum-seekers from Uganda and Somalia were forcibly returned to their countries of origin. Some of those returned to Somalia were subsequently killed there.
All seven political detainees held in administrative detention without charge or trial under the Public Security Regulations
were released in June. Wanyiri Kihoro, a lawyer, and Mukaru Ng'ang'a, a historian, were prisoners of conscience held since 1986. Raila Odinga, son of former vice-president Oginga Odinga, and Samuel Okumu Okwany, a former air force member, had been detained since 1988, Mirugi Kariuki, a lawyer and prisoner of conscience, had been detained since 1986. The two other administrative detainees had been held since September 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
Forty-seven political prisoners were still detained at the beginning of the year. They had been convicted between 1986 and 1988 in connection with a clandestine opposition group, Mwakenya [Muungano wa Wazalendo wa Kukomboa Kenya, Union of Patriots for the Liberation of Kenya). Charges against them included possessing or distributing seditious publications and taking an unlawful oath to join Mwakenya. Some of those convicted were prisoners of conscience and others may have been prisoners of conscience. Thirty-four of the prisoners received one-third remission of their sentences during the year and were released. At least three of those freed were prisoners of conscience: Odhiambo Olel, a medical doctor who reportedly was suffering from injuries caused by torture; Kimani wa Nyoike, a former member of parliament: and Julius Mwandawiro Mghanga, a student leader. Harris Okong'a Arara, another prisoner of conscience arrested in connection with seditious publications, remained in prison, Formerly a member of the air force, he was serving a lO-year sentence for possessing publications of the clandestine opposition groups, the Kenya Patriotic Front and the Kenya Revolutionary Movement, a charge he denied.
Most convicted political prisoners were held illegally for long periods before being brought to court. They were denied legal representation and access to their families before their trials, and were subjected to torture or duress to make them plead guilty to the charges.
During 1989 several suspected opponents of the government were also subjected to arrest and detention. Most of them were released without charge after two or three weeks in the custody of the police Special Branch. At least five were brought to trial on sedition charges: two were acquitted on charges of possessing seditious publications and released, three were
KENYA
convicted and imprisoned. Daniel Mwangi Theuri, who was unemployed, was sentenced in March to 20 months' imprisonment for failing to report the existence of a seditious organization. Dixon Jowe Alieth, a teacher, received a six-year sentence in October for possessing seditious publications. Wilson Awuor Ang'ong'a, a prison guard, pleaded guilty to joining Mwakenya and was sentenced to four and a half years' imprisonment.
In addition, three prisoners of conscience were charged with possessing the Protestant church magazine Beyond, which was banned in 1988 after criticizing the government's election procedures. Justin Kiborus Ngetich, a teacher, and his two sons, both school students, were arrested in October 1988. The three remained in custody throughout 1989, except for a short period when they were freed on bail. None of them had been brought to trial at the end of the year.
The editor of Beyond, Bedan Mbugua, was acquitted by the Appeal Court in August. He had been charged in 1988 with failing to submit an annual business report to the Registrar of Books and Newspapers, an offence for which he had received a nine-month prison sentence. Amnesty International believed his arrest had been politically motivated (see Amnesty International Report 1989). He had served two weeks of the sentence in August 1988, before his release on bail pending hearing of his appeal.
Despite a public statement by President Daniel arap Moi in February that torture was not permitted, reports were received about political prisoners who were tortured or threatened with torture. However, four police officers were imprisoned in February after they were found guilty of causing the death of Taalu Kotela Kiombwe. The victim, a Zairian musician tortured on suspicion of committing a criminal offence, died in custody in Mombasa early in 1988. No further developments were reported in the case of Peter Karanja, a political detainee who died in custody in 1987, although an inquest judge had concluded in 1988 that he had been tortured (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
Conditions of political imprisonment were harsh. Prisoners were held in solitary confinement and permitted to leave their cells for only one hour a day. Medical treat-
ment and hygiene were poor and access to reading material was limited. Visits and correspondence from relatives were also severely restricted.
Courts imposed over 36 death sentences for robbery with violence or murder. While the government disclosed no information about the number of prisoners under sentence of death, up to 200 people reportedly remained on death row. Most had apparently filed judicial appeals or petitions for presidential clemency. No executions were announced and it was not known whether death sentences were carried out in 1989.
In February more than 200 Ugandan asylum-seekers were forcibly returned to Uganda, despite fears that they would be subjected to human rights violations there. Ugandan security officials reportedly detained some of them upon their return. In September some 60 asylum-seekers from Somalia were forcibly repatriated, 18 of whom were said to have been extrajudicially executed by Somali soldiers and the rest detained. Hundreds of others were forcibly returned to Somalia in November after over 3,500 people attempted to escape fighting by entering northeast Kenya. The Kenyan authorities refused to allow the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to assist these asylum-seekers, and more were detained and deported in December. Some Kenyan nationals of Somali origin were also arrested and forcibly sent to Somalia in December, according to reports, including at least one opponent of the Somali Government believed to be at risk of human rights violations in Somalia.
Amnesty International welcomed the release of the seven people from administrative detention and pressed for the release of all prisoners of conscience. It also continued to investigate cases of possible prisoners of conscience. The organization appealed to the government in November for adherence to international standards in its treatment of Somali asylum-seekers. It urged the government to give all asylum-seekers access to international procedures for the protection of refugees. Arrmesty International protested when the government forcibly retxuned hundreds of asylum-seekers to Somalia.
Amnesty International also appealed for the commutation of all death sentences and for measures towards abolition of the death penalty.
