SAO TOME AND PRiNCIPE
Thirty-nine members of an opposition organization were sentenced to prison terms for seeking to overthrow the government. The prisoners' trial fell short of international standards as they had no right of appeal.
The Special Court for Counter-Revolutionary Acts was abolished in February. It was created in 1975, soon after the country became independent, to try political cases. It used summary procedures and defendants had no right of appeal. After its abolition, jurisdiction over political cases passed to the ordinary courts.
Forty-three members of the Frente da
Resistência Nacional de Sao Tomé e Príncipe-Reformada (frnstp-r), Reformed Sao Tomé and Príncipe National Resistance Front, were brought to trial in August before the Higher Court of Appeal for allegedly attempting to overthrow the government of President Manuel Pinto da Costa (see Amnesty International Report 1989]. There is no right of appeal from this court, the highest in the country. frnstp-r leader Manuel Afonso do Rosario dos Santos, known as Afonso Santos, and his companions were arrested in March 1988 when they entered the country illegally.
The defendants were charged with treason, armed rebellion and other offences including "mercenarism". Both foreign mercenary activities and use of foreign money to take up arms against the government are covered under "mercenarism", which is the only crime punishable by death in Sao Tomé. Afonso Santos allegedly received money from an unspecified foreign source and, with his supporters, attempted to capture the Head of State and the Minister of Defence. A Portuguese lawyer represented Afonso Santos, while two court-appointed defence lawyers represented the other 42 defendants.
All but four of the accused were found guilty in September on some of the charges. Although none was convicted of "mercenarism", the court found that the group had endangered the sovereignty of the state by accepting money from a foreign source. The court recognized that the defendants had been armed only with four unloaded pistols, but judged that the group's actions constituted an attempt against the life of the President and Defence Minister. Afonso Santos was sentenced to 22 years' impris-
SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE/SAUDI ARABIA
onment and ordered to pay compensation to the families of three of his supporters. The three had been killed in March 1988 when security forces captured the group. Thirty-four defendants were sentenced to between 16 and 21 years' imprisonment and four received two-year sentences.
Amnesty International welcomed the abolition of the Special Court for Counter-Revolutionary Acts. It expressed concern that those sentenced in September had no right of appeal against their convictions or sentences. The organization also urged the authorities to investigate allegations that some of the defendants had been ill-treated diu-ing interrogation and that one had been shot after his arrest. There was no reply from the government.
