NIGERIA
At least 30 critics of the government, all prisoners of conscience, were detained without charge or trial, most for brief periods but some for several months. Eleven trade union leaders who were arrested after a strike had their life sentences reduced to 10 years' imprisonment. Harsh prison and detention conditions continued to be reported. The number of known executions dropped sharply to 12 during the year, but this may have been because the authorities halted executions in public and did not announce the number carried out inside prisons.
The ban on political parties, in force since the armed forces took power in 1983, was lifted in May as a step towards the
NIGERIA
restoration of civilian rule planned for 1992. However, after criticizing the 13 parties which sought registration, the President, General Ibrahim Babangida, reimposed the ban in October. In December the government established two new political parties — one of the right and one of the left — which alone can contest forthcoming elections.
At least 30 prisoners of conscience, many of them joimialists, were detained without charge, most for periods of less than one week, but in some cases for up to eight months. They were held under the State Security (Detention of Persons) Decree, No. 2 of 1984. which provides for the indefinite administrative detention without charge or trial of any person suspected of threatening the economy or the security of the state,
Joiunalists who wrote articles critical of the government were routinely questioned by the security police, the State Seciuity Service (sss), and sometimes detained for short periods. Following an article in The Republic newspaper in June about a court action against the government, the police sought to arrest the editor, Paxton Olu-Idowu. and four of his staff. When he could not be found, armed police arrested his wife, Florence Olu-Idowu. Although eight months pregnant, she was held with a male suspect in a police cell without food, water or toilet facilities until her husband reported to the police the following day. He and foiu colleagues were subsequently detained for a week before being freed without charge.
Other journalists were held for longer periods. Anthony Ukpong, a reporter with the Weekly Metropolitan newspaper, was
arrested in December 1988 and held without charge until July when he was released before a legal action challenging his detention came to court. He had written an article speculating that the head of the police force was to be dismissed. Femi Aborisade, editor of Labour Militant, was detained without charge from February to September. He said he was questioned only about why he had continued to publish the newspaper after he had been detained for two weeks in 1988. Both complained of being held almost naked in cramped conditions at the sss interrogation centre in Lagos, and of being denied access to their lavtryers or families. Detainees held at the centre apparently went on hunger-strike more than once during 1989 to protest their conditions but did not achieve any improvements.
Two prisoners of conscience detained under Decree 2 were also prosecuted. In May Alhaji Balarabe Musa, a former civilian governor of Kaduna State, was arrested and charged with launching a political party while being disqualified from involvement in politics, an offence which carries a five-year prison sentence. Anyone who held office in any former government is banned from holding government office or a post in a political party until 1992; officials who have been convicted of any offence are banned for life. Although a court ordered Alhaji Balarabe Musa's release on bail two days after his arrest, he was immediately redetained under Decree 2. His trial was adjourned in August and he was released in October; the trial had not resumed by the end of the year.
In June Gani Fawehinmi, a lawyer and prominent government critic, was arrested in Lagos during a public meeting about the government's economic policies. He was detained in harsh conditions in northeast Nigeria, over 1,500 kilometres from his home in Lagos. He required hospital treatment a week later because he had not been given medication required for high blood pressure. In July the High Court in Lagos awarded him damages for unlawful arrest but ruled that it did not have jurisdiction to question his administrative detention. In September he was charged with obstructing the political transition program, an offence punishable by five years' imprisonment, for criticizing the government in a magazine interview. The courts agreed to his release on bail, but he was immediately redetained
NIGERIA/PAKISTAN
under Decree 2 and held until October when he was released after widespread protests, His trial had not resumed by the end of the year.
Hundreds of students were arrested in May and June during countrjoAdde demonstrations and riots against the government's economic policies. According to official statements, 22 people died in the disturbances, but unofficial sources put the death toll as high as 100. Six universities were closed and several student leaders were detained without charge under seciuity legislation. The President of the National Association of Nigerian Students (nans), Salihu Mohammed Lukman, was detained without charge throughout August and released after the High Court ordered the sss to justify his detention. Gbenga Olawepo and Gbenga Komolafe, also leading officials of nans, were arrested in September and October respectively. The Lagos High Court ruled in November that it had no jurisdiction to order their release, but a judge at a subsequent hearing ruled that the conditions for detention required by Decree 2 had not been met. This rendered the detention orders unlawful and they were released.
Eleven senior employees of the National Electric Power Authority (nepa), sentenced to life imprisonment in December 1988 after organizing a strike which cut power supplies, remained imprisoned although their sentences were reduced. They were convicted by the Miscellaneous Offences Tribunal, a special military court, of conspiracy to interfere unlawfully with nepa equipment and of inducing others to do so (see Amnesty International Report 1989). In April they withdrew their appeal to the Special Appeals TVibunal in the hope of clemency from the President; in August he reduced their sentences to 10 years' imprisonment.
In September it was reported that restrictions had been lifted on the movement of Major-General Muhammadu Buhari, the former head of state whose military government was overthrown in 1985, and Major-General TXinde Idiagbon, his former chief of staff. Following their release from detention in December 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989), they were apparently confined to their home districts.
Although the number of reported executions dropped sharply, from at least 85 in
1988 to at least 12 in 1989, the real figure for 1989 was believed to be considerably higher. In September the Chief Justice of Nigeria stated that executions in public had been stopped. It appeared that executions by firing-squad, formerly carried out in public, might be taking place out of public view. As with hangings, which take place inside prisons, they were not officially announced. The government did not state how many executions had been carried out in the year.
The last public executions known to Amnesty International were of three prisoners shot by firing-squad in February in Abuja, the new federal capital, before a crowd of thousands. They were convicted by a Robbery and Firearms Tribunal, a special court which allows no right of appeal to a higher court. One of those executed, Matthew Anu, was reported to have been aged 18 at the time of the execution and to have been a minor at the time of the offence.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience, for other political detainees to be either charged or released and for the repeal of legislation permitting the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience. The organization investigated whether power workers serving long prison sentences were prisoners of conscience and called for improvements in prison conditions. Amnesty International also expressed concern that prisoners, including at least one minor, continued to be executed after trials before special courts which allowed no right of appeal. In response to calls for the abolition of the death penalty, the government informed Amnesty International in July that a human rights department was to be established under ministerial control; no further information about it had been received by the end of the year.
