CAMBODIA (KAMPUCHEA)
Hundreds of people were reportedly arrested for alleged involvement in armed opposition activities amid continued armed conflict on the western fringes of the country and scattered guerrilla activity elsewhere: they were apparently detained without charge or trial. One political trial was reported. The death penalty was abolished.
The Government of the State of Cambodia, headed by Chairperson of the Coimcil of Ministers Hun Sen, faced con-
tinued armed opposition from the forces of the exiled Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea (CGDK) whose nominal head was Prince Norodom Sihanouk. The CGDK, which continued to represent Cambodia at the United Nations, included the Partie of Democratic Kampuchea, known as the "Khmer Rouge", whose guerrilla forces were mainly active in areas adjoining the border with Thailand. They mounted new attacks following the reported September withdrawal of Vietnamese troops, which had supported the government of Hun Sen. Widespread kidnappings and deliberate killings of non-combatant villagers and local administrators by guerrilla forces, particularly those of the "Khmer Rouge", were reported but could not be independently confirmed. International efforts aiming at a peace settlement continued.
In April an amended constitution was promulgated which abolished the death penalty and changed the name of the country from "People's Republic of Kampuchea" to "State of Cambodia". The Constitution also strengthened safeguards against torture and incorporated formal provisions for fair trials. However, the implementation of these measures was difficult to gauge as international human rights investigators were not permitted to visit the country and the difficulty of obtaining detailed information about human rights continued.
In June the Public Prosecutor General disclosed that over 534 political prisoners had been released since the central government initiated a review of their cases in December 1987. Those freed had apparently all been held without charge or trial or after unfair political frials. However, the identities of those released were not known, nor was it clear how many were
freed dxiring the year.
Hundreds of people were reportedly arrested, suspected of supporting the CGDk. The official radio. Voice of the Cambodian People (vocp), said in August that in the first three months of the year police had arrested 517 "covert enemy elements" who had been "hiding among the population in various localities". In June the vocP reported that "implanted agents of the enemy" had been arrested by the Batdambang provincial armed forces between December 1988 and April 1989. Three "enemy agents" were also said to have been arrested by the Kampung Thom provincial armed forces in May. Thirty-one others, officially described as "enemy agents" who formed parts of "hidden enemy networks", were reportedly arrested in September by armed forces of the Foiuth Military Region, believed to comprise Siem Reap-Utdar Meanchey, Banteay Meanchey and Batdambang provinces. None of those arrested was known to have been brought to trial.
Suspected opponents of the government continued to be subjected to arbitrary arrest and detention. A report submitted to the National Assembly by the Public Prosecutor General in June stated that local authorities were arresting political suspects without obtaining proper legal authorization and detaining them for longer periods than permitted by law. In particular, they were failing to observe a requirement under Decree-Law 27 d-l that the Council of Ministers' approval should be obtained before anyone can be detained without charge or for more than 12 months. The report also noted that despite unlawfully long periods of "temporary detention", there was "an incapacity to build up dossiers for presentation to the courts for trials". This resulted in the widespread detention without trial of people accused of criminal offences. The National Assembly was also informed in June that the Supreme People's Court had been unable to commence hearing appeal cases owing to lack of resources and other problems. This implied that tried and convicted political prisoners might effectively be denied an opportunity to appeal against conviction and sentence. However, a new Code of Criminal Procedure, passed on 16 July, stated that prisoners were entitled to file a "suit of contest" before the People's Supreme Court if they were
CAMBODIA (KAMPUCHEA)/CAMEROON
"unwilling to accept the verdict" of lower courts.
One political trial was reported: in March the official news agency announced that 15 CGDK guerrilla fighters belonging to the Sihanoukist National Army had been sentenced to prison terms of three to 20 years. All 15, apparently arrested in Kampot province in November 1988, reportedly pleaded guilty to establishing "clandestine forces" inside Cambodia, moving weapons into the country from Thailand and preparing to fire rockets into the capital, Phnum Penh. There was insufficient information to indicate whether their trial satisfied international fair trial standards.
Amnesty International continued to seek information from the government and other sources about political prisoners. In March the organization published the names of 343 political prisoners reportedly arrested between 1979 and 1986 and since held without charge or trial; it asked the authorities to clarify their current status. No reply was obtained during the year.
Amnesty International welcomed the abolition of the death penalty and other new constitutional measiu^s to protect human rights. It wrote several times to the government to suggest that an Amnesty International delegation should visit Cambodia to discuss human rights, but no response had been received by the end of the year.
