LEBANON
Government forces and armed militias carried out hundreds of arbitrary arrests of suspected political opponents, some of whom may have been prisoners of conscience. In most cases their fate and whereabouts remained unknown, but a small number were released in prisoner exchanges. A number of people were
LEBANON
killed outside the immediate context of armed conflict in what appeared to be extrajudicial executions.
Lack of central governmental control and armed conflicts between rival governmental and non-govemmental forces posed considerable problems for obtaining and assessing accurately information about human rights violations. However, all sides were believed to have perpetrated some abuses.
A Charter for National Reconciliation, proposed by the Arab League, was endorsed by Lebanese deputies meeting in Ta'if, Saudi Arabia, in October. It proposed a series of political reforms, including the transfer of executive power from the president to the prime minister and dividing an increased number of parliamentary seats equally between Muslims and Christians. On 5 November Lebanese deputies elected René Mu'awad as President of the Republic, a post which had been vacant since September 1988, He was assassinated 17 days later in West Beirut and was succeeded by Elias Hrawi, who was elected on 24 November. However, by the end of 1989 General Michel 'Aoun, appointed as interim prime minister in September 1988 by the outgoing president Amin Gemayel, continued to challenge the legitimacy of the elections and President Hrawi's cabinet. He remained head of an interim military cabinet based in East Beirut.
Syrian government forces maintained control of northern Lebanon, the Beka' Valley, West and southern Beirut, and the coastal road towards Sidon. Israeli government forces maintained control of the so-called "security zone" along the Lebanon/Israel border.
The predominantly Druze militia of the Progressive Socialist Party (psp) controlled the Shouf mountains south of Beirut. The mainly Shi'a Muslim Amai Movement retained control over territory in southern Lebanon between Sidon and the "security zone". The Lebanese Forces (lf), a mainly Christian militia, controlled territory in East Beirut and neighbouring coastal and mountain regions north and east of the city. The South Lebanon Army (sla), a Christian militia, controlled an area along the south-em Lebanese border, in conjunction with Israeli Defence Force (idf) units. The psp, Amai, the lf and the sla, although not governments, all exercised effective control over particular areas and their populations.
and thus had the means and responsibility to respect human rights. Other non-govem-mental groups conunitted human rights abuses but lacked such extensive or effective territorial control. They included Hizbullah (Party of God), Islamic Jihad and various Palestinian factions.
Both government and non-govemment forces reportedly arrested combatants and civilians. Syrian government forces carried out arrests of suspected opponents. Some were held in Lebanon in detention centres under Syrian jurisdiction, while others were transferred to Syria. At least 160 detainees who had been arrested by Syrian forces in Lebanon in previous years, and then held without charge or trial in Syria, were released during the year (see Syria). In July Shaikh Abd al-Karim 'Ubaid, a prominent member of Hizbullah, was abducted by Israeli forces from southern Lebanon and placed under administrative detention in Israel.
In January it was reported that 15 detainees held by the lf on charges of sabotage and espionage had been released in December 1988. In February predominantly Christian units of the Lebanese Army clashed with the lf for control of parts of East Beirut and its suburbs. During two weeks of hostilities, the army reportedly arrested 148 members of the lf militia, some of whom were said to have been taken to the Defence Ministry in Yarzé, northeast of Beirut. The lf reportedly arrested some 100 army personnel. At the end of February leading members of the Maronite chin-ch reportedly mediated between the army and the lf to secure the release of the detainees, but it was not clear whether any were released. In November two Amal members previously arrested by the lf in Byblos were released in a prisoner exchange with Amal.
In January a cease-fire agreement was concluded in Damascus between Amal and Hizbullah, which provided for the release of prisoners held by both sides. The following month, a total of 32 prisoners held in southern Lebanon were exchanged, but others reportedly remained in detention. Hizbullah said that Amal still held about 500 people arrested in lyre, Nabatiye, Jibchit and other areas, but it was not possible to verify this or obtain further information. In September Amal announced that it had detained a number of people in southern Lebanon who were intending to
LEBANON/LESOTHO
launch rocket attacks on Israel. It was not clear what had become of them by the end of the year. It was also not possible to obtain further information about 125 people reportedly detained by Amal in Ghazieh and Tyre in December 1988. However, two Palestinians detained by Amal in 1988 were reported to have been released in January, and two LF members arrested earlier in the year were known to have been released by Amal in the prisoner exchange with the LF in November.
The sla continued to hold an estimated 300 people in Khiam detention centre in southern Lebanon, some of whom were arrested during 1989. In January, 19 people from 'Ain Qunya, Khiam, Hasbayya, Habbariyya and Markaba were arrested. One was released in February but the fate of the others remained unknown. In May several people were arrested in Jezzine, reportedly for refusing to join the Sla. About 50 people, most of whom were arrested in previous years, were said to be held for refusing to join the sla. In October the sla was reported to have detained 22 people ftom the villages of 'Aytaroun, Kfartebnit, Kfarhouna and Sha'ba. Nine were later released but the situation of the others was unclear at the end of the year. Among them were five villagers from Sha'ba in the district of Hasbayya. They were arrested on 17 October, apparently for resisting efforts by Israeli forces to establish a civil administration in the "security zone" in place of the existing Lebanese administration. Other detainees included Suha Beshara, who apparently remained in untried detention. She had been arrested while reportedly trying to assassinate General Antoine Lahad. the leader of the sla, in November 1988.
Foiuteen detainees were reportedly released from Khiam detention centre in January, nine others in February and a further nine in November: some of the last group had reportedly been held without charge or trial for over two years.
Information was received during 1989 about the torture in previous years of detainees held by Syrian forces in Lebanon (see Syria).
A number of people were apparently deliberately killed for political reasons outside the immediate context of the armed conflict. They included Shaikh Hassan Khaled, the Mufti of Lebanon and the country's highest Sunni Muslim authority,
who was killed on 16 May; Nazem Qadiri, a Sunni member of parliament killed on 20 September; and President René Mu'awad, who was killed in a bomb blast on 22 November. All three were killed in West Beirut. There was insufficient information to attribute responsibility for these and other apparent extrajudicial executions. In late November, two Shi'a Muslim detainees were killed during riots by prisoners in Khiam detention centre. Some reports suggested that they died from inhaling tear-gas used by guards to quell the riots, but other reports alleged that they were shot by guards. General Lahad reportedly ordered an investigation into the incident.
Amnesty Intemational wrote to the LF in January to respond to its offer to hold talks with the organization (see Amnesty International Report 1989]. Amnesty Intemational asked for information from the LF in response to its previous inquiries as a basis for discussions. However, this was not forthcoming by the end of the year. In December Amnesty Intemational wrote to the SLA expressing concern about the reported killing of two detainees in Khiam detention centre the previous month. The organization requested the names and details of the detainees and asked to be informed of the results of any investigation into the incident.
