LIBERIA
Ten prisoners of conscience arrested in 1988 remained in prison and three others were held for two weeks. Two prisoners charged with involvement in a politically motivated murder died in detention, apparently as a result of torture, ill-treatment or medical neglect. Two other murder suspects and a prisoner under sentence of death also died in detention, apparently because of poor prison conditions. Government forces were reported to have extrajudicially executed unarmed civilians following an attempted invasion by exiled government opponents who also killed many civilians. Death sentences were passed on 20 people but no executions were reported.
Gabriel William Kpoleh and nine other prisoners of conscience sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment for treason in October
LIBERIA
1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989] remained in prison throughout the year. It appeared that they had been convicted after an unfair trial either because of their non-violent opposition to the government or in order to give credibility to the authorities' allegation of an attempted armed coup. The 10 prisoners were reportedly held in poor conditions at the Central Prison in the capital, Monrovia. In December the Supreme Court heard their appeal for a retrial but had not given a decision by the end of the year.
Momodu Lavala and two other University of Liberia students were detained illegally and without charge for two weeks in October; they were apparently suspected of contravening a ban on student political activities imposed by President Samuel Doe under an executive order in 1988. Momodu Lavala and another student had been suspended from the university after they re-established a student political party, citing a 1974 Supreme Court ruling that executive orders lapsed after one year if not ratified by the legislature.
In October two murder suspects died at Monrovia Central Prison, apparently as a result of torture, ill-treatment or medical neglect. The prison's superintendent told the court before which they had been indicted that they had been transferred from military custody in very poor health in September. Following their arrest, thought to have been in April or May, they had been held illegally and incommunicado in the Post Stockade, a military detention centre where political detainees have been tortured in the past. They and eight others were charged in August with conspiracy to commit a ritual murder — murder committed in the context of magical or religious beliefs — which was intended to assist in overthrowing President Doe. A former government minister, Major-General Gray Dioh Allison, had already been sentenced to death for the same ritual murder (see below), following a trial in which one of the two prisoners who died had testified for the prosecution. It appeared that the two may have been put under duress to induce them to testify for the state in a second trial; three of the others accused were released after apparently being offered immunity from prosecution if they agreed to turn state's evidence in the second trial. No inquest is known to have been held into the two deaths in prison.
Three other prisoners — suspected or convicted of criminal offences — died in custody, reportedly as a result of harsh conditions. A suspected murderer and another man sentenced to death for murder in February both died at Buchanan Central Prison in mid-1989; in October another murder suspect died at Monrovia Central Prison. The authorities did not reveal the cause of these deaths and no inquests were reported. However, the deaths were said to have been due to inadequate diet and poor conditions, particularly at Buchanan prison where there were no sanitary, washing or medical facilities. The authorities and voluntary bodies subsequently took steps to install toilets and improve the prisoners' diet at this prison.
Hundreds of imarmed civilians were killed after an estimated 100 exiled government opponents entered Nimba County in northeast Liberia on 24 December with the aim of overthrowing the government of President Doe. According to the authorities, the rebels initially attacked the villages of Butuo and Karnplay and killed some 16 officials and over 200 unarmed civilians. Refugees and other unofficial sources reported that the rebels killed dozens of people and that government forces retaliated by burning villages and killing large numbers of unarmed civilians who were unconnected with the rebels. Thousands of refugees fled to neighbouring Côte d'Ivoire and Guinea.
The chief of Butuo claimed that the armed forces which recaptured the village burned it down and shot dead the village commissioner, David Boley, and his wife on 29 December. After being questioned about the rebels, he and the Boleys were allegedly stripped, made to lie down and then shot; the chief of Butuo apparently survived because he was left for dead.
Following searches by the armed forces in Monrovia in late December, some 12 people suspected of supporting the invasion were reportedly arrested.
Twenty prisoners were known to have been sentenced to death following convictions for murder. Seventeen prisoners were sentenced in July after two trials in Voinjama, Lofa County. No executions were reported. Major-General Gray Dioh Allison, formerly minister of national defence, was sentenced to death in August for allegedly ordering a ritual murder intended to help him overthrow President Doe. He was
LIBERIA/LIBYA
convicted following a trial in camera before a military court which allowed no right of appeal to a higher court. Excerpts of his trial were shown on government-owned television, but the international and local independent press were not allowed to attend the trial. It appeared that prosecution witnesses, many of them arrested as suspects weeks before Major-General Allison, may have been led to testify by torture, ill-treatment or illegal inducements. When Major-General Allison's civilian lawyers sought a review of the trial on the grounds that the court's judgment had not been consistent with the evidence and that it had overlooked inconsistencies in witness testimonies, they were refused a review, convicted of contempt of coiut and fined. Major-General Allison was transferred to a remote prison camp at Belle Yellah where prisoners have died in recent years from ill-treatment, malnutrition and medical neglect (see Amnesty International Report 1989). No decision on his petition for presidential clemency was known to have been made by the end of the year.
Amnesty International published a report in May which called for the release of the 10 prisoners of conscience convicted in the 1988 treason trial and described ways in which the trial was unfair Amnesty International also inquired into the causes of deaths in detention and appealed against the use of the death penalty.
Five prisoners of conscience and 51 untried political detainees arrested in pre> vious years were held throughout 1989. At least 60, but possibly many more, suspected critics or opponents of the government arrested in 1989 were detained incommunicado and without charge or trial at the end of the year. At least one political prisoner was reportedly kept in detention despite having been acquitted and at
least 15 were serving sentences imposed after unfair trials. There was new information indicating that a prisoner of conscience had been executed in 1984.
In March the General People's Congress (gpc) discussed and promulgated a draft Law on the Consolidation of Liberty. This retained the ban on certain political and religious activities, but called for guarantees to protect the independence of the courts. It also called for the use of the death penalty to be restricted as a step towards its ultimate abolition.
On 16 May Libya became a State Party to the United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading TYeatment or Punishment, and to the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
Five prisoners of conscience remained in Abu Salim Prison in TOpoli throughout the year. All of them had been arrested in 1973 and convicted of membership of the Islamic Liberation Party (ilp). A sixth alleged ilp member, 'Abd al-Qader al-Ya'qubi, was said to have, become insane and to have died at the end of 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
At least 51 other political detainees arrested between 1980 and 1986 remained in detention without charge or trial throughout 1989. They included Rashid al-'Urfiyah, a law graduate, and 'Umran 'Umar al-TUrbi, a dentist, who were suspected of belonging to illegal opposition groups and were arrested in 1982 and 1984 respectively. Most of these prisoners were held in Abu Salim Prison where many were apparently allowed family visits.
Hundreds of arrests were reported during 1989, particularly following violent clashes in January and April between religious activists and members of the security forces and Revolutionary Committees (local political groups set up to support official policies). At least 60, but possibly many more, of those arrested were reported to be still detained without charge or trial at the end of the year. They were held incommunicado and their whereabouts were unknown. They included Abu Bakr al-Sadiq Mahmud, an engineer arrested in January, and Muhammad al-Furtiya, who is regarded as a religious leader by some followers of the Wababiyya Islamic doctrine in Libya and was arrested in February.
Further arrests were reported in October, following clashes between religious
LIBYA/MADAGASCAR
activists and members of the security forces and Revolutionary Committees. In a speech to the gpc in October, Libyan leader Colonel Mu'ammar Gaddafi described those involved as worse than "cancer" and "Aids", and stated that they should be "crushed". Following this speech hundreds of religious activists were said to have been arrested by members of the Revolutionary Committees. However, no details were available by the end of the year.
At least one political prisoner, Abdullah Menina, was reportedly kept in detention despite having been acquitted. Arrested in 1984, he was said to have been tried in 1985 and acquitted on charges related to illegal political activities.
At least 15 political prisoners were serving prison terms imposed after unfair trials. Twelve were Islamic activists reportedly arrested in 1983 and convicted of belonging to an illegal organization by a court set up by the Revolutionary Committees. Their whereabouts remained unknown. Another Islamic activist, Hussayn Hadiya Suwayd, sentenced to life imprisonment in 1983, was reported to have died in 1986 but this had not been officially confirmed. Three political prisoners were military officers convicted of attempted coups and sentenced to death in two separate military trials in 1970 and 1985. Their sentences were not carried out and were commuted by Colonel Gaddafi in lune 1988. In all these trials the defendants were reportedly denied legal counsel and the right of appeal.
New information received diuing 1989 suggested that Muhammad Hilal, a prisoner of conscience held since 1980, had been executed in 1984. He was sentenced to death in 1983 by the Permanent Revolutionary Coiut, which convicted him of membership of the pro-Iraqi wing of the Ba'th Party. An ordinary criminal court had reportedly acquitted him of the same charges in 1982. Reports of his execution had not been confirmed by the govemment.
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the release of all prisoners of conscience and for clarification of the cases of other political prisoners. In 1988 the Libyan authorities undertook to review the cases of all remaining political prisoners after 400 were released in an amnesty (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1989). To Amnesty International's knowledge, no such review had taken place by the end of 1989.
The organization expressed concem about the secret detention of the 60 or more religious activists arrested in early 1989 and reportedly still held at the end of the year. It called for them to be treated humanely and given access to relatives, lawyers and medical attention. Amnesty Intemational also requested information about other arrests during the year, and about the reported deaths in custody, including that of Muhammad Hilal. No substantive responses were received.
