JAMAICA
At least 27 death sentences were imposed for murder but no executions were carried out during the year. Some 230 prisoners were under sentence of death. The United Nations Human Rights Committee (hrc) adopted the view that there had been violations of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (iccpr) in the cases of two prisoners under sentence of death. The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council (fcpc) in London annulled the convictions of 10 prisoners under sentence of death. There were further reports of ill-treatment of prisoners. Prisoners reportedly died after incidents in which the authorities used force. There were allegations that several people who could have been arrested were shot dead by the police.
*)'%%**)&&%%*)&%%*)&%
JAMAICA
The People's National Party (PNP) won the February general election and Michael Manley was sworn in as the new Prime Minister on 13 February.
At least 27 people were sentenced to death for murder during the year but no executions took place. Some 230 prisoners were on death row. Earl Pratt and Ivan Morgan (see Amnesty International Report 1969), sentenced to death in 1979, were still on death row at the end of the year despite the fact that in April the hrc, which supervises the implementation of the iccpr, adopted the view that Jamaica had violated its treaty obligations under the Covenant in their cases and that their death sentences should be commuted. The hrc found a violation of iccpr Article 14 (the right to a fair trial) because the Court of Appeal had delayed issuing a written judgment for three years and nine months after hearing the appeal. This delay had prevented Earl Pratt and Ivan Morgan from appealing to the icpc, the final court of appeal for Jamaica. It also found violations of Article 7 (the prohibition of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment) because the two men had been notified of a stay of execution granted to them on 23 February 1987 only 45 minutes before their execution was due to be carried out, despite the stay being formally granted about 20 boms earlier. The hrc's view was that the two men were entitled to a remedy for the violations of the iccpr and that "the necessary prerequisite...is the commutation of the sentence".
In decisions delivered in March and luly the jcpc quashed the convictions of 10 prisoners under sentence of death. The jcpc found that the trial judges had failed to warn the jury adequately about the danger of convicting on the basis of uncorroborated identification testimony. The 10 men, who were released in March and September, had spent between four and 11 years under sentence of death. The fcpc had previously allowed only one appeal in a lamaican death penalty case since 1980.
In early July some 380 prisoners at the General Penitentiary in Kingston started a hunger-strike to protest long delays in their court cases. Two days after starting their action, the prisoners refused to return to their cells unless they received assurances that their demands would be acted on. Prison warders, aided by police officers, used force and tear-gas to restore order
reportedly after prisoners became aggressive to prison personnel. As a result one prisoner died, three were admitted to hospital — one of whom died a month later — and a large number sustained injuries and were not given medical attention. Some of them appeared in court on 10 luly still showing serious injuries: the presiding judge ordered that all be aff^orded medical attention. The Minister of National Security agreed to investigate the incident but it is not known whether an investigation took place.
In September another prisoner, Phillip Leslie, died at St Catherine's Adult Correctional Centre allegedly after being beaten by warders when he refused to return to his cell. He reportedly sustained a broken leg and multiple head blows which resulted in a fractured skull; he died the same day. He had been among the prisoners injured in an incident in July 1988 at St Catherine's Adult Correctional Centre (see Amnesty International Report 1989). It was alleged that he had also been beaten on other occasions, which once resulted in his being sent to hospital with a fractured elbow.
There were reports that several people who could have been arrested were shot dead deliberately by police officers. The killings occurred in a context of widespread criminal violence in which over 100 people were killed in confrontations with the police.
David Wellington, aged 17, was allegedly shot dead at point-blank range by the police in July. A police report said that he had been killed when police officers returned fire from him and five other gunmen during a raid. However, witnesses claimed that armed police entered David Wellington's house, took him to the back of the building, pushed him under a staircase and shot him. Witnesses also said that there was no provocation, resistance or attack on the police. It was not known whether a police investigation said to have been initiated into the matter had been completed. Among other people reportedly killed by police in circumstances suggesting that they may have been unlawfully killed were Cedric Blake, Fitzroy Taylor, Paul Dawkins, Texton Bailey and George Barrington Miller. The police officers implicated in the death of Cedric Blake were to be charged. Amnesty International was seeking further information about all of
JAMAICA/JAPAN
these cases, and any investigations of them, to determine whether they were extrajudicial executions.
In February the Minister of Justice replied to Amnesty International's inquiry about reports in July 1988 of ill-treatment of prisoners at St Catherine's Adult Correctional Centre and of the beating of four inmates in the Gun Court Rehabilitation Centre which resulted in the death of one inmate (see Amnesty International Report 1989). The Minister said that the Department of Corrections and the Jamaica Defence Force had been asked to carry out an investigation into the incident at St Catherine's. He said a police investigation of the Gun Court incident had been concluded and eight warders were to be charged with murder. Seven had been charged by the end of the year.
In March Amnesty International published Jamaica — the Death Penalty. The report raised serious concerns about the fairness in practice of capital trials despite guarantees in the Constitution. It examined the adequacy of legal representation, delays in the judicial process and the failure of the Court of Appeals to issue written judgments in many cases. The report also pointed to weaknesses in the use of uncorroborated identification evidence on which many convictions are based. Amnesty International urged the Prime Minister to commute existing death sentences and called on the government to take steps to abolish the death penalty in law. In November Amnesty International representatives discussed the organization's concerns relating to the death penalty with government officials and local organizations. Amnesty International delegates observed the appeal hearings before the jcpc which resulted in the convictions of 10 prisoners under sentence of death being quashed. The organization welcomed the decisions which could have implications for other Jamaican prisoners under sentence of death.
