UGANDA
At least 2,300 political detainees held without trial were released but more than 1,000 political arrests occurred, mostly in areas of armed conflict. More than 2,000 people remained in detention without charge or trial at the end of 1989. Seventeen people faced trial on charges of treason, which carries the death penalty. Prisoners in military custody were report-edly tortured and ill-treated and govern-ment forces operating in the north and east reportedly killed civilians extrajudicially. At least 10 prisoners were executed, 23 others were facing execution after the Supreme Court rejected their appeals, and at least 35 people were sentenced to death.
Armed opposition to the government of President Yoweri Museveni continued in several areas. Government forces clashed in the north with groups belonging to the Holy Spirit Mobile Force and with a dissident faction of the Uganda People's Democratic Army (upda). In the east, the rebel Uganda People's Army (upa) was active in Kumi and Soroti districts. A small rebel group, the Ruwenzururu, was active in Kasese District in the southwest. Villagers were killed by rebels in all three areas and prisoners were reportedly killed by the army in both the north and the east.
In June the National Resistance Council (nrc), Uganda's Parliament, passed the Magistrate's Courts (Criminal Procedure/ Special Provisions) Act. This permits Magistrate's Courts in areas of insurgency to try people on charges carrying the death penalty. It also empowers the Head of State to appoint anyone as a magistrate, irrespec-
tive of the person's legal qualifications. Such magistrates are to be assisted during trials by a soldier and a locally elected official. The act removes guarantees of fair trial by placing the biuden of proof on the accused and by granting the courts discretion to convict on the basis of uncorroborated testimony. No trials under the new act were known to have taken place by the end of the year.
The National Resistance Army (nra) continued to carry out police and military duties. In October President Museveni directed the army to shoot automobile robbers who resisted arrest, following a spate of car thefts in the capital, Kampala. The army was also responsible for virtually all political arrests. Many of the detainees, who were effectively held illegally and without referral to the courts, were kept in ordinary prisons, where they were known as "lodgers". Others, particularly people suspected of conspiring against the government, were held in military barracks by the army's military intelligence branch.
At least 2,300 political detainees, the overwhelming majority of them from northern and eastern Uganda, were released during the year. Most had been detained dining coimter-insurgency operations during the previous three years and were held without charge as "lodgers". Most of those released appear to have been civilians, rather than members of armed opposition groups, who had been suspected of supporting rebels. Some 600 detainees from Kitgum District were released during the first four months of the year. A further 1,075 from Kitgum, Lira and Apac districts were released in August. In October, 625 detainees, most of them from Kumi, Tororo and Soroti districts, were released: however, more than 300 of them were later rearrested in order to "protect" them, the government said, from mob justice.
At least 2,000 people remained in detention without charge or trial at the end of the year. More than 100 people suspected of armed opposition to the government were arrested in Gulu District in May and about 600 former soldiers were detained in July on suspicion of belonging to armed opposition groups. In September, 57 alleged nra deserters and others suspected of involvement with the Ruwenzururu opposition group were arrested in Kasese District.
Among those held throughout the year
UGANDA
were people detained for allegedly plotting to overthrow the government. They included Major Fred Mpiso, who had been held without charge or trial at Luzira Prison since he was acquitted in March 1988 of treason. At least 28 people arrested in October 1988 in connection with an alleged coup attempt were also reportedly still held. Unconfirmed reports received in May indicated that two soldiers, Godfrey Kiyindire and Emazi Zzibu, and a civilian, Ssbuliba, had died in custody.
The courts ordered the release of some "lodgers" on writs of habeas corpus, but in some cases the authorities did not comply. In May a court order for the release of Stanley Owunu, a customs official arrested by the NRA in October 1988, was ignored by the Attorney General and prison authorities. A second release order issued in June was also ignored. The High Coiut then issued a third order for Stanley Owunu's release, but it was not known if he was freed.
Ten soldiers and civilians accused of conspiring against the government appeared before the High Court on charges of treason, a capital offence. Ben Masaba Mityero and three others accused of seeking to reinstate former president Milton Obote went on trial in June. They told the court that they had been tortured following their arrest in January 1987. Their trial was still continuing at the end of the year. The trial of Captain Frank Kibuuka and five others, which began in November, was also in progress at the end of the year. The defendants in this trial had been held since January 1987. Seven other people accused of committing political offences between August and October 1989 were also charged with treason and remanded in custody by the Jinja District Court in November.
The army reportedly tortured and ill-treated prisoners, particularly in areas of armed conflict. For example, villagers detained or questioned by soldiers were reportedly subjected to severe beatings in Gulu District in May and in Soroti District in July. The body of one man allegedly killed in July by nra soldiers in Dakabela, Soroti District, was bound in the manner known as kandooya or "three-piece" tying, a practice officially outlawed within the nra in 1987 (see Amnesty International Report 1988]. The victim's elbows, wrists and ankles were tied together, then all of
the bindings were knotted together behind his back. Ill-treatment was also reported from areas without armed conflict. In August Pampilio Elungat, the bursar of Wairaka College in Jinja, died in detention in Gadaffi Barracks, Jinja, shortly after his arrest A post-mortem examination revealed that he had been whipped before death.
Government soldiers reportedly carried out numerous extrajudicial executions during counter-insmgency operations, but few details of individual cases emerged. In February soldiers reportedly killed two women and their eight children at Bwobo, Gulu District, and at least 35 people were said to have been extrajudicially executed in May in the Bobi area, Gulu District. The May killings may have been the subject of a NRA inquiry, but no findings had been made public.
In July, 69 people held in nra custody at Mukuru, Soroti District, died. Most of the victims suffocated after they were locked in an abandoned train. Others were allegedly beaten to death or shot. The government said that those responsible for the deaths would face execution and 14 army officers were arrested. It was not known if the arrested soldiers had been brought to trial,
Firing squads executed at least seven soldiers convicted by military tribunals of murder, armed robbery or rape. Soldiers appearing before such tribunals had no guaranteed right to legal counsel or to appeal against sentence or conviction. Nine soldiers were known to have been sentenced to death in other military courts but it was not known if they were executed.
Kassim Obiu-a, a former deputy director of the Public Safety Unit, a security force unit responsible for killing a number of political prisoners in the 1970s, and two other people convicted of murder were hanged in March. These executions were the first carried out following civilian court trials since 1977. The Supreme Court dismissed the appeals of 23 other prisoners, most of whom were sentenced to death in the early 1980s for murder or robbery. It was not known if other executions took place. The High Court sentenced to death at least 26 people convicted of murder or robbery. They included Ali Fadhul, who had been a government minister in the 1970s and was found guilty of a murder committed in 1972.
In January an Amnesty International
UGANDA/UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
delegation visited Uganda to compile information and meet officials. The NRA prevented the delegates from carrying out inquiries in the town of Gulu and ordered them to return to Kampala. In March Amnesty International published a report, Uganda: The Human Rights Record 1986-1989, which summarized human rights developments since President Museveni took power, In response to a government invitation, an Amnesty International delegation visited Uganda in April to discuss the report's contents. The delegates met President Museveni, ministers and other officials. The government denied both the use of torture and extrajudicial executions described in Amnesty International's report and the practice of incommunicado detention. However, the authorities agreed to investigate specific reports of torture and killings by military intelligence which had occurred in 1988. The government responded to reports of extrajudicial executions in 1986 and 1987, denying that any of the incidents reported had been unlawful killings.
Amnesty International welcomed the release of political detainees held without charge or trial and urged that others in detention also be released or given an opportunity to challenge the reasons for their detention before a court.
At the beginning of the year Amnesty International welcomed the announcement that a commission composed of civilians and military personnel was to investigate reports of extrajudicial executions by soldiers in Gulu District in late 1988. Several months later the government told Amnesty International that the commission's findings would soon be made public, but no findings had been disclosed by the end of the year. Amnesty International later expressed concern at reports of further extrajudicial executions and, in particular, at the deaths of 69 prisoners in Soroti District. Amnesty International also appealed to the government to cease executions and to abolish the death penalty.
