YEMEN
(ARAB REPUBLIC)
Over 100 political prisoners, including possible prisoners of conscience, were held without charge or trial during the year, some of whom were reportedly subjected to torture or ill-treatment. One detainee died in custody, allegedly as a result of torture. At least three judicial amputations were carried out. New information was received about 12 political prisoners alleged to have "disappeared" in previous years. Forty-eight people were executed for criminal offences, and eight death sentences imposed in 1985 were confirmed by the Ta'iz Court of Appeal.
In November the government approved a draft constitution for a unified state with the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen to be ratified by the legislative bodies in
YEMEN (ARAB REPUBLIC)
both countries within six months. It was announced that a plebiscite on the draft constitution and the election of a single legislative body for the new Yemen Republic would then be held.
In May the Council of Ministers announced that the government would accede to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (iccpr), but it had not done so by the end of the year.
In January two students were reported to have been killed by security forces and 50 others arrested when they demonstrated in Ta'iz to protest against alleged killings and harassment of villagers by soldiers based at the town of al-Rahida. Most of those arrested were released soon after: it was not clear whether any were still held at the end of the year. Fourteen other people, mostly suspected members or supporters of the prohibited National Democratic Front (ndf), were arrested in Sufian, Sana'a Province, in August and September following further protests against alleged abuses by the armed forces. They were released uncharged in December. Among them was Muqbil Ahmad Sayfan, a farmer from Sufian. He was arrested on 30 August at Sa'da Central Hospital, where he was receiving treatment for a bullet wound sustained five days earlier while resisting a previous arrest attempt by members of al-Jihaz al-Markazi Lil-Amn al-Watani, Central Apparatus for National Security (cans).
At the beginning of 1989, at least 26 political detainees arrested in previous years, including possible prisoners of conscience, remained in detention without charge or trial. All were suspected ndf members or sympathizers. Some had been held incommunicado for long periods: for example, 'Ali Muhammad Nu'man, a trade unionist arrested in Ta'iz in March 1983, was denied visits for six years while held without trial in Hadda detention centre, on the outskirts of the capital, Sana'a. He was released in November,
One of those held throughout the year was 14-year-old 'Ayesh 'Ali 'Ubad from al-Baydha province. He was arrested by members of the Seventh Armoured Brigade in December 1987 when only 12 years old, apparently because he is related to exiled opponents of the government. He was initially held for about 10 weeks in Qasr al-Basha'ir detention centre in Sana'a, where he is said to have been tortured. He was
then transferred to Sana'a Central Prison.
In November the government informed Amnesty International that seven people reportedly arrested in June 1987 for alleged sabotage had been brought to trial. Four were sentenced to prison terms ranging from seven to 10 years and three were acquitted (see Amnesty International Report 1989). The authorities did not indicate how the trial was conducted or when it took place.
Political detainees were reportedly subjected to tortiue or ill-treatment. This included the common use of iron shackles for long periods. One untried detainee died in al-Shabaka detention centre in Ta'iz on 1 April, allegedly as a result-of torture. Qa'ed Qassem Sa'id, a member of the Central Conunittee of the opposition Hizbul-Wahda al-Sha'biyya al-Yamani, Yemeni Party of Popular Unity (YPPU), had been detained without charge or trial since February 1986 and had last been seen by his relatives in December 1987. In December the authorities confirmed his death in custody, but stated that it had been due to "physical and mental illness".
One former detainee, who had been held without charge or trial for more than 16 years prior to his release in 1989, told Amnesty International that during his detention he had been made to walk barefoot over nails and suspended for long periods from a metal bar inserted between his knees and elbows while his hands were tied — a form of torture known locally as "Kentucky chicken". He had also been forced to wear leg irons for over seven years.
At least three judicial amputations were carried out: in February, three people convicted of theft had their right hands amputated publicly in al-Tahrir Square in Sana'a.
Twelve people arrested for political reasons in previous years were reported in 1989 to have "disappeared" from custody. They included 'Ali 'Abdul Majid 'Abdul Qader, who was arrested by members of cans in Sana'a in February 1983 as a suspected member of the YPPU. He was initially held at al-Hadda detention centre. Another case was that of Tawfiq Tahir al-'Ashawi, an electrical engineer from Ibb Province, arrested by members of the armed forces in January 1981 on suspicion of ndf membership. He was initially held for one month in Yarim detention centre in Radhma district, Ibb province. The fate of
YEMEN (ARAB REPUBLIOAEMEN (PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF)
the 12 detainees and that of Colonel Sultan Amin al-Qirshi, who "disappeared" in 1978 (see Amnesty International Report 1989), remained unknown.
At least 48 people, all of whom had been convicted of murder, were publicly executed during the year. In March, the Ta'iz Court of Appeal confirmed the death sentences imposed in 1985 on eight ndf members, five of whom were in custody. The five had surrendered to the authorities following a general amnesty in 1982 but were subsequently arrested, tried and convicted of murder. The charges arose from alleged killings which occurred before 1982 as a result of clashes between the ndf and government forces. Their defence lawyer reportedly withdrew from the trial in protest against alleged procedural irregularities. Their sentences had not been ratified by the Supreme Judicial Council and they had not been executed by the end of the year.
Amnesty International sought information about prisoners detained without trial and expressed concern to the government about the increased use of the death penalty and the high number of executions carried out. It pressed for commutation of the death sentences outstanding against eight ndf members and for clemency for other prisoners under sentence of death. It also called for an end to judicial amputations. In March the government told Amnesty International that executions and amputations were carried out in accordance with the Shari'a (Islamic law), which "gives the detainee the right to defend himself by all appropriate means...including the non-admissibility as evidence of statements extracted from him under duress". The government also stated that the death sentences passed on eight ndf members were for criminal offences not covered by the 1982 general amnesty.
YEMEN
(PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF)
At least 31 suspected opponents of the government were arrested and held without charge or trial, including possible prisoners of conscience. At least 17 other detainees arrested in previous years were held without trial throughout 1989, while 14 others were brought to trial in August.
Thirty-four political prisoners sentenced after trials in 1987 were released in an amnesty declared in March. Political detainees were reportedly tortured; one died in custody in suspicious circumstances. The fate of 16 detainees who "disappeared" in previous years remained unknown. Eight death sentences ratified by the Presidium of the Supreme People's Council were reportedly carried out.
In July the government issued a draft Document for Comprehensive Political and Economic Reform as a basis for further discussion of reforms. In November the government approved a draft constitution for a unified state with the Yemen Arab Republic. The new constitution would take effect only if the legislatures of both countries ratify within six months, followed by plebiscite approval in both countries.
In December the Central Committee of the ruling Yemeni Socialist Party (ysp) announced that opposition groups would be legalized and that steps would be taken to publish new newspapers after a revision of the press and censorship law.
The government granted an amnesty in March to 36 political opponents who had been sentenced in 1987 to prison terms (see Amnesty International Report 1988). Two of the 36 had been tried in their absence; the others were released.
At least 31 suspected supporters of former president 'Ali Nasser Muhammad were arrested and all but three were still detained without charge or trial at the end of 1989. Seven of the detainees were arrested in Aden in March, including Hussein 'Umar Thiban, an aeronautical engineer, and Fatima Ahmad Muhammad, a former secretary to the Minister of Finance. The seven were first held at al-Fateh detention centre and later moved to al-Mansura prison. In May, 24 others were arrested in Shabwa. They included students, police officers, civil servants and labourers. Three of the 24 were released in August.
At least 17 suspected government opponents arrested in previous years remairied
YEMEN {PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF)
in detention without charge or trial. They included 11 suspected members of the banned al-Ikbwan al-Muslimun, Muslim Brothers, who were arrested in late 1987 and early 1988. Four suspected supporters of the former president who were arrested in Shabwa in May 1988 also remained in custody. Sa'id Aghbari (see Amnesty International Report 1989) and Muhammad Saleh al-Hammati, detained for political reasons since 1986, were still held at the end of the year.
Those freed during the year included 'Abdul Karim Shamsan, formerly a candidate of the YSP Central Committee, who was released without charge in April (see Amnesty International Report 1989). Information was also received in 1989 of the release in July 1988 of 38 political detainees held without trial. They had been among a group of 52 suspected supporters of the former president arrested in al-Mukalla in January 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989). In August the remaining 14 detainees were tried in camera by the Supreme Court of the Republic on charges of treason and membership of an illegal organization. Ahmad Nasser Salim al-Fadhli, a government employee, was among 11 defendants sentenced to between five and 15 years' imprisonment. The other three defendants were released. Another defendant in the case was tried in absentia and sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment. The secrecy of the trial prevented an independent assessment of the proceedings and some of the defendants may have been prisoners of conscience.
One detainee believed to have been arrested for political reasons died in suspicious circumstances in June. Farid 'Awadh Haidara was arrested in February 1988, shortly after returning to the country. Prior to his return, the Minister of State Security had reportedly promised him and his relatives a pardon for fleeing the country with the former president. Farid 'Awadh was placed in the custody of Amn al-Dawla, State Security, in 'Utaq Central Prison, Some reports suggested that he had been tortured. His body was handed over to his family for burial.
Information was received in 1989 about the torture of political detainees in previous years. 'Abdullah Salem Ba'um, a former deputy director of the Institute of Commerce in al-Mukalla, was reportedly beaten with cables and forced to stand for
over 12 hours in al-Fateh detention centre in March 1988. 'Abdullah 'Abdo Bashr, a navy captain, was allegedly beaten with cables while suspended naked from a ceiling during his detention in 1987. He was also forced to stand in a heated metal barrel.
The fate of 16 political detainees who "disappeared" after arrest between 1967 and 1975 remained unknown. They included Tawfiq 'Azazi, a former chief magistrate at the Supreme Court, and 'Abdul-Hamid Ghanim, a restaurant owner (see Amnesty International Report 1981, 1982 and 1983).
Eight prisoners convicted of aggravated murder were believed to have been executed shortly after the Presidium of the Supreme People's Council ratified their death sentences in February. A bank manager convicted of embezzling public funds and sentenced to death by the Hadhramut Province Court in January had not been executed by the end of the year.
Amnesty International expressed concern about the detention without charge or trial of suspected government opponents, urging that all detainees be either promptly charged with recognizably criminal offences and fairly tried, or released. Amnesty International sought information about the circumstances of Farid 'Awadh Haidara's death and appealed for the commutation of all nine known death sentences. In response to an inquiry by Amnesty International, the government stated in January that the names of 16 "disappeared" detainees did not appear in prison records. The government also asserted that the 1987 trial of 138 people charged in connection with the violent events of January 1986 (see Amnesty International Report 1988) had been conducted in accordance with international standards for a fair trial. In April the government informed Amnesty International that the seven alleged supporters of the former president who were arrested in March were under investigation in connection with "a spy network operating on behalf of a foreign state". The government failed to confirm the reported death in custody or to explain the circumstances in which it occurred.
