ZAMBIA
Three prisoners of conscience and six other long-term political prisoners were released from administrative detention without charge or trial, but at least one other long-term political detainee was still held without trial at the end of the year. Torture and ill-treatment of prisoners was reported, allegedly leading to at least two deaths. At least 18 prisoners were executed, the first executions reported since 1985, and the death penalty continued to be imposed on prisoners convicted of aggravated robbery or murder.
At the beginning of the year at least 13 political prisoners were held in administrative detention without charge or trial under the Preservation of Public Security Regulations, which allow the Head of State to authorize such detention indefinitely "for the purpose of preserving public security". The regulations require that detainees are told the reason for their detention within 14 days, and that their cases are reviewed periodically by a special tribunal empowered to recommend their release or continued detention. However, the tribunal sits in camera and the President is not obliged to implement its recommendations which are made confidentially.
Among those held in - administrative detention at the beginning of 1989 were at least three prisoners of conscience who had been held since 1986 as suspected members of the illegal opposition Peoples' Redemption Organization (pro): the mling United National Independence Party is the only political party permitted under Zambia's constitution (see Amnesty International Report 1989). Peter Chiko Bwalya was freed in April and Henry Kalenga in November. The third, loseph Chitalu, was arrested with them but was also charged with sedition in luly 1987. However, this charge was dropped and he was also released in November.
At least three people, but probably many more, detained for alleged links with the South African Govemment were held without charge or trial. Two of these were released in 1989: James Gondwe, held since 1986; and James Kasamanda, an army captain held since March 1988. However, Hendrik Stephen du Plessis, a South African national held since December 1987 as an alleged spy, remained in detention throughout 1989.
Four other political detainees held since October 1988 — two civilians and two army officers — were released imcharged. However, foiu army officers arrested with them, including Lieutenant-General Christon Tembo, were charged with treason in August. They were alleged to have plotted to overthrow the govemment in 1988 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1989). Their trial was to take place in 1990.
There were reports of tortiue and ill-treatment of criminal prisoners by police and prison staff. In March a High Court judge expressed concern at the increase of such abuses. In September another judge
ZAMBIA/ZIMBABWE
instructed senior officers from Lusaka Central Prison to investigate an alleged assault by a team of warders on three criminal prisoners, causing injuries to their legs and arms. In October the Appeal Comt awarded substantial damages to MacMillan Mhango for torture inflicted on him in police custody. The court had previously acquitted him of murder and aggravated robbery.
The deaths in custody of at least two prisoners were alleged to have resulted from police torture or ill-treatment. Abel Nyirenda, who died in police custody in April, was said to have been subjected to severe beatings. Ishmael Zimba, an alleged security agent for the Malawi Government, was also reported to have been tortured prior to his death in November in police custody in Lusaka. He was one of several Malawians arrested in October following the murder of Mkwapatira Mhango, an exiled opponent of the Malawi Government, and nine others in Lusaka. The police said Ishmael Zimba's death would be the subject of a judicial inquiry but it was not known if this had begvm by the end of 1989.
At least 18 prisoners convicted of murder or aggravated robbery were hanged at Mukobeko Maximum Security Prison in Kabwe. These were the first known executions since 1985. In June, 11 prisoners under sentence of death had their sentences commuted to life imprisonment by President Kenneth Kaunda. At least six prisoners convicted of aggravated robbery or minder, both of which carry a mandatory death sentence, were sentenced to death. The Supreme Com! overturned at least four death sentences passed in previous years, and upheld five others.
In August the African National Congress (anc) of South Africa, whose headquarters is in Lusaka, unlawfully imprisoned four former anc members suspected of involvement in bomb attacks against the organization. One, Sipho Hubert Mbeje, was reportedly beaten severely. The Zambian authorities intervened and the foiu- were handed over to Zambian officials after two weeks in anc custody. Three were later released but Sipho Hubert Mbeje was remanded in custody on unrelated criminal charges.
Amnesty International welcomed the releases of prisoners of conscience and other untried political detainees and called
for other political detainees to be brought promptly to trial, or released. In June Amnesty International published a report on its concerns, Zambia: Continuing Cases of Administrative Detention and Torture. The Zambian authorities did not respond directly to Amnesty International but were reported in the Zambian press to have rejected the contents of the report. Amnesty International also expressed concern about the increase in executions and appealed for the commutation of all death sentences.
