UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
A 15-year-old possible prisoner of conscience continued to be detained without charge or trial. At least three people were lashed in public as a judicial punishment. The government failed to respond to requests for an investigation into detailed allegations of torture.
Mahmud Sulaiman 'Abdi, a 15-year-old Somali national who was arrested in December 1987 (see Amnesty International Report 1989], continued to be detained without charge or trial at al-Wathba Central Prison in Abu Dhabi throughout the year. There was no information to suggest he had been involved in any illegal activities in the United Arab Emirates (uae) and his imprisonment appeared to be connected with his father's political activities as an exiled opponent of the Somali Government. No further information was available on the fate or whereabouts of Isma'il al-Nouri, an Iraqi national detained in 1988
UNITED ARAB EMIRATESAINITED KINGDOM
(see Amnesty International Report 1989).
On 10 October an unidentified woman received 80 lashes of the whip in public in Ras Al Khaymah as punishment for being found drunk in public. Later in October two unnamed youths, aged 16 and 18, were each sentenced to 550 lashes for theft. The sentences were carried out in public with the youths receiving approximately 40 lashes every Friday for three months.
In January Amnesty Intemational wrote to the uae President, His Highness Shaikh Zayed Ibn Sultan al-Nahayyan, to urge an inquiry into allegations of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners in al-Wathba Central Prison in 1988 and previous years (see Amnesty International Report 1989). Ronald Startup, a British national who had been held in the prison without charge or trial between July and October 1988, testified that several of his fellow prisoners had been beaten and tortured. The authorities did not respond to Amnesty Intemational's letter and no inquiry was believed to have been instituted. There was also no response to other inquiries by the organization, for example in relation to Mahmud Sulaiman 'Abdi.
Amnesty Intemational urged the authorities to abolish judicial floggings which constitute a form of torture, or cmel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. It also appealed to the authorities on behalf of several Somali and Iranian nationals said to be at risk of forcible repatriation to their countries of origin, where it was believed they would be at risk of tortiue or execution. The organization was not aware of any cases of forcible repatriation of refugees.
