BAHRAIN
Dozens of people, including possible prisoners of conscience, were detained without charge or trial. Over 100 other prisoners were serving prison terms imposed after unfair trials for alleged political offences. There were reports of political detainees being tortured, particularly during pre-trial incommunicado detention, apparently to force them to confess to political offences. An alleged death from torture was categorically denied by the government.
Most of those detained were from Bahrain's majority Shi'a community and were suspected of involvement with illegal revolutionary groups based outside Bahrain, particularly in Iran and Syria.
The authorities used wide-ranging powers of detention, available under the 1974 Decree Law on State Security
Measures, to imprison suspected government opponents. These permit administrative detention without charge or trial for up to three years by order of the Minister of the Interior. Judicial review in such cases, which takes place in camera, is only available three months after the date of detention, at the prisoner's request, and at six-monthly intervals thereafter. However, it is rarely used, possibly as a result of detainees not being informed about the procedure.
The 1974 Decree Law, through an amendment to Article 79 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, also allows detainees to be held in unlimited pre-trial detention if they are suspected of involvement in illegal activities threatening state security. Detainees are denied access to lawyers and are not informed of the reasons for their detention. Under this procedure there is no opportunity for judicial review. The broad formulation of these powers appears to allow the detention of those expressing their political or other conscientiously held beliefs in a non-violent manner.
In early February approximately 30 people were detained under the 1974 Decree Law in and around Bani Jamra in northwest Bahrain. Among them was a well-known religious teacher, 'Omran Hussein 'Omran, one of 12 of those held who remained in incommunicado detention in 'Adliya Prison at the end of the year. Among the 12 were four youths. At least 30 other members of the Shi'a community were arrested in May and June and were still detained at the end of 1989.
All cases involving charges against the internal or external security of the state are tried by the Civil Supreme Court of Appeal. Procedures before this court fail to comply with international standards for a fair trial. In particular, the court is empowered to convict defendants solely on the basis of confessions, which are admissible as evidence even if they are contained only in police or prosecution docimients and
BAHRAIN/BANGLADESH
unsupported by corroborating evidence, including witness evidence. Effectively unlimited pre-trial Incommunicado detention increases the risk that prisoners may be tortured to force them to confess to crimes they may not have committed. The Civil Supreme Court of Appeal sits as a court of first instance in political cases; there is no right of appeal.
At least two political trials began before the court in 1989 and were still in progress at the end of the year. In June, nine people who were detained in September 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989] appeared on charges related to membership of an illegal political organization and incitement against the government. They included Muhammad Jamil 'Abdul 'Amir al-Jamri and 'Abdul Jalil Khalil Ibrahim Hassan, respectively the son and son-in-law of Sheikh 'Abdul 'Amir al-Jamri, a prominent religious leader whose brief detention in 1988 had caused unrest in the Shi'a community. In September three men arrested in November 1987 appeared before the court on charges of planning to sabotage oil installations (see Amnesty International Report 1988).
Over 100 political prisoners sentenced after unfair trials before the Civil Supreme Court of Appeal remained in prison. They included 14 alleged supporters of the banned Bahrain National Liberation Front, who were convicted in October 1987; 18 alleged supporters of the illegal Islamic Enlightenment Society, who were convicted in 1984; and nine alleged members of the outlawed Islamic Front for the Liberation of Bahrain, who were convicted in 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989). Approximately 70 others sentenced in connection with an alleged coup attempt in 1981 also remained in prison.
Several defendants in political trials were alleged to have been tortured to force them to make confessions prior to their appearance in court. Mirza 'Abdulkhaliq, who came before the court in September accused of attempted sabotage, alleged that he had been tied by rope to a car and dragged across stony ground. Interrogators also allegedly threatened to rape prisoners' wives or their female relatives. Other methods of torture reportedly included beating and suspension by the wrists.
In February the body of Muhammad Mansour Hassan, whose brother is a former political prisoner in Bahrain now living in
exile, was found lying on waste ground. There were contradictory explanations of how he met his death. Opposition groups alleged that he had died in police custody as a result of torture after being detained at Bahrain International Airport on 25 January. The Minister of the Interior denied that Muhammad Mansour Hassan had ever been in police custody and told Amnesty International that there were no suspicious circimistances surrounding his death, which the ministry attributed to natural causes.
Amnesty International called for the fair trial or release of uncharged political detainees arrested in February. May and June. It continued to seek information about prisoners sentenced after unfair trials by the Civil Supreme Court of Appeal, urging that they should be retried in accordance with international standards, or released.
In May Amnesty International received comments from the government on the Bahrain entry in Amnesty International Report 1988. These stated that any allegations of torture can be presented to the courts and that allegations of torture and prohibiting family visits and access to lawyers are '"baseless", The organization responded by bringing to the government's attention its detailed recommendations regarding the implementation of human rights safeguards in its December 1988 document. Concerns in the State of Bahrain. No reply had been received by the end of the year.
