KOREA
{DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF)
Two Japanese nationals, who may be prisoners of conscience, were held throughout the year. About 40 university staff and students reportedly detained in 1988 were possibly still held. Some sources suggested there were thousands of political prisoners but this could not be confirmed as it remained extremely difficult to obtain detailed information about human rights. The Democratic People's Republic of Korea (dprk) authorities maintained strict censorship and the authorities and media rarely provided information about arrests, political trials or the death penalty.
Unofficial reports suggested that imprisonment is used extensively to ciutail rights to freedom of expression and association guaranteed under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (iccpr), to which the dprk acceded in 1981. Individuals who criticize President Kim II Sung, his son and political successor Kim Jong II or the policies of the ruling Korean Workers' Party are liable to lengthy terms of imprisonment.
Isamu Beniko and Yoshio Kuriura, two Japanese seafarers who were both sentenced in December 1987 to 15 years' "reformation through labour", continued to be held throughout 1989. They were possibly prisoners of conscience (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
It was not clear by the end of 1989 whether the authorities had released about 40 staff and students of the University of Pyongyang and the Kim Chaek University of Technology, who were reportedly detained in mid-1988 following the appear-
ance of wall posters criticizing the government's economic policies (see Amnesty International Report 1989). There was no new information about their cases.
An apparently authoritative report received by Amnesty International in 1988, based on information from visitors to the dprk, suggested that in April 1987 tens of thousands of people were being held for political reasons at corrective labour camps throughout the country. Major camps were said to be located in Chongpyong, Hoenyong, Kyongsong, Onsong, Sariwon, Yodok, Yongpyon and Yongang, with at least four smaller camps near Pyongyang and Onsong town. It was not possible to obtain further information about these camps and the prisoners held in them during 1989.
Amnesty International continued to seek information about the trial, treatment and conditions of Isamu Beniko and Yoshio Km-iura. In May Amnesty International published a short report on its concerns in the dprk. It contained information about trial proceedings, prison camps and the death penalty.
Amnesty International representatives were invited to the World Festival of Youth and Students in Pyongyang in July, but were unable to attend as the dprk authorities failed to issue entry visas in time. At the inaugural ceremony, several delegates carrying a banner of support for Amnesty International were attacked by security personnel and the banner was snatched away. However, others carrying placards advocating observance of human rights in the dprk and in the People's Republic of China were not disturbed.
