JORDAN
Over 100 suspected opponents of the gov-ernment, including many prisoners of conscience, were arrested during the year. Most were detained without charge or trial following riots in April, held for several months, and then released before the end of the year. About 20 political prisoners were tried before the Martial Law Court whose procedures did not satisfy international standards for fair trial. About 60 political prisoners sentenced in previous years by this court remained in prison at the end of the year. Torture and ill-treatment of political prisoners were reported. At least three prisoners were executed for murder.
In April riots broke out in the south of the country in protest against economic measures introduced by the government. Twelve people were reported to have died and hundreds were injured, Hundreds of protesters were arrested, but most were released in May, with the exception of alleged political activists. Following the riots and widespread demands for economic and political reform, national elections for an 80-member Lower House of Parliament took place in November and King Hussein bin Talal appointed a 40-member Senate and a new government under Prime Minister Mudar Badran.
The authorities continued throughout 1989 to imprison people considered a threat to security using emergency powers provided by the Defence Law, in force since 1939, and martial law, in force since 1967. Some prisoners were administratively detained without charge, trial or judicial review. Others were prosecuted before the Martial Law Court. In December the new government announced that it would lift martial law within four to six months and "freeze" its use in the meantime. It also stated that it would review the cases of prisoners sentenced under emergency legislation.
Over 70 suspected opponents of the
government were arrested in April in connection with the riots. They were detained without charge or trial under emergency legislation in Swaqa Prison, south of the capital, Amman. All the detainees were believed to be prisoners of conscience or possible prisoners of conscience. They included writers and journalists, engineers, students, lawyers, doctors and trade unionists. Many were alleged members of banned political organizations such as the Jordanian Communist Party, the Organization of the Popular Front in Jordan (opfj), and the Organization of the Democratic Front in Jordan (Odfj). Some were former prisoners of conscience. For example, 'Imad Milhelm, Hashem Gharaybah and 'Ali Hamdan Zuyud had all previously served sentences of up to 10 years' imprisonment. Salem al-Nahhas, who was deputy president of the Jordanian Writers' Association when it was dissolved by the government in 1987, had previously been detained without charge or trial several times. Most of those detained without charge or trial in connection with the April riots were released in September; the remainder were freed by the end of 1989.
Among the other political prisoners arrested during the year were at least 15 alleged members of the opfj arrested between June and November and detained without charge or trial in the headquarters of the General Intelligence Department (gid) in Amman. Nine of them were arrested in October, apparently in reprisal for armed attacks against Israel carried out in September across the Jordanian border by the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine. The nine included Hamdi Matar and Ahmad Saleh Musleh, who were also members of the Palestine National Council (the Palestine Liberation Organization parliament in exile). All 15 were released in December.
Hundreds of prisoners were released during the year. In February about 900 prisoners were freed. They included about 50 political prisoners, over 30 of whom had been held without charge or trial on suspicion of belonging to banned organizations. Ahmad Fares al-Khatib had been detained without charge or trial since August 1983; at least 25 suspected members of al-Fatah and the opfj had been similarly detained since 1987. Forty-eight untried political detainees were released in December. Among them were a number of long-term
JORDAN
detainees, some of whom may have been prisoners of conscience. They included Ziad 'Ali Qasem, detained since October 1984 and Rasem al-Hindi, detained since January 1988. Also released were two brothers detained as alleged members of the Islamic Liberation Party (ILP), Muhammad Yasin Zallum and Abd al-Halim Zallum, who had been arrested in October 1987 and June 1988 respectively.
About 20 people were reportedly tried on political charges before the Martial Law Court. In September Kamal Khalil, a musician, and Hasan Shahin, an academic researcher, were sentenced to four years' imprisonment after being convicted of membership of an illegal organization. They were reported to have been tortured in the custody of the GID following their arrest in November 1988. Munir Akrush, a student arrested in August, was tried under the 1953 Law of Resistance to Communism and sentenced in December to four years' imprisonment for possession of banned literature. In November Muhammad Jarrad, Jamal Shaker and Muhammad Khattab, three alleged members of the ILP who were arrested in April, were reportedly sentenced to three yeeirs' imprisonment. They, like others sentenced by the Martial Law Court, may have been imprisoned solely for the non-violent expression of their beliefs. Moreover, their trials did not satisfy international standards of fair trial. They had no right of appeal and the court was not bound by the code of criminal procedure or the law on evidence applicable in other Jordanian courts.
There were new reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners. In January between 12 and 18 political prisoners in Swaqa Prison were reportedly beaten and held in solitary confinement. They had been protesting against prison conditions, including restrictions on visits by relatives, and had tried to publicize their grievances. Majed al-Khawaja, an accountant serving a four-year sentence for membership of an illegal organization, was allegedly handcuffed to a prison gate (a method commonly called shabah], beaten and held in solitary confinement for over two weeks. In February Adib Afnan, an untried political detainee held since January 1987, was reportedly subjected to shabah, flogged with electric wires and whips, kicked and punched in the head. He allegedly lost consciousness and suffered severe bruising,
impaired mobility and apparent neurological damage. In June or July, Yaser Qubaylat, an untried political detainee aged 17, was reportedly severely beaten and held in solitary confinement for one week after an argument with a guard.
Detainees were also reportedly tortured or ill-treated by the gid, either at the time of arrest or in the gid headquarters in Amman. In April 'Imad Milhelm was reportedly beaten and injured by two gid members who arrested him in an Amman street. Akram Salamah, a student, was said to have had several of his fmgers broken as a result of beatings by gid members in Irbid in April. In June Abd al-Aziz Khadr, an engineer, was allegedly subjected to beatings on the soles of the feet. At least one person held in the Military Intelligence headquarters in Amman was allegedly tortured, including with electric shocks.
Three prisoners were executed in October for premeditated murder. Other executions may have been carried out during the year. Three prisoners reportedly convicted between 197^ and 1982 of politically motivated offences remained under sentence of death.
Amnesty International repeatedly appealed to the government to release prisoners of conscience and to ensure that all other political detainees received a prompt and fair trial on recognizably criminal charges, or were released. It continued to be concerned that trials of political prisoners by the Martial Law Court failed to meet international standards of fair trial. Amnesty International welcomed the releases of prisoners during the year.
Amnesty International urged the authorities to ensure respect for the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners and to investigate all allegations of ill-treatment of prisoners, bring to justice those found responsible and grant redress to the victims. The organization also appealed for clemency for prisoners sentenced to death.
In January the government responded to Amnesty International's 1988 call for Jordan to ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. The government said it was studying the matter but did not envisage an early decision. In March a senior Public Security Department
JORDAN/KENYA
official told Amnesty International that prison regulations, including those providing for corporal punishment, were being reviewed. In May the government denied holding prisoners of conscience and stated that all reports received by Amnesty International concerning torture and ill-treatment were "groundless and mere fabrications". However, the authorities had not responded to a memorandum on torture submitted by Amnesty International in 1987 nor had they provided specific information in response to inquiries about individual cases since 1987.
