VIET NAM
At least 15 prisoners of conscience and 24 people who may have been prisoners of conscience were held throughout the year. Many other people were also believed to be held because of their religious or cultural activities, their alleged political beliefs or their attempts to leave the country clandestinely. Some of those imprisoned had been sentenced after unfair trials; others had been detained since 1975 without charge or trial in "re-education" camps. Torture and ill-treatment in police custody and in "re-education" camps continued to be reported. At least four people were sen« tenced to death. It was not known whether any executions were carried out.
Legal and judicial reforms for safeguarding human rights continued to be enacted as part of the official doi moi, "renovation", policy. A new Criminal Procedure Code came into force on 1 January. It affirms the presumption of innocence as the basis for administration of justice. It also sets out procedures governing arrest, investigation and the conduct of trials. While the new code appears to proscribe detention without trial, decrees and regulations providing for such detention apparently remained in force.
Several prisoners of conscience were transferred from prison to a "re-education" camp in Dong Nai Province, where conditions were reportedly less harsh and detainees were allowed to receive visitors and to correspond with relatives. Those
VIET NAM
transferred included Thich Tri Sieu and Thich Due Nhuan, Buddhist monks sentenced in 1988; Dominic Tran Dinh Thu, a Roman Catholic priest, and some defendants tried with him in 1987; and Doan Quoc Sy and Hoang Hai Thuy, writers held since 1984. Thich Tue Sy, a Buddhist monk and scholar, was reportedly transferred in December to a remote camp in Phu Khanh Province. The inaccessibility of the camp prevented him from receiving supplementary food needed for health reasons.
Ho Hieu Ha and Nguyen Huu Cuong, two Protestant pastors and prisoners of conscience who were convicted in 1987 of "preaching against the revolution" (see Amnesty International Report 1988), were reportedly offered release in February on the condition that they would emigrate to the United States of America. Although officials said in May that the pastors had been released, it appeared that they remained in detention at the end of the year.
Phan Van Lam Binh, a writer who had been a prisoner of conscience since 1978, was reportedly released but placed under restrictions of movement. At least six people who may have been prisoners of conscience during detention without charge or trial since 1975 were also released. They included Phan Nhat Nam and "ftan Duy Hinh, both of them writers, and Yoshida Ganshin, a Buddhist monk and military chaplain.
The situation of some 200 people was unknown and many of them, including possible prisoners of conscience, were believed to have remained in detention without trial. Some had been held for up to 14 years. They included Buddhist, Roman Catholic and Protestant clergy, former members of parliament, lawyers, teachers and students arrested on account of their political or religious beliefs and activities. Among them were Tran Xuan Tu, a Protestant pastor arrested in 1987; Nguyen Khac Chinh, a lawyer arrested in 1975; and Truong TYiy Ba, a 71-year-old business woman arrested in 1975.
Attempting to leave the country without official permission is a crime under Articles 85, 88 and 89 of the Criminal Code. People arrested for attempted "illegal departure" may be detained without trial or charged imder the Criminal Code. At least 30 people were reportedly detained without trial for attempted "illegal departure".
and the actual number was believed to be much higher. Lam Thi Tuyet and her five children were reportedly arrested in February while trying to leave the country by boat. It was believed that they remained in detention without trial at the end of the year.
In August officials reportedly said that efforts to prevent clandestine departures had intensified during 1989. They stated that in two northern provinces, 413 people had been convicted of "illegal departure" between January and June. Those convicted received prison sentences of up to 12 years. According to one foreign press report, an official said that the authorities in his province had shot people attempting illegal emigration and that two people were executed for such attempts during the first half of the year.
The government said in May that no more than 130 former soldiers and officials of the previous Republic of Viet Nam (rvn) Government remained in "re-education" camps. However, the situation of several hundred former rvn military officers and a number of former civil servants, who had been held in camps, was not known. Among them were Truong Kim Gang, a former military attaché in Phnum Penh; Nguyen Van Hao, a pharmacist and lieutenant in the rvn medical corps; and rvn military chaplains Ttan Ba Loc and Nguyen Khac Nghi. Some prisoners among this group of several hundred may have been released under government amnesties in 1987 and 1988. A further government amnesty was declared in September to mark the country's National Day, but the names of released prisoners were not made public.
Despite the introduction of the Criminal Procedure Code, political trials apparently still proceeded with re.stricted rights to defence. While little information about the trials was available, some details were received about a trial conducted before the Ho Chi Minh City People's Court on 31 December 1988. Three brothers were reportedly convicted on charges of "anti-government" activities. Two of them, Tran Vong Quoc and Tran Tu Thanh, had been held since December 1984. The two were said to have been accused, in part, of compiling information for human rights organizations abroad about "reactionary activists" who were tried and executed for political crimes. Tran Tu Huyen, the third brother,
VIET NAM/YEMEN (ARAB REPUBLIC)
was charged with failing to report his brothers' activities. The three were reportedly denied legal representation. Tran Vong Quoc received a 12-year sentence and remained in prison at the end of the year, Tran Tu Thanh received a five-year term and was released in September and Tran Tu Huyen was released on probation.
The official media continued to report torture and ill-treatment, although less frequently than in 1988. The Communist Party theoretical journal Tap Chi Cong San stated in February that "many of those responsible for upholding the laws...have tortured people themselves or ordered others to torture prisoners" and that "they [public security officers] can arrest, threaten and oppress anyone they want without fear of being brought to trial or punished".
In December legislation governing the Vietnamese media was introduced. A new law states that while the media is obliged to "struggle against acts of law-breaking" it requires official authorization and is subject to stringent controls by the central and local government. In addition, the judicial authorities "have the right not to supply information to the media",
Torture and ill-treatment of inmates was said to remain common in "re-education" camps. According to former detainees, each camp has a special "disciplinary" house for solitary confinement. Prisoners are reportedly held there in near total darkness for weeks or months at a time, often shackled, and on reduced food rations. Even minor infringements of camp rules can be punished with such imprisonment. Former prisoners also alleged that they had been beaten with rifle butts, rubber hoses and sticks for failing to meet required work quotas while detained for "re-education".
Mai Van Hanh, a dual French-Vietnamese national who was sentenced to death for treason in 1984, was released in January. His death sentence had been commuted in 1985.
At least four people were sentenced to death. It was not known whether there were any executions. In Jime the Vung Tau Con Dao People's Court sentenced Nguyen Nhu Binh to death on charges of "swindling, murder and robbery, and organizing illegal emigration". In September two people were sentenced to death for murder, attempted murder and armed robbery. In December Ha Van Hang was reportedly convicted of participating in "politically
subversive activities" and sentenced to death by a people's court in Binh Duong.
In May an Amnesty International delegation visited Viet Nam for the first time in 10 years. The delegation met senior officials from the Interior, lustice and Foreign Affairs rhinistries, as well as senior members of the judiciary and the procuracy. The delegates visited one "re-education" camp in Thuan Hai Province, but requests to visit other camps were turned down. Officials stressed the government's commitment to the "renovation" process, to ensuring that arrest, imprisonment and trial procedures conform to the new Criminal Procedure Code, and to enforcing legislation prohibiting torture and ill-treatment.
Amnesty International urged the government to release all prisoners of conscience, to review the cases of all detainees held without charge or trial, to ensure that trials were conducted in accordance with international standards, to commute all death sentences and to take steps towards the abolition of the death penalty.
