MALI
Nine prisoners of conscience were detained for two months and two of them were allegedly tortured. Four people were sentenced to death but no executions were carried out.
In June four students from the Ecole nationale des ingénieurs, National School of Engineers, were arrested. They were held illegally and incommunicado for about six weeks, two in security police custody and two in military custody. By
MALI/MAURITANIA
law, they should have been referred to the procuracy and formally remanded or released within 48 hours of arrest. The two held in military custody, Adama Bantjini Coulibaly and Souleymane Yaya Dembele, were reported to have been tortured in the barracks of a parachute regiment in Djikoroni, near the capital, Bamako. Adama Bantjini Coulibaly was allegedly suspended by his wrists while being tortured. Large numbers of students and teachers were tortured and ill-treated there in 1980, including a student leader, Abdoul Karim Camara, who died in detention as a result of torture,
Five other students were arrested in early August, one of whom, Oumar Coulibaly, was later released without charge. The four others, together with the four arrested in June, were charged with distributing false information which might disturb public order, an offence punishable by up to three years' imprisonment. The charges related to the distribution of a leaflet by an unofficial student organization. The leaflet protested against difficulties experienced by students, including delays in the payment of grants, and called for students to be allowed to associate freely. In late August Souleymane Dembele was convicted and given a suspended one-month prison sentence and the others were acquitted. All were released immediately.
The government of President Moussa Traor^ was reported to have stated in May that it intended to abolish the death penalty. This announcement was apparently made in response to a call from the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement for governments to make a special humanitarian gesture to commemorate the movement's 125th anniversary. However, no formal moves were known to have been taken by the government to remove provisions for the death penalty from the law.
Four people were sentenced to death in Jime but no executions were carried out. The four were convicted of embezzling public funds by the Special Court of State Security, a special court in which military officers may sit as assessors to assist the court's civilian judges. It was established in 1976 with the power to impose the death penalty for offences against the security of the state and for embezzlement of state funds or property worth more than 10 mil-Uon cfa francs (about us$34,000). Those
convicted have no general right of appeal, although they may appeal on procedural irregularities to the Supreme Court.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience and called for an inquiry into allegations that detainees had been tortured or ill-treated in military custody. The orgar^ization also appealed for the commutation of death sentences.
