SRI LANKA
amnesty to Tamil militants and the jvp. The jvp did not respond but in June the ltte announced a cessation of hostilities against the Sri Lankan Government. However, fighting continued between the lite and the ipkf together with allied Tamil groups.
The Indian Government agreed in September to vdthdraw the ipkf by the end of the year, provided that arrangements had been made for the safety of the Tamil community in the northeast. Apparently in anticipation of the withdrawal, the Eelam People's Revolutionary Liberation Front (eprlf) and its allies abducted and detained thousands of young men and some women for training in a new Indian-backed defence force. Indian troops withdrew from Amparai District in October and the unofficial Tamil National Army (tna), believed to have incorporated those abducted and trained, appeared in its place. By the end of the year an estimated 25,000 Indian troops remained in Jaffna and TYincomalee districts. As the Indian troops withdrew, heavy fighting was reported between the lite and the tna, and between the ltte and the armed Tamil groups allied with the Indian forces.
In October the government invited the International Committee of the Red Cross (icrc) to Sri Lanka to trace missing people, visit places of detention and inform the parties to the conflict about the rules of war.
In the south extrajudicial executions were carried out by uniformed members of the security forces and by "death squads" believed to be associated with them. Many hundreds of people were killed, apparently because they were suspected of supporting or sympathizing with the jvp, but it was impossible to establish the true total. The identity of many victims was not known because bodies were mutilated beyond recognition, burned in heaps on tyres or thrown in rivers. Some bodies were dumped long distances from the scene of execution. The relatives of missing people were often too frightened to pursue inquiries. However, some people witnessed their relatives being taken into custody and later identified bodies. Some victims had been taken by uniformed police or army officers; others had been abducted by unknovm armed men in civilian clothes, some of them travelling in unmarked vehicles. Security force spokespersons said many victims were jvp sympathizers or col-
laborators. Other people killed were from villages believed to be collectively sympathetic to the jvp.
In a new development, responsibility for many retaliatory killings following attacks by the jvp was claimed in the name of "vigilante" or paramilitary groups. The government claimed these groups operated independently and without official sanction. However, the security forces were widely believed to have been directly involved or to have acquiesced in these killings. Witnesses said some victims had been in security forces custody shortly before they were killed.
Reports of extrajudicial executions attributed to the security and paramilitary forces increased significantly after emergency regulations were reintroduced in June. These regulations permitted security forces to dispose of bodies without postmortem or inquest. Reports of extra-legal killings increased again from August, when the jvp announced it would kill the families of personnel who did not resign from the security forces. Posters, some signed in the name of the Sri Lanka Army, then appeared in public places bearing threats that 10 or more relatives of jvp members would be killed for each killing of a security force member's relative.
Hundreds of demonstrators, many of them coerced into demonstrating by the jvp, were shot dead by security forces. In July hundreds of people, under pressure from the jvp, defied curfew regulations and demonstrated against the Indian military presence in Sri Lanka. About 150 peaceful demonstrators were reportedly shot dead by police at several locations in the south. Hundreds more deaths are believed to have remained unrecorded.
Lawryers pursuing human rights cases were among those who were apparently extrajudicially executed. Charitha Lankapura and Kanchana Abhayapala had filed hundreds of habeas corpus applications with the courts on behalf of "disappeared" prisoners and others arrested in the south. The former was killed by unknovm armed men in July and the latter in August. At least 20 other lawyers were reportedly threatened with death in attempts to prevent them from working on such cases. Several people who complained of or witnessed human rights violations by the security forces were also reportedly killed.
SRI LANKA
By July over 400 habeas corpus petitions had been filed on behalf of people who had allegedly "disappeared" or been illegally arrested in the south. Very few petitions were filed after Charitha Lankapura's death because lawyers feared reprisals for taking on such cases.
Information was received during the year about over 2,000 "disappearances" after arrests by security forces in the south. Most victims were young men, many from socially depressed areas, but included some Buddhist monks and students. Some people who reportedly "disappeared" were later released after being held in unacknowledged detention by the authorities. Other "disappeared" people were believed to have been killed, and the fate of many remained unknown.
The authorities arbitrarily arrested thousands of people on the basis of anonymous denunciations and suspected links with the jvp. Some detainees were released after short periods. Others were detained under the Prevention of Terrorism Act (pta), which permits up to 18 months' detention without charge or trial, or under the emergency regulations (reinfroduced in June) which permit indefinite detention without charge or frial. Detainees were commonly held incommunicado. Many reportedly were tortured and died in custody. Relatives of suspects were also held as "hostages" in the absence of the wanted person. Many of the relatives were apparently beaten in custody and some were killed. The brother of an army deserter was reportedly arrested in Kandy district in place of his brother in July. Next day his body was foimd in a nearby reservoir.
The frial of three police officers accused of murdering Wijedasa Liyanarachchi in September 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989) was postponed until December because the defendants had difficulty retaining a lawyer. One lawyer who had been retained went into hiding after an attack on his home, presumed to have been carried out by the jvp, in which a member of his household was killed. The suspects charged with mmdering three students in Ratnapura in October 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989] were released on bail in January. The suspects included the Chief Minister's son and several law enforcement officers. Their frial had not started by the end of the year.
In April the Supreme Court awarded
damages to several torture victims and people who had been illegally detained. A lawyer received death threats after her client was awarded record damages for tor-tme. A few days after a victim of wrongful detention was awarded damages, he was reportedly abducted and "disappeared".
Several trials for violent political offences in the south began during the year. Five people were charged under the pta and emergency regulations for a grenade attack on the parliament building in August 1987 (see Amnesty International Report 1988] and for other offences. Their frial, which began in August, had not been completed by the end of the year. Four people suspected of -murdering the UN? Chairman in December 1987 (see Amnesty International Report 1988] were put on frial in May. One of the defendants was shot dead in hospital by unidentified armed men in September — he had been admitted after suffering heart frouble in jail. He said he had been tortured during interrogation.
In the northeast hundreds of people were arrested by the ipkf and screened for links with the ltte. Members of the eprlf and allied Tamil groups aided the ipkf in identifying suspects. Relatives of ltte suspects were also reportedly detained. The Indian authorities did not disclose whether these detainees were held under Sri Lankan or Indian legislation. There were no reports that detainees had been charged or fried. In August the Indian authorities reportedly said 5,489 prisoners were in ipkf custody. Members of the EPRLf and other Tamil groups also regularly arrested and detained ltte suspects, according to reports, but no information was available on how many were detained,
Both the ipkf and groups allied with them reportedly tortured prisoners. Indian troops regularly beat prisoners and subjected them to elecfric shocks. Dozens of prisoners were reportedly killed in custody. There were dozens of cases in which arrests by the ipkf or eprlf were witnessed and after the authorities said the detainees had been released, their bodies were found with gunshot wounds.
Several reprisal attacks by the ipkf after ambushes by the ltte were reported. Up to 46 people were exfrajudicially executed at Valvettiturai in August after the ltte had ambushed an ipkf pafrol there and killed six Indian soldiers. Among the reported victims was a one-year-old child.
SRI LANKA/SUDAN
Many extrajudicial executions in the northeast were reportedly committed by the eprlf and their allies, acting with the backing or acquiescence of the ipkf. The eprlf was allegedly responsible for scores of extrajudicial executions. Ahilan Thiruchelvam, the son of the editor of a Jaffna-based newspaper, was detained in May by armed men seeking his father. The son's body was foimd soon after with gunshot wounds.
Information was received during the year that at least two of six Tamil asylum-seekers who were forcibly returned to Sri Lanka from the United Kingdom in February 1988 had been tortured after their return. One of the victims was reportedly tortured by the IPKF in Jaffna, and the other by police in Colombo.
In January Amnesty International welcomed the lifting of the state of emergency and the release of prisoners detained under emergency regulations. It urged the government to repeal indemnity legislation passed in December 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989]. The organization proposed a visit to Sri Lanka by an Amnesty International delegation to discuss human rights issues with the authorities.
Throughout the year Amnesty International urged the government to adopt effective safeguards to protect detainees from torture, death in custody and "disappearance". It recommended that the pta and the reintroduced emergency regulations be amended to protect human rights. The organization expressed particular concern about increased reports of extrajudicial executions attributed to the security forces and to "death squads" apparently working with them. It urged the government to withdraw Emergency Regulation 55ff, to institute an independent commission of inquiry into extrajudicial executions and to clarify the fate of the "disappeared". Amnesty International also requested effective protection for people who had received death threats.
The government responded in July that Amnesty International's proposed visit should be "postponed for the time being". In August the Minister of Foreign Affairs informed Amnesty International that the "Sri Lanka Government has not repeat has not given orders to execute anybody", and that "subversives" had been killed by the security forces during exchanges of
fire in combat.
Amnesty International urged the Indian Government to investigate reports of torture, deaths in custody and extrajudicial executions committed by the ipkf and allied Tamil groups in the northeast. The organization also called for safeguards to prevent such human rights violations. It appealed to the Northeastern Provincial Council to halt the abduction and forcible detention of "recruits" to an irregular security force and to release people held for training against their will. The council responded to Amnesty International that the recruitment was voluntary,
In May Amnesty International published a report, Sri Lanka: Continuing Human Rights Violations, which detailed its concerns in both southern and northeastern Sri Lanka. In December it published Sri Lanka: Reports of Extrajudicial Executions.
