CUBA
At least 60 government critics, many of them prisoners of conscience, were arrested and at least 33 of them remained in prison at the end of the year. The majority were sentenced to prison terms after trials which fell shori of international standards for fairness. Some detainees were held for prolonged periods without access to
CUBA
defence lawyers before they were charged and brought to trial. Several political prisoners, including at least two prisoners of conscience who had been detained in ear-lier years, were released. Four senior mili-tary officials convicted of drug-trafGcking and corruption were executed in July. It was not known whether any other execu-tions took place.
The majority of people detained were members of the growing number of small unofficial groups concerned with civil and political rights and environmental issues. The Cuban Government responded to the activities of such groups by increasingly repressing attempts to challenge the political monopoly of the Cuban Communist Party and public criticism of President Fidel Castro and his govermnent.
Several members of the unofficial Asociación Pro-Arte Libre (apal), Association for Free Art, were arrested. The association promotes creative work produced independently of governmental guidelines. In January Carlos Novoa Ponce and Jorge Luis Mari Becerra were arrested in Havana. They were initially held with five other members of apal, who were arrested in October 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989), in the headquarters of the Departamento de Seguridad del Estado (dse). Department of State Security Police. All seven were transferred in February from the dse headquarters, also known as Villa Marista, to prison. Diuing May and June Carlos Novoa Ponce, Jorge Luis Mari Becerra and one of the five other men, Lázaro Cabrera Puentes, staged hunger-strikes to protest their detention without charge or trial. Their detention appeared to contravene the Code of Penal Procedure, which provides that detainees should receive within 10 days of arrest formal notification of the charges against them. The seven apal members were tried in September and received sentences of
between nine and 21 months' imprisonment for offences including "illegal association". Six other apal members arrested in October 1988 completed their sentences and were released during the year.
Nine members of the unofficial Partido Pro Derechos Humanos en Cuba (ppdhc), Cuban Human Rights Party, were arrested and imprisoned in the first four months of the year. In January police arrested Manuel González González and his wife, son and daughter-in-law. They were charged with illegally producing in their home the party bulletin Franqueza, Openness. Three days after their arrest they were tried before the Tribunal Municipal Popular de Centro Habana, Central Havana People's Municipal Court, reportedly without access to a defence lawyer. After a summary hearing Manuel González González was sentenced to one year's imprisonment. His wife, Lidia, was sentenced to nine months and his son to six months. His daughter-in-law was fined. His son and wife were released in July and October respectively.
In April five other ppdhc members were arrested after publicly announcing their intention to hold a "popular, peaceful" demonstration in Havana during the visit of Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev. The demonstration was reportedly planned to show support for Soviet reform policies. Those arrested included Dr Alfredo Samuel Martinez Lara, president of the ppdhc, David Moya Alfonso and Javier Roberto Bahamonde Masot. The three men, reportedly denied defence counsel, were tried before a municipal court on charges of illegal association. Dr Martinez Lara and David Moya were sentenced to nine months' imprisonment. Javier Roberto Bahamonde, initially sentenced to three months' imprisonment, was tried again in June and sentenced to an additional year's imprisonment for illegal economic activity because he had worked as a photographer without official authorization.
Dr Martinez Lara, David Moya and six other ppdhc members had been arrested in March while preparing an edition of Franqueza and charged with illegally producing an unauthorized publication. Dr Martinez Lara, David Moya and three other defendants were fined; the three others were acquitted. Other ppdhc members arrested during the year included Edita Esther Cruz Rodriguez, arrested by the Policía Nacional Revolucionaria, the
CUBA
national police, in November. Charges against her were apparently connected to her involvement in organizing a mass for a long-term political prisoner on hunger-strike. She had been among the ppdhc members arrested in April before the Soviet President's visit and had received at that time a suspended prison sentence of three months. After her arrest in November she was transferred to the Centro de Reeducación para Mujeres del Occidente, Havana's women's prison, where it is believed she was serving the three-month sentence previously imposed.
ppdhc members Guillermo Rivas Díaz and Aymé Liado, who were arrested in November 1988, were released in January and allowed to leave the country. They had received prison sentences of one year and three months respectively. The former Human Rights Party president, Tania Diaz Castro, was arrested in 1988 and sentenced to one year's imprisonment. She was released in November on completion of her sentence (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
State security agents arrested three leading human rights activists in August: Elizardo Sánchez Santa Cruz, president of the Comisión Cubana de Derechos Humanos y Reconciliación Nacional (ccdhrn), Cuban Commission of Human Rights and National Reconciliation; Hiram Abi Cobas Núñez, acting president of the ppdhc; and Hubert Jérez Mariño, president of the Comité Martiano por los Derechos del Hombre (cmpdh), "Marti" Committee for the Rights of Man. The three men, representatives of the recently formed Coordinadora de Derechos Humanos de Cuba (codehu), Coordinating Body of Cuban Human Rights Groups, were charged under Article 115 of the Penal Code with "spreading false news with the aim of endangering the prestige or standing of the Cuban State", The charges apparently stemmed from an interview they gave to foreign journalists about the trial and execution in July of four senior army and Interior Ministry officials. During the interview the three men reportedly stated they had reason to believe that the defendants were being subjected to "psychological pressure without legal protection which was tantamount to tortiue under international law".
The three men were held in Villa Marista until mid-September, then transferred to Combinado del Este prison in
Havana. In Villa Marista they were reportedly held in cells with permanent artificial lighting and were denied fresh air, exercise and reading materials. The Ttibunal Popular Provincial de Habana, People's Provincial Court of Havana, tried them in November and sentenced Elizardo Sánchez to two years' imprisonment and both Hiram Abi Cobas and Hubert Jérez to 18 months' imprisonment.
Hiram Abi Cobas had been arrested in January, apparently in connection with the publication of the ppdhc bulletin, and released the following day after paying a fine. He was also among the ppdhc members arrested in April and during that period of detention reportedly suffered a heart attack. He received a three-month suspended sentence, apparently on grounds of ill-health. Elizardo Sánchez had previously been imprisoned for political reasons on several occasions, most recently between September 1986 and May 1987 (see Amnesty International Report 1987 and 1988).
The release of long-term political prisoners continued, in accordance with a June 1987 agreement between the Cuban Government and the United States Catholic Conference, The agreement provided for the release of several hundred prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, and permission for travel to the United States of America (uSa). In January the Cuban authorities announced expansion of the release program to include 44 prisoners whom it had previously described as too dangerous to release.
Two prisoners of conscience were released. Amado Rodríguez Fernández, who was serving a sentence imposed in 1985 of 15 years and six months, was released in April and Fernando Villalón Moreira, sentenced in 1986 to three years' imprisonment, was released in August (see Amnesty International Report 1989). The Cuban authorities gave no further information about the release program and the number of political prisoners released during the year was unclear. At least three so-called "plantados históricos", or political prisoners held since the 1960s and 1970s who refused to take part in prison rehabilitation programs or to obey certain prison regulations, remained in detention at the end of the year.
At least four prisoners were sentenced to death and executed in 1989. Division
CUBA/CYPRUS
General Arnaldo Ochoa Sánchez, Interior Ministry intelligence official Colonel Antonio de la Guardia Font, Captain Jorge Martinez Valdés, Major Amado Padrón Trujillo and 10 other armed forces and Interior Ministry officials were coiurt-mar-tialled before a Special Military Tribunal. Charges against them included hostile acts towards a foreign state, drug-trafficking and abuse of their official positions. They had allegedly assisted Colombian drug-traffickers in exporting cocaine to the USA via Cuba and engaged in illicit economic activities on the Angolan black market. A military honour tribunal preceding the court-martial had recommended that a Special Military Tribunal should try General Ochoa for high treason. At the end of the four-day court-martial, Justice Minister Juan Escalona, acting as State Prosecutor, requested the death penalty for seven of the 14 defendants. He argued that the incidents in which the accused were involved put in "imminent danger the security, prestige and honour" of the country. The defendants, while accepting responsibility for the charges against them, denied that their actions were politically motivated. State-appointed military defence lawyers confined their role to pleading for clemency on the grounds of extenuating circumstances.
Arnaldo Ochoa Sánchez and the other three defendants sentenced to death were executed by firing-squad in July, after the Tribunal Supremo Popular, People's Supreme Tribunal, and the Consejo de Estado, Council of State, confirmed the sentences. The 10 other defendants were sentenced to prison terms ranging from 10 to 30 years.
Amnesty Intemational was concerned that although the alleged criminal offences were committed without apparent political motivation, the prosecution may have introduced political charges to permit the application of the death penalty. Under the revised 1987 Penal Code, the maximum sentence applicable for dmg-trafficking offences is 15 years' imprisonment. Under Article 110 of the Penal Code, however, "hostile actions against a foreign state" resulting in reprisals against Cuba, alteration of diplomatic relations or war, may be punished by 10 to 20 years' imprisonment or death. Charges against the defendants included offences proscribed in Article 110.
Amnesty International appealed to the Council of State for commutation of the death sentences against Amaldo Ochoa Sánchez, Antonio de la Guardia Font, Jorge Martinez Valdés and Amado Padrón Trujillo, The organization also continued to appeal for the release of prisoners of conscience and sought information from the Cuban authorities about the legal status of political prisoners. It urged the Cuban Government to implement judicial reviews of the cases of political prisoners whose trials had not conformed to internationally recognized standards. No substantive response to these communications was received during the year. Amnesty International expressed to the Cuban authorities its interest in attending the trial of Elizardo Sánchez, Hiram Abi Cobas and Hubert lérez. The government responded that, although the trial was public, it was not willing to admit intemational observers.
