AUSTRALIA
At least nine Aboriginals died in custody in 1989, despite the endorsement in February by federal and state Aboriginal affairs ministers of recommendations to prevent such deaths made by a Royal Commission of Inquiry in December 1988. The commission was established in 1987 in response to widespread concern about the pattern and high incidence of Aboriginal deaths in custody and the fears expressed by several deceased prisoners' families that some deaths may have resulted from ill-treatment by police or prison officials.
The federal Minister for Justice announced in early May that the Royal
AUSTRALIA/AUSTRIA
Commission would not inquire into any deaths occurring after the end of that month. The commission had already recommended improved procedures at police lock-ups, better training for police and prison officers, better medical care for prisoners and the decriminalizing of drunkenness. Federal and state officials met in May to discuss ways of monitoring implementation of the recommendations.
A coroner's inquest recorded an open verdict in March on the death of Edward Cameron, a 23-year-old Aboriginal football player, who was found hanged by a single bootlace in a police cell in the small Western Australian town of Geraldton in July 1988. This meant the inquest was unable to determine the precise circumstances of his death.
The coroner found "...that the failure of individual police officers to understand the importance of frequent checks on persons detained in custody, after the publicity given to the several deaths in custody that had already occurred in this state and elsewhere, is almost beyond comprehension. This failm-e indicates an attitude of mind which must be overcome if deaths in custody are to be minimized. The construction of 'suicide proof cells will not be sufficient on its own. It is not the physical surroundings of custody but the care exercised by the custodians which will have the most influence on the problem."
There was no new information about the circumstances of the death of Graham Walley, a 21-year-old Aboriginal, who was found in October 1988 hanged by his belt in a cell of Greenough Regional Prison, also in Geraldton. Amnesty International had expressed concern to the authorities about the reported circumstances leading to the deaths of both Graham Walley and Edward Cameron shortly after they occurred (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
In May an Airmesty International representative met Prime Minister Bob Hawke, Federal Aboriginal Affairs Minister Gerry Hand and Peter Dowding, the Premier of Western Australia, the state with the highest incidence of Aboriginal deaths in custody, and urged the speedy implementation of safeguards against further deaths in custody. All three government ministers expressed their commitment to the prevention of such deaths.
