SOUTH AFRICA
Scores of people, including prisoners of conscience, were detained without charge or trial under state of emergency regulations. Hundreds of others were released following a wave of hunger-strikes, but most of them had their freedom of movement, association and expression restricted. Five prisoners of conscience who had been in custody since late 1984 or early 1985 were freed by the Appeal Court. Allegations continued to be received that political detainees, including some held in the nominally independent "homelands", were tortured. Three former security police officers said they had been part of a "death squad" which had murdered government opponents in South Africa and abroad. At least 60 people were hanged at Pretoria Central Prison and further executions were believed to have been carried
out in the "homelands". However, the authorities in the I^anskei "homeland" announced a moratorium on executions.
P.W. Botha resigned as State President and was replaced in July by F.W. de Klerk. The National Party was returned to power in September with a reduced majority following a general election, from which the majority black population was excluded. The election took place in the face of a defiance campaign organized by the Mass Democratic Movement (mdm), a broad coalition of anti-apartheid groups. During the campaign the number of arrests and allegations of police brutality increased.
The newly elected administration relaxed controls on demonstrations and released eight long-term political prisoners, including Walter Sisulu, former Secretary-General of the banned African National Congress (anc). These government measures coincided with a reduction in violent activities by the anc. However, the high level of violence continued in Natal between supporters of Chief Gatsha Buthelezi's Inkatha movement, a conservative KwaZulu "homeland"-based organization, and supporters of the United Democratic Front (udf), a broad coalition of anii-apartheid organizations.
In June the government renewed for a further year the nationwide state of emergency which had been continuously in force since June 1986. Emergency regulations continued to be used by the authorities to ban political meetings, demonstrations and politically sensitive funeral processions. The activities of certain organizations, including human rights groups, were prohibited under the regulations. All members of the police and seciuity forces retained immunity from prosecution for acts committed in "good faith" during the exercise of their emergency powers. They also retained powers to arrest people considered a "threat to public safety" and to detain them incommunicado, without charge or trial, for up to 30 days. The Minister of Law and Order held powers to prolong such detentions indefinitely by administrative order.
At the beginning of the year, at least 1,000 critics and opponents of the government were held without charge or trial under the emergency regulations. Many prisoners of conscience were among them, including the leading udf member Mutile Henry Fazzie and his wife, Ethesia
SOUTH AFRICA
Buyiswa Fazzie. Like many others, the couple had been held continuously since 1986. Most of these detainees were released in the first half of the year following a wave of hunger-strikes by emergency detainees protesting their continued imprisonment. Mutile Henry Fazzie and Ethesia Buyiswa Fazzie were among those released in May.
Some emergency detainees, however, were released conditionally. At least 650 of them had their freedom of movement, association and expression restricted. Contravention of the restrictions was punishable by imprisonment. Godfrey Molekwa, a prisoner of conscience held since June 1986, was restricted to Mokorong District upon his release from detention in March. He was prohibited from participating in the activities of the Mapela Youth Congress and from attending any meeting involving criticism of the government. He was also required to report twice daily to a police station about 65 kilometres from his home, and was prohibited from entering the school where he formerly taught.
A leading journalist, Zwelakhe Sisulu, remained under overnight house arrest and had been prohibited since his release from detention in December 1988 from writing for publication (see Amnesty International Report 1988).
Children and young people were among those detained without charge or trial under the emergency regulations. Between June 1988 and June 1989 over 200 children were reportedly detained. April Mohau, a 17-year-old boy, was detained in April and Petrus Labasi, aged 16, in June. Both youths had been placed in emergency detention twice previously. At least 39 young people released from detention were placed under restriction orders.
Over 80 suspected government opponents were detained for interrogation under Section 29 of the Internal Security Act (ISA) of 1982, which permits the security police to hold detainees indefinitely incommunicado and in solitary confinement, without charge, for interrogation. Similar provisions were used to detain political suspects in the nominally independent "homelands". Ngconde Balfour, a leading activist in the Western Cape, was held incommunicado under Section 29 for almost six months before he was released without charge in July. Law and Order Minister Adriaan Vlok said in April that 82
people were in detention under Section 29 provisions.
Five prisoners of conscience sentenced at the end of the so-called Delmas Tl-eason Trial in 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989) were released in December when the Appeal Court overturned their convictions. Among them were Mosioua "Terror" Lekota, Popo Molefe and "Moss" Chikane who had been in custody continuously since eeirly 1985.
Political detainees held without trial were reportedly tortured, although official restrictions on media coverage of detention and prison conditions obscured the extent to which torture occurred. In March a witness at an inquest in 'the case of Caiphus Nyoka, a student leader who died in 1987 after being shot by police during his arrest, described being tortured by police at Daveytown police station. Exodus Guguletu Nyakane, who was with Caiphus Nyoka when the police arrested him at Caiphus Nyoka's home, said he had been shut in a locker containing tear-gas, been partially suffocated with a cloth, had boiling water poured down his back and been given electric shocks. The inquest court rejected his testimony. It also ruled that the police, who had shot Caiphus Nyoka nine times after bursting into the bedroom where he was sleeping, had acted in self-defence and were not criminally liable for his death. The police told the court that they had believed Caiphus Nyoka to be armed. No substantial evidence was produced in court to support this claim.
In another case, however, the Pieter-maritzburg Supreme Court issued a restraining order against four police officers accused of torture and vigilante action. One of the applicants in the case, Imbali youth activist Nonginkosi Zondi, alleged in a sworn statement to the court in November that the police had detained him three times and tortured him with electric shocks, beatings, near asphyxiation with a plastic tube placed over his head and threats to kill him. After each detention he was released without charge. His allegations were supported by a medical report and the sworn statements of other community activists who alleged they had been tortured by the police.
Torture in Bophuthatswana and other "homelands" was also reported during the year.
In April it was reported that emergency
SOUTH AFRICA
detainees in Johannesburg and other centres who required treatment after going on hunger-strike had been shackled to their beds with leg-irons. The authorities said they had used shackles to prevent escape. Hunger-striking detainees in the TY-anskei "homeland" were also reported to have been shackled to hospital beds.
An inquest into the murder of Mathew Goniwe and three other community activists from Cradock (see Amnesty International Report 1986) concluded in February without identifying those responsible for the deaths. In March, however, six police officers in the Ciskei "homeland" were convicted of culpable homicide in connection with the death in 1987 of another black activist, Eric Mntonga (see Amnesty International Report 1988 and 1989).
In the Venda "homeland", hundreds of people were arrested in July and August, apparently in efforts to pre-empt protests against official celebrations of the 10th anniversary of Venda's "independence". At least a dozen detainees required hospital treatment after having been assaulted, kept in unhygienic cells, and given food of poor quality. The younger detainees appear to have borne the brunt of police violence. Among them was Michael Nevari, aged 17, detained and assaulted until he lost consciousness at Thohoyandou police station in July.
Political detainees in both Venda and Transkei said after their release that they had been held in harsh conditions. Many were held incommunicado in unhygienic conditions and reportedly denied adequate medical treatment. Misile Stemele, a church worker detained in Ti-anskei from November 1988 until late 1989, said he and others had been given rags to serve as blankets during the winter months and dirty food, and had been forbidden to receive food parcels and clothing from outside the detention centre.
There was renewed concern that opponents of the government might have been victims of extrajudicial executions, particularly following the murder in May of prominent human rights activist David Webster. The concern increased in October and November, when three former members of the security police admitted in separate accounts that they had been involved in the early 1980s in at least nine "death squad" murders. The victims were govern-
ment opponents living in South Africa and in neighbouring states. Butana Almond Nofomela, scheduled to be hanged in October for a murder unrelated to "death squad" activity, was granted a stay of execution after he had alleged in a sworn statement that he was one of four secur--ity police involved in the 1981 murder of Griffiths Mxenge, a lawyer and former political prisoner.
Butana Nofomela named senior police officers who he said had organized the "death squad" unit and had paid him and his fellow assassins to murder Griffiths Mxenge. His allegations were corroborated by both his former commanding officer. Dirk Johannes Goetzee, and a former member of the unit, David Tshikalange. Dirk Goetzee said he had knowledge of, or had taken part in, the killings of several suspected ANC members inside and outside South Africa. He said victims' bodies had been burned to conceal the murders. He also stated that the security police had sent parcel bombs to kill government opponents, including Ruth First, who was killed in Mozambique in 1982.
An inquiry into the allegations of "death squad" activity was established under the direction of the Attorney General of the Orange Free State but the government rejected appeals for a judicial commission of inquiry. Butana Nofomela was charged with the murder of Griffiths Mxenge. His trial was adjourned until 1990. The Minister of Justice announced that Dirk Goetzee and David Tshikalange would also be prosecuted, although both had fled the country.
The death penalty continued to be used extensively, although the number of executions declined significantly from previous years. At least 60 people were hanged at Pretoria Central Prison. An unknown number of executions were also carried out in the nominally independent "homelands". In October the authorities in the 'ftanskei "homeland" announced a moratorium on executions, pending consideration of abolishing the death penalty.
In May, 14 of the 26 defendants tried in connection with a politically motivated killing at Upington were sentenced to death. Like 12 people sentenced to death in June in connection with a similar case in Ciskei, the defendants were convicted and sentenced on the basis of the "common purpose" doctrine. This maintains that
SOUTH AFRICA/SPAIN
people present at the time of a killing may he considered culpable even without proof of their direct participation in the crime. Appeals were pending in both cases at the end of 1989.
In November the Appeal Court set aside the death sentences of five people from Queenstown convicted on the basis of "common purpose". After retrial before the Supreme Court they received prison terms ranging up to 20 months. The court ruled that a process of "deindividuation" could occur whereby members of a highly aroused crowd lost their individual sense of identity and could therefore be held only partially responsible for the actions of the group.
Amnesty International continued throughout the year to press for the release of prisoners of conscience and to express concern about the detention without charge or trial of other political detainees. The organization made numerous appeals on behalf of individual detainees and people placed under restriction orders. It also called for impartial investigation of all torture allegations. After the "death squad" disclosures of Butana Nofomela, Amnesty International urged the government to establish an independent judicial inquiry into allegations of police complicity in unlawful killings and attacks on government opponents. In addition, it urged State President de Klerk to commute all death sentences.
In December two Amnesty International delegates preparing to attend an Appeal Court hearing were refused visas to enter South Africa. Amnesty International provided testimony of its concerns in South Africa to the United Nations on several occasions, addressing the Ad Hoc Working Group of Experts on Southern Africa, the 12 to 13 December Special Session of the United Nations (un) General Assembly on Apartheid, and other un bodies.
