AUSTRIA
Regular and consistent reports of ill-treatment in police custody continued in 1989. In some cases the incidents described were severe enough to amount to torture. People who complained about ill-treatment ran a high risk of criminal prosecution or investigation after lodging their complaint.
In January Austria ratified the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Pimishment.
In July the Interior Minister stated that between 1986 and 1988, 530 criminal complaints of "inadmissible use of force" were lodged against the police. Eight pohce officers had been convicted, three of whom were transferred to different posts. The minister also provided statistics which showed that, in those regions for which statistics were available, 45 per cent of those lodging such a criminal complaint had been investigated by the police or prosecuted as a result of their complaints.
A number of alleged victims of ill-treatment stated to Arrmesty International that they were reluctant to make complaints or allow their names to be published for fear of prosecution for "defamation". As a result it was difficult to assess accurately the mmiber of cases of ill-treatment which occurred.
One alleged victim of torture said that he was held for two days in March in the offices of the Vienna Special Branch. He was allegedly questioned by six police officers who repeatedly held his head under water until he agreed to sign a statement confessing to a number of
AUSTRIA/BAHAMAS
crimes. He asked Amnesty International not to reveal his name as he had met someone in prison who had been prosecuted for "defamation" and given an additional prison sentence after making a complaint about ill-treatment.
In March Mustafa All and Fatahi All were stopped in Vienna and fined by two police officers who said that they had crossed the road when a pedestrian signal was red. When Mustafa Ali refused to pay, the police officers allegedly used insulting and racist language. Mustafa Ali was arrested and handcuffed — allegedly as a result of resisting the police officers' attempts to push him towards a deep pit on a building site. Fatahi Ali and Mustafa Ali alleged that more police officers arrived and beat them with truncheons, continuing to do so even when Mustafa Ali fell to the ground.
Mustafa Ali was taken to the Leopoldstadt police station where allegedly he was again beaten until he lost consciousness after being pushed against a pane of glass. He was transferred to the Lorenz Bohler Hospital where concussion, facial wounds, bruising and tenderness below the eyes and on the cheekbone were established. He was released from the hospital two days later,
In May Mustafa Ali made a complaint about his ill-treatment to the Constitutional Court. It had not been heard by the end of the year.
During a trial in May at the Vienna Provincial Court a witness, Miroslav Stojic, said that as a result of being beaten by police officers in February 1988 he had been forced to make a statement that the defendant had helped him break into a tobacconist's shop. The defendant was acquitted of this offence. A police doctor had examined Miroslav Stojic immediately after the alleged beating and had found, inter alia, that his left eye had been completely closed through recently caused bruising. Investigations into Miroslav Stojic's allegations were stopped in April 1988 under Article 412 of the Code of Penal Procedure, which allows this in cases where it has proved impossible to establish the identity of the perpetrators. The Public Procurator warned Miroslav Stojic in court that if it was proved that he had falsely accused the police officers he should expect a charge of defamation.
In July, at the Graz Provincial Coiut, the
first hearing took place in a case brought by the Graz Public Procurator against Wilhelm Sommer (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1989). Wilhelm Sommer was accused of defamation as a result of complaining that in September 1988 he had been physically assaulted by the police while handcuffed. The criminal complaint against the police officers had been dismissed by the Graz Public Procurator. An Amnesty International delegate observed the hearing. In December Wilhelm Sommer was acquitted.
Arrmesty International sent the Austrian Government a memorandum and a detailed report about its concerns in March and December respectively. These included the lack of an adequate procedure for complaints about ill-treatment, the need for more practical and legislative safeguards against ill-treatment, and the need to ensure that genuine complainants are not discouraged from making a complaint about police ill-treatment through fear of being charged with a criminal offence. In August, in their reply to the memorandum, the authorities pointed to steps already taken to prevent ill-treatment, such as changes to the Administrative Offences Code (see Amnesty International Report 1989). They said that further measures were planned, such as a decree to the courts and public prociuators on the implementation of Article 15 of the United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. Article 15 prohibits evidence produced through torture from being used in court against the victim.
