DJIBOUTI
Six people were detained for several months for criticizing the government: they appeared to be prisoners of conscience. A seventh died in custody, possibly as a result of torture. Other government critics were detained for short periods. Prison conditions were harsh. A number of asylum<seekers from Somalia were forcibly returned to Somalia.
On 20 April several people were arrested in Tadjourah after a meeting with the Minister of the Interior. They were protesting against what they claimed to be the authorities' misappropriation of food supplies intended for flood victims. One of those arrested, Abdulqadir Daoud "Harbi", a former police officer, died in Gabode prison in the town of Djibouti on 2 May. There were claims that he had died as a result of torture. Two others, Houmed Dini "Lakisso" and Ali Mohamed "Faroura", were taken to court in June. A charge against them of contempt was withdrawn, but they were immediately rearrested. They went on hunger-strike in early July to protest their continuing detention. At the end of August they were tried and convicted of spreading false information, but were freed with suspended six-month prison sentences.
DJIBOUTI/DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
Four other people, including Mohamad Ali "Digdig", a journalist, were arrested in late Jime for making similar criticisms of the Tadjourah authorities and calling for a boycott of Independence Day celebrations. They too were tried in August on a charge of spreading false information and received short suspended prison sentences.
It was unclear whether a number of political prisoners arrested in 1987 and 1988 were still in custody in 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1989]. There were no reports of their being brought to trial during the year.
Conditions in Nagad prison near the town of Djibouti, where the people arrested in Tadjourah in April and Somali asylum-seekers were held, were reported to be harsh. Many prisoners were beaten and ill-treated, apparently as a matter of routine.
New information was received in 1989 about dozens of Somali asylum-seekers, members of the Issaq clan, who had been arrested and returned to Somalia in 1988 as a result of the Djibouti Government's policy not to grant asylum to refugees from Somalia. They had been detained on their return and ill-treated. In 1989 the same policy also led to scores of Somali asylum-seekers being forcibly returned to Somalia, but it was not possible to establish what happened to them.
Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of the Interior in May about the death in custody of Abdulqadir Daoud and the legal status of those arrested with him. The Minister replied that Abdulqadir Daoud had not been tortured, but had died in hospital after a heart attack. Amnesty International requested further details and urged an investigation, but no reply was received. Amnesty International also expressed concern that the six other prisoners then held were prisoners of conscience and called for their release.
