COTE D'IVOIRE
Five people were detained for short periods, apparently because of their political activities, and it appeared that a government opponent convicted on criminal charges may have been prosecuted for political reasons.
Bamba Moriféré. one of eight National Assembly Vice-Presidents, was arrested and placed under house arrest for a few days in April. Upon returning from abroad he had been found in possession of an opposition group manifesto. The ruling Parti démocratique de Côte d'Ivoire, Democratic Party of Côte d'Ivoire, of President Félix Houphouët-Boigny is the only officially recognized political party, although the Constitution does not prohibit other parties. He was not charged with any offence but was replaced as Vice-President a few weeks after his arrest. He retained his position as member of parliament.
Four other political arrests occurred in December. In Abidjan, security police detained two Togolese nationals, Têtevi Godwin Tété and Daniel Kuevi Akué, apparently because of their links with a Togolese political organization opposed to one-party rule in Togo. They were arrested when documents criticizing one-party rule in Togo were found in Têtevi Godwin Tété's possession after he arrived in Côte d'Ivoire from France. The documents did not advocate violence and both men appeared to be prisoners of conscience. After two weeks' detention without charge or trial, Têtevi Godwin Tété was expelled to France and Daniel Kuevi Akué to Senegal.
Mahan Gahe Basile and Kei Etienne,
both leading members of the Fédération des syndicats libres de Côte d'Ivoire, Federation of Free Tïade Unions in Côte d'Ivoire, were also arrested in December. The federation is one of the few trade union organizations independent of the ruling party. Abidjan security police held the detainees for four days, questioned them about their trade union activities and released them without charge.
Innocent Kobena Anaky, managing director of a transit company and a leading member of the unauthorized party Front populaire ivoirien. Ivorian Popular Front, received a 20-year sentence in February for failing to pay taxes and customs fees on behalf of his company. These criminal charges may have been brought against him for political reasons. He had been arrested in November 1988 and initially held outside the framework of the law (see Amnesty International Report 1989). His lawyers were given little time to prepare his defence and left the court in protest. Innocent Kobena Anaky was reportedly convicted on the basis of answers he gave to an examining magistrate, despite his statement that he could not reply adequately to the charges without access to his company's accounts.
Amnesty International was concerned about the short-term detentions of trade unionists and others. In its appeal for the release of the two Togolese imprisoned in December, the organization urged that they not be repatriated to Togo, where it was believed they might be at risk of torture. Amnesty International sought information from the government about Innocent Kobena Anaky's imprisonment, noting indications that he may have been charged and convicted because of his non-violent political activities. In response, the Minister of Justice said that Innocent Kobena Anaky was an ordinary criminal prisoner.
