PORTUGAL
Ill-treatment in police custody and prisons was reported. It was alleged that ill-treatment contributed to the death of one prisoner.
In February Portugal ratified the United
Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
Some of the allegations of ill-treatment in police custody referred to 1988 or earlier years. Ill-treatment was reportedly often inflicted with a view to extracting confessions or other information from criminal suspects. It was claimed that many detainees were reluctant to make an official complaint of ill-treatment when they appeared before a judge because police officers had threatened them with further ill-treatment or longer prison sentences.
Daniel Rodriguez Perez, a Spanish citizen, was arrested in April 1988. He alleged that officers of the Public Security Pohce punched and kicked him in Santo Tirso police station and struck his head with a pistol. Eight days later, after his transfer to Chaves prison, he was taken to a local police station for further questioning by officers of the ludicial Police. He claimed he was beaten with truncheons and punched and kicked until he lost consciousness. He alleged that when he regained consciousness, he was bleeding from his mouth and ears but that his requests for medical assistance were reftised, as were his requests to contact a lawyer, his family or the Spanish consul. A week later he was apparently taken back to the police station, again beaten with truncheons, and physically forced to sign various papers. He alleged that he was threatened with a longer prison sentence if, during his trial, he complained to the judge about his treatment.
He sent written complaints to the judicial authorities in August and November 1988 and described his treatment to the Santo Urso court, which sentenced him in October 1988 to seven and a half years' imprisonment on various criminal charges. On 30 November 1988 he was summoned before a court in Matosinhos to make a statement and answer questions about his allegations of ill-treatment. He had received no further information regarding the court's action and the investigation of his complaints by the end of 1989.
M치rio Manuel da Luz. from the Republic of Cape Verde, died in June while serving a 17-year prison sentence for murder and robbery. Before his death he had been held in a punishment cell in Linh칩 prison, undergoing a one-month disciplinary term for seriously wounding a
PORTUGAU/ROMANIA
prison guard. On 21 June, the day before this punishment was to expire, he was reportedly found unconscious on his bed. He was taken to Caxias prison hospital where he died a few hours later. A number of fellow prisoners alleged that, during his month in the punishment cell, he had been kept almost constantly handcuffed to the cell window, subjected to severe daily beatings by prison guards, often after immobilizing sprays had been used against him, and fed on a soup containing large quantities of a sedative drug. Some inmates of Caxias prison hospital alleged that they had observed marks on his body suggesting that he had been beaten.
In July the Director of Prison Services stated publicly that the Linh칩 prison authorities had reported that nothing irregular had occurred. He added that there was no reason to doubt this information but that if the autopsy raised any doubts, an inquiry would be opened. In October the Procurator General's office reported that judicial and administrative inquiries were under way.
Amnesty International expressed concern about the alleged ill-treatment of detainees, particularly Daniel Rodriguez and M치rio Manuel da Luz, and sought information from the authorities about the steps taken to investigate such allegations.
