MAURITANIA
At least 200 people, including prisoners of conscience, were detained without charge or trial for over four months in the wake of intercommunal violence in April. Other prisonei^ of conscience were among at least 60 political prisoners serving sentences imposed in previous years, mostly after unfair trials: 19 of these were released in December. Numerous reports of torture, some resulting in death, were received. At least 30 people appeared to have been victims of extrajudicial killings by government forces deployed in the south.
Hundreds of people were killed in April during intercommunal violence which affected both Mauritania and Senegal. Most of the victims in Mauritania were Senegalese nationals. Black Mauritaniens belonging to ethnic groups from the south of the country, as well as other black Africcms, were also among the victims. As tension between Mauritania and Senegal rose in response to the killings, Senegalese living in Mauritania were repatriated and thousands of Beidanes and Haratines living in Senegal were returned to Mauritania, The Mauritanian Government also expelled
MAURITANIA
more than 50,000 black Mauri tanians between May and September, claiming they were Senegalese. During this mass expulsion, government forces committed extensive abuses, including arbitrary arrests and detentions, torture and extrajudicial executions. Following the mass expulsions, some deportees retmned to Mauritania to collect their cattle and belongings. They admitted responsibility for committing violent acts against security forces and others who had expropriated their property.
Most of those detained belonged to the black Halpulaar ethnic group. The authorities apparently considered members of this group to be the main critics of the Beidane community's predominant role in the government. Farmers and cattle-herders in the south who opposed the expulsions or the expropriation of their property were among those detained. At least 60 state employees were also arrested. Oumar Tall, a manager in a state company, and Diop Mamoudou, the deputy governor of Aïoun El Atrouss region, were arrested in the capital, Nouakchott, because of their suspected political activities.
Numerous detainees were held without charge or trial for periods ranging from a few days to more than four months, apparently because they were suspected of involvement with the opposition Forces de libération africaine de Mauritanie (flam), Mauritanian African Liberation Forces. flam, which opposes the predominant role in government of the Beidane community, had not appeared to be active since the imprisonment of flam supporters in 1986 and 1987.
Most of the detainees appeared to be held unlawfully. Detainees in Nouakchott were held in "safehouses" rather than regular prisons or police stations. Most arrests in the south were carried out by the National Guard, a paramilitary force responsible for guarding the country's borders. Many of those arrested were summarily expelled from Maiuitania at the time of their release. Kane Lamine was among six people arrested in the southern town of Jeder-El-Mohguène during late May; it was not known whether he had been freed by the end of the year. The other five were detained for several weeks and summarily expelled to Senegal upon their release.
Numerous arrests took place after protests against the expulsions and other abuses.,Most arrests occurred between May
and July, and most detainees were freed when the rate of expulsions fell in September. Abdallahi Ould Bah Nagi Ould Kebd, a student leader and member of the Beidane community who had been detained without charge or trial from December 1988 to January 1989, was arrested again in late May. He was apparently suspected of writing a leaflet which criticized the expulsions. The authorities released him without charge in early September. Forty-four villagers were arrested in Fondou at the end of July, following a protest against abuses committed by the National Guard. The detainees, including Deputy Chairman Mamadou Yero War of Bagodine rural area, were taken to Aleg prison and held without charge until October. Members of Maghama Town Council, including Isma Abdoul Kane, were among at least 30 people arrested in May in Maghama. These arrests followed protests against abuses committed by the gendarmerie. The detainees were released without charge in October.
Suspected black activists, virtually all of them Halpulaar, were arrested in October and November, mostly in Nouakchott or the southern town of Kaedi. It appeared that those arrested were suspected of links with either flam or another group composed of both Beidanes and black Mamitanians which criticized the mass expulsions. At least 30 people were still held at the end of 1989, including Ladji T^aor^, a former prisoner of conscience from Nouakchott, and Oumou Kalsoum Barro, a school teacher in Kaedi.
In contrast to previous years, none of those detained for political reasons in 1989 was brought to trial. The security forces appeared to have powers of detention and imprisonment without reference to the courts.
More than 60 people sentenced after a series of political trials in the previous three years, including at least six prisoners of conscience, remained in prison at the beginning of the year (see Amnesty International Report 1987, 1988 and 1989). Most of them were black civil servants, academics, students, or armed forces personnel. In December President Maaouiya Ould Sid' Ahmed Taya ordered the reduction of all convicted political prisoners' sentences by one year. As a result, the six prisoners of conscience and 13 others were freed.
"ftials held between 1986 and 1988 were
MAURITANIVMAURITIUS
unfair by international standards: defendants were convicted primarily on the basis of statements made under duress and their lawyers were not given sufficient time to prepare their defence (see Amnesty International Report 1987, 1988 and 1989).
Thirty-three political prisoners who had been serving their sentences at Oualata prison, where fom- prisoners died in 1988 because of harsh conditions, were moved to Aioim El Atrouss barracks in February. This transfer improved their conditions of imprisonment and they were allowed to receive family visits. Seven of a group of eight political prisoners, who were supporters of the Ba'th Arab Socialist Party convicted on political charges in 1988, were transferred during the latter half of the year from Tichitt prison to improved conditions at Tidjikdja. The eighth prisoner, former government minister Mohamed Yehdih Ould Breidelleil, was released in December.
Numerous reports alleged the torture of detainees, particularly black Mauritanians held in the south. Five students detained ft^om December 1988 to January 1989, among them B6chir El Hassen and Mohamed Mahmoud Ould Hamakttar, were also reportedly tortured. The torture methods reported included burning with hot coals and the "Jaguar", diuing which a detainee is suspended upside-down and beaten on the soles of the feet. Prisoners were also reportedly beaten and deprived of food, drink and sleep for long periods. Mohamed Yero Ba, a headmaster and member of Kaedi Town Council, was arrested in June and, according to reports, suspended above a fire and beaten in detention. Eyewitnesses said that his body was covered with biu-ns. It was not known whether an official inquiry into his death in police custody took place. At least nine other people died as a result of torture.
Although Mauritanian law prohibits the use of torture, the authorities took no knowm action to investigate torture allegations or to prosecute alleged torturers.
At least 30 people, most of them Halpulaar herders, appeared to have been extrajudicially executed in the south by government forces. Some reports suggested that troops had adopted a policy of shooting on sight in the vicinity of the border with Senegal, although no such policy was officially announced. Most killings were attributed to the National Guard but few
details were available about individual cases. The victims of apparent extrajudicial executions included two boys, lO-year-old Abdoulaye Bâ and 12-year-oId Mamadou Bâ, whose throats were reportedly cut in June by members of the National Guard. The boys were herding in the Pattoucone area when they were killed. An eye-witness reported that Abdramane Lam. a cattle-herder from Mbout area, was killed in June by gendarmes who then attempted to hide his body. Members of the National Guard killed Hadiya Bâ, a teacher and member of the Boully Town Council, in October. In November three members of the National Guard fired on a group of six women and children outside their village of Néré-Walo, near Kaédi. Three people were killed: Houlèye Baïdi Bâ, a young woman, and two children aged 13 and four. The judicial authorities and government were not known to have investigated any of these killings.
Amnesty International expressed concern to the government about reports of arbitrary arrests, torture and killings following the disturbances in April. In July the organization publicly luged the authorities to prevent further human rights violations. The government responded by denying that abuses had occurred and accusing Amnesty International of favouring Senegal in the dispute between Mauritania and Senegal.
In November Amnesty International published a report, Mauritania 1986-1989, Background to a Crisis, which described human rights violations such as the torture and unfair trials of political prisoners and the jailing of prisoners of conscience. Earlier, the organization had submitted to the government detailed information about the use of torture and recommendations for steps to end torture, including investigation of torture reports and prosecution of alleged torturers. Amnesty International continued to investigate the cases of political prisoners sentenced after unfair trials in previous years.
