ECUADOR
The use of torture and ill-treatment by police forces continued to be reported throughout the country. Of the 10 or more deaths in police or security force custody, five reportedly resulted ft-om torture or ill-treatment. A congressional committee concluded that the victim of a "disappearance" in 1983 had in fact been killed by naval and police officers while in detention. The government failed to clarify other "disappearances" reported in previous years. Army and police officers allegedly ill-treated many indigenous people and peasants in the context of land disputes.
Police forces reportedly continued to inflict torture and ill-treatment on detainees. Héctor Vinicio Arteaga Carpió was detained on 8 June and taken to the Servicio de Investigaciones Criminales (sic), the Criminal Investigation Service, in Azuay, where he was interrogated for two days. He alleged that Sic agents tied his hands behind his back, placed a club between his arms and then repeatedly submerged his head in water causing semi-asphyxia. He stated that he was forced to do exercises and that he was kicked in the face. On 19 June Héctor Mejía, a truck driver, and four colleagues were detained in Quito by agents of the SIC based in Pichincha. The detainees were reportedly interrogated under torture, including being hanged from their thumbs and having gas hoods placed over their heads.
Of the 10 or more people who died while in police or Sic custody, five showed clear medical signs of torture or ill-treatment. Selfido lives Camacho was detained in May in Caluma, Bolívar
province, accused of stealing two mules. A medical certificate indicated that he died as a result of an electric shock. An investigation into his death was initiated by a police tribunal. Gonzalo Quintero Mina was detained in July in Nueva Lo ja, Sucumbios province, by members of the national police. Witnesses said that he was beaten by the police on arrest, apparently to force him to divulge the name of a prisoner who had reportedly escaped: he was then taken to a police station. Three days later his relatives were told that his body was in the morgue of the local hospital.
A multi-party congressional committee which had been investigating the "disappearance" of teacher Consuelo Benavides Cevallos in 1985 (see Amnesty International Report 1987) concluded its investigation in early January. The committee, formed in September 1988, interviewed a large number of witnesses, including several members of the navy and the police. The committee's report concluded that Consuelo Benavides was killed in custody after having been subjected to torture. It named several high-ranking officers of the navy and the police as responsible for illegal and arbitrary arrest, torture, murder, document forgery and perjury. It was left to the Supreme Court to initiate judicial proceedings against those implicated, but this had not been done by the end of 1989.
No further information emerged about other people who "disappeared" after being taken into custody in 1985 and 1986. The government also failed to account for the whereabouts of Manuel Garcia Franco, a car park attendant detained in 1987 by a member of the navy. His detention had followed a complaint from a navy officer's wife about the theft of her car.
Army and police officers, sometimes operating in conjunction with armed groups paid by landowners, allegedly ill-treated many members of indigenous and peasant communities. On 13 January combined army and police forces entered a peasant community in Baba, Los Ríos, where there was a dispute over land tenure. Many members of the community, including children, were reportedly beaten and received death threats. Eleven days later the same people and their families had their crops destroyed and were forcibly evicted by 80 armed men who had landed in helicopters. On 14 and 16 July some 150 police officers reportedly entered the Pijal
ECUADOR/EGYPT
community in Imbabura province. They allegedly beat peasants, including children, while evicting them from the land.
In November Amnesty International wrote to President Rodrigo Borja expressing concern about reports of torture and ill-treatment, in some cases leading to deaths in custody, and asking for a full and impartial investigation. No reply had been received by the end of the year.
