CHILE
Investigations into more than 100 "disappearance" cases were closed before they had been completed. There was limited progress in some judicial investigations into past human rights violations, but most cases remained unclarified. Approximately 450 prisoners remained in prison facing legal proceedings for politically
CHILE
motivated offences, most of whom were denied proper guarantees for a fair and impartial hearing. Reports of torture, although fewer than in previous years, continued. There were fewer cases of abduction and torture by clandestine groups believed to have links with the security forces. However, these groups continued to harass critics of the military government, and a politician was assassinated in September. Two political prisoners were sentenced to death and the prosecution recommended death sentences in a further 17 cases.
The first presidential and congressional elections since the military coup that brought General Augusto Pinochet to power in 1973 were held in December. Patricio Aylwin, leader of the 17-party Concertación de Partidos por ¡a Democracia. Coalition of Parties for Democracy, was elected President. The opposition coalition gained 22 of the 38 elected seats in the Senate. However, this was not enough to achieve an overall majority, because of a constitutional provision enabling the Pinochet administration to appoint nine senators. In the House of Deputies the opposition gained 72 of the 120 seats. The civilian government was scheduled to take office in March 1990.
The transition towards an elected government resulted in greater opportunities for political activity. The election campaign was, for the most part, peaceful, although some violent incidents were reported and a number of political activists were allegedly harassed. About 20 carabineros (uniformed police officers) were reportedly arrested for beating a demonstrator to death in the aftermath of the elections. At the end of the year the case was pending before a military court.
As part of the transition process, a plebiscite was held in July in which voters approved 54 amendments to the 1980 Constitution. These included: an end to the president's power to dissolve Congress, censor the media during states of exception, and send into exile or ban Chileans from entering the country; a prohibition of any suspension of amparo (the right to challenge one's detention before a court, similar to habeas corpus) during states of exception; and the repeal of Article 8, which had been used to ban the Communist Party and other parties. A new clause stipulates that state institutions have
to respect and promote human rights instruments ratified by Chile.
After years of campaigning by local human rights groups, in April the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights was incorporated into Chilean law. It had been ratified by Chile in 1972.
Attacks by members of armed opposition groups were reported during the year. The Frente Patriótico Manuel Rodríguez (fpmr), Manuel Rodriguez Patriotic Front, said it was responsible for killing Roberto Fuentes Morrison in June. He was a former member of the security forces who had been accused of participating in serious human rights violations, including "disappearances". during the 1970s. A group calling itself the Movimiento Juvenil Lautaro, Lautaro Youth Movement, claimed responsibility for the deaths of at least four carabineros and numerous assaults.
There was much debate about future policies on investigating human rights violations committed during the 16 years of military rule. Most of the thousands of cases submitted to the courts by human rights lawyers and others since 1973 remained unclarified. They included hundreds of "disappearances" and summary executions in the early years after the coup.
The opposition coalition stated that it would make every effort to establish the truth in such cases and that it would promote the repeal or annulment of the 1978 Amnesty Law. This law had been used to curtail investigations before the facts were fully established. The military warned, however, that no prosecutions against members of the armed forces accused of human rights violations before 1978 would be tolerated.
More than 100 of the approximately 700 "disappearance" cases before the courts were closed during 1989 through the application of the Amnesty Law. An August decision by the Supreme Court set a worrying precedent for future investigations into other cases. The Supreme Court confirmed the permanent archiving of the case of 10 Communist Party members who "disappeared" in 1976. It rejected two petitions against a 1986 Appeal Court decision to use the Amnesty Law to close the investigations before they had been completed (see Amnesty International Report 1987 and 1988). The decision meant that no further judicial investigations into this case were likely to take place.
CHILE
In November two important investigations into "disappearances" were closed by a military judge on the basis of the Amnesty Law. One case stemmed from a criminal complaint presented in 1978 against General Manuel Contreras, former head of the Dirección de Inteligencia Nacional (dina), Directorate of National Intelligence, and other senior members of the intelligence agency. They were accused of responsibility for the "disappearance" of 70 people between 1974 and 1976. This case was one of the most important legal actions to be taken against the dina and included substantial evidence of illegal arrests, torture and "disappearances". The other investigation concerned the "disappearance" of 24 people — mainly peasants — from Paine in 1973. Lawyers submitted appeals against the decisions, which had not been ruled on by the end of the year.
On the basis of the Amnesty Law, the Military Court of Appeal confirmed in November a lower military court's ruling to close investigations into the "disappearance" of eight people arrested in Valparaiso in January 1975.
The impartiality of military comis in the prosecution of members of the security forces responsible for human rights violations continued to be called into question. One such case was that of Rodrigo Rojas and Carmen Quintana, who were set on fire by a military patrol in luly 1986. Rodrigo Rojas died of his injuries (see Amnesty International Report 1988). In August a military judge gave Captain Fernández Dittus, head of the patrol, a 300-day suspended prison sentence for failing to ensure adequate treatment for the victims. The military judge accepted the patrol's version that the fire had been started accidentally, in spite of extensive evidence indicating that the two had been deliberately set alight.
By contrast, in November a military prosecutor recommended that Dr Ramiro Olivares and lawyer Gustavo Villalobos of the Vicaría de la Solidaridad, Vicariate of Solidarity, a chinch human rights organization, be sentenced to five years' imprisonment for "assisting terrorists" in 1986 (see Amnesty International Report 1989). Both men remained free on bail while legal proceedings continued. Amnesty International believed they were being prosecuted for their legitimate professional activities as human rights workers.
Approximately 450 political prisoners remained in prison. Most faced legal proceedings in military courts, the majority on charges of belonging to armed opposition groups or of armed offences. Irregularities, including long delays in trial proceedings and in access to trial dossiers, prompted complaints to higher comts. In February, for example, three political detainees accused of participating in the attempted assassination of General Pinochet in 1986 complained to the coiuts about extended delays in the pre-trial investigation (sumar/o). The sumario was not closed until November in these cases, three years after their arrest. Two political prisoners held since 1987 were released unconditionally in December after their cases were transferred to civilian courts. At least three others accused of politically motivated offences had charges against them revoked: the charges had been pending for several years.
There was concern for the health of Roberto Iko Andaur, a political prisoner who had been held in solitary confinement in Valparaiso prison since his arrest in May 1988 until December 1989, when the restriction was finally lifted.
A presidential pardon was granted to trade union leaders Manuel Bustos Huerta and Arturo Martínez Molina in October. They had served over 400 days of a 541-day internal banishment sentence for calling a work stoppage in October 1987 (see Amnesty International Report 1989). In addition, seven political prisoners serving 15-year sentences for illegal entry into the country were pardoned.
Some political detainees, though fewer than in previous years, said they had been tortured in police custody. Most of them were transferred to prison within five days or released. Among the cases reported was that of Julio Gerding Salas, who was arrested in August by members of the investigaciones (criminal investigations police). He said he was tortured with electric shocks before his release a week later. A number of others arrested during demonstrations reported being badly beaten after their arrest. For example, a number of political activists were kicked and beaten with rifle butts by carabineros in September. Some reports were also received of the torture of criminal suspects. José Miguel Donoso Muñoz, arrested by investigaciones in November and accused of robbery, alleged that he was given electric shocks and beaten.
CHILE/CHINA
Although most of those responsible for torture remained impunished, in November the Supreme Court upheld a civilian court judge's decision to charge nine members of the investigaciones with the torture of two political detainees, Vasilly Carrillo and José Silva Hidalgo. In another case, five carabineros from a disbanded intelligence unit were sentenced in March to between two and six years' imprisonment for "unnecessary violence resulting in the death" of political detainee Carlos Godoy Echegoyen in 1985 (see Amnesty International Report 1986). At the end of the year the accused were still free on bail pending the completion of the legal proceedings.
There were fewer reports than in previous years of abduction and torture by clandestine groups believed to be linked to the security forces. However, the clandestine groups continued to harass opposition politicians, journalists, hxunan rights lawyers and others. Their methods included death threats, surveillance and, in a few cases, assault and attacks on property. In September a group calling itself the Comando 11 de Septiembre, 11 September Command, said it had killed Jécar Neghme, leader of a political faction of the Movimiento de la Izquierda Revolucionaria (mir). Movement of the Revolutionary Left. A few days later, Jaime Cavada, leader of the Izquierda Cristiana, Christian Left, was intercepted in the street by three civilians and beaten on the back and head. In November the house of journalist Juan Pablo Cárdenas, who had been subjected in previous years to political persecution including imprisonment, was burned down by unknown people. Allegations of the involvement of seciuity force members in clandestine groups were given further weight in December when four plainclothes men, who had attacked demonstrators in 1983 and who were later identified as members of the security forces, were convicted and given suspended prison sentences.
In February Juan Diaz Olea and Cristian Vargas Barahona were sentenced to death by a military court after being convicted of killing two police officers during an attack on a police station in 1984. The military judge who sentenced them was said to have discounted evidence that they were elsewhere at the time of the attack and to have ignored their allegations that they had been forced to sign confessions by being
tortiued. Two co-defendants were sentenced to long terms of imprisonment, while a third was acquitted after more than four years in prison. An appeal against the sentences was pending before the Military Court of Appeal at the end of the year.
In November the military prosecutor investigating the 1986 attack on General Pinochet's life and three attacks on members of the security forces recommended the death penalty for 15 political prisoners. In the same month, the death penalty was recommended for two men accused of killing a police officer during an attack on a shop in 1986.
In May Amnesty International published Political Prisoners in Chile: Their Right to a Fair Trial. This examined judicial procedures and highlighted numerous irregularities in legal proceedings against political prisoners. The organization called for a review of such cases by civilian courts under conditions that guaranteed a fair and impartial hearing. It repeated calls for full investigations into past human rights abuses and urged the authorities to introduce further measures to prevent the use of torture and to halt the activities of clandestine groups. Amnesty International also campaigned for death sentences to be commuted and for the death penalty to be abolished.
