CONGO
More than 40 suspected government opponents detained without charge or trial since 1987 and 1988 were released, but 26 other untried political detainees, including prisoners of conscience, were held throughout the year. TWo journalists were briefly detained. At least two people were sentenced to death for criminal offences but no executions were reported.
At least 40 members of the Kouyou ethnic group who had been arrested in 1987 and 1988 and detained without
CONGO
charge or trial were released in November. They included at least 10 people who had been arrested and held in the capital, Brazzaville. The remainder had been arrested in the Owando area of northern Congo. All the detentions were connected with an alleged conspiracy against the government of President Denis Sassou Nguesso led by Captain Pierre Anga, who was killed by security forces in July 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989), and other suspected Kouyou supporters of former president Joachim Yhomby-Opango.
Twenty-six others arrested in connection with the same alleged conspiracy remained in detention without charge or trial throughout 1989: in November the government announced that they would be brought to trial. They included people arrested in Owando, former president Yhomby-Opango and 11 civilians and former senior armed forces officers arrested in 1987 and 1988. All of them appeared to be imprisoned unlawfully: they continued to be held without charge or trial despite the requirement under Congolese law that all cases are referred to the procuracy within three days of arrest.
Several prisoners of conscience were among those who remained in detention without charge or trial at the end of the year. They included Father Joseph Ndinga, a Roman Catholic priest. He was apparently arrested in September 1987 because he ordered chin-ch bells to be rung in Owando when government troops were about to enter the town in an attempt to arrest Captain Anga and former president Yhomby-Opango. The reinstatement of the former president was said to have been the aim of the alleged conspirators.
Captain Anga's sister, Thérèse Okouli, also appeared to be a prisoner of conscience. She was held at Brazzaville's air force base, reportedly in ill-health, apparently because of her family connections. Three of Captain Anga's brothers and one of his half-brothers were also still detained at the end of the year.
Former president Yhomby-Opango also remained in detention without charge or trial throughout 1989. He was held at a govemment-ovmed villa on the Cité des 17 estate. He was arrested in 1987. Other detainees included four military officers held without charge or trial since July 1987 as suspected supporters of the former president. One, Colonel Jean-Michel Ebaka,
went on hunger-strike in February in protest against the authorities' refusal to allow him relatives' visits, or to bring him to trial or release him. Following the hunger-strike he was reportedly allowed visits by relatives. At the end of the year he was held at the Camp du 15 août military camp in Brazzaville together with Colonel Henri Eboundit and Captain Lambert Emerson Elenga.
Lecas Atondi Monmondjo, a former director of the Office national des librairies populaires (onlp). National Office of Peoples' Bookshops, was arrested in August 1987 and still detained without charge or trial at the end of 1989. After a hunger-strike in June he was moved from the Brazzaville headquarters of the Armoured Regiment to the Plateau des 15 ans military camp in Brazzaville, where his conditions reportedly improved. Damase Ikeye, a medical doctor arrested in Owando in 1987, was still detained without charge or trial at the end of 1989. It was not clear whether he and Lecas Atondi Monmondjo were imprisoned in connection with the alleged conspiracy on behalf of former president Yhomby-Opango.
In August, two journalists — Jean Baptiste Placca of the Paris-based ¡eune Afrique magazine and Jacques Boy Buta Lumbwele, a Zairian refugee and an Agence France Presse (afp), French News Agency, correspondent — were arrested after one of them received a letter smuggled out of prison by Lecas Atondi Monmondjo. Jean Baptiste Placca was held for one day's questioning and then expelled from Congo. Jacques Boy Buta Lumbwele was detained for two weeks and then released.
At least four death sentences were imposed by the courts: on two prisoners convicted in March of murder, and on two others convicted in November of armed robbery and murder. However, no executions were known to have been carried out.
Amnesty International urged the government to release Father Joseph Ndinga and other prisoners of conscience and to bring to trial promptly and fairly all other political detainees. Amnesty International also appealed for the commutation of all death sentences.
COTE D'IVOIRE/CUBA
