IRAN
Over 1,500 executions for criminal offences were announced in the official press, more than 1,000 of them for drug-trafRcking. Some of those executed as
IRAQ/IRELAND (REPUBLIC OF)
alleged drug-traffickers may have been political prisoners. Hundreds of political prisoners arrested in previous years, including prisoners of conscience, remained imprisoned throughout 1989 although there were some releases. New arrests of alleged opponents of the government were also reported. Hundreds of people were sentenced to death or imprisoned after unfair trials before Islamic Revolutionary Courts. Over 40 of those executed were stoned to death, and people convicted of criminal ofTences were subjected to other cruel, inhuman or degrading punishments: ftoggings were common and at least nine people had fingers or a hand amputated. The government endorsed a death threat against a British author and, in at least three cases, exiled opponents of the government were killed in circumstances suggesting that they may have been the victims of extrajudicial executions.
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the leader of the Islamic Republic of Iran, died on 3 June and was succeeded by the then President, Seyed Ali Khamenei. In July Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, Speaker of the Majlis (Islamic Consultative Assembly), was elected President with increased executive powers. The office of prime minister was abolished. The judiciary was restructured: the Supreme Judicial Council was abolished and replaced by a Head of the Judiciary, Ayatollah Mohamed Yazdi.
The full scale of the mass killings of political prisoners after the July 1988 cease-fire in the war with Iraq emerged more clearly during the course of 1989, It became evident that at least 2,000 prisoners had been summarily killed between August 1988 and January 1989, and that the true figure was probably far higher (see Amnesty International Report 1989]. Many families had still not been officially notified by the end of 1989 that their relatives had been executed. Those that were notified were often not told where their relatives had been buried. This lack of official
information about the fate of political prisoners created a climate of rumour and uncertainty which hampered the gathering of information about the remaining political prisoners.
On 23 January a new law came into force imposing mandatory death sentences on those found in possession of specified quantities of heroin, opium or other proscribed drugs (see Amnesty International Report 1989). By the end of the year over 1,000 people had been executed for drugs-related offences. On 5 April the Prosecutor General was reported by Tehran Radio to have said that 313 smugglers had been executed so far, that 65 more were due to be hanged the following day, and that he hoped executions would continue until the last smuggler in the country was eliminated.
Multiple executions of up to 80 victims in a single day, in different towns, took place on many occasions. Some executions, particularly of women, took place inside prisons, but hundreds of people were hanged in public, often in groups. In some cases, several nooses were attached to a horizontal bar which was then raised, so that the victims were hauled up by the neck in a row to die of slow strangulation. Bodies were ft-equently left on display for hours, and in at least one instance in January a gibbet was mounted on a lorry and driven through the streets of Tehran with bodies still hanging from it.
In January the judicial authorities called for crimes to be punished more speedily. The result was that executions for offences such as murder, rape, armed robbery and prostitution increased dramatically. Over 250 such executions were announced between January and the end of May and more than 400 by the end of the year. Most victims were hanged, but at least 43 sentenced for adultery, prostitution or pimping were stoned to death. According to official reports, thousands of people witnessed such stonings and members of the public participated directly in some of them. In one incident in April, 12 women and three men were stoned to death in a football stadium in Bushehr.
Mass executions of political prisoners such as those in 1988 were not reported in 1989, although opposition sources claimed that some political prisoners were among those ostensibly executed for drug-trafficking. About a dozen people, according to the
IRAQ/IRELAND (REPUBLIC OF)
government, were executed on charges of spying, sabotage or armed insurgency. According to unconfirmed reports, three senior naval officers were executed in April and other military officers were among 30 people executed in July. Officials did confirm the execution in April of Fatemeh Moddares Tehrani, a political prisoner serving a seven-year sentence imposed after her arrest in 1982. It was not clear whether any judicial process preceded her execution.
The number of prisoners of conscience who continued to be held was not known. However, among them were about 10 women members or supporters of the Tideh Party, who were arrested in 1982 before the party was banned. Some of them had been sentenced to prison after siun-mary trials, but some were held without charge or trial and others were kept in prison after their sentences had expired. They were held throughout 1989 in Evin Prison in Tehran, together with about 90 other women political prisoners, some of whom may also have been prisoners of conscience.
The number of political prisoners still held at the end of the year was also unclear. At least 2,000 had been killed in the second half of 1988, hundreds were moved from one prison to another and an unknown number had been released after agreeing to "repent" and sign guarantees of future good conduct. Former prisoners who broke such guarantees - for example, by leaving the country - risked their relatives being fined or imprisoned.
In February amnesties were annoimced to mark the 10th anniversary of the revolution which brought the Islamic Republic into being. The authorities said that 2,600 out of a total of 3,500 political prisoners were to be released. Himdreds of political prisoners do appear to have been freed, but it was impossible to verify official figures. Subsequent amnesties specifically excluded "non-repentant" political prisoners. By the end of the year Ghasr and Ghezel-Hesar prisons, which had been used to hold political prisoners, were reported to have been closed down. Evin Prison was said by prisoners' relatives to be far less crowded than before.
Among the prisoners of conscience known to have been released were six supporters of the Association for the Defence of Freedom and Sovereignty of the Iranian
Nation, who had been arrested in May 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
There were new arrests in September when relatives of prisoners and some former inmates reportedly held demonstrations in Behesht-e Zahra and Khavaran Cemeteries in Tehran to demand information about the fate of prisoners. Dozens of demonstrators were arrested but most were released by the end of the year. In December students were reportedly detained after clashes with seciurity forces at a demonstration about student accommodation.
There were also periodic reports of political arrests in the Kurdish area of Iran where armed opposition to the govemment continued. However, details of those held, or what became of them, were impossible to obtain. It was also not possible to confirm reports received in the last quarter of 1989 of people being arrested for protesting about food shortages and other economic hardships.
Hundreds of people were imprisoned or executed after unfair trials before Islamic Revolutionary Cnurts, which are responsible for trying those charged with dmg-trafficking as well as political offences. Trials before these courts fall far short of international standards for fair trial. Defendants have no defence counsel, no right to call witnesses and no right of appeal.
Amnesty International recorded nine cases where people convicted of repeated theft had four fingers of the right hand amputated, or the whole hand. Hundreds of people were also sentenced to floggings, which are imposed for a variety of offences, sometimes together with other punishments. For example, in one case in Varamin in May, three men convicted of rape received 80 lashes before being executed. A fourth man was sentenced to 129 lashes plus nine years' imprisonment.
In Febmary Ayatollah Khomeini issued a fatwa (religious edict) to the effect that it was the duty of all Muslims to kill the British novelist, Salman Rushdie, for writing an allegedly blasphemous novel, The Satanic Verses. This fatwa continued to be endorsed by the Iranian Govemment throughout the year.
Leading members of opposition groups abroad were killed in at least three separate incidents in circumstances which suggested the complicity of the Iranian authorities. In lune Atayollah Byahmadi, a former
IRAQ/IRELAND (REPUBLIC OF)
colonel in the Shah's Intelligence Service, was shot dead in his hotel room in Dubai. In July Abdul Rahman Ghassemlou, leader of the Kiudish Democratic Party of Iran (kdpi), was killed in a Viemia apartment together with two companions while taking part in negotiations with Iranian Government representatives. In November the Austrian authorities issued arrest warrants for three suspects in connection with the Fa3Pl killings. The suspects included Iranian Government agents who had left Austria or gone into hiding in the Iranian Embassy in Vienna after the killings. In August Bahman Javadi, a member of the Central Committee of the Commimist Party of Iran, was killed and a companion seriously wounded when unidentified gunmen attacked them in a Cyprus street.
In January Amnesty International submitted a written statement to the United Nations (un) Commission on Human Rights summarizing the organization's concerns in Iran. In August Amnesty International delivered an oral statement to the un Sub-Commission on the Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, drawing attention to the execution of people under 18 years of age when the offence was conunitted. In December the government agreed for the first time to allow access to Iran by the on Special Representative on the situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Amnesty International campaigned throughout the year for an end to executions and in January published Iran: The Death Penalty, a short survey of the death penalty since the 1979 revolution. In February it lorged the government to withdraw death threats against Salman Rushdie. In June it published Iran: Over 900 Executions Announced in Five Months, which documented recent executions for drug-trafficking. It also described the new directives issued by the judicial authorities to speed up the punishment of crime, which appear to have exacerbated the arbitrary and summary nature of arrests, trials and executions in Iran. Following the shootings of opposition activists in Dubai, Austria and Cyprus. Amnesty International called on the government to condemn such political killings and to make it clear to all its representatives that such actions would not be tolerated.
The Iranian Government continued to deny that mass killings of political prison-
ers had been carried out in 1988, despite mounting evidence to the contrary. This included letters of protest apparently written by Ayatollah Montazeri before his resignation as designated successor to Ayatollah Khomeini, In a response to Amnesty International's appeals, the authorities ■issued a document through the United Nations which maintained that only a small number of people had been executed; that they had taken part in, or collaborated with, an armed incursion into Iran by the opposition National Liberation Army in 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989); and that the government had the right to punish those who took up arms against it. The authorities failed to respond to repeated requests ft'om Amnesty International for details of any charges brought against political prisoners executed in prison in 1988 and for information about the procedmes followed at their trials.
The authorities responded to repeated calls from Amnesty International for an end to mass executions of drug-traffickers and other criminals by affirming their belief that the death penalty was an appropriate response to serious crime and an effective deterrent. They failed to respond to Amnesty International's concerns about the summary nature of the trials of many of those executed.
