MOZAMBIQUE
More than 750 untried political prisoners arrested in previous years and 37 sentenced after unfair trials by the Revolutionary Military Tribunal were released. The tribunal itself was abolished. About 140 other untried detainees arrested in previous years and accused of crimes against the security of the state
MOZAMBIQUE
remained in custody while the authorities considered whether to prosecute them. There were at least 300 new arrests of people suspected of violent opposition to the government. Judicial flogging was abolished and no one was sentenced to flogging by the courts: however, some prisoners were reported to have been flogged unlawfully or tortured or ill-treated in other ways. No progress was made in clarifying the fate of dozens of prisoners who "disappeared" in the 1970s.
The government took important steps to increase protection for human rights in a continuing program of legal reform. The Revolutionary Military Tribunal was abolished in March following the establishment of the Supreme People's Court and the Procurator General's Office in December 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989]. The Revolutionary Military Tribunal had been set up in 1979 as an interim measure pending the establishment of the Supreme Court. It tried political prisoners using summary procedures and there was no right of appeal against its decisions. Flogging, a punishment which could be imposed by all courts, was abolished in September.
Fighting between government troops and the Resistencia Nacional Mogam-bicana (renamo or rnm), Mozambique National Resistance, continued throughout the year. Talks between government representatives and renamo leaders were held to seek an end to the conflict but no agreement was reached by the end of 1989. Millions of civilians were affected by the fighting. renamo reportedly abducted hundreds of civilians, some of whom it tortured and killed. In an attack on Massinga in southern Mozambique in May, a renamo
unit reportedly cut off the genitals of seven men, raped and then killed three women and abducted 50 civilians. In Gaza Province in August, dozens of civilian prisoners were reportedly axed or clubbed to death by renamo guerrillas after their hands had been tied behind them.
There were also claims that civilians had been tortured and killed by government troops during counter-insurgency operations, but it was impossible to corroborate these independently, The authorities acknowledged some abuses and several soldiers and militia members were arrested and prosecuted. Three soldiers were arrested in May and charged with torturing a radio journalist they had accused of trespassing on military property. They had not been tried by the end of the year. In October, two militiamen were each sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment for killing a school teacher in Niassa Province.
Over 750 long-term political detainees, most of them suspected of committing crimes on behalf of renamo, were released in late 1988 and in 1989 under Laws of Pardon passed in December 1987 (see Amnesty International Report 1988] and July 1989. About 140 others remained in custody: their cases were referred to the procuracy to consider whether they should be brought to trial. One such prisoner was tried in the Maputo City Provincial Court in October and sentenced to 18 years' imprisonment for spying on behalf of renamo.
At least 300 suspected members or supporters of renamo were arrested or captured by the army in areas of conflict during the year but few details emerged about individual cases. One man arrested in Tete Province in March was reported in the press to have admitted ordering the killing of 80 civilians captured by renamo. Some of those held were reportedly kept incommunicado in military custody for long periods although the law requires that prisoners held by the army are handed over to the security or criminal police immediately after questioning. None of those arrested was brought to trial.
At least a few prisoners were also held incommunicado for several months in the custody of the Serviço Nacional de Segurança Popular (snasp), People's National Security Service. They included three businessmen from South Africa and a Mozambican colleague who were arrested
MOZAMBIQUETMYANMAR (BURMA)
in Maputo in January, apparently for political reasons. They were denied access to lawyers, relatives or consular officials until shortly before they were released uncharged in May and June.
All 37 prisoners serving sentences imposed after unfair trials by the Revolutionary Military Ti-ibunal in previous years were released in August under a Law of Pardon passed in July. They included Carlos Gamboa Lopes Valerio, Pedro José Gonçalves and Ian Douglas Grey (see Amnesty Internationa} Report 1988 and 1989). Another, Tomás Mukoe Simango, who received a 15-year sentence in 1986 for armed rebellion and kidnapping civilians on behalf of renamo, had lost full use of his legs as a result of being kept tightly tied for many hours after his arrest. All 37 had been convicted by the Revolutionary Military Tribunal of crimes against the security of the state.
There were several reports of torture or ill-treatment inflicted by police, soldiers and prison warders. Eight people, who were subsequently sentenced to between three and 14 years' imprisonment for fraud, told the Maputo City Court in September that criminal investigation police had tortured them to extract confessions. The court ordered an inquiry into the torture allegations, which was continuing at the end of 1989.
No flogging sentences were imposed by the courts between January and September, when the punishment was abolished by law. However, several people were unlawfully whipped on the orders of soldiers and prison guards. For example, a militia commander in Cabo Delgado Province ordered two militiamen to be given 13 lashes each for firing their guns without permission. Six common-law prisoners were flogged in March when they were recaptured after escaping from a prison in Maputo. Prisoners were unlawfully whipped for disciplinary offences in the security and civil prisons at Machava on the outskirts of Maputo.
There was no news of dozens of detainees who had been arrested in the mid-1970s and subsequently "disappeared" in custody (see previous Amnesty International Reports).
Although Mozambique retained the death penalty, no death sentences were passed in 1989. The last executions took place in May 1986.
In September Amnesty International published Mozambique: the Human Rights Record, 1975-1989 - Recent Government Measures. The report surveyed hiunan rights in Mozambique since independence in 1975 and described changes introduced since the mid-1980s to improve the protection of human rights. It recommended the restriction of the SNASP's powers of incommunicado and indefinite detention, the investigation of cases of prisoners who "disappeared" in the mid-1970s and the abolition of the death penalty. At the same time as the report. Amnesty International published a letter from the Minister of Justice. This acknowledged that abuses had occurred, but explained the government's policy to protect human rights in the face of destruction and gross abuses by RENAMO. Anmesty International welcomed the release of political prisoners and made inquiries about others, including untried detainees and prisoners who were reportedly flogged or otherwise ill-treated.
