SUDAN
Several hundred prisoners of conscience were detained without charge or trial following a military coup in June. Some were subsequently released but at least 200 were still detained at the end of the year. Dozens of prisoners of southern origin were executed extrajudicially by soldiers and hundreds of civilian non-combatants were deliberately killed by pro-government militias in areas affected by armed conflict. Forty-two people of southern origin "disappeared" in custody. Dozens of prisoners were tortured in November and December. A prisoner of conscience and at least five other people were sentenced to death, and several
SUDAN
hundred other people were under death sentences for murder. At least four executions took place.
There was continuing armed conflict in the south between government forces and the armed opposition Sudan People's Liberation Army (spla). Both sides were alleged to have extrajudicially executed prisoners taken in the course of the fighting and to have committed other abuses. A cease-fire was announced in May but renewed fighting broke out in October following a change of government in Khartoum.
In February 150 senior army officers submitted a memorandum to Prime Minister Sadiq al-Mahdi calling for a new government. a peaceful solution to the armed conflict with the spla and major political and economic reform. This led to a new coalition government being formed in March, which included the Umma Party, the Democratic Unionist Party (dup), representatives of political parties deriving their support largely from southerners, and the trade imions. The National Islamic Front (nif) refused to join the coalition because of disagreements about the implementation of Islamic laws and the new government's intention to negotiate with the spla.
The coalition government led by Prime Minister Sadiq al-Mahdi was overthrown on 30 June in a military coup led by Lieutenant-General Omar Hassan al-Bashir, who became head of a new military governing body, the National Salvation Revolution Command Council (nsrcc). On 9 July the nsrcc appointed a cabinet of mainly civilian ministers, several of whom were believed to be nif supporters.
Immediately after taking power on 30 June the nsrcc declared a nationwide state of emergency, banned all political parties and trade unions, dissolved the Constituent Assembly (parliament) and suspended the Constitution. All non-religious associations were suspended, including local human rights groups and the Sudan Bar Association. Under new state of emergency legislation, the security forces were empowered to arrest people without warrants and to detain them indefinitely without charge or trial. No provision was made for such untried detainees to challenge the grounds for their detention before the courts or for independent review of detention orders. Under an amendment to the state of emergency laws, organizing a strike
became an offence punishable by death.
On 6 July the nsrcc created special military courts to try people arrested under the state of emergency laws and others, Defendants were not allowed full legal representation. On 27 September these courts were abolished and replaced by six new Revolutionary Security Courts and a high court. Defendants were then said to have been allowed the right to defence counsel. However, in December further special courts were created: in these, lawyers were allowed to give advice to their clients during the trial but were not allowed to address the court directly or to present arguments to the court in support of their client. Prisoners convicted by these courts were allowed to lodge an appeal to the Chief lustice but had no right of appeal to a higher court.
On 7 December a member of the nsrcc announced that the government would implement the "September laws" enacted in 1983 by the government of former President Gaafar Nimeiri, which had been partially suspended since that government's overthrow in 1985. These laws, based on an interpretation of Islamic law, provided for the judicial amputation of limbs, flogging as a penalty for numerous offences, and stoning and crucifixion as methods of execution.
Immediately after the June coup, some 80 leaders and officials of political parties and former government officials were arrested and held in detention without charge or trial at Kober prison in Khartoum. These included the deposed Prime Minister and leader of the Umma Party, Sadiq al-Mahdi; Dr Hassan al-Turabi, leader of the nif; Mohamed Osman al-Mirghani, leader of the dup; and Mohamed Ibrahim Nugud, General Secretary of the Sudan Communist Party. Some detainees were released uncharged after a few days; others were freed after several months. For example, 19 prisoners released uncharged on 16 November included former government minister Omar Nur al-Daiem and senior members of the Umma Party and the nif. All those released were prohibited from leaving the country. Sadiq al-Mahdi and some 30 other former government officials and prominent politicians, including prisoners of conscience, remained in detention without charge or trial at the end of the year. Dr Hassan al-TYirabi and Mohamed Osman al-Mirghani were
SUDAN
released from prison and placed under house arrest at the end of November
More than 150 trade union activists and dozens of others, including academics, lawyers and journalists, were also arrested and detained without charge or trial from August onwards, after a number of trade unions and professional associations presented the govemment with a memorandum on 31 July, protesting against new restrictions on trade union rights. Some of those arrested were detained at Kober prison, but most were transferred either to Shalla prison in western Sudan or to a prison in Port Sudan, in the northeast, after they complained about their conditions at Kober prison. However conditions at Shalla and in Port Sudan were said to be even harsher. Among those still detained at Shalla prison at the end of the year were Ahmed Mohamed Saleh, President of the Electrical Engineers' Union, and Omar Ahmed al-Amin, Secretary-General of the Sudanese Employees Union. In contrast to the detained former govemment officials and politicians, who were allowed family visits at Kober prison, the trade union prisoners were denied family visits or access to lawyers.
Two prominent human rights activists were among those detained. Ushari Ahmed Mahmoud, a lecturer at Khartoum University, was arrested on 8 July and detained at Kober prison. Amin Mekki Medani, a lawyer and founder member of the Sudanese Organization for Human Rights, was arrested in Khartoum on 7 September and detained in Port Sudan. Although no reason for their detention was divulged, it seemed that both were imprisoned because their past activities in defence of human rights in Sudan resulted in their being regarded as potential opponents by the new govemment. Other prominent lawyers and members of the Sudan Bar Association were arrested in early August. Some were released in November, including Sadiq al-Shami and Ishaq Shadad, but others, including two members of the Bar Association's Executive Committee, Kamal al-Jazuli and Gelal Eddine al-Sayed, were still detained without charge or trial at the end of the year.
A further wave of arrests in Khartoum in late November and December followed a week-long strike by medical doctors in protest at the arrest and dismissal by the authorities of some of their colleagues and
the banning of the Sudan Doctors' Union. Dozens of doctors were arrested. Most were released a few days later, but more than 20 were believed to be still detained without charge or trial at the end of the year, including Dr Yahya Omar Hamza and Dr Mohamed Abdelgadir Hilal. The military authorities announced after the coup that all those arrested for political reasons would be tried fairly and promptly. However, by the end of the year only a few political prisoners had been charged and brought to trial. One of them. Idris al-Banna, a former deputy chairman of the Supreme Council of State, was convicted on 2 September by a special military court on corruption charges and sentenced to 40 years' imprisonment. His lawyer was present in court but was not allowed to defend him, and the hearing was reported to have lasted less than half an hour. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that criminal charges may have been brought against him for political reasons and that his trial did not conform to intemationally recognized standards of fairness.
In December, four doctors accused of organizing a strike in November were also tried by a special court. They were denied legal representation and the right to appeal to a higher court. One of them, Dr Maamun Mohamed Hussein, was sentenced to death on 10 October and another, Dr Sayed Mohamed Abdallah, was sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment. The other two were acquitted on the grounds of insufficient evidence.
Some doctors and others were reported to have been tortured and ill-treated by members of the security services following their arrest. Dozens of those arrested in November and December were held initially at "safe houses" in Khartoum and kept blindfold during their interrogation and tortured. Farouk Mohamed Ibrahim, a lecturer at Khartoum University who was arrested on 30 November, was kept in a secret interrogation centre for several days and reportedly severely beaten before being transferred to Kober prison. In another case, Buthina Douka, a nursing sister at a hospital in Khartoum, who was arrested soon after the coup, was reported to have been beaten, tied up with ropes and severely ill-treated while detained at Omdurman prison. She was released in early November. Sadiq al-Mahdi, the former prime minister, was reported to have
SUDAN
been ill-treated by senior military officers. He said that on the night of 3 October he was taken out of prison, interrogated for some four hours by senior military officers, verbally abused and threatened with execution.
Suspected spla supporters arrested in areas of armed conflict were also reportedly tortiued or ill-treated. In March three Dinka men were arrested at an army checkpoint on the outskirts of Meiram, in south Kordofan. They were then tightly bound and left lying in the sun for some seven hours, apparently to make them confess to membership of the spla. They were then released: however one, Manut Deng, died within a few hoius and the other two were so seriously injured by the way they had been tied that they both later had both their arms amputated in Khartoum civil hospital. Despite widespread publicity about these cases, the authorities were not known to have taken any action against those responsible or to have instructed soldiers not to use this method of tying up prisoners.
There were reports of extrajudicial executions of civilians by members of pro-government militias and the armed forces both before and after the military coup. On 23 April troops and militias reportedly destroyed a number of villages near Abri in the Nuba mountains in apparent retaliation for the killing of soldiers in landmine explosions. On 19 luly, at least 34 civilian prisoners were killed by soldiers in the town of Wau in the south. The killings occurred after a soldier was injured by a mine near the airport. Troops were reported to have arrested civilians in Zagalona and Grinti markets in Wau and to have opened fire on them shortly after dark.
In late October pro-government Murahaleen militia forces were reported to have raided Nuba villages in the Lagawa area of southern Kordofan and killed more than 100 people, injuring many others. Forty-two people from the Nuba and Dinka conununities who had sought refuge from the fighting in the south by moving to Khartoum were arrested and subsequently "disappeared", including Mary Ajak, a muse, and joseph Madot, a trader. Unconfirmed reports suggested that military intelligence officers had taken them from police custody and extrajudicially executed them in al-Markhiat, near Omdurman.
Dr Maamun Mohamed Hussein, a pris-
oner of conscience, was sentenced to death by a special military court on 10 December. He was convicted of participating in and calling for a strike and of incitement to opposition against the govemment. He was denied full legal representation at his trial. Although the presiding judge at the court said that he had the right to appeal against his conviction, the Head of State, Lieutenant-General Omar Hassan al-Bashir, was reported to have said publicly that he considered the strike an act of treason, that Dr Maamim Mohamed Hussein deserved the death penalty, that he could not appeal to a higher court against his sentence and that he would not benefit from clemency. However, Dr Maamun Mohamed Hussein had not been executed by the end of the year.
Two people sentenced to death for murder by ordinary courts in previous years were executed in Febmary. There were further death sentences and more executions in December of people convicted in unfair trials by special military courts. Magdi Mahgub, a businessman sentenced to death by a special court on 1 December for illegal possession of foreign currency, was executed on 17 December. He had not been allowed assistance from defence counsel. After the coup, the military authorities had ordered everyone in possession of foreign currency to declare the amounts in their possession to the govemment and threatened severe punishment, including the death penalty, for those contravening new cinrency regulations. Gergis al-Ghous Boutros, an assistant pilot working for Sudan Airways, was sentenced to death on 24 December by a special court in Khartoum on charges of attempting to smuggle foreign currency out of Sudan.
Sayed Ahmed Ali Gaballa was executed on 17 December in Khartoum. He had been sentenced to death for alleged drug dealing by a special court in Khartoum on 23 October.
Several hundred people convicted of murder in previous years were believed to be still under sentence of death. In late September the Supreme Court confirmed the death sentences on five Palestinians who were sentenced to death in October 1988 for killing several people in bomb and machine-gun attacks on a hotel and a club in Khartoum in May 1988. However, the Supreme Court modified the mandatory death sentences imposed on the five to
SUDAN/SWAZIUND
allow the relatives of those killed to decide whether the five should be executed or not.
The SPLA was also reported to have killed members of the armed forces and pro-government militias captured in combat. Following the SPLA's captme in March, of Bor, in the Upper Nile region, several hundred captured government soldiers were reportedly executed and their bodies thrown into the Bahr al-}abal river. Also in March, seven government soldiers were reported to have been extrajudicially executed soon after their surrender in the village of Lolyanga, a few miles south of Torit in Eastern Equatoria.
The SPLA was also reported to be holding former members of its own organization in detention, among them Joseph Oduhu, who had previously participated in SPLA delegations to other countries. In December Amnesty International wrote to SPLA leader John Garang detailing reports of alleged killings of prisoners by SPLA forces, urging that they be investigated and that steps be taken to prevent any recurrence of such abuses.
During the first half of the year. Amnesty International urged Prime Minister Sadiq al-Mahdi's government to investigate reports of extrajudicial executions and torture by the armed forces and militias.
Following the military coup, Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience and urged that all those detained be allowed to contest in court the reasons for their imprisonment.
An Amnesty International delegation visited Khartoum in November and met two members of the nsrcc responsible for areas of the south and other senior government officials. However, the delegation's requests for meetings with the Head of State and nsrcc members responsible for political prisoners were not granted. The delegates expressed concern about widespread violations of human rights in the context of the civil war in southern Sudan and the continuing detention without charge or trial of more than 150 prisoners of conscience arrested after the military coup. In December Amnesty International published a report, Sudan: Human Rights Violations in the Context of Civil War, which detailed human rights violations which had occurred in the context of the armed conflict in the south. Also in December it published a document detail-
ing the cases of prisoners of conscience detained without trial after the coup.
The organization called for the commutation of the death sentence imposed on Dr Maamun Mohamed Hussein, a prisoner of conscience, in December and the commutation of all other death sentences. It urged the military government to investigate reports of extrajudicial executions and to take action to prevent prisoners being killed by troops or militia.
