CAMEROON
Five prisoners of conscience arrested in previous years and held without trial were released. At least 110 other political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, were still held at the end of the year for reasons including religious belief and alleged involvement in a 1984 coup attempt. One new arrest of a possible prisoner of conscience was reported. Two political prisoners died, allegedly as a result of torture and medical neglect. Prison conditions were reported to be harsh. At least one death sentence was imposed but no executions were known to have been carried out.
In September Cameroon ratified the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights.
cameroon
One prisoner of conscience, Albert Mukong, a writer who had also been a prisoner of conscience in the 1970s, was released unconditionally in May. He had been held since Jime 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989], when he was arrested for criticizing both the government and its predecessor in radio interviews with the British Broadcasting Corporation (bbc). He was charged with using subversive language detrimental to the government and to the Head of State, an offence punishable by up to five years' imprisonment. His trial before a military court was repeatedly adjourned in early 1989 and in May the charge was withdrawn.
Frédéric Batoum, a prisoner of conscience, was released from Yoko prison in July. He and Samuel Zézé, another prisoner of conscience who reportedly remained in detention without charge or trial, had been among 14 people arrested in December 1985. Those arrested had distributed literature on behalf of the Union des populations du Cameroun (upc), Union of Cameroonian Peoples, an opposition party which is not permitted to engage in any activities although it has not been banned by law. The 14 were released without charge in August 1986, but Frédéric Batoum and Samuel Zézé were redetained in November 1986 and again held without charge or trial.
Other prisoners of conscience included five members of the Jehovah's Witnesses, which has been banned since 1970. Olivier Nwana, arrested in February 1982, and three other Jehovah's Witnesses detained since May 1988, were believed still held without charge or trial at the end of 1989. One Jehovah's Witness was known to be
serving a prison sentence: Augustine Kong was jailed for two years in June 1987 for practising a banned religion. It was not known whether he had been released during 1989. One of a number of Jehovah's Witnesses arrested in late 1988 was released in early 1989, and it appeared that those arrested with him were released later in the year.
The legal basis for detaining Jehovah's Witnesses and others without charge or trial remained unclear, although emergency legislation provides for administrative detention without charge or trial on grounds of national security in certain parts of the country. Political detainees have no opportunity for judicial appeal to establish the reason for, or the legal basis or likely duration of, their detention.
Possible prisoners of conscience arrested in previous years and believed still held without trial at the end of the year included Mohamed Lawane Krama, who was arrested on his retiun to Cameroon from abroad in January 1984; and Georges Yopa and his sister, Nicole Ngakou, detained since January 1987 although reportedly acquitted in October 1987 on charges of possessing subversive documents. Djeukam Tchameni Dominique, a computer company director arrested in November 1988 on suspicion of importing subversive material, was also in custody throughout the year. Initially held incommunicado by the military in harsh conditions, he was transferred in July to the headquarters of the Brigade mixte mobile, the paramilitary police. In October he was transferred to hospital suffering from angina, where he remained at the end of the year. Amadou Bakary, a senior official, was reportedly arrested in February on suspicion of communicating with an exiled government opponent and was believed to be still held at the end of 1989.
More than 100 people arrested in connection with a failed coup attempt in April 1984 were reportedly still held at the end of the year. At least 78 had been sentenced after trials before military courts which did not conform to international standards of fairness. At least eight others were believed to have remained in detention despite their acquittal by military courts. At least eight prisoners were held after expiry of their sentences and at least 10 were detained without charge or trial (see Amnesty International Reports 1985 to 1989).
CAMEROON/CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Some of those still held appeared to be prisoners of conscience, detained despite the absence of evidence linking them to the coup attempt. They w^ere apparently arrested because of family or other connections with former president Ahmadou Ahidjo, who died in 1989, or with others suspected of plotting to overthrow the government. They included Suzanne Lecaille and Oumarou Aman, who remained in detention, despite their acquittal in 1984 on charges connected with the coup attempt. Abdoulaye Mazou, a judge and former senior civil servant, was still held after his five-year sentence expired during the year. Habouba Moussa, an airline employee, and Roger Bolimo, a customs inspector, remained in detention without charge or trial.
In March Cameroon's Ambassador to France stated publicly that those still held in connection with the 1984 coup attempt were military personnel convicted of criminal, not political, offences after fair trials. He said that those still imprisoned after completing their sentences were held in administrative detention without charge or trial because they had not repented and posed a continuing threat to public safety.
Four prisoners held in connection with the 1984 coup attempt were reportedly released. Information received during the year confirmed the release of Rose Zia, a bank employee, who may have been freed in 1987 after being acquitted by a military tribunal in 1984. Alain Touffic Othman, who was redetained in January 1985 after being acquitted by a military tribunal in 1984, was released in July. Jean Ngogang and Christophe Zangbou, electricians who had been detained without charge or trial since April 1984, apparently for criticizing the government, were also released in July.
Two political prisoners died in December at the Central Prison (known as Nkondengui prison) in the capital, Yaoundé, allegedly as a result of torture or ill-treatment followed by medical neglect. Both were believed to be held in connection with the 1984 coup attempt: one of them, former Captain Madam Dogo Aboubakar, had been sentenced to life imprisonment. They and some 30 other political prisoners were reportedly tortured and severely beaten after they were found with religious and other personal items prohibited to prisoners.
New information was received about
harsh conditions in police cells and prisons, particularly the Nkondengui prison, where some 5,000 prisoners were reportedly held. As many as four or five prisoners allegedly died there each day during periods in 1987 and 1988 due to malnutrition, medical neglect and gross overcrowding.
No executions were reported but at least one person received a death sentence. Augustin Ban din was convicted of breaking into a bar and stealing musical equipment. The death penalty is mandatory for "aggravated theft", a broadly defined offence which includes any theft accompanied by forcible entry.
In November the National Assembly passed a law introducing the death penalty for the illegal importation, production, stocking, transportation or transit of toxic or dangerous wastes.
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the release of prisoners of conscience and for either the fair trial or release of political detainees. The organization also appealed on behalf of prisoners sentenced after unfair trials by military courts in 1984, calling for retrials in accordance with international fair trial standards. Amnesty International urgently appealed for improvements in prison conditions and urged abolition of the death penalty.
