MEXICO
Numerous prisoners were released following a series of pardons including two political activists who had been held on allegedly fabricated charges. Reports of torture or ill-treatment, leading in at least three cases to death in custody, were received, although the authorities denied that ill-treatment was systematic. The new government said it was investigating individual "disappearance" cases which occurred during the 1970s and early 1980s but no progress had been reported by the end of the year. A special commission was set up to investigate the "disappearance" of José García in 1988 but his case remained unclarifíed. Killings were reported in rural areas, some of which may have been carried out by landowners or pistoleros (gunmen) acting with the acquiescence of local authorities. In a few
MEXICO
cases, investigations into these killings and other human rights abuses resulted in charges being brought against those allegedly responsible, but many cases remained unresolved.
The new administration of President Salinas de Gortari, who assumed office in December 1988, embarked on a series of measures with the stated intention of "modernizing" the country. Some of these related to human rights. In February President Salinas announced the first in a series of pardons for certain prisoners detained for "socially and politically motivated offences" as a step towards "national reconciliation". Among the first prisoners to be released were Israel Gutiérrez and Francisco Urbina Hernández, who had been arrested in 1984 (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1989). Although they were charged with criminal offences, Amnesty International believed they might have been arrested for their non-violent political activities. By November several hundred prisoners had been released, many of them indigenous people thought to have been arrested in the context of land disputes, as well as other long-term prisoners held for politically motivated offences.
In February a Directorate of Human Rights was set up within the Interior Ministry. One of its main functions was to receive complaints of human rights abuses. The head of the Directorate, Luis Ortiz Monasterio, stated that cases of detainees alleged to have "disappeared" in the 1970s and early 1980s would be "analysed on a case-by-case basis, in an attempt to resolve the matter to the satisfaction of all parties involved". He and several other officials — including a state attorney general — acknowledged that torture occurred although they denied that it was deliberate policy. They criticized the use of initial statements taken by police as the "queen of proofs" (compelling evidence) against suspects because of the risk that it may have been obtained through coercion. In November torture was made a state crime in Chihuahua, punishable with between two and 10 years' imprisonment. Local bishops and other human rights activists had reported numerous cases of torture in the state, and by the end of the year several police agents had been detained and accused of killing two men in September and October allegedly through torture.
New reports from several states accused
judicial police, and on occasion military personnel, of torture and ill-treatment of detainees. Most of those affected were suspected of common crimes. It was alleged that charges were sometimes based on confessions extracted under dmess. Detainees are constitutionally entitled to immediate contact with a lawyer, but in practice it was sometimes several days before detainees were located by their lawyer or family, during which period ill-treatment, especially beatings, reportedly sometimes occurred.
In January an appeal court confirmed a seven-year sentence for possession of marijuana against Gregorio Castanon (see Amnesty International Report 1989). It was believed, however, that the charges may have been based solely on a confession made as a result of torture. An investigation by the Ministry of Defence dismissed the torture allegations as unfounded but details of the inquiry were not known. Gregorio Castaiion's retraction of his confession — on the grounds that he had been forced to ratify it under the effects of torture — was reportedly dismissed by the courts inter alia because he had not submitted a formal complaint.
In March eight women, some pregnant, who were arrested and accused of crimes related to abortion, said they were held incommunicado for almost 20 hours by members of the since disbanded Intelligence Directorate in Tlaxcoaque, Mexico City. Two of them alleged that the group were threatened with death, stripped, kicked and beaten. Only days before, an agreement had been published in the government's Official Gazette which included the stipulation that individuals in police custody were not to be held incommunicado and that detainees should be treated "with the greatest respect and dignity".
A few detainees, such as Communist Party member Antonio Orozco arrested by judicial police in March, alleged they were tortured with electric shocks. Juan Alvarez Resales, arrested in March in Veracruz, said he had to be taken to hospital after police beat, kicked and punched him, and on two occasions forced him to swallow pieces of glass with carbonated mineral water containing chilli. In August Eleazar Beltran from Chihuahua state registered a formal complaint declaring he was held blindfold in a military barracks, stripped naked and beaten. He said soldiers repeatedly threw cold water on him, placed a plastic bag
MEXICO
over his head, tied a rope round his neck and kept tightening it, strung him up by his arms and told him he was going to die. After two days they took him away in a truck, and eventually abandoned him.
In April the Attorney General's Office of the Federal District asked the courts to issue arrest warrants against five judicial police agents accused of causing the death in custody of Octavio Hernández Pérez the same month. Reports indicated that he had died as a result of blows to the head and other parts of the body. The outcome of the investigations into his death was not known. The head of the Federal District Judicial Police acknowledged initially that the police "went too far" during the interrogation.
In May the president of the Mexican Bar Association called on the judicial police in Mexico state to end the use of torture and the practice of holding detainees incommunicado. The Attorney General of the Republic was reported as saying in September that an investigation would be carried out into the ill-treatment of detainees and that anyone found responsible would be brought to justice.
Although the authorities promised to investigate cases of "disappearances" from the 1970s and early 1980s, no progress was reported by the end of the year. In July members of the Comité Eureka, an organization which campaigns for clarification of "disappearance" cases, submitted a formal complaint to the Attorney General's Office requesting that José Zorrillo Pérez, former head of the Federal Security Directorate (see below), and other former security agents should be interrogated about a number of "disappearance" cases in which they allegedly participated. The "disappearance" of José Ramón García, a member of the Partido Revolucionario de ¡os TYabajadores, Revolutionary Workers' Party, also remained unclarified. He "disappeared" in December 1988 in Cuautla, Morelos, on the way to a meeting. A commission was set up by the authorities to monitor investigations, but by the end of the year little progress had been reported.
Reports of killings, mostly in the context of land disputes, were received from the states of Michoacán, Puebla, Oaxaca, Veracruz, Hidalgo, Chiapas and Chihuahua. The problems in obtaining information from remote rural areas meant that it was difficult to ascertain the full circumstances
of many of the killings and subsequent investigations. Amnesty International sought information to determine whether, as in the past, local authorities had colluded with local landowners and pistoleros to cover up the crimes.
In February, eight peasants were killed in Pijijiapan, Chiapas, when, according to witnesses, about 50 men — landowners and pistoleros — opened fire on peasants who had gathered to meet landowners and local agents of the Public Ministry to discuss land issues. The agents of the Public Ministry are reported to have fled when the shooting started. Four people were reportedly arrested shortly afterwards, but the current state of investigations was not known at the end of the year.
In June Pedro Hernández Hernández was murdered in Embocadero, Veracruz. He had been active, together with former prisoner Zózimo Hernández, in publicizing abuses against his community including numerous killings as a result of land disputes. The two men had been warned earlier by an agrarian reform official that they would be killed if they returned to Embocadero. In November a member of a peasants' union was arrested without warrant and charged with the murder of Pedro Hernández, and the killing of three landowners in 1984. However, it was alleged that his confession had been extracted as a result of beatings and near-asphyxiation, Lawyers appealed for the charges to be revoked against seven other men from Embocadero arrested in November and also charged with the murder of the three landowners. At least three said that police coerced them into confessing by beating and almost drowning them.
In a few other cases investigations into killings led to the imprisonment of those allegedly responsible, although most cases remained unclarified. At least eight rural police officers were arrested in Xoxocotla, Mexico state, in January in connection with the killing in the same month of four people and the injuring of numerous others: they had shot at a crowd gathered to protest against alleged fraud during local elections. In August landowner Roberto Zenteno finally gave himself up to the courts to face charges of shooting dead indigenous peasant leader Sebastian Pérez in Chiapas in December 1988. An arrest warrant had been issued in January.
The arrest in June of José Zorrillo Pérez,
MEXICO/MOROCCO AND WESTERN SAHARA
on charges of ordering the murder of a journalist, set an important precedent. Manuel Buendia, one of numerous journalists killed in unclarified circumstances during the past few years, was shot in Mexico City in 1984. At the time of his death he had been investigating allegations of police and government involvement in drug-trafficking. Delays in investigations under previous administrations had called into question the willingness of the authorities to clarify the case.
Amnesty International welcomed the new measures taken by the government concerning the release of prisoners and the announcement that "disappearances" would be investigated on a case by case basis, but continued to press for information about the outcome of the investigations. It sought further information about reports of torture and of killings, particularly in rural areas. In July the organization sent a document to President Salinas outlining cases of torture, killings, political prisoners and "disappearances" which had been submitted to previous administrations and which in many cases had not been satisfactorily resolved. In October a response was received from the Foreign Ministry informing Amnesty International of steps taken by the government regarding human rights and stating its intention to respond at a later date to the specific issues raised in the letter.
