BRAZIL
Peasants involved in land disputes were arbitrarily detained in growing numbers. The detainees were often ill-treated or tortured. Torture of criminal suspects and prisoners continued to be widespread, in many cases leading to deaths in custody. The circumstances of some deaths in custody were suggestive of extrajudicial killings. In urban areas, killings increased of suspected petty criminals and juvenile offenders by "death squads" allegedly made up of police personnel. In rural areas, trade unionists and campaigners for agrarian reform continued to receive threats and more than 50 were killed: the state authorities persistently failed to bring to justice those responsible for these crimes or for assaults on members of indigenous communities.
The first direct presidential elections since 1960 were held in two rounds in November and December. The successful candidate, Fernando Collor de Mello of the National Reconstruction Party, was due to take office in March 1990. During the year Brazil ratified the United Nations (un) Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the Inter-American Convention to Prevent and Punish Torture.
There was an increase in detention without warrant of peasants involved in land disputes and further reports of their being tortured and ill-treated in short-term custody. On 11 March battalions of the Brigada Militar, Military Police, from Rio Grande do Sul expelled a group of some 600 peasant families from land they had recently occupied in Salto do Jacui. After sealing off the encampment and spraying it with tear-gas, members of the Brigada Militar allegedly fired into the crowd. Five police officers and 400 peasants were reported to have been wounded in the eviction, and 14 peasants were treated for bullet wounds. The police reportedly beat many peasants taken into custody, and five detainees were allegedly staked to ant-hills after arrest.
Ivan Brito de Assis, a leader of the Movimento Dos TYabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (mst), Landless Rural Workers' Movement, was one of 11 mst members detained without warrant for a day on 29 August in the state of Alagoas. Ivan Brito de Assis said afterwards that he had been repeatedly beaten and threatened with summary execution. He said that a rope had been tied around his testicles and that he had been tortured with electricity while
BRAZIL
hung from an iron bar (called the pau de arara, parrot's perch). He alleged he had been tortured in order to make him give information to police and landowners about the MST, a legal organization. A medical examination the day after his release found that he had multiple bruising and swellings consistent with his testimony.
There were continued reports of the widespread use of torture and ill-treatment of criminal prisoners and suspects. In March a joint conunission of Brazilian human rights organizations visited a prison in Sao Paulo, the Casa de Detengao. The commission interviewed prisoners there following allegations that over 1.000 of them had been beaten after an escape attempt by two inmates in which a prison guard was killed. According to the commission's report, military police stationed at the prison removed prisoners from their cells and made them strip and kneel against the wall so that they could not see their assailants, Prison guards then cut them with knives or beat them with pieces of wood, iron bars, cables and rubber truncheons. The commission noted many ft'ac-tures of legs, arms and ribs in addition to bruising on the prisoners interviewed. Medical assistance had apparently not been given for some days after the incident. The results of a judicial inquiry into the allegations had not been made public by the end of the year. A number of prisoners also testified to the commission about continuing torture, including the use of electric shocks and beatings with iron bars, in Pavilion 6 of the Casa de Detengao (see Amnesty International Report 1988).
On 5 February, 18 prisoners died of asphyxiation in the 42nd police precinct of Sao Paulo. They had been sealed with 33 other inmates in a punishment cell which measured 1.4 metres by 3.6 metres with no air vent. According to survivors, the incident followed an escape attempt which had been foiled by guards. After the prisoners had been brought under control, they were stripped naked and beaten by a column of military and civil police. Fifty-one of them were then forced into the cell. Despite cries that prisoners were dying, the cell was not opened for over two hours. Civil and military police inquiries were opened, but by the end of the year little progress had been made in bringing judicial proceedings against the 21 police officers charged with aggravated homicide for the ill-treatment
and deaths. After 30 days' suspension, two of the three civil police agents who were charged were transferred to active duty at the Police Disciplinary Board, which was investigating the case. Eighteen military police officers also charged with aggravated homicide, whose case was to be heard by a military tribunal, were not suspended from active duty.
Prisoners were killed following escape attempts in other states in circumstances suggestive of extrajudicial executions. Ten military and three civil police were charged with the killing in February of seven detainees at the Vila Aurora police station in Rondonopolis, Mato Grosso state. The detainees had been dragged out of their cells and then stabbed and shot by hooded men, identified by survivors as military police officers. Prisoners were also killed in custody following three other prison disturbances: 11 were killed in Cuiabá, Mato Grosso, in March; eight were killed in Curitiba, Paraná state, in November; and five were killed in Rio de Janeiro state in December. In all these cases there were allegations that prisoners had been assaulted by the authorities after they had surrendered.
"Death squads" were reported to have increased their activities against suspected petty criminals and juvenile offenders in major cities. "Extermination groups" made up of civilian vigilantes and members of the civil and military police were reportedly responsible for hundreds of killings. The Rio de Janeiro State Police Commission of Inquiry into Extermination Groups, established in 1983, continued its investigation, but the level of crimes attributed to "extermination groups" with police participation did not fall, A study of official police statistics and newspaper reports in Rio de Janeiro state by a joint commission of local human rights groups recorded 1,175 homicides in seven municipalities in the state in the first six months of 1989. Press reports asserted that many of these killings had been committed by "extermination groups". In a number of cases, witnesses had reported uniformed police among the assailants.
In Recife, Pemambuco, the Gabinete de Assessoria Jurídico Popular, Popular Legal Advice Bureau, reported 212 killings attributed to "death squads" in the city during 1988 and 88 such killings in the first three months of 1989. Victims were
BRAZIL
mainly suspected petty criminals, predominantly youths between the ages of 18 and 25. Bodies were usually riddled with bullets. Some had marks of handcuffs on them or the hands were tied with nylon rope. In July the Governor of Amazonas state disbanded the entire state civil police force following evidence of substantial civil police involvement in "death squads" in the capital, Manaus.
Investigations into "extermination groups" were hampered by intimidation of witnesses and threats or attacks on those denouncing the killings. In March Luis Tenderini, President of the Justice and Peace Commission of Recife, was abducted, beaten and burned with cigarettes by men who warned him not to investigate "death squad" activities in the city. The Justice and Peace Commission had urged the authorities to prosecute police found responsible for the killings. Some military police officers were being officially investigated for involvement in "death squad" activities. In July Dom Mauro Morelli, the Bishop of Duque de Caxias, Rio de Janeiro state, received death threats after he had denounced police involvement in "extermination groups".
In rural areas there was no significant progress in bringing to justice those responsible for killing peasant leaders involved in land or labour disputes. Gunmen allegedly hired by landowners and land claimants continued to carry out such killings with impunity throughout the year. Amnesty International believed that the persistent failure to prosecute in such cases suggested acquiescence by the state authorities in these crimes. In spite of the notorious, widespread and persistent nature of these killings, the Brazilian authorities failed at every level to take effective measures to stop them.
A number of trade unionists and community leaders supporting the actions of peasants were killed in Espirito Santo state. Killings increased following a violent confrontation in June during which squatter peasants linked to the MST allegedly killed a landovraer and a plainclothes police officer who were attempting to expel them from land they had recently occupied near the town of Pedro Canario.
On 6 June, 13 peasants were arrested and allegedly tortured by state police seeking information incriminating other members of the community. The 13 were
released the following day, but a series of further arrests followed. Among those detained was Verino Sossai, President of the Rural Workers' TYade Union of Montanha, who was arrested on 6 July and accused of sheltering one of the principal suspects. He was released after a few days, but was assassinated two weeks later. A month earlier the treasurer of the Workers' Party in Linhares, Paulo Damiao TVistao, had been killed. He had previously denounced state complicity in what he believed to be a campaign of violence against peasants and human rights activists sponsored by a landowners' organization, the Uniào Democratica Ruralista (UDR), Democratic Ruralists' Union. By the end of July federal police were reported to be investigating connections between these two killings and the July killing of a newspaper columnist, Maria Nilce Magalhaes, who was reportedly planning to publish material on local corruption.
In August attempts were made on the lives of Vilmar Schneider, a Lutheran pastor from Linhares, and Osmar Barcelos do Nascimento, a human rights lawyer, Church workers in Espirito Santo, including the Bishop of Mateus and several members of the Comissào Pastoral da Terra (Cpt), Church Land Commission, received death threats. In September Valdemicio Barbosa dos Santos, a leader of the Rural Workers' Trade Union of Pedro Canario, was shot dead, reportedly with a police-issue weapon. In December a French priest, Father Gabriel Maire, was shot dead as he drove back to his parish in the city of Vitoria. Before his death Father Maire had made a statement to the local Justice and Peace Commission about death threats he had allegedly received from police officers because of his work in support of the landless poor. By the end of the year a former civil police chief had been charged with commissioning the murder of Maria Nilce Magalhaes. The public prosecution service had not yet brought charges for the other killings of trade unionists and community leaders supporting peasants in Espirito Santo.
In July two men were indicted for the murder of rubber tappers' trade union leader Francisco Alves Mendes Filho, known as Chico Mendes, who was killed in December 1988 in Acre state (see Amnesty Internationa] Report 1989). They were appealing against the indictment.
BRAZIU/BRUNEI DARUSSALAM
Two other men charged with the killing had not yet been arrested.
There was very little progress during the year in bringing to trial those responsible for scores of other killings studied by Amnesty International.
The authorities failed to take effective measures to prevent further attacks on members of indigenous communities. Scant progress was made in bringing anyone to trial for the March 1988 killings of 14 Hcuna Indians in Amazonas state (see Amnesty International Report 1989). Gold prospectors were reported to have killed Yanomami Indians in Roraima state, but there was no news of the outcome of police inquiries into these incidents. In one case in August, two women and a child were killed at an illegal airstrip near the Surucucus Indian post. While the authorities did not prevent gold miners entering Yanomami lands, they maintained their ban on anthropologists and health workers. This hindered the effective reporting of incidents and made it impossible to determine the circumstances and extent of killings in Yanomami areas.
Amnesty International asked the Brazilian authorities about investigations into allegations of torture in detention centres and prisons. The allegations referred both to peasants detained in the context of land disputes and to ordinary criminal prisoners. Following the deaths in custody through asphyxiation in Sao Paulo in February, Amnesty International raised with judicial authorities their role in the protection and promotion of human rights in the state. In March Amnesty International sent a medical delegation to Rio Grande do Sul to examine prisoners detained following the expulsion of some 600 peasant families. The delegation confirmed the existence of injuries consistent with the prisoners' allegations of ill-treat-ment. Following reports of alleged extrajudicial executions and death threats, the organization appealed to the authorities to investigate these incidents fully and bring those responsible to justice.
In August Amnesty International expressed concern to the un Sub-Commission on the Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities about the Brazilian Government's failure to protect indigenous people from violent assault, or to prosecute those responsible for the killing of Indians.
