ITALY
Hundreds of prisoners of conscience, all conscientious objectors to the national service laws, were in prison. Unreasonable delays continued to be reported in judicial proceedings in political cases. There were allegations of ill-treatment in police custody and prisons: some of these were not adequately investigated. Several judicial
inquiries which had been opened into alleged ill-treatment in previous years remained unresolved.
In April the Defence Committee of the Chamber of Deputies (lower house of parliament) finalized a new draft law on conscientious objection (see Amnesty International Report 1989). Its proposals included widening the grounds on which conscientious objector status might be granted and reducing the length of civilian service from 20 to 15 months, three months longer than military service. In July the Constitutional Court ruled that the existing eight-month difference between military and alternative service was punitive to conscientious objectors. From 9 August recognized conscientious objectors were allowed to terminate their civilian service after 12 months. The draft law on conscientious objection was still awaiting parliamentary discussion at the end of the year.
A new Code of Penal Procedure came into force on 24 October, replacing the inquisitorial system of criminal justice with a system containing many features of an accusatorial system (see Amnesty International Report 1989). The slow hinc-tioning of the criminal justice process, which frequently contributed to excessive delays in judicial proceedings in political cases, had been widely criticized for many years. In some cases, international standards relating to fair trial within a reasonable time had been breached (see Amnesty International Reports 1987 to 1989). The new code aims to simplify and speed up judicial procedures and strengthen the rights of the defence. However, judges' and lawyers' associations repeatedly alleged that the structural and administrative reforms necessary for the efficient functioning
ITALY
of the new code were incomplete and that this would exacerbate delays in judicial proceedings. Many judges and lawyers also called on the government to introduce an amnesty law to reduce substantially the massive backlog of proceedings; they considered this essential for the successful application of the new code. On 27 October the government presented a draft amnesty law applicable to numerous minor offences committed before 28 July 1989, which proposed that conscientious objectors sentenced for refusing military service should not be liable for further call-up. It was still awaiting parliamentary discussion at the end of the year.
In August the Chamber of Deputies asked the government to prepare legislation abolishing the death penalty from the Wartime Military Penal Code: this would abolish the penalty for all offences under Italian law. By the end of the year such legislation had not been introduced.
In January Italy ratified the United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
In July the Ministry of Defence stated that there were 532 conscientious objectors held in military prisons, of whom 90 per cent were Jehovah's Witnesses. The law requires recognized conscientious objectors to perform civilian service but many objectors refused this option either on conscientious grounds or because they considered its length to be punitive. Until the Constitutional Court's July ruling effectively reduced the length of civilian service. Amnesty International considered that it was not an acceptable alternative to military service owing to its punitive length. It therefore considered those imprisoned for refusing to undertake civilian service to be prisoners of conscience.
The length of precautionary detention (the period between the moment of arrest and the passing of a definitive sentence by the final court of appeal) that is allowed by Italian law has repeatedly been criticized by legal experts. Although the new Code of Penal Procedure reduced the maximum permitted length of precautionary detention from six to four years, it allowed suspension of this limit in "particularly complex court hearings". A decree law passed in September also extended the permitted length of precautionary detention for people sentenced by first instance courts
for serious offences relating to terrorism and organized crime.
During the 1980s there was widespread legal concern over the practice of filing multiple charges in political cases in order to extend the permissible limits of precautionary detention. The problems caused by this practice were evident in 1989 in proceedings against 421 defendants charged with promoting armed insurrection against the state and committing acts aimed at provoking civil war. They had been committed for trial in July 1983. Many of them had already been accused of and, in some cases, convicted of being members of the Red Brigades and ft'equently of having been involved in specific violent acts carried out by the Red Brigades, The new charges made possible a further period of precautionary detention. As a result, some defendants who had been on the point of release on the original charges spent up to four more years in prison in precautionary detention. In October 1989 Rome Assize Court fully acquitted the first 253 defendants; their trial had opened in March. The trial of the remaining defendants opened in November and ended with their acquittal two weeks later. No judicial justification was ever given for the delay of about six years between the committal order and the opening of the trials.
Reports of the alleged ill-treatment of criminal suspects in police custody continued throughout the year; some of the allegations related to 1988. There were also claims that there was an increase in the number of charges of calumny brought against detainees who had alleged ill-treatment by law enforcement agents. In some cases the judicial authorities appeared to have made little effort to investigate formal complaints of ill-treatment.
On 9 August 1988 Domenico Garzón submitted a complaint to the Verona Public Prosecutor's office. He alleged that he had been repeatedly ill-treated by law enforcement officers in San Bonifacio carabinieri station during the night of 26 May 1988. He claimed that they had punched and kicked his head and body and had beaten him with a wooden broom handle. He alleged that he was then made to kneel, handcuffed, for nine hours, facing the wall in an unlit cell and kicked and punched regularly. A medical report issued by Verona district prison immediately after his transfer on 27 May recorded numerous cuts and
ITALY/JAMAICA
bruises which appeared to be consistent with his allegations. No investigation was apparently carried out by the responsible judge of instruction and the original complaint was archived on 17 January 1989.
Little progress appeared to have been made in several judicial inquiries opened in previous years into allegations of ill-treatment in police custody. In July the Italian Interministerial Committee on Human Rights reported that judicial inquiries into the alleged ill-treatment of approximately 47 detainees in Milan in early 1988 and of Francesco Badano in Padua in May 1988 were still continuing. It added that criminal proceedings had been instituted against a carabinieri officer who had shot Antonio Leone in a Naples police station in July 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989). Two people, whose cases were included in an investigation into approximately 30 cases of alleged ill-treatment opened by the Naples Public Procurator in 1986, were awaiting trial on charges of calumny against the police. No progress was reported in the remaining cases in the Naples investigation (see Amnesty International Reports 1987 to 1989).
The trial of 15 law enforcement agents, in connection with Salvatore Marino's death in custody in Palermo in August
1985	(see Amnesty International Reports
1986	to 1989), opened in May but was immediately adjourned on the grounds that two defendants were absent from court. No date had been fixed for reopening the hearing by the end of the year.
Allegations of ill-treatment were also made by prison inmates. Pietro Barberino alleged that he and about 20 non-Italian prisoners were regularly beaten by prison guards in Pianosa Island prison between August 1985 and August 1988. He also claimed that two senior guards regularly entered the cells of foreign prisoners at night, forcing them to strip naked and then punching and kicking them. As a result, a number of these prisoners apparently suffered burst eardrums, broken teeth and numerous cuts and bruises. Pietro Barberino alleged that he was often beaten after he had intervened to stop the ill-treatment of fellow prisoners. He reportedly suffered numerous minor injuries, including broken teeth, and underwent an emergency eye operation as a result of blows inflicted by prison guards. He sent written complaints to the judicial authori-
ties in August and December 1988. He was interrogated by a Public Prosecutor in February 1989 but had apparently received no further news regarding the judicial investigation of his allegations by the end of the year.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of conscientious objectors considered to be prisoners of conscience. It welcomed the new Code of Penal Procedure insofar as it aimed at reducing the length of judicial proceedings, but was concerned that delays would persist owing to inadequate provision for the necessary structural reforms. It asked to be informed of the steps taken to investigate allegations of ill-treatment and monitored the progress of judicial inquiries opened into such allegations in previous years. The organization also investigated cases where charges of calumny were brought against detainees, apparently without full investigation of their original complaints.
