CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Two prisoners of conscience were released after serving prison sentences, but one was later rearrested. An untried political detainee arrested in 1987 remained in
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
custody throughout the year. Twelve government opponents were detained after being forcibly repatriated from Benin; they were still held without charge or trial at the end of the year. Three prisoners remained under sentence of death; no new death sentences or executions were reported.
Two prisoners of conscience — Thomas Koazo, a journalist, and Jeanne-Marie Ruth Rolland, a former president of the national Red Cross Society — were released. Both had been sentenced in August 1987 to three-year prison terms by the Special Tribunal in separate trials (see Amnesty International Report 1989). Thomas Koazo was convicted of insulting the Head of State by reporting — falsely, according to the authorities — that President André Kolingba had secretly met former Emperor Jean-Bedel Bokassa shortly after the latter had returned to the country and been detained. In July and August, prior to his release in September, Thomas Koazo was reportedly held in chains at the Seventh District Police Station in the capital, Bangui. Jeanne-Marie Ruth Rolland was convicted of inciting people to disobey and insult the authorities; she had publicly criticized government officials for confiscating a diamond which she had found. She was released from Ngaragba Prison in Bangui in September and was rearrested in December after refusing to move out of the way of a government motorcade.
One untried political detainee, who also appeared to be a prisoner of conscience, remained in prison throughout the year. Jacques Ngoli, a civil aviation authority employee, was arrested in May 1987. He had apparently helped an army officer to draft a tract which urged the government to respect democratic freedoms and criticized what were described as the arbitrary powers of the country's leaders. No charges had been brought against him by the end of 1989. He was said to be held at Ngaragba Prison, where he was reportedly beaten by guards and kept naked in chains for a few days in 1988.
Confirmation was received during 1989 that 12 students arrested in September 1988, at least four of whom had appeared to be still held at the end of 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989], had all been released in November 1988. Seven were acquitted and five received suspended sentences after they were tried by
Bangui's Criminal Court on charges of inciting people to strike and preventing others from exercising their freedom to work.
Twelve opponents of the government were arrested in August after they were forcibly repatriated to the Central African Republic from Benin. They included General François Bozize, a former Minister of Information who had sought refuge abroad after he was accused of involvement in an unsuccessful coup attempt in March 1982 (see Amnesty International Report 1983), and five of his supporters. The six others were said to be members of the opposition Front patriotique ouban-guien-Parti du travail (fpo-pt), Oubangui Patriotic Front-Labour Party, an illegal organization under the Central African Republic's one-party constitution. Although the repatriations took place in August, the detention of the 12 was only acknowledged by the authorities in October. They said that the 12 had planned to sabotage fuel and electric installations and carry out a series of assassinations, but none of them had been charged or brought to trial by the end of 1989. They were all held incommunicado in military custody in Bangui: François Bozize was detained at Roux military camp, the others at Kassai military camp.
Three people convicted by the Special Tribunal in 1982 of placing explosives with intent to cause an explosion at a French military base remained under sentence of death, No new death sentences or executions were reported in 1989.
Two Zairian university students, Fariala and Mwamba, who had been seeking asylum in the Central African Republic, were reportedly arrested in Bangui and forcibly repatriated in June to Zaire, where they were immediately detained. They had left Zaire following the violent suppression of student demonstrations in February 1989. The two students were still held without charge or trial in Zaire at the end of 1989.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of the two prisoners of conscience and investigated the case of Jacques Ngoli as a possible prisoner of conscience, urging his trial or release. Amnesty International also sought information about those detained following their forcible repatriation from Benin and pressed the authorities to bring them to trial on recognizably criminal charges, or release them. Amnesty
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC/CHAD
International urged the Head of State to commute the three death sentences outstanding since 1982.
