ARGENTINA
Members of a left-wing group, who had attacked a military barracks in January, were allegedly tortured after surrendering. There was evidence that two of them may have been summarily executed after surrendering and that three others "disappeared". Following the declaration of a state of siege there were a number of short-term arrests of members of left-wing political parties, accused of inciting riots in May. A pre-trial presidential pardon in October for senior military officers further curtailed hopes that past gross human rights violations would be investigated.
The year was marked by social unrest and political violence. In January members of a left-wing group, Movimiento Todos Por la Patria (mtp), All For the Fatherland Movement, attacked a military barracks at La Tablada in the province of Buenos Aires. Thirty-nine people died in the attack, 11 of whom were police or military personnel.
Presidential and congressional elections were held in May, which were won by the
ARGENTINA
Justiciahsta (Peronist) party. At the end of May hyperinflation and spiralling food prices provoked a series of attacks on supermarkets in the cities of Rosario and Córdoba, which were accompanied by violent clashes between looters and police forces. The government accused left-wing political parties of inciting the riots. President Raúl Alfonsín's government imposed a 30-day state of siege, but looting spread to other regions. About 15 people were killed in the rioting, approximately 100 were injured and more than 2,000 were detained. Most of those detained were charged with looting and other public order offences, but at least 28 people, including trade unionists and members of left-wing political parties, were detained under the state of siege provisions. At the end of June, the state of siege was suspended and President Alfonsin stepped down five months early in favour of the President-elect, Carlos Menem. In October President Menem, faced with continuing military pressure over human rights trials, issued pre-trial pardons for 39 senior military officers.
An armed attack by members of the mtp on the Third Infantry Regiment barracks at La Tablada in Buenos Aires province in January resulted in the death of nine soldiers, two police officers and 28 mtp members. There was evidence that two of the mtp members listed as dead may have been summarily executed after having surrendered and that three others "disappeared" after having been captured, ft was also reported that detainees were tortured while in military custody after surrendering, and that some were subjected to further torture while in incommunicado detention under the supervision of the Federal Police and prison service personnel. All were reportedly held by the police in conditions which amounted to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.
In April the Attorney General said that judicial inquiries had been opened into the alleged violations of human rights of the mtp members. By the end of the year the inquiry had been completed in only one case. It concerned alleged assaults by police and prison officers on five mtp prisoners in the main coiuthouse cells in Buenos Aires on 28 January. Official medical examinations ordered by a judge revealed a substantial increase in injiuies compared with those registered four days
earlier, after the prisoners' surrender. Sebastian Joaquin Ramos, for example, had three injiuies when first taken into custody and 45 injuries on 28 January. The judge accepted that illegal force had been used against some of the defendants. However, he dismissed the case on the groimds that the evidence implicating police and prison service officials was insufficient. An appeal was lodged against the ruling.
In October, 20 mtp defendants involved in the attack on La Tablada barracks were found guilty of aggravated illicit association, rebellion, 11 counts of homicide, 12 counts of attempted homicide and other charges. They were given sentences ranging fi'om 10 years to life imprisonment. Since all the defendants had been charged with illicit association, special summary procedures were applied under Law 23.077 on the Protection of Constitutional Order. The trial was heard before the Federal Appeals Court of San Martin; under Law 23.077 appeals to the Supreme Court in such trials are limited to constitutional matters. In December the Federal Appeals Court of San Martin refused the defendants leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, ruling that the grounds for appeal were insufficient.
Amnesty International's subsequent report on the events at La Tablada reflected the organization's concern that the judicial inquiries had failed to obtain important evidence from the barracks that would have helped ascertain the time, place and manner of death of all of the 39 who died, ft also commented on the fact that autopsy procedures were not of a sufficiently high standard to help determine whether particular deaths had occurred in combat or were the result of extrajudicial executions after surrender. Amnesty International concluded that there was evidence to support the allegations that two mtp members had been extrajudicially executed and that three others had "disappeared" after surrendering. Arrmesty International believed that the delays in investigating the related complaints of torture and ill-treatment could not be justified. These delays amoimted to a denial of the right of all detainees to have such complaints promptly, impartially and effectively investigated.
In June a judge ordered a raid on the headquarters of the Partido Obrero (po), Workers' Party, in Buenos Aires and the arrest of five of its leaders. They were charged with "seeking to impose their
ARGENTINA/AUSTRALIA
ideas by force or fear" because of leaflets they had distributed urging workers to demonstrate. By the end of June the po leaders had been freed and charges against them had been dropped.
In July Fermín Angel Núñez, who had been detained in 1975, was granted parole. Amnesty International believed that Fermín Núñez had received an unfair trial when convicted in 1979 of politically motivated crimes of violence (see Amnesty International Report 1989). Fermín Núñez was among a group of 64 alleged former guerrillas pardoned by President Menem in October.
On 6 October President Menem pardoned 39 senior military officers, who were to have been tried by civilian courts for crimes perpetrated between 1976 and 1983 during the Argentine Armed Forces' "dirty war" against alleged subversives. TWo federal public prosecutors faced disciplinary hearings and risked dismissal when they challenged the constitutionality of the pretrial pardons, despite instructions from the Attorney General not to do so. These pardons brought to a standstill all but one of the criminal proceedings into past human rights violations including "disappearance", torture and extrajudicial execution. By the end of the year only one trial was continuing, that of the former Commander of the First Army Corps, Guillermo Suárez Mason. In separate decrees President Menem pardoned military officers charged with rebellion after military uprisings in late 1987. early 1988 and late 1988.
Human rights organizations expressed concern about undue delays by juvenile courts in the identification of children bom to women held in secret detention centres during the 1970s, who were then allegedly given to police or military families. In May twin 13-year-old boys and an Argentine couple, (a former police sergeant and his wife), were extradited from Paraguay to Argentina. The couple had claimed they were the parents of the children. In 1985 a juvenile court, acting on behalf of a former political exile who believed they were his children, ordered blood tests but the couple fled with the twins. On their return to Argentina the couple were charged with falsifying the children's birth certificates and concealing their identities. The twins were placed with foster parents. In October blood tests proved that the boys were not the children of the original plain-
tiff but of another couple, Maria Rosa Ana Tolosa and Juan Enrique Reggiardo, who had "disappeared" in 1977. The judge then freed the former police officer and his wife, and returned the boys to their custody. By December the court had still not ruled on four petitions lodged by the boys' maternal grandfather to be accepted as a plaintiff in the case and to be granted custody of the children.
In June Amnesty International wrote to both President Alfonsin and President-elect Menem reiterating the principle that all human rights violations should be independently investigated, notwithstanding a change of government. It said that any law which granted immunity from prosecution to people charged with criminal responsibility for violations of human rights ran the risk of being seen as encouraging or facilitating future abuses. Amnesty International delegates observed sessions of the mtp trial in September and October, and sought information about the judicial inquiries into the alleged violations of the rights of the mtp detainees.

