NAMIBIA
Political prisoners were released and legislation permitting detention without trial was abolished, in accordance with a United Nations (un) plan for Namibia's independence from South Africa. As well as the political prisoners released by the South African authorities, hundreds of prisoners who had been held outside Namibia by the armed opposition South West Africa People's Organisation (SWAPO) were freed and allowed to return to Namibia. However, hundreds of people detained in previous years either by the South African authorities in Namibia or
NAMIBIA
by swapo forces in Angola remained unaccounted for and had effectively "disappeared". There were new reports of torture and former prisoners held by both sides to the conflict said they had been tortured in previous years. Some prison-ers were said to have been deliberately killed and several swafo supporters were allegedly executed extrajudicially. Four prisoners were sentenced to death but there were no executions.
The un plan, which came into effect on 1 April, involved a series of major political changes. The South African-appointed government was dissolved in March and Namibia was administered under a transitional arrangement by South Africa's Administrator-General. The un Secretary-General's Special Representative for Namibia supervised the independence plan, with the assistance of the un Transition Assistance Group (untag), a military and civilian monitoring force drawn from various countries. Repressive or restrictive laws, including those that had permitted long-term and incommunicado detention, which had facilitated torture and other hxmian rights violations in the past, were repealed. From April onwards political prisoners were released and Namibian exiles, particularly swapo supporters based in Angola, returned to Namibia. Most South African forces were withdrawn from Namibia or confined to base. Elections for a 72-member Constituent Assembly were held in November. swapo won 41 seats while the Democratic "Rirnhalle Alliance (dta), which had dominated the previous government, won 21. The assembly began drafting a constitution (which required a two-thirds
majority) on the basis of principles drawn up by the un Security Coimcil in 1982. These included guarantees for civil liberties and an independent judiciary.
At the beginning of April there were major clashes in northern Namibia between South African forces and swapo guerrillas before untag units arrived in the area. Some 300 swapo guerrillas were killed. swapo said that the guerrillas were already in Namibia while the South African authorities said they had crossed from Angola after 1 April, in violation of the un plan. In subsequent months there were numerous politically motivated assaults on Swapo supporters, including some killings. Many of these attacks were attributed to members or former members of -the paramilitary Counter-Insurgency Unit (coin) known as Koevoet (Crowbar).
Dozens of uncharged political detainees whose arrest had been acknowledged by the South African authorities were released between April and June. In July, 24 convicted political prisoners and one who was awaiting frial were freed. Another who was sentenced in August to nine years' imprisonment for a politically motivated murder was released in November.
The fate of many people who reportedly "disappeared" after being detained by the South African security forces in the 1970s and 1980s remained unknown. Reacting to lists of some 60 "disappearance" cases submitted by swapo and by Amnesty International, the South African authorities said that those named had either been released or were not known. However, further evidence emerged in 1989 about the absence of safeguards for detainees in the past, calling into question the reliability of the South African authorities' response to reported "disappearances". Dozens of swapo combatants captured in previous years had apparently been held in unacknowledged detention for up to five years on a farm run by police near Tsumeb. Seventeen left the farm in September after smuggling out a letter about their plight. A police commander subsequently claimed that they were paid labourers rather than prisoners,
In May swapo announced the release of 200 prisoners it had been holding in its military bases in Angola. It had previously admitted holding about 100 prisoners accused of spying for South Africa. Eventually over 500 were reported to have
NAMIBIA
been released. Among them were Bience Gawanas, a London-based lawyer who had been arrested by SWAPO in Zambia in August 1988 and subsequently detained in Angola (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
Some of those released claimed that many other prisoners were still detained in swapo bases outside Namibia and that others had died or been killed in detention. These allegations, together with accounts of torture by those previously detained in Angola, received considerable publicity in Namibia. In September a un delegation visited 30 swapo bases in Angola and Zambia to investigate the allegations but found no prisoners still in Swapo's custody. The un subsequently reported that some 1,100 names of alleged prisoners had been submitted to it. Of these, 163 names were either incomplete or duplications. A further 67 people had never been detained; 517 had been imprisoned and were known to have been released; 123 were reported to be dead (although the circumstances of their deaths were not noted) and 263 could not be accounted for. Among those named were two prominent swapo members who had been imprisoned in Namibia before rejoining swapo in exile. Bemardus Petrus was reported to have died in 1986 and Victor Nkandi's fate was said not to be known (see Amnesty International Report 1987). The un said it would continue to investigate the outstanding 263 cases.
A civil court action to secure the release of six people reportedly detained by swapo in Angola was initiated in the Windhoek Supreme Court in May by relatives of the six and the Parents' Committee, an organization set up to press for the release of detainees held by swapo. In November the court ruled that five of the six had been unlawfully detained by swapo until at least May 1989, but that there was insufficient evidence to prove that the sixth had been detained. Although it lacked the power to order the release of prisoners held in Angola, the court instructed swapo to account for the five, if they had been released since May.
Convicted political prisoners who were released from Windhoek Central Prison in July said that they had been tortured by South African security forces following their arrest in previous years and had witnessed other prisoners being tortured. They described severe beatings, electric shocks.
suspension by the feet and partial suffocation as among the methods of torture which had been used.
Prisoners released from swapo custody in Angola also said they had been tortured. The methods they cited included severe beatings, being suspended by the wrists or ankles, being burned, and being partially buried. They said they had been held in large pits roofed with zinc sheets or tree-trunks. swapo representatives acknowledged that prisoners had been tortured.
There were also new reports of torture and ill-treatment in custody. A commission of inquiry heard that two suspected criminals, losiah Pineas and Paulus Ndume, had been blindfolded and bound, suspended on a bar and subjected to electric shocks during interrogation in a Windhoek police station in June. The commission instructed the police authorities to investigate the case with a view to prosecuting those responsible. Two leading Swapo members laid charges against police after they were apparently assaulted by police in Oshakati police station in November. One of them, Maxuilili Nathaniel, a former acting president of swapo's internal wing, sustained a deep cut in his head.
There were allegations that South African police and security forces had deliberately killed prisoners. Among the 300 swapo guerrillas killed in April, at least 18 were apparently shot in the back of the head at close range after they were captured. In August police shot a former Koevoet member dead at his home in Rundu, claiming he had resisted arrest. Petrus Joseph had joined swapo after leaving Koevoet and in March had testified in court that Koevoet personnel had been ordered to arrest and intimidate suspected swapo supporters. In September the murder of Anton Lubowski, a prominent lawyer and swapo member, fuelled speculation that the South African authorities might be implicated. A police investigation into the murder was announced and was still continuing at the end of the year.
In March the Supreme Court ruled that the immunity from prosecution granted by South Africa's State President in 1988 to six soldiers suspected of killing a swapo supporter should be withdrawn. However, the authorities were granted leave to appeal against the court's ruling. By the end of the year there had been no decision concerning a similar appeal on behalf of four soldiers
NAMIBIA/NEPAL
who beat a political detainee to death in 1985 (see Amnesty International Report 1989). In November the Administrator-General granted an amnesty to two members of the South African security forces accused of murders committed during counter-insurgency operations in 1985.
Four people were sentenced to death. Leonard Sheehama, a swapo member, was sentenced to death in April for a bomb explosion which killed five people in Walvis Bay, a South African enclave in Namibia. He was tried in Walvis Bay by a South African court. Three other men convicted of murder were sentenced to death in Windhoek in June. A stay of execution was granted in favour of Lukas Matsuib shortly before he was due to be hanged on 9 June. He had been convicted of murder in 1988. There were no executions.
In March Amnesty International submitted to the un lists of political prisoners reportedly held by the South African authorities in Namibia including convicted prisoners, untried detainees and prisoners feared to have "disappeared" in custody. It also submitted a list of prisoners reportedly detained by swapo in Angola. It made inquiries about prisoners who were believed to have "disappeared" in custody, both in Namibia and in swapo's bases in Angola. Amnesty International called for strong human rights guarantees to be included in Namibia's new constitution. It appealed against the use of the death penalty.
