NIGER
All the remaining 12 political prisoners sentenced after unfair trials were released on the Head of State's orders in April and December. Two people were sentenced to death after being convicted of murder.
In September a new constitution was approved by referendum to make Niger a one-party state ruled by the Mouvement national de la société de développement, the National Movement for the Society of Development. Presidential and national assembly elections took place in December.
In April, on the 15th anniversary of the coup which brought the armed forces to power in 1974, President Ali Saïbou ordered the release of 10 prisoners convicted of politically motivated offences after unfair trials. Seven of them, including Mohamed Mohamed Abdoulahi, known as "Billa", had been sentenced to death in 1985 in connection with an attack that year on government buildings in Tchin Tabaraden. When he was appointed Head of State in 1987, President Ah Saibou had commuted their death sentences to life imprisonment and later reduced these to 30 years (see Amnesty International Report 1988). The three others freed in April were
two army officers and a journalist convicted in 1988 in connection with an unsuccessful coup attempt in 1983 and sentenced to between seven and nine years' imprisonment. The two freed in December were also army officers convicted in connection with the same coup attempt and sentenced to 10 and 20 years' imprisonment. They had been among 28 people tried in 1988 by the State Security Court. After these releases no other political prisoners were known to be held in the country.
In March two people were sentenced to death in Zinder after being convicted of murder. It was not clear whether they exercised their right of appeal but they had not been executed by the end of the year.
An Amnesty International delegation visited Niger in March and met the Minister of Justice, the Minister of the Interior and several other officials from the two ministries. Ministers told the delegates that the government had resolved not to tolerate human rights violations and was prepared to take legal steps to ensure that human rights were respected.
Amnesty International asked about the whereabouts of five people arrested and sentenced after the attack on government buildings in Tchin Tabaraden in 1985 who had not been released. It was informed that four of them had died in 1985 of gastroenteritis in Bimi-Nkonni New Prison, and that the fifth had died during the attack on the government building.
