PANAMA
Several hundred political prisoners were released in December. Their release fol> lowed the entry of United States (us) armed forces into the country on 20 December and the overthrow of Panama's de facto ruler, Defence Forces' Chief Brigadier General Manuel Noriega. Several thousand supporters of General Noriega were briefly detained by us troops during the intervention. Before the us action, hundreds of critics and opponents of General Noriega's government had been held, mostly for short periods, without trial or after summary proceedings. Many said they had been tortured or ill-treated while held in sub-standard prison conditions. Some detainees were deported upon release. Other Panamanians were refused entry to the country; some were detained at the airport and tortured. A number of Defence Forces' officers arrested after a March 1988 coup attempt were held in detention without trial until they were released following the us action. At least three people were allegedly extrajudicially executed by the Defence Forces in the context of elections in May. Thirteen Defence Forces' officers were reportedly summarily executed without trial following a failed military uprising in October. Some were said to have been tortured.
The us action followed the declaration of war by Panama on the United States of America (usa) on 15 December; among the us' stated purposes were to protect us lives and to detain General Noriega on drug charges filed against him in the us. Following the us intervention, the Defence
PANAMA
Forces were disbanded. Guillermo Endara Galimany, the apparent victor in May elections which had been annulled by General Noriega's government, was sworn in as Panama's new president. General Noriega took refuge in the residence of the Papal Nuncio, where he remained at year's end.
Following the US action, several thousand supporters and suspected supporters of General Noriega were reportedly detained on US army bases in the Canal Zone or in temporary holding camps constructed by US forces. Many were members of the Defence Forces or the paramilitary civilian Dignity Battalions linked to them. At the end of the year several hundred remained in detention.
The human rights violations which preceded General Noriega's overthrow took place in a context of political instability and unrest. Continued efforts by the opposition to remove General Noriega from power were met with abuses by the Defence Forces and the Dignity Battalions. Political tensions were exacerbated by the annulment of the May elections, by the October military uprising which General Noriega's supporters said was part of a US effort to bring down his government, and by steps taken by General Noriega to make himself the country's de jure leader.
General Noriega's administration said it annulled the May elections because of fraud, violence, and what it described as US-organized interference. However, international observers and local and foreign journalists said the opposition was in the lead when the government-controlled electoral tribunal stopped the count. Journalists reported and filmed widespread harassment and intimidation of the opposition by Defence Forces' personnel and Dignity Battalions. Opposition presidential candidate Guillermo Endara was beaten unconscious on 10 May when men wearing Dignity Battalion "T-shirts attacked opposition demonstrators in the capital with clubs and iron bars as uniformed soldiers stood by. Vice-presidential candidate Guillermo Ford was also brutally beaten and then held overnight in military custody. Hundreds of opposition supporters were brought before night courts and sentenced to imprisonment or fines, without being legally represented. Night courts, from which there is no right of appeal, are meant to deal only with infringements of the administrative code such as
theft and embezzlement.
Most people arrested in connection with the elections were released by December. Seventy-one were freed after an intercession by European Community ambassadors in June. Some said that after their release they had immediately been deported against their will.
Among those not released until the US action was Humberto Montenegro, bodyguard to Guillermo Ford. He had been arrested in May and charged with killing fellow bodyguard Alexis Guerra during the 10 May incident, in which he was himself gravely wounded. The opposition maintained that both bodyguards were shot by members of the Dignity Battalions. Initially, his detention was denied and it was feared that he had "disappeared". His detention in Modelo prison in the capital was later confirmed. He was reported to have been denied adequate medical attention for serious bullet wounds sustained on 10 May. Legal proceedings against him had stalled.
In the aftermath of the October military uprising, the government acknowledged the detention of 37 members of the Defence Forces. However, the local and foreign press reported that scores of others had gone missing after the rebellion, and were believed to be held in unacknowledged custody. Among the civilians arrested was radio journalist and opposition party member Senén Alfonso Briceño, who was arrested without warrant on 3 October, and allegedly beaten after Defence Forces' personnel overheard him express support for the uprising. His brother, Mario Briceño, who had publicly objected to Senén Briceño's detention, was himself arrested the following day as he left a supermarket. He was found to be carrying a banknote on which a derogatory name for General Noriega had been written. He was held for several weeks on charges of insulting the Panamanian state; Senén Briceño was held until late November. Opposition presidential candidate Guillermo Endara was briefly taken into custody on 5 October when the Dignity Battalions attacked the opposition's headquarters with firearms, clubs and tear-gas as uniformed Defence Forces' personnel stood by.
Guillermo Márquez Amado was detained by men believed to be from army intelligence when he arrived at Panama City's airport on 8 November. They interrogated him about a Christian Democrat
PANAMA/PAPUA NEW GUINEA
meeting he had attended abroad and his supposed links with exiled Panamanians. His captors reportedly hooded him, cocked their guns and threatened to shoot. He said that after threats to rape his wife in his presence and to kill his daughters, he signed a statement that he had cooperated with US attempts to overthrow General Noriega and was released.
Twenty Defence Forces' officers detained and reportedly tortured after a failed coup in March 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989) remained in custody until their release following the US intervention. Their continued detention had been permitted by military law, under which military personnel could be transferred to civilian jiuisdiction after one year in detention without trial, the maximum permissible under military law. At the time of the us action, pre-trial investigatory procedures initiated by the civilian courts had not been completed. Following the officers' release, tiny punishment cells where some said they had been held were displayed to the public and then destroyed.
Both military and civilian prisoners who had been held in Modelo prison, in El Renacer prison in Gamboa, and in the offshore penal colony of Coiba complained about conditions. They said they had been overcrowded, that food, water, health care and sanitary facilities were inadequate or non-existent, and that access to legal counsel and their families had been severely limited or prohibited. A number of prisoners were reportedly subjected to beatings, burning, and disfigurement with razor blades and knives.
Election-related abuses included at least three apparent extrajudicial executions. One victim was Father Nicolás Van Kleef, a paralysed Dutch priest. Soldiers commandeered his car on election day as he announced mass times by loudspeaker, and shot him in the back of the neck. The following day government supporters led by riot police attacked an apparently peaceful crowd of opposition supporters. Three journalists were apparently singled out for attack and suffered serious injuries,
Following the October coup attempt, the Defence Forces announced in an official war communique that 10 rebel officers had died in the fighting. The opposition claimed that they, as well as three others originally listed as detained, had been summarily executed without trial immedi-
ately after they surrendered. The body of one. Captain Nicasio Lorenzo Tunon, was returned to his relatives for burial; they rejected official explanations that he had hanged himself in his cell. Families of some of the dead officers alleged they had been tortured before being shot.
There was no news under General Noriega's administration of any official efforts to establish responsibility for the mutilation and murder in 1985 of an outspoken opposition leader, Dr Hugo Spadafora, a former Panamanian vice-minister of health. Much evidence had emerged over the years to link the Defence Forces to Dr Spadafora's murder and decapitation, but the perpetrators had not been brought to justice (see Amnesty International Report 1988).
Amnesty International repeatedly called on General Noriega's government to investigate reported abuses and bring those responsible to justice. The organization asked the government to take steps to ensure the safety of detainees and to charge or release them. Letters were sent in May and November, asking the government to ensure that full and impartial inquiries were conducted into the human rights violations which took place in the context of the May elections and the October coup attempt. They were unanswered at the time of the change of government at the end of the year.
In November Amnesty International expressed concern about reported torture in Panama to the Organization of American States.
