ANGOLA
Hundreds of people suspected of support-ing an armed opposition organization were imprisoned, some of whom may have been prisoners of conscience. The prisoners included people arrested in previous years who remained in detention without charge or trial. More than 700 prisoners were freed during the year in an amnesty. Over 20 people were tried and convicted, including possible prisoners of conscience. Two people were sentenced
to death but 50 death sentences imposed in previous years were commuted. No executions were reported. Namibians released from imprisonment in Angola said they had been tortured while in custody. More than 260 Namibians reportedly imprisoned in Angola could not be accounted for.
Fighting continued between government forces and the opposition Uniào Nacional para a Independéncia Totaì de Angola (unita), National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, despite diplomatic efforts to obtain a peace settlement and direct talks between President José Eduardo dos Santos and UNrrA's leader, Jonas Savimbi. As a result of the continuing conflict, hundreds of thousands of civilians were forced to abandon their homes and there were acute food shortages. Each side accused the other of deliberately killing civilians and both held prisoners. unita reportedly captured hundreds of civilians and forced them to serve in its ranks.
During the year more than half of the 50,000 Cuban troops based in Angola left the country as part of an international agreement to bring about Namibia's independence.
An amnesty law promulgated in 1988 under the government's policy of "Clemency and National Harmonization" came into force in February. This granted amnesty or clemency to all government opponents who agreed to renounce violence and comply with the Constitution, including those who had been detained or convicted. Such an agreement implied recognizing the legitimacy of a one-party state.
More than 700 political prisoners, including detainees held without trial, were released in mid-1989 under the February amnesty law.
The government-controlled media reported the capture of hundreds of unita combatants in many parts of the country. Other sources said hundreds of civilians were also arrested on suspicion of supporting, sheltering or supplying information to unita. Some of those arrested may have been prisoners of conscience, held on account of their non-violent views or activities, although few details were available about individual prisoners. One man was reportedly arrested for possessing a cassette recording of a unita radio broadcast, but it
ANGOLA
was not clear whether he was charged or brought to trial.
An unknown number of suspected UNITA members or supporters arrested in previous years continued to be detained without charge or trial in Luanda and other towns, and in rural detention camps such as Bentiaba in Namibe Province. Detailed information about these prisoners could not be obtained.
TVvo people imprisoned for criticizing senior government figures may have been prisoners of conscience. Elizabeth Maria dos Reis Fangony, a brewery worker, was serving a two-year sentence imposed in December 1988 by the People's Revolutionary Court in Luanda. The charges against her apparently stemmed from a critical reference to a senior security police official which she made after one of her colleagues was arrested in connection with another matter. José Manuel Simeao Miranda, an accountant, was sentenced to one year's imprisonment in August. He had been arrested in November 1988 and convicted of making a defamatory remark about President dos Santos. He was released in October, apparently because his period of pre-trial detention was deducted from his sentence.
The trial of 30 members of the Church of Jesus Christ on Earth, known as the Tocoist Church, which began in Luanda in November 1988, ended in February. The People's Revolutionary Tribunal convicted 19 defendants of crimes against state security and homicide, and sentenced them to between five and 19 years' imprisonment. The 11 other defendants were acquitted. Most of the defendants were believed to have been arrested after clashes, resulting in several deaths, between factions of the sect in late 1986 and early 1987 (see Amnesty International Report 1989). After the clashes, government officials claimed that supporters of one faction sought to destabilize the government. Precise details of the charges on which the defendants were convicted were not published. Those convicted reportedly had no right to appeal against their conviction and sentence.
Political detainees were reportedly subjected to severe beatings or other forms of torture shortly after their arrest, particularly in Luanda and in Benguela and Namibe provinces. Although few details were available, some reports indicated that detainees held at the security prison in
Luanda, known as the Catete Road Prison, were tortured with electric shocks.
The death sentences imposed on 50 people by courts between 1981 and 1987 were commuted in June under the Clemency and National Harmonization policy. None of these death sentences, imposed for crimes allegedly linked to unita activities, had previously been reported publicly. The announcement of their commutation indicated that death sentences were imposed more extensively in Angola diuring recent years than was officially acknowledged. It was not known how many prisoners remained under sentence of death.
Death sentences were imposed in July on Captain Humberto Campos Abrantes, an air force pilot, and Captain Francisco José Jorge Setas Ferreira, a helicopter pilot. The People's Revolutionary Court in Luanda convicted them on charges of passing military secrets to South Africa. Their death sentences were subject to automatic review by a special Appeals Court, the findings of which had not been announced by the end of the year.
In March unita publicly denied allegations that several of its senior officials had been killed and some of its members had been burned to death in previous years as a result of disputes within the organization. Amnesty International was unable to either confirm or discount reports of these killings. unrra also denied that it had imprisoned Uto Chingunji, its former representative in the United States of America (see Amnesty International Report 1989), although it continued to be alleged that he might be under restriction at untta'S headquarters at Jamba in southeast Angola. Jonas Savimbi reportedly said at a unfta congress in September that the organization was holding between 8,000 and 10,000 prisoners. It was unclear, however, who these prisoners were and whether, in addition to captured government soldiers, they included civilian supporters of the government or unita dissidents.
More than 500 Namibians who had been held in Angola by the South West African People's Organisation (swapo) were released during the year, mostly in May, in accordance with a United Nations (un) plan for Namibian independence. Upon returning to Namibia, those freed said they had been tortured in Angola and that other Namibians were still held in Angola. In
ANGOLA/ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA/ARGENTINA
September a UN delegation appointed to investigate the fate of more than 1,000 prisoners reportedly held by swapo visited 22 swapo bases in Angola. The delegation found no evidence that SWAPO was still holding prisoners but noted that 123 detainees had reportedly died in SWAPO custody and that 263 others could not be accounted for (see Namibia}.
Amnesty International welcomed the release of political prisoners and investigated the cases of two convicted prisoners who may have been prisoners of conscience, The organization also welcomed the commutation of 50 death sentences and urged the commutation of the two death sentences known to have been imposed in 1989. In March Amnesty International submitted to the Angolan Government lists of Namibian prisoners reportedly held in Angola by SWAPO and qualifying for release and repatriation imder the UN plan for Namibian independence. The organization later expressed concern about reports that many of these prisoners had been tortured and urged the Angolan authorities to investigate the fate of others who apparently "disappeared" while held in Angola. In December the Procurator General replied that all SWAPO's prisoners had been released but did not provide information about detainees who had "disappeared".
ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA
One person was executed. This followed an execution in 1988, which was the first to be carried out for nine years.
Eardley Browne was hanged on 13 lune. He had been sentenced to death for a murder committed in 1988. His appeal to the Eastern Caribbean Court of Appeal had been dismissed earlier in the year. However, at the time of his execution he
had apparently not petitioned the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council (JCPC) in London, Antigua's final court of appeal. There were no prisoners under sentence of death at the end of the year.
Amnesty International wrote to Prime Minister Vere C. Bird Sr in July asking whether Eardley Browne had had the opportunity to appeal to the jcpc and, if not, the reasons for his execution before he had been able to pursue fully all legal procedures for review of his sentence. No reply had been received by the end of the year.
