MYANMAR (BURMA)
Many hundreds, possibly thousands, of suspected government opponents, including prisoners of conscience, were detained without charge or trial or sentenced to prison terms after unfair trials before military tribunals. Torture was widely reported as were extrajudicial executions by government troops combating longstanding insurgencies in ethnic minority areas. The authorities failed to investigate thousands of killings of pro-democracy demonstrators by government troops in 1988. At least 100 people were sentenced
MYANMAR (BURMA)
to death, although it was not known whether any such sentences had been carried out. All death sentences for crimes committed before the military coup of 18 September 1988 were commuted.
Martial law orders introduced after the State Law and Order Restoration Coimcil (slorc), headed by General Saw Maung, took power in a military coup in September 1988 remained in force throughout 1989. These severely restricted the scope of political activity, making participation in gatherings of more than four people (Martial Law Order 2/88) and public criticism of the armed forces (Notification 8/88) punishable by imprisonment. Further restrictions on freedom of expression and association were in force under legislation passed in years previous to the military coup. On 17 and 18 July martial law orders 1/89 and 2/89 declared that people who opposed martial law by "violation or defiance of the orders issued by the slorc, the government or (military) commanders" would be tried summarily and only by military tribunals.
The full number of prisoners of conscience and other political prisoners held in Myanmar is believed to have run into thousands. At the end of the year Amnesty International had detailed information about more than 200 prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience, but these constituted only a small proportion of those reportedly arrested for political reasons. By mid-August, according to some estimates, 3.000 people had been arrested, and there were many further arrests before the end of the year.
Many prisoners of conscience were critics and opponents of the government detained for campaigning peacefully against martial law restrictions on freedom of expression. Arrests were reported throughout the year. Those held included Aung Din, the acting Chairman of the All-Burma Federation of Student Unions (absfu), who was arrested in the capital, Yangon, on 24 April. He had publicly criticized the slorc in speeches and organized public meetings in defiance of the authorities. He was still believed detained without charge or trial at the end of the year. Other government opponents were arrested during the Burmese new year festival in April: they included Pa Du, a National League for Democracy (nld) activist who had led a troupe of young actors whose performances were interpreted as criticizing the armed
forces. Pa Du also was still reportedly held without charge or trial at the end of 1989.
Widespread arrests of political party leaders and activists in Yangon, Mandalay and other principal towns began on 17 July and continued at least until the end of the month. Those held included Moe Hein, leader of the Democratic Party for a New Society (dpns), who appeared to be a prisoner of conscience. It was not known if he was charged or tried. Ten people were arrested during an illegal gathering of monks at Shwedagon Pagoda, Yangon. On 28 July, after a single morning session, a military tribunal sentenced seven of them to five years' hard labour for violating Order 2/88: the status of the other three was not known.
On 20 July troops arrested five members of the nld executive committee and placed its principal leaders under house arrest. Aung San Suu Kyi, the daughter of Aung San, an independence hero, was still under house arrest at the end of the year. Tin U, a retired army general and nld chairman, was also put under house arrest in July; in December he was sentenced to three years' imprisonment for "creating public disturbances". Those arrested in July included 38 other nld supporters who were seized at the nld headquarters: some of them were then reportedly interrogated under torture at Ye Kyi Aing detention centre. Most were believed to remain in custody at Yangon's Insein Prison at the end of the year. Details of charges against them were not known,
Leaders of other legally registered political parties also among those detained in July included Aye Lwin, Chairman of the Students' Revolutionary Party for Democracy, Ko Aung Win (also known as U Aung Win), General Secretary of the Youth and Students' Union Association, and Daw Cho Cho Than, General Secretary of the Patriotic League for Peace.
U Nu, an 82-year-old former prime minister, and 13 of his supporters were placed under house arrest on 29 December for refusing to repudiate a symbolic "parallel government" proposed to act under his authority.
Some government opponents arrested in 1988 remained prisoners of conscience. Nay Min, a lawyer arrested in October 1988, was sentenced to 14 years' imprisonment in October 1989 for having provided information to the foreign news media. Two prominent ethnic Kachin lawyers.
MYANMAR (BURMA)
both of whom were detained in September 1988 in Myitkyina, were also still held. One, Bawk La, a Baptist preacher, was detained after making a series of speeches during demonstrations. He was reportedly beaten and given electric shocks during interrogation and to have suffered some memory loss as a consequence: his legal status was not known. Nan Zing La, also a Baptist, was tried and sentenced to five years' imprisonment reportedly as a consequence of two speeches he had made in September 1988. Neither of them was known to have advocated violence.
Trials for offences under martial law were held in accordance with the special norms and summary procedures established in July by Order 2/89. This stipulates that military tribimals are to "waive unnecessary witnesses" and not recall those "who have already testified". It requires tribunals to punish offenders with "(a) the death sentence; (b) life imprisonment; or (c) a jail term of not less than three years with hard labour", with death penalties to be imposed "regardless of the provisions under existing laws". Order 2/89 also stipulates that "decisions and judgments passed by a military tribunal shall be final". No judicial appeal is allowed. Death sentences must be ratified only by the area military commander and the sole recourse of the condemned is to ask the army Commander-in-Chief within 30 days to "review" the sentence.
There were new reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners during interrogation, in some cases leading to death. Torture methods reportedly included electric shocks, bums by cigarettes, superficial cuts with knives, near-drowning, hanging by the arms and the rolling of iron bars along the shin bones. Prisoners were often kept blindfold; forced to stand for long periods, to kneel on sharp stones, and to do callisthenics; and were denied food, water and sleep for extended periods.
Allegations of torture were received from many parts of the country and involved at least six distinct security agencies: the regular forces of the military [Tatmadaw] and the People's Police Force, and specialized agencies; the Military Intelligence Services (mis); the Special Branch or political police; the police Criminal Investigation Department (Qd); and the Bureau of Special Investigation Department (bsi), responsible for dealing
with "economic crimes". nld youth leader Myo Thein, a student and ethnic Mon, was detained in Yangon by the mis in July. He was reportedly beaten and had his head plimged repeatedly into water during interrogation. He was said to be held in Ye Kyi Aing detention centre at the end of the year. U Soe Myint, the dpns- secretary for Ayeyarwady, was reportedly arrested at his home by troops in May and interrogated at the mis headquarters in Pathein. According to other prisoners he was hooded with a rice bag, beaten and kicked, had his head held under water and was badly injured when an iron bar was rolled forcefully along his shins, removing much of the skin. He reportedly remained in detention at Pathein Prison at the end of 1989.
Torture as well as extrajudicial executions reportedly continued in ethnic minority areas where government forces were in conflict with armed opposition groups (see Amnesty International Report 1989). One former detainee, held from February to April as a suspected collaborator of Kachin insurgents, said he had been tortured at the army's Northern Military Command Headquarters at Myitkyina: he said that after "ordinary beatings" he was subjected to the "helicopter" (being spun around while hung from the ceiling) and beaten while in "the motorcycle" position (crouching down in a rider's position). He said he was partially suffocated with a plastic bag and subjected to the "iron road" (the rolling of an iron bar along his shins).
Government soldiers reportedly forced civilian villagers in minority areas to act as porters for them (see Amnesty International Report 1989) and frequently ill-treated or even killed them. One Kayin villager said soldiers had repeatedly kicked him while he was a porter in June because he had fallen and was "unable to stand back up quickly". A former soldier alleged that ethnic minority porters were sometimes killed for fear that they might reveal the whereabouts of government troops to opposition forces. This occurred, he said, when porters become too exhausted to proceed.
Those required to serve as military porters reportedly included people arrested in urban areas for protesting against the government. In August, shortly after the slorc announced the imminent release of 1,500 prisoners from Insein prison, up to 500 political prisoners — mostly students
MYANMAR (BURMA)/1^AMIBIA
— were said to have been taken by the army at night from the prison and sent by train to the northern Shan state town of Nong Cho. In September one group of about 48 students was reportedly seen in the Shan village of Human, Nam Hsan township, having been assigned to food and ammunition porterage duties for army counter-insurgency units. Soldiers allegedly beat five other students to death in the nearby Nam 1\i township.
Extrajudicial executions were also reported in the comse of military operations in communities alleged to support ethnic insurgents. On 1 December troops reportedly fired indiscriminately on the inhabitants of the Kayin village of Thetkaya when most of them were assembled to watch a film. Three young girls, two older women and a 15-year-old monk at the village monastery were reportedly shot dead without warning or provocation. Many of the villagers subsequently sought refuge in Thailand. No official inquiry was known to have been held into the shootings.
No official inquiry was known to have been carried out into the killings of demonstrators by government forces in 1988. Amnesty International had urged such an inquiry at the end of 1988 and had pressed the government to introduce safeguards limiting the use of lethal force by government forces (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1989).
At least 100 people were sentenced to death but it was not known if there were any executions. A military tribunal sentenced three young nld activists to death in July for alleged involvement in a bombing, in a trial completed in a single morning. Moe Kyaw Thu, aged 17, Zaw Zaw Gyi and Nyi Nyi U were still under sentence of death at the end of the year. They alleged that false charges had been brought against them in an attempt to discredit the nld. The SLORC said in October that 100 people had been sentenced to death in the previous three months: 76 by civilian courts and 24 by military tribunals, All death sentences for crimes committed before the military coup of September 1988 were commuted. Amnesty International was unable to confirm whether any executions had been carried out by the end of the year.
Amnesty International urged the government to release prisoners of conscience and to ensure that all other political detainees were either tried fairly and
promptly on recognizably criminal charges, or released.
The government informed Amnesty International in February that people detained in the course of demonstrations in late 1988 were being held for contravening Order 2/88 and the 1950 Emergency Provisions Act. The government said they were "unscrupulous instigators" who intended to create "confusion and chaos" and could not be considered non-violent.
Amnesty International expressed particular concern about the introduction of summary trials before military tribunals, which appeared grossly unfair and were empowered to hand down death sentences without effective appeal. The organization also urged the commutation of all death sentences and called for impartial investigation of all allegations of torture and of unlawful killings in the Kayin state.
Amnesty International wrote to the government several times to propose that a delegation from the organization should visit Myanmar to discuss human rights, but there was no response.
In May Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Myanmar for United Nations review under a procedure, established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728F/1503, for confidential consideration of communications about human rights violations.
In August Amnesty International published a report on torture, ill-treatment and killings of civilians in the Kayin state and in November published a report, Myanmar (Burma): Prisoners of Conscience, detailing arrests since September 1988.
