IRELAND
(REPUBLIC OF)
Two former prisoners pursued civil actions against the state claiming damages in connection with their imprisonment.
IRELAND (REPUBLIC 0F1/1SRAEL AND THE OCCUPIED TERRITORIES
They had been convicted in 1978 solely on the basis of confessions allegedly obtained by ill-treatment during incommunicado detention. They were not allowed to raise their allegations of police assault in the civil proceedings on the basis that the trial court in 1978 had rejected the allegations.
On 8 December the Republic of Ireland ratified the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights along with its Optional Protocol, and the Intemational Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
Osgur Breatnach, Brian McNally and Nicky Kelly, Irish Republican Socialist Party members, had been arrested in 1976 for alleged involvement in the Sallins mail train robbery. During their 1978 trial they had claimed that their confessions were the result of ill-treatment diuing prolonged incommunicado detention in police custody in April 1976. The Special Criminal Court ruled that they had suffered injuries in custody, but that these had been self-inflicted. They were convicted solely on the basis of their confessions. In 1980, after they had served 17 months of their sentences, the Court of Criminal Appeal held that Osgur Breatnach and Brian McNally had been interrogated in a "possibly menacing environment" while being denied access to a lawyer. The court ruled that their confessions had been involuntary and quashed their sentences (see Amnesty International Report 1980 and 1981). In July 1984 Nicky Kelly was released on "humanitarian grounds" after serving four years of his sentence (see Amnesty International Reports 1981 to 1985].
Nicky Kelly and Osgur Breatnach subsequently brought separate civil proceedings against the state in connection with their imprisonment. However, in January 1986 and July 1989 respectively, courts ruled that their claims for damages on the grounds of police assault would not be allowed to proceed because the Special Criminal Coiut's 1978 judgment had found allegations of ill-treatment to be without merit. In the July 1989 mling, the judge allowed Osgur Breatnach to proceed only with his other claims of malicious prosecution, false imprisonment and failure to vindicate constitutional rights. These proceedings opened in December 1989, but were adjoumed after one day and scheduled to continue in 1990.
An Arrmesty Intemational delegate observed the December civil proceedings in
the case of Osgur Breatnach. The organization's concems relating to these cases dated back to 1977 when it sent a delegation to Dublin to investigate persistent allegations of ill-treatment in police custody following the introducUon of emergency anti-terrorist legislation in 1976 (see Amnesty International Reports 1977 to 1979). An Amnesty Intemational representative had observed the 1980 Court of Criminal Appeal proceedings. The organization had expressed concem about the Special Criminal Court's 1978 mling in the light of numerous injuries which the accused had sustained in custody: some of these, according to expert witnesses at the 1978 trial, were incapable of being self-inflicted and were consistent with the allegations of assault (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1980 and 1981).
