PAKISTAN
At least 100 prisoners of conscience were detained for non>violent political or religious activities, but most were only held for short periods. They included members of the Ahmadiyya community who were arrested for expressing their faith. Torture in police custody was widespread, sometimes resulting in death. Two public
PAKISTAN
lashings were reported. At least 60 people were sentenced to death but there were no executions.
Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto's Pakistan People's Party (ppp) controlled the federal government and the provincial governments of Sind and North West Frontier Province. However, the ppp was in opposition in Punjab and, from February, in Baluchistan. The Punjab Government was controlled by the Islamic Democratic Alliance, and from February the Baluchistan provincial government was controlled by an alliance of the Baluchistan National Alliance, the Islamic Democratic Alliance and the Islamic ]amiatul-Ulema-e-Islam.
Violence between different ethnic communities continued in Sind province. Ahmadis — a religious group whose members consider themselves Muslims but whose Islamic status is denied under Pakistani law — were victims of sectarian violence in Punjab province in April and July
The majority of political prisoners who had been convicted in unfair trials by special military courts under the previous government were released in an amnesty in December 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989). However, several hundred prisoners convicted of serious criminal offences by these courts were excluded from the amnesty, including some allegedly convicted on false criminal charges brought against them for political reasons. The prisoners were barred from judicial appeal, except on limited procedural grounds, by amendments to the Constitution made before the lifting of martial law. By August about 700 of these cases had been examined by a review board, which recommended the release of 69 prisoners.
Several politicians and scores of party workers were arrested during 1989. Some were administratively detained, others were held on a range of criminal and political charges. A tour of Sind by G.M. Syed, the 87-year-old leader of the Sind National Alliance (sna), was halted when he was put under house arrest in October on a 30-day detention order and charged with sedition. The detention order, imposed by the Sind provincial authorities under the Maintenance of Public Order Ordinance (mpo), was extended for a further 30 days in November and again in December. He and about 30 sna supporters were arrrested after the Pakistani flag was allegedly burned by a group who had gathered to greet him at Sukkur airport. At the end of the year G.M. Syed and about 12 of his supporters were awaiting trial by a special court under the 1974 Suppression of Terrorist Activities (Special Courts) Act on charges of sedition and desecration of the national flag.
The mpo permits an initial period of up to three months' detention without trial to be imposed on anyone considered _to be "acting in any manner prejudicial to public safety or the maintenance of public order", Section 16 provides for up to three years' imprisonment for anyone whose speeches or statements are considered to cause "fear or alarm" to "any section of the public" or to promote "any activity prejudicial to public safety or the maintenance of public order".
Salman Taseer, deputy leader of the opposition ppp in the Punjab Assembly, was arrested in August under a detention order issued by the Punjab provincial authorities under Section 16 of the mpo and charged with sedition for a speech he had made in January. He had already been granted bail on other charges, and was released on bail on the sedition charge early the next day.
Members of the Ahmadiyya community
—	whose claims to be Muslim are punishable by imprisonment under Pakistani law
—	continued to be arrested for practising their faith. They were detained as prisoners of conscience for periods ranging from a few days to three months. Mirza Mubarak Ahmad Nusrat was arrested at Mirpurkhas, Sind province, in January and charged with defiling the name of the Prophet Muhammad, an offence which can carry the death penalty. He had included
PAKISTAN
blessings to the Prophet Muhammad, as well as to the founder of the Ahmadiyya movement, in a letter. He was released on bail after three months. In March the Ahmadiyya centenary celebrations were banned in Punjab province. In the same month 24 Ahmadis were arrested at Rabwah, the Ahmadiyya community headquarters, in connection with the -celebrations. Four were charged with violating the banning order. The others were charged with offences relating to the practice of their faith. All were released on bail. In October four Ahmadis, including two senior leaders, were arrested at Rabwah after the authorities withdrew permission for an annual Ahmadiyya conference after it had already begun. They were released on bail two days later.
Scores of people were reportedly tortured in police custody. In some cases police officers were charged following investigations, but no trials of police officers on charges relating to torture were reported. At least eight women were allegedly raped by police while in custody. In July two women were reportedly beaten with leather thongs in Mandi Bahauddin Saddar police station, Punjab province. They were then reportedly stripped and raped by six or seven police officers in turn, who also thrust sticks into their vaginas. After a protest demonstration, charges were brought against the police officers allegedly involved but it was not known whether they were taken into custody. In Sind province an inquiry was called into the alleged rape of Saima Anjum, a 16-year-old criminal suspect, by police at Landhi in December 1988, Police officers were said to have beaten and raped her, and forced chillies into her uterus. The police officers charged with the rape of three women in Nawan Kot police station, Lahore, Punjab province, had still not been arrested by the end of 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1989). In July a Lahore High Court judge directed that women should only be detained in judicial custody and not in police stations, as a protective measure.
Dozens of people reportedly died in custody, in many cases following alleged torture. In one case, medical officials were alleged to have falsified post-mortem reports to cover up the death from torture of Basir Ahmed, who died in Bahlak police station, Faisalabad, Punjab province, in
luly. The report of a first post-mortem said that he had died from natural causes but a subsequent examination found that his death had been due to torture. The police officers allegedly involved were charged with murder and suspended, but it was not known whether they were taken into custody or brought to trial.
The Sind provincial authorities informed Amnesty International that they had investigated the alleged torture in 1987 of Wazir Leghari, which had resulted in the amputation of both his legs below the knee (see Amnesty International Report 1988]. They found that he had been "severely beaten and maltreated" in Dadu District lail, and beaten again after his transfer to Hyderabad Central Jail. On admission to hospital "he had been beaten so severely that both his feet had badly swollen" and had had to be amputated. The investigation led to two prison officers being charged with causing grievous harm and suspended from service. However, the officers were subsequently reinstated without being brought to trial.
An unknown number of people were sentenced to lashing for sexual offences and drug-trafficking. In April Farida Bano was sentenced to four years' imprisonment and five lashes for adultery. In November Mohammad Sarwar Siddiqi and Mohammad Amin Bhatti were each sentenced to 30 lashes for rape. The sentences were passed under the Hudood laws, introduced in 1979 as part of former President Zia ul-Haq's "Islamization" program. Sentences of lashing are usually carried out at the end of the prison sentence but it was not known in how many cases this occurred. In January Fateh Mohammad, known as Fatto, reportedly received 30 lashes in public at Haroonabad, Punjab province, after having served a prison sentence for kidnapping and rape. In December a public lashing was reported in Rawalpindi, Punjab province.
Three Ahmadis were shot dead in a sectarian attack by Muslims at Chak Sikander, Punjab province, in July. One of the attackers was also reportedly shot dead. Police were alleged to have been present but not to have taken any action to protect the Ahmadiyya minority. However, to Amnesty International's knowledge, no independent inquiry was held into the incident. The attack apparently intended to drive Ahmadis from the locality and by the end
PAKISTAN/PANAMA
of tlie year, Ahmadis who had fled from Chak Sikander were still heing prevented from returning.
At least 60 people were sentenced to death but there were no executions. Special Courts for Speedy Trials (see Amnesty International Report 1988 and 1989] imposed at least 12 death sentences. As the federal government did not place the ordinance extending their duration before the National Assembly for approval, it lapsed in February. These courts then ceased functioning in all provinces except Punjab, where the authorities argued that they could continue to sit until November. The Lahore High Court ruled in September that the continuation of speedy courts after February had been illegal, However, the implementation of this judgment was suspended in October by the Supreme Court, which granted leave to the Punjab Government to appeal.
At least eight people were sentenced to death by stoning under the Hudood laws. In April Munir Ahmed and Parveen Akhtar were sentenced for adultery in Bahawalnagar, Punjab province. In June one woman and five men were sentenced to death by stoning in Khairpur, Sind province. The woman's first husband alleged she had remarried without being divorced. She and her second husband were sentenced for adultery; the four other men were sentenced as accomplices to the second marriage. The Governor of Sind quickly announced a stay of execution. The appeals to the Federal Shari'a Court — which hears appeals in cases brought under Islamic law — had not been heard by the end of the year.
An Amnesty International delegation visited Pakistan in August for talks with Prime Minister Bhutto and other members of the federal government and provincial administrations. Amnesty International pressed for the repeal or amendment of laws permitting the arrest and detention of prisoners of conscience. It called for a review of the remaining cases of prisoners convicted after unfair trials by special military courts. It mged the government to ratify international human rights standards, to introduce procedures to ensure prompt and thorough investigations into allegations of human rights abuse and to provide improved safeguards against torture in police custody and jails. It also asked that the use of fetters on prisoners be abolished.
Amnesty International later requested information on the precise grounds of detention of G.M. Syed and other SNA supporters.
