FRANCE
Hundreds of conscientious objectors to the national service laws, the vast majority of them Jehovah's Witnesses, were considered prisoners of conscience. There were several allegations of ill-treatment in police custody and reports that convicted criminals had been ilUtreated in one prison.
A number of conscientious objectors benefited from a law introduced in July granting an amnesty to people who had failed to report for or deserted from national service before 22 May 1988. The amnesty also applied to certain politically motivated offences committed before 14 July 1988 by separatists in Corsica and the overseas departments of Guadeloupe and Martinique.
In December parliament adopted a law extending the scope of an amnesty, introduced in November 1988 as part of the Matignon Agreement on the future of the overseas territory of New Caledonia, to cover certain crimes of premeditated murder committed before 20 August 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989). The Ministry of Justice indicated that this would involve the halting of nine judicial proceedings. These included the cases of Kanak separatists accused of murdering four gendarmes in April 1988, an inquiry into allegations that members of the French security forces carried out extrajudicial executions of three Kanaks in Ouvea in May 1988, and inquiries into the killing in previous years of important Kanak political activists (see Amnesty International Reports 1987 io 1989).
In January France ratified the European
Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
Conscientious objectors who refused to conform to the national service laws continued to receive sentences of up to 15 months' imprisonment. Alternative civilian service is twice the length of ordinary military service. Amnesty International considers that it is therefore not an acceptable alternative and that those imprisoned for refusing to imdertake it are prisoners of conscience.
Bruno Guillor6, a teacher, was granted conscientious objector status in 1983 but refused to carry out civilian service because, among other objections, he considered its length to be punitive. He was imprisoned in May 1989 when the Supreme Court confirmed a 12-month prison sentence which had been passed by lower courts in 1988. He was released in July under the provisions of the amnesty law.
At least two imprisoned conscientious objectors had been refused conscientious objector status because their applications had been made after their call-up orders were issued. Patrick Odent-Allet and Christophe Albouy were adopted as prisoners of conscience on the grounds that individuals should be able to seek conscientious objector status at any time.
Allegations of ill-treatment in police custody often concerned immigrants and French citizens of African origin. Lucien Djossouvi, from Benin, claimed that he was ill-treated by three plainclothes police officers on 5 September. One of them asked to see his identity papers, then insulted him and refused to show proof that he was a police officer. Lucien Djossouvi alleged that shortly afterwards the three officers handcuffed him and beat him to the ground with truncheons. They threw away his papers then dragged him to the entrance of a nearby building and beat him again. He was reportedly threatened with deportation if he made any official complaint and was then abandoned. He was admitted to hospital later that day to receive emergency treatment for serious head and facial injuries. On 12 September he made a judicial complaint, which was under investigation at the end of the year.
There were allegations that on 12 June prison guards ill-treated inmates of Clairvaux prison who had refused to leave
FRANCE/GABON
the exercise yard after three of them had reportedly attacked a guard. Eight prisoners claimed that, on returning to the prison building, they were stripped and handcuffed for body searches. They said they were then made to pass about 30 guards who beat them with fists and truncheons and, in some instances, threw them down a staircase. The prison doctor examined the eight prisoners within hours of the alleged incidents and issued medical certificates recording various cuts and bruises. One prisoner's relative obtained a copy of a certificate describing a wound near the prisoner's left hip requiring three stitches, cuts and bruises to the head and face, and a possible cracked rib. An administrative inquiry was immediately opened.
Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of lustice welcoming the administrative inquiry into allegations of ill-treatment at Clairvaux prison. It asked to be informed of the inquiry's findings and of any disciplinary or judicial proceedings that might result. In September the Minister replied that a reasonable degree of force had been necessary to make a group of approximately 30 prisoners return to their cells and submit to body searches. The administrative inquiry had established that in eight cases "acts of violence were indeed committed...beyond the necessary use of force". In these cases, the injuries had been found to consist primarily of bruises arising from blows to the face or body. The Minister informed Amnesty International that at his request the Public Prosecutor of Tïoyes had opened a judicial inquiry. The administrative inquiry had failed to identify the guards responsible for the ill-treatment. According to press articles, apparently quoting the administrative inquiry's report, the guards were unwilling to incriminate each other and the prisoners were unwilling to identify the perpetrators "for reasons which are easy to understand". In December the Ministry of Justice informed Amnesty International that the Public Prosecutor of Troyes had carried out an inquiry to identify the perpetrators of the ill-treatment but that this had also been unsuccessful.
Throughout the year Amnesty International appealed for the release of conscientious objectors considered to be prisoners of conscience.
