PAPUA NEW GUINEA
Scores of people suspected of supporting or sympathizing with an armed opposition group on the island of Bougainville were detained without charge or trial for periods of up to one month. Some of the detainees were tortured or ill-treated by government security forces. At least five people appeared to have been extrajudicially executed, some after torture by government forces.
On Bougainville, which forms part of North Solomons Province (nsp), the government faced armed opposition from the Bougainville Revolutionary Army (bra).
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
The bra, which has been active since late 1988. sought additional compensation for land occupied by the large Bougainville Copper Limited (bcl) mine and for resulting environmental damage. In 1989 the bra began to advocate Bougainville's secession from Papua New Guinea. The bra committed acts of violence, including murder and possibly torture of civilians suspected of informing on bra activists. Security forces subjected suspected bra sympathizers, including entire communities in areas of alleged bra activity, to intimidation and random beatings, death threats, sexual harassment, house burnings and destruction of other property.
On 26 June the government of Prime Minister Rabbie Namaliu imposed a state of emergency on the island. The decree, which remained in force at the end of the year, gave security forces increased powers of arrest, detention and seizure. In practice, security forces often exceeded these powers. In late October the Parliamentary State of Emergency Committee recommended the passage of a new Internment Law, which would permit the detention of suspected bra members or sympathizers for up to two months without charge or trial. The legislation had not been passed by the end of the year.
Despite the government's assurances that it was committed to protecting human rights guaranteed by the Constitution, reported human rights violations by members of the security forces were seldom investigated and those allegedly responsible were not known to have been prosecuted. In December a retiring National Court Judge, Mr Justice Tos Barnett, expressed concern over the failure of the government and the courts to investigate numerous allegations of human rights abuse. He said that if the situation was not remedied.
"official violence and extra-legal punishments would be legitimised in the minds of the security forces and of the public".
Police and Defence Force soldiers beat dozens of people on Bougainville, including political leaders, local government workers, medical professionals and villagers. They also threatened some of these people with death. The victims included Joseph Kabui, the Premier of NSP, and Michael Laimo, the NSP Minister for Agriculture. Both men had actively sought a peaceful solution to the Bougainville crisis. They were severely beaten by police in separate incidents in July. Michael Laimo lost an eye when members of the Police Riot Squad stopped his car, beat him and struck him with the barrel of a gun. Police dragged Premier Kabui from his car as he returned from chinch with his elderly mother, punched and hit him with a rifle butt, and forced him to lick the blood of a slain police officer from the side of a police vehicle.
In December Edmond Benny and seven young men travelling by truck to Arawa were stopped by Defence Force soldiers who accused them of making "bad signs" at soldiers manning a roadblock. Troops ordered the eight to drive to Army Camp 10 at Panguna, where a group of soldiers dragged them from the truck and beat them with gun butts, fists and boots. Edmond Benny and one other man were reportedly beaten until unconscious and the others sustained bruises and cuts. The military authorities subsequently acknowledged that the detainees were not rebels and the soldier who led the assault apologized for the "error".
At least one person reportedly died in detention after being tortured. Aloysius Minitong, an outspoken critic of environmental destruction in the area of the bcl mine, was said to have been tortured following his arrest in December. He was apparently suspected of being a member of the bra, although no charges were brought against him. According to reports he was first held at Boku police station, where he sustained knife wounds requiring stitches and knee injuries so severe that he could not walk. He was then transferred to Army Camp 10, where he was beaten and kicked about the head and body until he lost consciousness. He was taken to a hospital and eye-witnesses there said he was unable to stand and his face was severely swollen.
PAPUA NEW GUINEA/PARAGUAY
After only one day in hospital he was removed against medical advice to the Joint Forces Headquarters in Arawa, where he received further beatings. He was then moved to Arawa police station, denied medical attention and bedding, and reportedly died in his cell three weeks after his arrest,
Security forces were believed to have deliberately killed at least five people in their custody. The government claimed that they had died in combat with government troops. Autopsies indicated that some of the victims had been tortured. In August it was reported that three corpses had arrived at Arawa General Hospital with visible signs of torture. Attached to the body of one victim, Ambrose Leo, was a note saying "This is the first billion of your ten billion", evidently a reference to the bra's demand for 10 billion Kina (us$7.2 billion) in compensation for land and environmental damage. Doctors who examined Ambrose Leo's body said that he had been kicked and beaten before being shot at close range. Another victim, Peter Tarupiu, had multiple bruises to his face, neck and chest. He was bleeding from both ears and one of his cervical vertebrae was completely severed. The cause of death was said to be neck and spinal colimin damage resulting from a heavy blow.
In November Defence Force soldiers detained Vincent Onari, a maintenance worker at the bcl mine, and another man suspected of bra membership. Soldiers beat the two before taking them to Army Camp 10. According to eye-witness ac-coimts, Vincent Onari was semi-conscious when thrown out of a military vehicle outside the army camp, kicked and beaten with rifle butts and then shot four times in the head.
Scores of people were detained without charge or trial on suspicion of supporting the bra. Some were held for up to one month, although the law requires that detainees be charged soon after arrest, normally within a few hours. Paul Minnou, a community youth worker, was detained without charge for 30 days following his arrest in November. Police interrogators reportedly accused him of supporting the bra, threatened him with death and held him handcuffed and without food and water for one night at Hutjena police station. He was then transferred to custody elsewhere before his release.
In October Amnesty International sent a
memorandum to Prime Minister Rabbie Namaliu detailing reports of arbitrary arrests, beatings and alleged exfrajudicial executions in Bougainville and expressing interest in meeting officials in Papua New Guinea. By the end of the year the government had not provided any substantive reply. In December Amnesty International called for an impartial investigation into the reported tortme and exfrajudicial killing of Vincent Onari. In the same month the organization wrote to the government concerning the deteriorating human rights situation in Bougainville, and reiterated its interest in visiting Papua New Guinea.
