GUATEMALA
The security forces and the "death squads" linked to them were reportedly implicated in hundreds of extrajudicial executions and "disappearances". When bodies were found they often bore marks of torture. People detained for short periods and the few survivors of unacknowledged kidnap-style arrests also reported having been tortured. Scores of real or suspected government opponents faced harassment and assault by the security forces, acting clandestinely or in uniform.
In most cases known to Amnesty International in recent years, real or suspected govemment opponents were not imprisoned: they "disappeared" or were extrajudicially executed. However, in August at least 60 teachers and 10 students were detained for short periods in connection with a strike by teachers. Some reported being ill-treated in custody. In October two former military officers were sentenced to seven years' imprisonment for their part in an attempted coup in May. Ordinary criminal prisoners protested that condi-
tions in Guatemala's largest prison were severely sub-standard.
Reports of human rights violations escalated sharply in 1989, having initially decreased after President Vinicio Cerezo came to office in 1986 (see Amnesty International Report 1989). Most violations were reported in the context of the ongoing guerrilla insurgency in a number of departments. The government attributed responsibility to forces they claimed were beyond their control, citing the military factions responsible for several attempted coups or the armed opposition. The abuses were frequently carried out by heavily armed men in plain clothes who used unlicensed vehicles with darkened windows, making attribution difficult. In many cases, however, there was evidence of official complicity. The choice of victims (often govemment opponents and dissidents or their families), the information to which their assailants had access, the armaments and vehicles used, and the fact that some of the victims were assaulted and seized in full view of imiformed security force personnel, all suggested that those responsible were serving members of the security forces, acting as "death squads". Amnesties declared immediately before and during President Cerezo's administration effectively granted immunity from prosecution to perpetrators of human rights violations under previous military governments. This created a climate conducive to further violations.
The consultative process known as the Diálogo Nacional, National Dialogue, which was set up under the terms of the 1987 Central American Peace Agreement, seemed to have little eff^ect on the resurgence of human rights violations. A number of non-govemmental participants in the dialogue were themselves the victims of abuses in 1989. Marcos Juan Baltazar, representing Guatemala's displaced people in the National Dialogue, was killed in August in circumstances suggesting that the official security forces were responsible. Exiled opposition leaders who had returned to participate in the dialogue left the country in May after repeatedly receiving anonymous death threats.
On 2 July men in plain clothes abducted José Rolando Pantaleon, a member of trade union theatre and music groups at the Guatemala City Coca-Cola bottling plant. His tortured body was found hours later.
GUATEMALA
Government authorities maintained that he was murdered for private motives. However, he and other theatre group members had been repeatedly threatened by heavily armed men in plain clothes after the group staged a satirical play lampooning the military. In February his brother had been shot and wounded by gunmen as police stood by.
Between 9 August and 11 September at least 12 students, all either former or current student leaders at the state University of San Carlos (usac), a long-term target of human rights violations, were abducted, tortured, and either "disappeared" or were extrajudicially executed. They included Victor Hugo Rodriguez Jaramillo and his wife Silvia Maria Azurdia Utrera, abducted in Guatemala City in view of passing police cars on 23 August. The witnesses said the abductors' cars had been parked outside the couple's home for several hours, with heavily armed men clearly visible inside, but police nearby had made no effort to question them. The victims' car was seen later that morning outside a police station. The police first denied a car had been parked there, then claimed that it had been another, identical car. The couple's bodies were found on 10 September near the university, with those of two former usac leaders abducted earlier. One of the latter, Carlos Humberto Cabrera Rivera, had returned from exile in 1986 and was in the leadership of the teachers' strike. All bore marks of torture. The tortured bodies of three more missing students were recovered later. Five remained missing, two of whom had been named on "death squad" death lists in a leaflet bomb which exploded at the university in February. Those named were warned to cease "subversive intervention" and abandon leadership of the usac students' association. Government officials variously attributed responsibility to factional fighting in the student association, "terrorists", and "crazy members of the far right working in league with army dissidents".
Leaders and members of the Consejo de Comunidades Etnicas, "Runujel ¡unam" (cerj), Council of Indigenous Communities "We are all Equal", "disappeared" and were threatened, intimidated and extrajudicially executed. Cerj was formed in 1988 to campaign for the human rights of Guatemala's indigenous peoples. In April four peasants, Luis Ruiz, Macario Fu
Chivalán, Agapito Pérez and Nicolás Mateo, "disappeared" after being abducted from an estate in Suchitepéquez department by soldiers. Before the peasants "disappeared" the army had organized national press conferences at which they produced people they described as guerrilla defectors who accused cerj of links with the armed opposition. Videos of the statements were then shown throughout the areas where cerj is active and the army warned Indian villagers that they would be killed unless they denounced cerj organizers. In May President Cerezo met cerj President Amilcar Méndez Urízar concerning the four abducted in April. The President promised a response within the month but it had not been received by the year's end. Amilcar Méndez had received repeated death threats, some delivered anonymously, others made by army personnel.
Leaders and members of the Grupo de Apoyo Mutuo (gam). Mutual Support Group — the relatives' group campaigning for information about the "disappeared" — were reportedly harassed and threatened by the military both in the capital and in departments where gam was pressing for exhumation of victims of extrajudicial executions. One gam member was abducted and murdered in luly. In August heavily armed men in plain clothes seized another gam member, who remained "disappeared". Also in August the group's headquarters were bombed.
Diana Ortiz, a United States (us) Ursuline nun, was one of the few smvivors of abduction in recent years. She was seized on 2 November by men in plain clothes, after receiving death threats apparently related to her work with Indian children in Huehuetenango department. She later stated that she was handed over to uniformed police officers driving an official police car. She said they blindfolded her and took her to a warehouse, where she was asked to identify photographs of people she did not know, and then sexually abused, beaten and burned with cigarette butts by three interrogators. A fourth man arrived, said that the television news had identified her as North American and that her captors had made a "stupid mistake", and returned her to Guatemala City.
In August Maritza Hurtarte Guillén de Ruiz reportedly suffered a fractured vertebra after being beaten by the police while in short-term detention in the Antigua
GUATEMALA
Guatemala prison. She had been arrested on a demonstration in support of the teachers' strike. Other demonstrators were threatened, beaten and fired upon by police and military units.
In March prisoners took control of Guatemala's largest prison, Pavón, for four days in protest at alleged brutal treatment by prison guards, severe overcrowding, and inadequate sanitation and nutrition. The rebels seized warders' weapons and took over 500 hostages including children. Some 12 people were reportedly killed in crossfire during the takeover and 50 to 60 were injured, but the incident ended without further casualties when the government agreed that no reprisals would be taken against the rebels. However, in April it was reported that inmate Juan Carlos Tejeda Tórtola was beaten and deprived of food and water because of his leading role in the rebellion.
The government has periodically announced the formation of human rights investigatory bodies but these appear to have made little progress in investigating abuses; some apparently never began to function. New initiatives were often an-noimced immediately before international bodies, such as the United Nations Commission on Human Rights (unchr), were to consider Guatemala's human rights record, or when President Cerezo faced national pressure on human rights issues. In October Gonzalo Menéndez de la Riva, who had been appointed to the constitutionally established office of Human Rights Attorney in August 1987, resigned, giving ill health as the reason. However, the Guatemalan press reported that he resigned because the Human Rights Attorney's office was ineffective.
The police and judiciary appeared unwilling or unable to investigate abuses and bring the perpetrators to justice, particularly when the military were implicated. In the few cases where inquiries were announced, the investigations foundered when evidence pointed to army involvement (see Amnesty International Report 1989). In other cases, families of the dead and "disappeared" were either too frightened to seek redress or were offered bribes by the security forces to abandon their efforts.
The case of student Luis Fernando de la Roca Elias, who "disappeared" in 1985, remained closed despite admissions by
Guatemalan officials that evidence pointed clearly to military responsibility. Inquiries into the 1988 "death van" murder and "disappearance" cases also appeared to have stalled although the Treasury Police agents initially arrested for the abuses had alleged that the military were responsible. There was apparently no official effort to determine how extrajudicial execution victims exhumed in 1988 had died (see Amnesty International Report 1989). Similarly, no information was available regarding the investigation which San Marcos departmental police claimed had been imder-taken into the "disappearance" of local social democratic leader Eladio Ambrosio, abducted in TVes Cruces on 16 June by men in plain clothes. His son pursued the car to a military base, but the commander denied Eladio Ambrosio was there. Local residents told foreign human rights workers investigating the case that five other people had been abducted from Tres Cruces since 1984, apparently by the military, but that families had been t^o frightened to report these "disappearances".
Six police officers sentenced to 30 years' imprisonment in 1988 for the murder of two usac student leaders in Quetzaltenango the previous year continued to appeal against their convictions, charging that their claims that members of the Quetzaltenango military brigade were involved had not been investigated, Journalists and human rights investigators were denied access to the police officers. It was also reported that the six had offered the victims' families payments to drop the case.
There was continuing controversy over the highly publicized killing of 22 peasants in November 1988 in El Aguacate, Chimaltenango department. In December 1988 the Guatemalan Government flew two villagers to the United States of America (usa) where they declared at press conferences and public meetings that the armed opposition had carried out the killings, However, evidence compiled by Guatemalan and international hiunan rights groups suggested that their testimony was false and that the army was responsible for the killings and had intimidated genuine witnesses. In January Assistant Human Rights Attorney Arturo Martínez Gálvez resigned, saying information about the case had been withheld from the Human Rights Attorney In June the Human
GUATEMALA/GUINEA
Rights Attorney's office said inquiries had been hampered by lack of cooperation from the Attorney General and the judge handling the case. The same month Alberto Callejas, the father of one of the villagers taken to the USA, "disappeared". He had reportedly told human rights investigators that the military had coerced his son into giving false testimony and that they both believed the army had killed the villagers. Days later the military arrested another peasant and brought him before local villagers to confess that he was a member of an armed opposition group responsible for both the killings and the "disappearance" of Alberto Callejas. His family insisted that he had confessed after being drugged and beaten. Charges relating to the "disappearance" were later dropped, and he was sentenced to two years' imprisonment for stealing a weapon.
Amnesty International repeatedly asked the government to investigate reported abuses. Official human rights bodies replied that the government was committed to protecting human rights and that official agents were not responsible for the abuses. In April Amnesty International detailed its concerns in a memorandum to the government. No response was received, and in June the organization published Guatemala: Human Rights Violations under the Civilian Government, which launched an international action to press the government to take urgent steps to reverse the rapidly deteriorating human rights situation. In July the government gave Amnesty International materials described as the results of official inquiries into cases of "disappearances" and feared extrajudicial executions that the organization had raised, the first case-specific response Amnesty International had received from Guatemala since it began raising cases with the authorities in the 1960s. However, in many cases there was insufficient information to confirm the government's claim that a "disappeared" person had reappeared; in other cases the government's information clearly referred to people other than those on whose behalf Amnesty International had appealed.
In August the President of Congress and a member of Guatemala's Congressional Human Rights Commission met Amnesty International in London to discuss the organization's human rights concerns in Guatemala. In an oral statement delivered
in February to the UNCHR, Amnesty International included reference to the Guatemalan authorities' failure to investigate effectively reported cases of "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions. In August the organization drew attention to abuses directed at Guatemala's indigenous people, particularly CERJ members, in an oral statement to the UN Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities.
