PERU
At least 503 people, including 69 children and young people, "disappeared" and hundreds more were victims of extrajudicial execution. They included human rights lawyers, teachers, trade unionists and peasant community leaders. Prisoners of conscience were held on false charges of "terrorism". Torture by the military and police, including rape, continued to be reported throughout the country.
A campaign of assaults, sabotage and execution-style killings by clandestine opposition groups, a high incidence of narcotics-related crime and a severe economic crisis provided the backdrop to gross hiunan rights abuses as President Alan Garcia approached the end of his six-year term. Campaigning began for national elections scheduled for April 1990. The government responded to proliferating
I
I
PERU
political violence by continuing to renew states of emergency restricting civil rights: by the end of the year 67 of Peru's 181 provinces were under emergency measures. Political and military authority in these areas was delegated to the Armed Forces Joint Command, with all but the provinces of Lima and Callao administered by the armed forces. These political-military commands were able to assume virtual autonomy from civil authority under Law 24,150 of 1985, In practice they had the authority to carry out detentions without notifjdng civil authorities or accoimting for the fate of prisoners. Military courts exercised jurisdiction over police and military personnel nationwide but were not known to have punished such personnel for recent human rights abuses in the emergency zones.
The legal means of redressing human rights abuses became increasingly inoperative in the emergency zones. The courts did not generally implement habeas corpus: even had attempts been made to do so, the armed forces continually denied the judiciary and public prosecutors access to military camps and bases where prisoners were known to be held incommunicado. The Public Ministry, headed by the Attorney General, increasingly failed to discharge its constitutional responsibility to defend human rights. This had been fulfilled in the past largely through its public prosecutors who received complaints and were empowered to take steps to remedy abuses. Since 1988 two successive Attorneys General have withdrawn resoiurces and political support for investigations in the emergency zones and transferred or dismissed prosecutors who have brought criminal charges against army officers (see below and Amnesty International Report 1989). In January the United Nations Special Rapporteur on torture observed that in areas administered by the military the machinery of the law "had ground to a halt". Access to the emergency zones was increasingly denied and the work of human rights groups based within the zones was obstructed by arrests, death threats, bombings and, in two cases, extrajudicial executions.
The clandestine Partido Comunista del Perú "Sendero Luminoso", Communist Party of Peru "Shining Path", remained active throughout most of the country. Its forces continued regularly to murder cap-
tives in summary, execution-style killings, sometimes after torture and mock trials. Most of its victims were civilians but others killed included police and military personnel who were captured or incapacitated by wounds. Shining Path demanded a boycott of November's municipal elections and threatened to murder candidates and voters: they killed over 350 people in October alone. The Senate Commission on National Pacification reported 243 police and 105 military personnel killed in 1989 and said the Ministry of the Interior had estimated the killing of between 3,000 and 5,000 "subversives", although some may have been non-combatant civilians.
In July Peru ratified the two Protocols additional to the Geneva Conventions which relate to the protection of victims of international (Protocol I) and non-intema-tional (Protocol II) armed conflicts.
Of 503 people who were known to have "disappeared" after arrests during 1989, 92 were subsequently released or found dead; the others remained unaccounted for. Amnesty International had records of 2,761 prisoners reported to have "disappeared" and who remained unaccounted for since this phenomenon was first reported in January 1983; the true number of "disappearances" may be much higher. A commission formed by the Peruvian Congress in 1988 to investigate "disappearances" announced in September that 5,877 people had "disappeared" over the previous nine years. The former special commissioner for the investigation of "disappearances", prosecutor Carlos Escobar Pineda, told the press that his team had proof of army responsibility for some 500 cases of "disappearance" in 1987 and 1988 and had prepared charges against army commanders which had been stopped by higher civilian authorities. Carlos Escobar Pineda had been removed from his post in November 1988 and in August 1989 he was dismissed by the Attorney General.
"Disappearances" were in part a consequence of the armed forces' policy to deny holding prisoners. The majority of the "disappeared" were members of isolated peasant communities. Scores of children and young people — the age groups from which Shining Path is known to concentrate its recruiting — "disappeared" after detention during army raids. In May soldiers raided communities in Santo Tomás de Pata, Huancavelíca department, and detained
PERU
schoolboy Sergio Huamancusi Ramos and fom- others who subsequently "disappeared". Ten-year-old Juan Carlos Pocco Contreras was detained by troops in July in Pachaconas in Apurimac's Antabamba province. Although reportedly seen in army custody at the Santa Rosa Base Contra-Subversivo, Counter-Subversive Base, his fate was not known.
"Disappearance" was often reported in conjunction with extrajudicial execution. Walter Wilfredo Valer Munalla "disappeared" after detention by troops on 29 September but his body, marked by torture, was found dumped at the door of his place of employment in Ayacucho on 7 October. His sister, 14-year-old Rita Marlene Valer Munalla, was detained in Ayacucho city by the army on 11 October. Another schoolgirl saw her being forced into an army vehicle but her detention was denied and she remained "disappeared".
Often whole communities appeared to be collectively punished. On 17 May troops of the army's Ollantaytambo Battalion reportedly detained 20 residents of the peasant community of Calabaza in Jimin's Satipo province. The following day the bodies of 11 of them were found on the banks of the Calabaza river. On 13 June, according to local sources, troops raided the Santa Ana community in Ayacucho's Lucanas province but found that all but the elderly had fled into the heights: they killed Natividad Quispe, aged 90, and three others. On 26 June troops reportedly returned in a night raid before residents could escape, illuminating the village with flares. Three men were killed and young women were reportedly taken into the church and raped. Fourteen-year-old Casimira Quispe Condori was reportedly raped and then severely wounded in the back with a bayonet. The following day troops moved into the nearby community of Pampamarca, and established a temporary military headquarters in the church while residents were screened as potential "subversives"; eye-witnesses reported that 10 people were killed on the spot. No investigations were known to have begun into these cases.
Others believed to have been targeted for extrajudicial execution included journalists, lawyers, human rights activists, leaders of women's groups, trade unionists and political opposition leaders. Some were killed — others were only threatened
or were victims of bomb attacks on homes and offices.
Himian rights lawyer Fernando Mejia Egocheaga was taken barefoot from his home in Oxapampa by uniformed troops of the local garrison on 15 June; his wife, who subsequently fled the country, was reportedly raped after the arrest and threatened with death should she make a formal complaint. The same night the head of the Oxapampa branch of the national teachers' union, Aladino Melgarejo Ponce, was seized by troops. The bodies of the two men were found a day later bearing marks suggesting they had been tortured. Investigations into the killings were not known to have taken place.
Other attacks and apparent extrajudicial executions followed threats made anonymously or in the name of shadowy "revenge" groups, but believed to originate with the military and police and with gunmen working with the ruling party, the Alianza Popular Revolucionaria Americana (apra), American Popular Revolutionary Alliance. A communique of July 1988 had announced the creation of the Comando Democrático Rodrigo Franco (crf), Rodrigo Franco Democratic Command, saying that "to defend Peru" it would take reprisals for every "mayor, soldier or police officer killed". Actions attributed to crf proliferated in 1989, although different forces appeared to be responsible. In Ayacucho and San Martin departments, the evidence suggested that the political-military commands were directly responsible for attacks. In cities elsewhere, information based on dozens of case studies suggested that responsibility lay with military and police \mits as well as gunmen of the ruling party, apparently operating with the sanction of some high authorities. Some attackers operating in crf's name in the capital, Lima, were identified as cadres of apra after capture by police, but all were released rapidly without charge.
Other possible extrajudicial executions occurred in the context of trade union activity. On 9 February police of the Special Operations Division, who were uniformed but disguised with hoods and camouflage paint, opened fire on several thousand demonstrating farmers as they approached the town square of Pucallpa, in Ucayali department. In September a provincial prosecutor told the press he had
PERU
brought charges against pohce for the murder of 23 farmers in Pucallpa but protested that none had been detained and the case had not progressed.
Cases of mass killings by military personnel in past years had not resulted in convictions by the end of the year. Military trials were not known to have been held in relation to the 1985 detention and murder by troops of 69 people — 26 of them under the age of 15 — in the Ayacucho hamlet Accomarca (see Amnesty International Report 1986). An army lieutenant, who had told a Senate Commission that even Accomarca's infants had been "dangerous" and that he took the decision to eliminate the villagers because "they have an ideological tendency", was promoted. Two officers of the Republican Guard (a paramilitary police force), charged with responsibility for the extrajudicial executions of 124 prisoners at Lurigancho Prison in
1986	(see Amnesty International Report
1987	and 1988], were sentenced to 15 and seven years' imprisonment by a military court. Both men planned to appeal. Seventy-five police and army personnel involved in the same operation — including the army general who commanded it — were acquitted. Prosecutions for the 31 or more killings by the army at Cayara, Ayacucho, in May 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989] continued to be frozen by the office of the Attorney General, and obstructed through death threats and the murder of witnesses. A ninth witness who had testified to army atrocities in Cayara, Marta Crisostomo, was murdered in September. In November prosecutor Carlos Escobar Pineda — who investigated the Cayara case — fled the country after further threats to his life.
Almost all political prisoners acknowledged to be in detention have been accused of "terrorism". They have included prisoners of conscience who were falsely charged, among them trade unionists, community leaders and members of legal opposition parties, although these prisoners have generally been released after short periods. Two prisoners of conscience held for longer periods were released. Agripino Quispe Hilario (see Amnesty International Report 1989), a Presbyterian pastor, was released in October after more than four years' imprisonment. Porfirio Suni Quispe, the head of the Aricoma Peasants' Federation who had been detained in May 1988, was
released in March when a "terrorism" charge was dropped. Other prisoners of conscience who remained in custody included Carmela Ferro Estrada, detained in September 1988 for travelling to Abancay, Apurimac, to seek information about the fate of her husband, Anacleto Lliulli, who had "disappeared" following his arrest by troops in Huayrapampa in July 1988. She was awaiting trial, charged with "terrorism", in the Abancay prison.
Abusive treatment continued and was reportedly common practice during criminal and political investigations in both rural and urban areas. Torture, including rape, was widespread during army operations in rural areas, with frequent reports of systematic beatings, near-drovming, hanging by the arms and threats of mutilation or death. Sexual abuse by troops of women in Quechua-speaking peasant communities was reportedly routine — but other women also reported rape dxiring periods in army custody. No army personnel stationed in the emergency zones were known to have been prosecuted for the rape of women in their custody and effective investigations into charges of torture were not known to have taken place.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience and investigated the cases of possible prisoners of conscience. It pressed the authorities to account for prisoners detained during the year and in previous years who had "disappeared", to investigate reported extrajudicial executions, and to bring the perpetrators to justice. These appeals received no formal response from the government, although some Peruvian embassies acknowledged the receipt of copies of letters sent to the authorities.
In August Amnesty International published a report entitled Peru: Human Rights in a State of Emergency and in September a report on the army massacre at Cayara was published. In November the organization published Peru Rriefing: 'Caught between two fires', and launched an international campaign aimed at bringing the pattern of gross human rights abuse to the attention of responsible Peruvian authorities and international public opinion.
In oral statements to the United Nations (un) Commission on Human Rights and the un Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in March and August respectively,
PERU/PHILIPPINES
Amnesty International included reference to its concerns in Peru.
In May the organization submitted information about its concerns in Peru for UN review under a procedure, established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728F/1503, for confidential consideration of communications about human rights violations.
