GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC
At the end of the year a new government announced its intention of revising the laws used to imprison prisoners of conscience. Two amnesties were declared under which any remaining prisoners of conscience should have been released. During most of the year thousands of prisoners of conscience were detained under laws greatly restricting freedom of expression, association, assembly and movement. Many of the prisoners were convicted in unfair trials. Detained demonstrators were ill-treated by the security forces.
Throughout the year increasingly large demonstrations took place on a variety of issues, such as restrictions on free expression, association, assembly and movement; the alleged falsification of election results; and allegations of official corruption.
A new Head of State, Egon Krenz, was appointed in October. The appointment occurred shortly after former head of state Erich Honecker resigned amid large-scale protests against government policies and a wave of emigration. Egon Krenz resigned on 6 December and Manfred Gerlach, leader of the Liberal Democratic Party, became acting Head of State.
On 27 October the Council of State declared an amnesty in which most nonviolent political prisoners should have been released. A second amnesty was annovmced on 6 December. The amnesties and other measures suggested that any remaining prisoners of conscience would be released by the end of the year.
GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC
On 7 November the government resigned and a committee of the People's Chamber (parliament) rejected a draft law to ease foreign travel restrictions on the grounds that it failed to meet citizens' expectations. On 8 November the ruling Sociahst Unity Party (sed) elected a new Politburo; on 9 November nearly all restrictions on foreign travel were lifted pending new foreign travel legislation. A new government was formed under Prime Minister Hans Modrow on 17 November. Announcements of this government included a plan to prepare new laws on foreign travel and freedom of association and assembly, and to provide a civilian alternative to military service. On 1 December the Interior Minister submitted to the People's Chamber a revised draft law which would grant every citizen of the German Democratic Republic (gdr) the right to travel abroad at any time without an exit visa. The draft was referred to parliamentary committees for further discussion. On 5 December a Justice Ministry spokesperson announced that the Penal Code and Code of Penal Procedure' would be revised to conform to international instruments ratified by the Gdr and to decriminalize nonviolent political activity.
On 3 December the SED Politburo and Central Committee resigned. By 9 December an Extraordinary Congress of the SED had elected Gregor Gysi, the Chairman of the GDR Council of Lawyers' Associations, as its new leader. In the past Gregor Gysi had acted as defence counsel in some political trials.
Before the events of October and November, it was impossible in practice to gain official approval for associations and demonstrations opposing government policy. Afterwards, unofficial demonstrations were allowed and at least one hitherto unofficial political association, New Forum, received official recognition.
At least 232 prisoners of conscience or possible prisoners of conscience, including 102 convicted in 1989, served sentences during the year. Information about individual prisoners was restricted by the secrecy which surrounded political imprisonment and the real number of convicted prisoners of conscience was probably much higher. No convictions of prisoners of conscience were reported after the October amnesty.
As in previous years restrictions on freedom of movement were a major factor con-
tributing to the convictions of prisoners of conscience. For example, Thomas Schiitt was detained in March and sentenced to 30 months' imprisonment under Article 219 of the Penal Code for "making illegal contacts" and under Article 100 for "treasonable activity as an agent". In August 1988 he reportedly applied to emigrate. The authorities rejected his application and he filed an objection. When this was overruled, he protested again. In February 1989 he approached a member of a government delegation from the Federal Republic of Germany, seeking help to emigrate. Articles 219 and 100 were frequently used against would-be emigrants who turned to individuals or organizations outside the gdr for help. Thomas Schiitt was released in November, following the October amnesty.
Throughout the year thousands of peaceful demonstrators were detained for supporting views contrary to official policies. Although the vast majority were released within 24 hours, some peaceful demonstrators were sentenced to prison terms and some were sefitenced without trial. On 11 September, for example, the police reportedly detained more than 100 people who had gathered for a "Service for Peace" at St Nicholas Church in Leipzig. Although most were released within 24 hours, at least 16 demonstrators received prison sentences of between four and six months for "riotous assembly" (Article 217 of the Penal Code). Article 270 of the Code of Penal Procedure empowers judges to impose such sentences without trial if the accused pleads guilty. No evidence suggested that any of the 16 had advocated violence: all 16 were released on 13 October.
Unofficial demonstrations took place in several cities on the weekend beginning 7 October, the 40th anniversary of the founding of the gdr. According to an 18 November report by the General State Procurator, 3,456 demonstrators and bystanders were detained and all but those suspected of using violence were released by 15 October. The Berlin Police stated that on 13 October no demonstrators detained in Berlin remained in custody. On 17 October the General State Procurator said that only 11 people in the gdr continued to be held on suspicion of having committed violent acts during demonstrations. Therefore, the overwhelming majority of demonstrators arrested between 7 and 8
GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC/GERMANY, FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF
October were detained for exercising non-violently their right to free expression and assembly.
In November the General State Procurator informed a meeting of the Sed Central Committee: "During the events surrounding 7 October, the security forces used excessive force.... Individuals were beaten [on arrest and while in custodyl, made to stand for long periods, sometimes in physically painful positions, and also subjected to degrading treatment." He informed the People's Chamber on 18 November that of the complaints received, 480 indicated that security forces may have committed criminal offences in their treatment of demonstrators and bystanders. He said 76 investigations had begun and four indictments had been prepared. One indicted police officer was sentenced by a Berlin court on 24 November to 14 monAs' imprisonment for pushing a detained demonstrator down a flight of stairs. On 21 December the Berlin Municipal Court which heard the police officer's appeal sent the case back for retrial, requesting clarification of whether the police officer had acted deliberately or negligently.
Before the events of October reports continued to indicate secret and summary proceedings in political cases. Political trials were routinely conducted in camera, with defendants' families and friends excluded and access to a lawyer severely restricted. Sylke Glaser, for example, was tried in camera and sentenced in June 1988 to 15 months' imprisonment by a court in Rostock. She had been convicted of "public vilification" under Article 220 of the Penal Code after distributing leaflets calling on participants in the official May Day demonstrations to reject official slogans and to write their own. She reported that she was allowed to look at relevant legal provisions for only 15 minutes and to speak to her lawyer for only 15 minutes before her trial. She served six months of her sentence.
During the year Amnesty International worked for the release of all detainees whom it could identify as prisoners of conscience and sought information from the authorities on others whom it believed might be prisoners of conscience.
In January Amnesty International published GDR: Sweeping Laws — Secret Justice, a report detailing its concerns in recent years. The concerns included the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience,
laws used to imprison them and the secrecy surrounding political imprisonment.
In April and June Anmesty International submitted information about its concerns in the gdr for United Nations review under a procedure, established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728F/1503, for confidential consideration of communications about human rights violations.
In November Amnesty International wrote to Head of State Egon Krenz and to the gdr Ambassador in London to welcome the October amnesty and the lifting of restrictions on freedom of movement. It urged revision of the Penal Code articles used to imprison prisoners of conscience, in conformity with the GDr's obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and requested the results of inquiries into allegations that security forces ill-treated detainees.
