SYRIA
Thousands of political prisoners, including hundreds of prisoners of conscience, continued to be detained under state of emergency legislation in force since 1963. The majority were held without charge or trial. Some had been held for over 20 years. Others remained in prison after the expiry of their sentences. However, more than 320 untried political detainees, including three prisoners of conscience, were released during 1989. Torture of prisoners was said to be widespread and routine, and one "disappearance" was reported. One person was executed.
Thousands of suspected government opponents arrested in Syria and in Syrian-controlled areas of Lebanon continued to be detained without trial. At least 122 more were arrested during the year. Among those
SYRIA
detained were 286 prisoners of conscience and 178 others who may have been prisoners of conscience. Many were suspected members of prohibited political parties or Palestinian groups, such as Hizb al-'Amal al-Shuyu'i, Party for Communist Action (pca); al-Hizb al-Shuyu'i al-Maktab al-Siyassi, Communist Party Political Bureau (cppb); al-Ikhwan al-MusIimun, Muslim Brotherhood; al-Tanzim al-Sha'bi al-Nasiri, Popular Nasserist Organization (pno); Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (dflp); Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (pflp); Fatah-, Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command (pflp-gc); Harakat a!-Tawhid ai-lslami, Islamic Unification Movement (ium); and the pro-Iraqi Arab Socialist Ba'th Party.
Foiuteen cppb members were arrested between February and June and held without charge or trial in Damascus, Saidnaya and Tartus. Foiu of them were released uncharged in September (see below). The 10 others were still in detention without charge or trial at the end of the year. They included Fawwaz Hammuda, a laboratory technician from Deir al-Zor, who was held in Saidnaya Prison.
In April Syrian forces reportedly arrested a number of people in West Beirut and Zahle suspected of cooperating with the mainly Christian army brigades loyal to General Michel 'Aoun (see Lebanon). In May over 100 others were reportedly arrested by Syrian forces in West Beirut following demonstrations protesting against the killing of Shaikh Hassan Khaled on 16 May (see Lebanon). It was not possible, however, to obtain further details of these arrests. Between April and August, Syrian forces arrested 14 suspected members of the pro-Iraqi Ba'th Party in Tripoli and the Beka' Valley, but it was not known where they were held. At least 69 Palestinians suspected of being members oi Fatah or of supporting Yasser 'Arafat, Chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization (plo), were also reported to have been arrested during the year by Syrian security forces in Lebanon. Most were arrested near the Sabra, Chatila, Burj al-Barajneh, Mar Elias and Tal al-Za'tar refugee camps in Beirut, or near other Palestinian refugee camps in Sidon and Tyre in southern Lebanon.
Some of those detained were reportedly arrested by Amal, a predominantly Shi'a militia in Lebanon, and later handed over
to Syrian troops. These included three brothers arrested in lyre and Sidon on 27 October. Two of them, Khalil and Muhammad Khattab, were released two days later, but the fate of the third, Ibrahim Khattab. remained unknown. In November Amal reportedly arrested 25 pflp-GC members in southern Lebanon on suspicion of cooperating with anti-Sjrian Palestinian factions in the area. They were reportedly handed over to Syrian intelligence, and their fate remained unknown. Among them were Mahmud Musleh and Kamel al-Haj, leading pflp-GC figures in southern Lebanon.
Political detainees arrested in previous years continued to be held without charge or trial. Some had been in detention for over 20 years. Ahmad Suwaidani, a former army officer, diplomat and member of the Ba'th Party's Regional Command, was arrested in 1969. He was held in al-Mezze Prison, Damascus. In July he went on hunger-strike to protest against his continued detention without charge or trial. Three members of the Jewish commimity arrested in 1987 and 1988 (see Amnesty International Report 1989] were also still held without charge or trial in 'Adra Civil Prison. The whereabouts of two of them, Eli and Selim Swed, remained unknown until October, when relatives were allowed to visit them.
Some 450 people arrested between August 1987 and March 1988 on suspicion of supporting the pca were believed to have remained in detention without trial (see Amnesty International Report 1989). A further 111 cppb members arrested between 1980 and 1988 were also among those who remained in detention without charge or trial throughout 1989. Among them was Ghassan Khouri, an architect and university lecturer from Deir 'Atiyya. Arrested in May 1988 by Amn a!-Dawla, State Security, he was held in al-Sadat detention centre in Damascus. Jalal Khanji and Riad Bastati, who were among 80 members of the Syrian Engineers' Association arrested in 1980 after demanding political reforms, remained in detention without charge or trial in 'Adra Prison. The whereabouts of most of those arrested with them were unknown.
More than 320 untried political detainees, three of whom were prisoners of conscience, were released. Of these, about 160 had been arrested by Syrian forces in Lebanon. 'Issam 'Abd al-Latif, a member of
SYRIA
the DFLP's Political Bureau, and Salah Salah, the pflp's representative in Lebanon, were released in January. They had been held without charge or trial for 23 and 10 months respectively. Three lawyers, all prisoners of conscience, were released in April: Salim Aqil, Thuraya Abd al-Karim and Abd al-Majid Manjouneh had been detained since 1980. A member of the Syrian Engineers' Association also detained since 1980, Abd al-Majid Abu Sha'la, was released in May. In Jime 140 Palestinians, all said to be supporters of Yasser Arafat, were released, as were 45 lum members or supporters. Many had been detained for over five years. Nineteen CPPB members were released between July and October; they had been detained for periods ranging between three and 18 months. In November, 117 lum members or supporters were released. In December three members of the Jewish community were released from Adra Prison: Albert and Victor Laham and Zaki Mamroud had been held in detention without trial for two years. During the year information was also received of the release in late 1988 of two CPPB members held in detention without trial since May 1988, including Butros Abd al-Massih (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
The routine torture and ill-treatment of prisoners continued to be widely reported. Prisoners were also frequently reported to have been denied medical treatment. Among the victims were four Palestinians — Hassan Dib Khalil, Fayez 'Arafat, Diab Muhammad Mustafa and Muhammad Dawud. They were held without charge or trial in Fara' al-Tahqiq al-'Askari, Military Interrogation Branch, in Damascus. All were members of Fatah arrested in Lebanon in 1983 and 1985 and reportedly tortured on various occasions since then, including in 1989. In November they were reported to be in a critical condition after being denied medical treatment for injuries resulting from torture and for ailments contracted as a result of prolonged detention and poor prison conditions.
Testimonies alleging torture were also received from former detainees arrested in previous years in Syria and Lebanon. One was from a Palestinian released in late 1988 after being held for 21 months at Anjar detention centre in Lebanon and Fara' Falastin, Palestine Branch, in Damascus as a suspected PLO member. He
said he had been tortured with electric shocks, beaten all over his body and partially asphyxiated by having his head immersed in water. Another was from a Lebanese member of the pro-Iraqi Ba'th Party arrested in June 1988 and held for 42 days at the Madrasat al-Amrican, American School, in TVipoli. He said he had been beaten and flogged for long periods, given electric shocks and hung by his wrists from the ceiling with nylon rope. He also said he was tied to a metal chair, the back of which was bent so as to put severe strain on his spine, neck and limbs, causing him to lose consciousness. Another Palestinian suspected of PLO membership arrested at Damascus airport in September 1988 and held for almost a month in Fara' Falastin was allegedly tortured both during and after interrogation. According to his testimony, he was flogged and beaten with metal cables while naked, and subjected to falaqa (beating on the soles of the feet) for prolonged periods.
Mudar al-Jundi, an engineer from Tartus arrested in September 1987 on suspicion of supporting the PGA, was held in Fara' Falastin in Damascus after his arrest. He was reportedly tortured during interrogation in 1987, denied medical treatment for acute asthma, and then "disappeared", His whereabouts remained unknown.
One execution was reported in 1989. Ahmad Abdallah Ahmad was publicly executed by hanging in Tartus in June after being convicted of murder and armed robbery.
Amnesty International repeatedly expressed concern to the government about the continued detention without trial of prisoners of conscience and other political prisoners, and about reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees. In June an Amnesty International delegation attending an international meeting in Syria met Vice-President Abd al-Halim Khaddam and other government officials, the first such contact since 1978. The delegation urged the release of prisoners of conscience and the prompt, fair trial or release of other untried political detainees, the impartial investigation of torture allegations and deaths in custody, and abolition of the death penalty. Government officials said they would be prepared to establish contact with Amnesty International and in future would respond to its inquiries. The organization presented the names of over
SYRIA/TAIWAN
400 untried political detainees, among them prisoners of conscience. The officials stated they would examine them and respond in detail. However, the government had provided no further information about these prisoners by the end of 1989.
In an oral statement delivered to the United Nations (un) Commission on Human Rights in February, Amnesty International drew attention to reports of the routine torture of political detainees by Syrian security forces, consequent deaths in custody and the failme of the government to investigate complaints of torture. There was no response from Syrian Government representatives. On 8 March the Commission on Human Rights announced its decision to drop Sjria from consideration by the un under a procedure established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728f/1503. Amnesty International had made a submission to the un under this procedure in April 1988, drawing attention to a consistent pattern of human rights violations in SjTia and Syrian-controlled areas of Lebanon (see Amnesty International Report 1989).
