LAOS
At least 37 suspected opponents of the government, including four known to be prisoners of conscience, remained under restrictions without charge or trial for "reeducation" in Houa Phanh province. An unknown number of others were under restrictions for "re-education" in Attapeu province. Several political arrests were reported.
The first elections to a national parliament since the People's Democratic Republic of Laos was established in 1975 were held in March. All 121 candidates for seats on the 79-member Supreme People's Council were approved by the authorities and all but a few were members of the ruling Lao People's Revolutionary Party. The committee appointed in August to draft a constitution had not completed its work by the end of the year although the promulgation of a constitution was officially described as a "main task" of the newly elected assembly.
In November the Supreme People's Council adopted a criminal law and a criminal procedure law which replaced and expanded on regulations previously issued by various ministries. Legislation also established the People's Judiciary Institute for public prosecution and the Supreme People's Court. The death penalty apparently remained in force under the new
LAOSAEBANON
legislation but no death sentences or judicial executions were reported.
At least 34 people associated with the pre-1975 government were reportedly still held without charge or trial for "re-education" in the northeastern province of Houa Phanh. Four of those known to be held were prisoners of conscience, detained for their non-violent opposition to the government, and others may have been prisoners of conscience.
The 34 were held at a small camp near the village of Sop Pan, formerly the main "re-education" centre in Houa Phanh, where improved conditions were reported. People held there included Khamphan Pradith, a Christian poet; Hao Sisoumang Sisaleumsak, a 72-year-old doctor; Salat Rajasak, a former member of parliament; and 62-year-old Houmphanh Norasing, also a former member of parliament. All 34 were reportedly permitted to move somewhat more freely than in previous years in the area around Sop Pan. They were also permitted to send and receive letters. It appeared that most of them were no longer required to perform manual labour. Instead, they were employed in administrative or professional work. However, most of those restricted were said to be in poor health resulting from the conditions of imprisonment and restriction to which they have been subjected for 14 years.
Three other prisoners, Khamtou Sackda, Sisavanh Bannavong and Khamphan Thammakhanty, were reportedly released from a high-security detention centre, designated 07, at Sop Hao in northeastern Houa Phanh where they had been held for allegedly violating "re-education" regulations. They apparently had been held in isolation under harsh conditions,
No further information became available about 185 people previously reported to be held without charge or trial for "re-educa-tion" at various places in Attapeu province. Sisanone Khamphanh and several others were said to be restricted to the provincial capital, Samakhixai-ville, where they were employed in skilled jobs. Others apparently continued to work in labour gangs building and repairing roads.
The official news media continued to report arrests of alleged subversives. Early in the year the media reported that in 1988 public security officials in Bolikhamsai province arrested "12 enemies in various localities who were hiding among the
people", The official report suggested that the 12 had been detained for spreading "false propaganda" and circulating leaflets that "tried to tarnish the reputations" of government leaders. No hirther details about their cases were known to have appeared in the official media, and there was no indication whether they were charged or brought to trial. In August official sources reported the arrest of 38 Vietnamese "reactionaries" who had entered Laos from Thailand, The 38 were to be tried in January 1990 by the Supreme People's Court.
In February Amnesty International wrote to Kaysone Phomvihan, Chairman of the Council of Ministers, to welcome the release of political prisoners in late 1988, to express concern about those still held and to inquire about three people reportedly arrested in 1988 and accused of spying in Vientiane province. The letter also proposed that an Amnesty International delegation visit Laos to discuss human rights and possibilities for incorporating international standards for human rights protection in the Constitution and other national law. Amnesty International received no response to the letter during the year. However, a delegation from Amnesty International met a senior government official in December and outlined the organization's concerns. The same month Amnesty International wrote again to inquire about human rights protection in the new legislation adopted in November.
