MOROCCO AND WESTERN SAHARA
Over 300 political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, were held during the year. Fifty were pardoned in May, 31 of whom were prisoners of conscience. Many of the remaining prisoners were serving sentences imposed after trials which fell short of internationally recog* nized standards for fair trial. Reports of torture and ill-treatment, mainly in garde
à vue (incommunicado) detention, continued. Sixteen people died in custody under suspicious circiunstances. Some prison conditions amounted to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment and one of several prisoners on hunger-strike protesting against these conditions died. The fate of about 100 former military personnel imprisoned since the early 1970s was still unknown, as were the whereabouts of people of Saharan origin arrested by Moroccan security forces since the mid-1970s. Three death sentences were passed, but no executions were carried out.
Fifty political prisoners, including 31 prisoners of conscience, were released after King Hassan II granted them a royal pardon on 6 May. Those freed included Allai El Azhar, a teacher, and Driss Rekab Bouissef, a university lecturer. Both had been among a group of prisoners tried in 1977; they had been sentenced to 30 and 20 years' imprisonment respectively.
Eight other prisoners of conscience, sentenced to long prison terms in 1977 on charges of plotting against the state and membership of clandestine Marxist-Leninist groups, did not benefit from the royal pardon. They remained in Kenitra Central Prison throughout the year.
Among them were Driss Benzekri and Mohamed Srifi, two students serving 30-year terms. Another prisoner of conscience, Ali Idrissi Kaitouni, a painter and poet, was also held in Kenitra Central Prison. He was sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment in May 1982 on account of his v^^itings.
The widow, a cousin and six children of General Mohamed Oufkir, who died in dubious circiunstances after a 1972 coup attempt, remained under house arrest near Marrakech. They had been held incommunicado and without charge or trial in prison camps for 15 years, apparently because of their family links with General Oufkir. They were considered prisoners of conscience. Four of the children escaped in April 1987, contacted lavi^ers and made a public appeal, but they were rearrested after several days.
Over 120 students were arrested and imprisoned for up to three years following widespread student demonstrations in May. The students were calling for improved facilities and recognition of the Unior} nationale des étudiants marocains (unem), Moroccan National Students' Union, as their official negotiating body. At
MOROCCO AND WESTERN SAHARA
least 85 students from universities at Fes, Meknes and other cities were tried and convicted on charges which included disturbing public order, demonstrating on the university campus, causing damage to property, and membership of imauthorized political organizations.
Many of the students were held in garde à vue detention for prolonged periods after arrest. In some cases, official records were falsified by police to conceal this. In one case, the police stated that 24 students had been arrested in Fes on 8 July when they had actually been arrested on 23 and 24 June. All 24 were held in garde à vue detention until 13 July. They subsequently received six-month prison sentences, which were suspended in the cases of three women. They were convicted on charges of belonging to an illegal organization and disturbing public order. All these students claimed to have been ill-treated or tortured. One of them, Boudra Boussa, who had been taken to Derb Moulay Cherif, a detention centre in Casablanca, did not appear in court with the others. He was in hospital with a broken hand, reportedly as a result of torture. He was later tried separately and was also sentenced to six months' imprisonment.
Seventeen alleged supporters of an Islamic movement, 14 of them teachers, were sentenced in Taroudant in December to prison terms of between one month and one year. They were charged with belonging to an unauthorized organization, possessing docmnents liable to cause a breach of the peace and holding unauthorized meetings. They appeared to be prisoners of conscience.
In November Mohamed Idrissi Kaitouni, the director of L'Opinion, an opposition party newspaper, was sentenced to two years' imprisonment for publishing a joint statement by two human rights organizations. The Association marocaine des droits de ¡'homme and the Ligue marocaine de défense des droits de l'homme issued a statement about four deaths in custody in August in "suspicious circumstances". Mohamed Idrissi Kaitouni was subsequently pardoned by King Hassan II on 12 November. The government refused entry into the coimtry to two Amnesty International delegates seeking to observe the trial.
At least 112 political prisoners sentenced after apparently imfair trials in pre-
vious years were still held at the end of the year. Among them were 19 students of a left-wing tendency within the unem, convicted in 1984 of conspiring to overthrow the government, and 70 alleged supporters of an Islamic movement, convicted in 1984 of plotting against the monarchy, planning to set up an Islamic republic and threatening state security.
Twenty-three other prisoners, mostly members of the unem and the Syndicat national des enseignants (sne), National Teachers' Union, were serving sentences of between six and 20 years' imprisonment in Casablanca, Tangiers, Safi and Kenitra prisons. They were convicted in Casablanca in 1986 of membership of the clandestine Ila al-Amam (Forward) movement, and of conspiring against the government (see Amnesty International Report 1987).
All three groups of prisoners were sentenced after trials in which proceedings did not appear to satisfy internationally recognized standards for fair trial. In particular, defendants were convicted on the basis of confessions allegedly obtained under torture or threat of torture during prolonged pre-trial detention.
There were new reports of torture and ill-treatment of people in garde a vue detention. In May the trial of Ali Belmeziane and five other students opened in Fes in the absence of the defendants — apparently because they still bore signs of torture. In August six students on trial in Meknes on charges arising from disturbances at the university alleged that they had been tortured at Derb Moulay Cherif detention centre. Others said that they were threatened with rape in police custody in order to force them to sign confessions. Detainees were said to have been tortured by being beaten while suspended in contorted positions, beaten on the soles of the feet, and partially suffocated with rugs drenched with urine or detergent.
Sixteen people died in police custody, leading to further allegations of torture and ill-treatment. Two of these deaths reportedly resulted in police officers being prosecuted for assaulting prisoners. In another case, the Minister of Justice was reported to have ordered an official inquiry into the death in February of Abdeljalil Yakouti who police said had hanged himself. The outcome of the inquiry was not known to Amnesty International, Eye-witnesses were said to have seen signs of torture on
MOROCCO AND WESTERN SAHARA/MOZAMBIQUE
the dead man's body. In August Larbi Charrat, a welder and member of the Parti du progrès et du socialisme (PPS), Party of Progress and Socialism, died in custody. The police said he had committed suicide by hanging himself in the headquarters of the gendarmerie at Sidi Slimane. He had been arrested two days earlier for participating in protests against the destruction of shanty towns in Dar Bel Amri, near Kenitra. However, unconfirmed reports suggested that his death was the result of torture.
Prison conditions were reported to be harsh. Conditions in a number of prisons appeared to constitute cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. At Laalou Prison in Rabat, for example, prisoners who protested against inadequate medical care were reportedly beaten and chained in "cachots" (small, windowless, underground punishment cells), In April four political prisoners in Laalou Prison went on hunger-strike for improved conditions and an investigation into their long-standing torture allegations. They broke off the hunger-strike for a time, but renewed it on 17 June. They were transferred at the end of July to Avicennes Hospital in Rabat where one, Abdelhaq Chbada, died on 19 August. The three others were still in hospital, where they were being force-fed, at the end of the year,
Hassan Aharrat and Noureddine Jouhari, two political prisoners who were among a group of six who went on hunger-strike in June 1985, also remained in hospital at the end of the year. Three others had been released in 1988 and 1989 after completing their sentences. The fourth, Moulay Tahar Douraidi, was said to have ended his hunger-strike in August. He was seen by his mother for the first time in five years in December and soon after resumed his hunger-strike. The six began intermittent hunger-strikes in 1984 in protest against torture during garde à vue detention and inhumane prison conditions, including insufficient medical care. They were reportedly kept bound to their beds in a basement room. Guards forcibly fed them through gastric tubes and their clothes were changed only every four to six months. For the last four years in hospital, with the exception of the one visit which Moulay Tahar Douraidi received in December, they had not been permitted to see lawyers or relatives.
No new information was received about
approximately 100 military personnel who were sentenced to prison terms following attempts on the life of King Hassan II in 1971 and 1972. They were believed to be still held incommunicado and at a secret location. Some of them were still held although their sentences had expired.
There was also continuing uncertainty about the fate of hundreds of Sahrawis reported to have "disappeared" in the custody of Moroccan security forces since the mid-1970s. They included Fatma el-Ghalia Ment Moulay Ahmed Quid Leili, an administrator from Tan Tan, who was arrested in January 1976, and Sidati Ould Selami Ould Lehbib, a blind radio announcer, arrested in November 1987 in Laayoune. According to the government, inquiries had revealed no trace of those alleged to have been arrested and to have "disappeared".
Three people were sentenced to death for murder in March and death sentences imposed in 1988 on two Italian nationals convicted of drug-trafficking and murder were confirmed on appeal. There were no executions.
Amnesty International welcomed the release of prisoners of conscience in May and pressed for the release of other prisoners of conscience. It sought information about possible prisoners of conscience. Amnesty International also expressed concern to the authorities about reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees in garde a vue detention and urged thorough and impartial investigations of all torture allegations and deaths in custody. Amnesty International also sought further information about Sahrawi prisoners alleged to have " disappeared" in the custody of Moroccan security forces. No response was received to the memorandum submitted to the government in July 1988 following the January 1988 visit of an Amnesty International delegation to Morocco.
