ROMANIA
<
All prisoners of conscience imprisoned under the former government of President Nicolae Ceausescu were reportedly released in December. Before the change of government there were at least 27 known prisoners of conscience, and
ROMANIA
dozens of possible prisoners of conscience were imprisoned or under house arrest, often without charge or trial. Reports of ill-treatment in police custody included at least one case which allegedly resulted in death. Hundreds of people died during the overthrow of President Ceausescu's government at the end of the year. Many were killed indiscriminately or summarily executed by the security forces. Former President Ceausescu and his wife, Elena, were executed after a summary trial. Special military tribunals with emergency powers were set up under the new government.
Following the overthrow of President Ceausescu in December the new authorities, the National Salvation Front headed by President Ion Iliescu, announced the release of all political prisoners imprisoned under the former government, the abolition of the death penalty, and the repeal of some laws restricting human rights.
In March the United Nations Commission on Human Rights voted to appoint a Special Rapporteur to examine the human rights situation in Romania.
Censorship under the Ceausescu government severely restricted information about political trials; consequently both the total number of prisoners of conscience and statistics on the death penalty were not known.
Mircea Raceanu, a senior official in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, was arrested in January and charged with espionage and treason for allegedly passing information to foreign diplomats. However, the real reason for his imprisonment appeared to be his opposition to the authorities. In July he was tried in camera and sentenced to death. In August the sentence was confirmed on appeal but in September it was commuted to 20 years' imprisonment. He was released in December.
In March six former senior officials, including Mircea Raceanu's adoptive father Ion Raceanu, signed an open letter to President Ceausescu criticizing the government's human rights record and calling for the restoration of constitutional guarantees concerning citizens' rights. The signatories of the letter were subjected to various restrictions on their freedom of movement. For example, former foreign minister Corneliu Manescu, aged 73, was placed under house arrest and in May was forcibly moved to another residence in Bucharest,
where he remained confined under constant surveillance until December.
Many other people who openly criticized the Ceausescu government were reportedly placed imder house arrest, often without any formal charges being brought against them. Doina Cornea, a former university lecturer from Cluj, remained under virtual house arrest for her human rights activities until December, apart from a few days of relative liberty in January following international pressure (see Amnesty International Report 1989]. In an open letter to President Ceausescu in April, in which she queried the legal basis for her treatment, she stated that security agents were placed at her door, that she was not allowed visitors, that her telephone had been cut off and her mail withheld. She reportedly received a number of death threats and was twice beaten by the police. Mircea Dinescu, editor of the literary review Romania Literatura, was placed under virtual house arrest in March after giving an interview to the French newspaper, Libération, in which he stated that the judicial system, the press and the police force had become instruments of "intimidation and terror". All restrictions on him were lifted in December.
Petre Mihai Bacanu, a journalist for the newspaper Romania Libera, was arrested in January at the state publishing house Scinteia in Bucharest. He was apparently suspected of being one of the audiors of a pamphlet entitled The Disease of Power, which allegedly called for peaceful opposition to the administration of President Ceausescu. In June he was reportedly tried in camera and sentenced to six years' imprisonment for illegal trading in cars, coffee and other commodities. Amnesty International believed he may have been imprisoned for his non-violent exercise of the right to free expression. He was released in December.
Prisoner of conscience Diunitru luga was released in September after serving six years of a 12-year prison sentence for "propaganda against the state". Werner Sommerauer, sentenced to three years' corrective labour in 1987 following a demonstration, was freed in December (see Amnesty International Report 1989].
Reports of torture and ill-treatment of people in police custody included the case of Janos Tamas, an ethnic Hungarian from Balan, Harghita Coiuity. He was taken into
ROMANIA/RWANDA
custody in May on suspicion of obtaining meat illegally. He was allegedly suspended by his wrists and beaten by foiu? police officers until he died of liver failure on 26 May. On 2 October Ana Ciherean was found dead in a park: she had been detained by police officers at a hotel in Timisoara the previous evening. She had reportedly been raped and her arms and legs were broken. Bela Sepsey, an ethnic Hungarian, reportedly suffered serious head injuries while in police detention in Timisoara on 15 October after being detained on suspicion of possessing foreign currency. His arrest may have been related to his membership of the Reformed Church in Timisoara, which had been in conflict with the authorities, On 2 November the pastor of this church, Laszlo Tokes, an outspoken critic of both the govemment and church leadership, was reportedly beaten by "unknowTi assailants" who broke down the door of his apartment. He was apparently under constant police surveillance at the time of the attack but the police did not intervene.
Hundreds of people died, many killed indiscriminately or summarily executed by the security forces, diuing a period of unrest leading up to and following the overthrow of President Ceausescu's govemment. On 17 December demonstrations began in Timisoara after the authorities forcibly evicted Laszlo Tokes ft-om his church in the city and transported him to the remote parish of Mineu in the north of the country. A large crowd gathered in the centre of Umisoara and some demonstrators began to attack police buildings. Troops and tanks were brought in and security forces opened fire indiscriminately, killing large numbers of demonstrators, including children. It was reported that the security forces hunted dovra people known to have participated in the demonstrations, and summarily executed them. Violent clashes also took place in other towms throughout the coimtry, including Bucharest, Arad, Sibiu and Brasov.
President Ceausescu and his wife, Elena, were executed on 25 December after a summary trial. On 26 December the newly established National Salvation Front announced the creation of special military tribunals with emergency powers to summarily try and execute those still fighting the new authorities. However, no further executions took place and at the end of
December the death penalty was abolished.
During the year Amnesty Intemational urged the authorities to release prisoners of conscience and to provide further information about other people imprisoned or under house arrest who were possible prisoners of conscience. The organization luged the authorities to institute full and impartial investigations into the deaths of Janos Tamas and Ana Ciherean, and into the alleged ill-treatment of Bela Sepsey and Laszlo Tokes. In December it called for a full and impartial investigation into the killings and reported summary executions of demonstrators by security forces. The organization urged the new authorities to abolish the death penalty and expressed regret at the execution of Nicolae and Elena Ceausescu. It also called on them to bring to justice those responsible for past human rights abuses, but urged that this should be done in accordance with internationally recognized requirements for fair trials.
