JAPAN
A de facto three-year moratorium on executions ended in March when three prisoners were hanged. Four others, including a 70-year old man, were executed in November. Fifty-five others were awaiting execution, some in conditions of detention amounting to ill-treatment, and some 40 others were under sentence of death. Conditions of detention in some police cells amounted to ill-treatment. The government failed to fulfil its international obligations adequately to protect refugees and asylum-seekers.
An eight-party coalition government
took office in August, following elections to the Diet (lower house of Parliament) in which the Liberal Democratic Party lost its majority. The new Prime Minister, Hosokawa Morihiro, pledged to implement wide-ranging political reforms. The Minister of Justice, Mikazuki Akira, stated al his inaugural press conference that he would sign execution orders for prisoners whose death sentences had been approved by the Supreme Court, implicitly criticizing some of his predecessors who had blocked the execution process by not signing such orders.
A de facto moratorium on executions in force since November 1989 ended in March when three men who had been on death row for between 13 and 23 years were executed after then Minister of Justice Masaharu Gotoda signed their execution orders. They included Kawanaka Tetsuo, who was hanged before all avenues for review or commutation of his sentence had been exhausted. His mental condition had reportedly deteriorated in the months preceding his execution: according to a doctor at Osaka Detention Centre, he was hallucinating and "on the verge" of becoming schizophrenic.
Following established practice, the March executions were carried out in secret. Executions are never announced publicly and even the families or lawyers of the prisoners concerned are not informed of impending executions. Prisoners themselves may not be informed until a few hours before execution takes place. In practice they are unable to meet relatives or a lawyer after being informed of their impending execution.
Those executed in November included Deguchi Hideo, aged 70, and Sakaguchi Toru, who were held at Osaka Detention Centre. They were executed after spending nine years on death row. Also executed were Kojima Tadao, who was held in Sapporo, and Seki Yukio, held in Tokyo. They had both been on death row since 1978.
Approximately 90 prisoners were reported to be under sentence of death at the end of the year, including some 55 whose sentences had been confirmed by the Supreme Court. At least three had spent more than 25 years on death row. Among them were Okunishi Masaru, aged 67, imprisoned since 1961, and Tomiyama Tsuneki, aged 76, imprisoned since 1963 and sentenced to death in 1971.
JAPAN
Prisoners sentenced to death continued to be subjected to arbitrary restrictions on their right to have contact with the outside world. As a general rule, they were only allowed to meet close relatives - and their lawyer if they had one. The authorities justified this practice by stating that it helped to keep the prisoners emotionally "stable". Prison wardens appeared to exercise wide discretion over the degree of isolation imposed on death row prisoners. In some prisons, condemned prisoners were held almost permanently in solitary confinement.
There were new reports of police ill-treatment of suspects. Huang Yuwei, a Chinese resident, alleged that he was punched and beaten with clubs by six police officers while held for 24 hours in June in a Tokyo police station on suspicion of being an illegal immigrant. The police denied that he was beaten and said he had had to be subdued by police officers because he refused to go to the police station. He was released after police confirmed that he was a legal resident. The investigation into his complaint, which was lodged in October, had not been completed by the end of the year.
In October three police officers from the Kawasaki District Police were given suspended prison terms and fined following a complaint by Hayakawa Yoshimitsu, a day labourer. He alleged that he was severely beaten, burned and threatened by the three officers while detained for several hours on 30 December 1992. The police initially denied the claim that severe bums and contusions suffered by Hayakawa Yoshimitsu had resulted from ill-treatment in custody.
Conditions of detention in police custody amounted in some instances to ill-treatment. Police detention facilities, known as "substitute prisons" [daiyo kan-goku], continued to be used instead of the detention centres administered by the Ministry of Justice to hold criminal suspects for up to 23 days prior to indictment (see Amnesty International Reports 1991 and 1992). Interrogators in "substitute prisons" were in practice allowed unlimited access to detainees and were able to deny them adequate rest and access to the outside world for weeks on end — with the exception of short meetings with a lawyer and, at the discretion of police authorities, visits by a doctor. Several former inmates of "substitute prisons" alleged that they had been forced or threatened into signing confessions admitting to crimes they did
not commit. Methods of coercion used reportedly included detaining suspects in a "substitute prison" cell together with one or more other inmates who had been instructed to "advise" the suspect to confess. Former inmates reported receiving blows to the head, being deprived of sleep and rest during daily 10-hour interrogation sessions over periods of up to several weeks, and having interrogators shout into their ears.
Protection for refugees and asylum-seekers remained inadequate (see Amnesty International Report 1993). Procedures were secretive, arbitrary and often obstructive. Some asylum-seekers, despite clearly being entitled to refugee status, had their applications refused and were kept in a legal limbo on visas which had to be renewed every 30 days. This meant they faced the constant threat of deportation. Restrictive mles and procedures were compounded by a lack of guidance and advice for asylum-seekers. Immigration officials appeared to lack knowledge about international standards relating to refugees, and seemed not to have ready access to reliable information on human rights conditions in applicants' countries of origin.
In February Hong Jianbing, a Chinese asylum-seeker and a well-known political dissident who was at risk of serious human rights violations if returned to China, was forced to leave Japan. His claim for refugee status had been rejected on appeal in October 1992 despite the fact that the un High Commissioner for Refugees had recognized him as a refugee. In January he was informed by the Japanese authorities that he would be deported to China if he did not leave Japan. He travelled to Europe and was eventually accepted as a refugee by Canada.
In March Amnesty Intemational published a report, Japan: Inadequate Protection fdr Refugees and Asylum-Seekers, which drew attention to the cases of several asylum-seekers, including Hong Jianbing. Amnesty International urged the authorities to establish an independent advisory body composed of impartial members with recognized expertise to review the entire system of refugee protection in Japan, and to ensure that all asylum-seekers have effective access to a fair and satisfactory asylum procedure. It also urged the authorities not to detain asylum-seekers other than in cases of absolute necessity.
JAPArVJORDAN
in accordance with relevant international standards. In response to the report, the Ministry of Justice disputed many of the organization's findings and stated that existing procedures met lapan's international obligations.
In May an Amnesty International representative visited Japan and met officials of the Ministry of lustice and the National Police Agency to discuss safeguards for human rights in "substitute prisons", the use of the death penalty, and conditions on death row. Amnesty International expressed concern that there was inadequate separation of authority between those responsible for the interrogation and those responsible for the custody of suspects held in "substitute prisons", and about the harsh disciplinary regime for death-row prisoners.
In August, following the inauguration of the new government, Amnesty International published an open letter to Prime Minister Hosokawa and called on his government to give urgent attention to human rights in lapan. In October Amnesty International issued two reports. Japan: Resumption of Executions and lU-Treatment of Prisoners on Death Row, and Japan: The "Substitute Prison" System: a Source of Human Rights Violations, which it submitted to the un Human Rights Committee prior to its consideration of the Japanese Government's report on implementation of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (icgpr). The Human Rights Committee expressed concern at the "number and nature" of crimes punishable by death in lapan and stated inter alia that "undue restrictions on visits and correspondence" with prisoners on death row. and the failure of the authorities to notify relatives of executions are "incompatible" with the iccpr. It recommended reforms to pre-trial procedures, including the "substitute prison" system.
