MACEDONIA
(THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF)
Information came to light about the reported beating and other ill-treatment of ethnic Albanian prisoners in 1992. Ethnic Albanian refugees from Serbia were forcibly returned to that country, despite fears that they would be at risk of serious human rights violations there, and after some were allegedly ill-treated by Macedonian police.
In lanuary unprofor, the un peace-keep-ing force in the former Yugoslavia, deployed a small contingent of troops in Macedonia, aimed largely at deterring the spread of conflict from neighbouring Serbia. A monitoring mission of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (csce) had been established in 1992. In April, following months of controversy over use of the name "Macedonia", to which Greece objected, the republic was admitted to the un under the temporary name of "The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia". Continuing opposition from Greece, Albania and Cyprus also prevented Macedonia from being admitted as a member of the csce. although it was granted observer status.
Information came to light in February about an incident which had occurred in December 1992. A group of about 20 ethnic Albanian criminal prisoners was transferred from Idrizovo prison near Skopje to a prison in Skopje itself. In Skopje, during several hours of questioning which took place over two days, the prisoners were reportedly punched, kicked and beaten all over their bodies by police, who included officers of the state security service. Some prisoners who sought medical care did not receive it until several days later.
In August at least 47 refugees from Serbia, all ethnic Albanians, were forcibly returned to Serbia. These were largely men of military age from Kosovo province in Serbia, many of whom might have fled the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (fry) to avoid military service. Some of them were allegedly ill-treated by Macedonian police. It was not known what became of them after they were returned to the fry.
In March Amnesty International wrote
MACEDONIA/MALAWI
to Prime Minister Branko Crvenkovski calling for an investigation into the alleged assault on ethnic Albanian prisoners in Skopje. No reply had been received by the end of the year. In September the organization appealed to the authorities not to forcibly return ethnic Albanians to the fry, on the grounds that they would be at risk of human rights violations there. It expressed concern that no serious examination was being made of individual cases, and that the men were being returned without regard to their possible fate upon return.
