MAURITANIA
There were reports of torture and ill-treatment by the security forces. An amnesty law was introduced to give immunity from prosecution to perpetrators of major human rights violations from 1989 to 1992.
The situation in southern Mauritania, bordering on Senegal and Mali, remained tense. More than 60,000 black Mauritani-ans who had fled or been expelled in 1989 or 1990 (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 and 1991) remained in Senegal and some in Mali. Although there was no official reason why they could not return, many refused to do so because of reported harassment and killings of black Maurita-nians and because they felt their status in Mauritania would be unclear. At the time of expulsion, their identity papers had been confiscated and had not been reissued.
In January the Special Court of Justice, which had been established in 1978, was abolished. It had passed death sentences without any right of appeal and had
convicted people on the basis of confessions made imder duress. In October 1992, the President of the Special Court of Justice had rejected a complaint by lawyers on behalf of nearly 200 families of the "disappeared" (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1993).
In May the government enacted a total amnesty for all members of the security and armed forces for all offences committed during a three-year period from 1989 to 1992. During that time, more than 400 black Mauritanians had been extrajudicially executed, thousands had been arbitrarily detained for lengthy periods without charge or trial and many others had "disappeared". The authorities said the amnesty law was a contribution towards national reconciliation but they took no steps at all to investigate or resolve the cases of the "disappeared" or other victims of gross violations.
In March there were protests when an army colonel implicated in torture visited France for military training and Maurita-nian human rights activists publicly called on the French authorities to bring him to justice. However, no investigations or other legal proceedings were initiated against him either by the French or Mauritanian authorities and he was able to return to Mauritania.
There were several reports of arrests, torture and killings of members of Mauritania's black population in the south, but few details were available. It appeared that the abuses may have been racially motivated. In February seven black Mauritanian villagers from Tektaké Ferlo were arrested by members of the gendarmerie, apparently as opponents of the government. They were all reportedly tortured before one escaped, three were released and three were transferred to prison in Sélibaby. In similar circumstances, M'Baye Ba, from Kalinioro village, was arrested in late February or March and reportedly tortured at the police station at Ould Yengé before being transferred to prison in Sélibaby. He and the three others from Tektaké Ferlo were all apparently freed in return for substantial payments to a local judicial official.
In June, Mamadou Bodiel Tall, a Senegalese national, died shortly after he was reportedly tortured and robbed by Mauritanian security forces at their military encampment near the Senegal border. He apparently drowned when he tried to swim
MAURiTANIA/MAURITIUS
the Senegal river after escaping; when he got into difficulties Mauritanian soldiers allegedly stopped him returning to the Mauritanian side. His body apparently bore evidence of tortin-e.
In response to Amnesty International's appeal for an inquiry into the death in August 1992 of Dia Hamath Atoumane (see Amnesty International Report 1993], the authorities told Amnesty International that neither he, nor others detained with him, had been tortured - although they did not explain how they had reached this conclusion.
Amnesty International was very concerned by the amnesty granted in May to those responsible for mass killings and "disappearances", as it appeared likely to prevent relatives of those who "disappeared" or were killed obtaining clarification of their fate, as well as providing legal immunity against prosecution for the perpetrators of these gross abuses. Amnesty International criticized the amnesty and continued to urge the authorities to appoint an impartial and independent inquiry into the "disappearances" and other violations and to hold those responsible to account.
In an oral statement to the UN Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns in Mauritania.
