MOROCCO AND WESTERN SAHARA
Over 450 political prisoners, including more than 140 prisoners of conscience and probable prisoners of conscience, were serving sentences imposed añer unfair trials in previous years. Over 100 people were arrested during the year for political ofTences; many of them were released uncharged but some were sentenced to up to 20 years' imprisonment after unfair trials. Torture and ill-treatment continued to be reported: at least three people allegedly died as a result of beatings. Hundreds of Sahrawis and Moroccans who had "disappeared" in previous years were believed to be still held in secret detention centres. Formerly "disappeared" Sahrawis released in 1991 continued to be subject to restrictions on their freedom of movement and expression. One prisoner was executed. One man was sentenced to death and over 150 prisoners remained on death row.
Direct and indirect elections for the National Assembly, the first for nine years, were held in June and September. The centre-right parties which have dominated the government during the past 20 years won a majority; however, an alliance of the two main opposition parties increased its seats.
Morocco ratified the un Convention against Torture in June, and in November a Minister for Human Rights was appointed.
The un-sponsored referendum on the future of the Western Sahara, postponed from January 1992, had still not taken place by the end of the year (see Amnesty International Reports 1992 and 1993). However, the cease-fire agreed between the Frente Popular para la Liberación de Saguia el-Hamra y Rio de Oro, Popular Front for the Liberation of Saguia el-Hamra and Rio de Oro, (known as the Polisario Front), and Morocco continued in force and observers from the un Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara (minurso) remained in place.
More than 450 political prisoners, including over 140 prisoners of conscience and probable prisoners of conscience, remained in prison at the end of 1993. Most had been imprisoned after unfair trials in previous years after being convicted of offences against state security, membership of illegal organizations, distributing leaflets or disturbing public order. Conviction had usually been secured solely on the basis of confessions allegedly extracted under duress. They included people arrested after demonstrations and riots in 1984 and 1990, supporters of illegal Marxist and Islamist organizations, and people sentenced to five years' imprisonment after allegedly making remarks critical of King Hassan II (see previous Amnesty International Reports).
Abdessalem Yassine, leader of the banned Islamist organization al-'AdI wa'l-Ihsan, Justice and Charity, remained under house arrest without charge or trial at his home in Sale. His lawyer was allowed to visit him. Two leading members of al-'AdI wa'l-Ihsan who tried to visit him in August were detained briefly.
Two prisoners of conscience were released in July by royal amnesty. Noubir Amaoui, secretary general of the Confédération démocratique du travail. Democratic Labour Confederation, had been sentenced in April 1992 to two years' imprisonment for defamation (see Amnesty International Report 1993). Driss Ghenimi, the regional secretary of the Union générale des travailleurs marocains, General Union of Moroccan Workers, had been sentenced to five years' imprisonment in May 1992 after members of a rival trade union alleged that he had insulted the King. Defence lawyers had walked out of the court after being refused permission to call witnesses.
Over 100 people were arrested in June and September after demonstrations in a number of towns against alleged election fraud. Most demonstrators were released uncharged but in Bouznika, Benahmed and Tifelt demonstrators were charged with unauthorized demonstrations and damage to public buildings. Six remained in detention awaiting trial at the end of the year.
Trials frequently fell short of international fair trial standards. Six Sahrawis arrested after demonstrations in Assa in September 1992 were sentenced in July to 20 years' imprisonment in two trials in the
MOROCCO AND WESTERN SAHARA/MOZAMBIQUE
Rabat military court. They were convicted of offences against external state security for possessing Polisario flags; three of them were also convicted of burning vehicles. The trials were held in camera and the defendants, who stated in court that they had been beaten by police, were not allowed full defence rights.
Thirteen students from Oujda, who had been arrested in December 1992. were sentenced in January to up to one year's imprisonment on charges of participating in unauthorized demonstrations and spreading false information to disturb public order. They stated during their trial that they had been forced to sign police statements under torture, without having been allowed to read them. In February eight were acquitted on appeal, one had his sentence reduced to six months and one had his sentence raised to 18 months' imprisonment.
The new limit of six days garde à vue (incommunicado) detention (for offences not related to state security) introduced in 1990 appeared to be generally respected, except in Western Sahara where detainees were frequently held for several months in illegally prolonged garde à vue detention. Other provisions in the same law providing for medical examinations to be available for all detainees and for families to be promptly informed of an arrest appeared to be generally disregarded. Torture and ill-treatment continued to be widespread in Western Sahara. Elsewhere beatings and deprivation of food and sleep were reported in police and gendarmerie stations. Demonstrators arrested in June in Bouznika stated that they were beaten by police immediately after arrest and marks of beatings were recorded by the investigating judge. However, no further investigations appear to have been made into the allegations.
At least three people died in custody allegedly as a result of ill-treatment. Mustapha Hamzaoui died in Khenifra Police Station shortly after his arrest in May. Relatives and other observers, including doctors and representatives of Moroccan human rights organizations, stated that bruises could be seen on his body. A second autopsy ordered by the Khenifra authorities was carried out without a family representative being allowed to be present. It found that death was the result of suicide. The family and the Organisation
marocaine des droits de I'homme, Moroccan Human Rights Organization, lodged a charge of homicide against persons unknown. This was brought to court in September but the case was adjourned and had not been heard by the end of the year.
Hundreds of people of Western Saharan origin and Moroccans who had "disappeared" after arrest in previous years remained unaccoimted for and were believed to be still alive in secret detention. They included Faraji Mohamed-Salem Bueh-Barca, who "disappeared" in Laayoune in 1976 at the time of a Polisario Front attack. Abdelhaq Rouissi, a trade union activist who "disappeared" in 1964, was reported to be still alive, although seriously ill, in secret detention.
More than 300 Sahrawis released in 1991 after up to 16 years in secret detention continued to be severely restricted in their freedom of movement and association. Some were rearrested in 1992 and 1993 and held in secret detention for several months: others were expelled from Western Sahara to towns in Morocco. Neither the survivors of "disappearance" nor the families of the 81 people known to have died in previous years in the secret detention centres of Tazmamert, Agdz, Qal'at M'Gouna and Laayoune were known to have received any compensation from the government. No inquiry has been held into how such secret detentions were allowed to take place and no one has ever been brought to justice for perpetrating these abuses.
One prisoner was executed during the year. Mohamed Tabet, a former police commissioner and district official in Casablanca, was sentenced to death in March by the Casablanca Criminal Court for rape, debauchery and violence against over 1,000 women. He was executed in August in the first known execution since 1982. Three other police officers, who were convicted of covering up his offences after a charge was lodged by victims in 1991, were sentenced to up to 20 years' imprisonment. A policeman was sentenced to death in December after being convicted of raping handcuffed young boys. More than 150 other prisoners who had been sentenced to death in previous years, some of them in the 1960s, remained on death row. They included 14 political prisoners sentenced between 1979 and 1985.
In the framework of the Western
MOROCCO AND WESTERN SAHARA/MOZAMBIQUE
Saharan settlement, Amnesty Intemational called on the Moroccan Govemment to ensure that no Sahrawi was imprisoned for the non-violent expression of opinion. The organization urged the un to amend and widen the mandate of minurso so that it could monitor alleged human rights violations and take appropriate action to address them.
Amnesty Intemational welcomed the government's ratification of the un Convention against Torture and called for safeguards enshrined in the Convention to be implemented immediately in order to stop torture and ill-treatment. The organization also called for the unconditional release of all prisoners of conscience, for the release of all those who remained "disappeared" and for the commutation of all death sentences. It welcomed the releases of Noubir Amaoui and Driss Ghenimi and the appointment of a Minister for Human Rights.
In May Amnesty Intemational delegates were allowed to visit Morocco for the first time since 1990. They held talks with the Conseil consultatif des droits de ¡'homme (ccdh). Human Rights Advisory Council, a govemment-appointed body which includes representatives of political parties, professional bodies and two human rights groups. The organization subsequently sent the ccdh and the govemment the names and details of 80 Moroccans and 485 Sahrawis who were believed to have "disappeared" after arrest and a list of 159 prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience. In December the ccdh told Amnesty Intemational delegates it would examine the lists and stated that victims of "disappearance" and former inmates of Tazmamert and their families would be given free legal assistance to seek compensation.
Amnesty Intemational published a report in Febmary, Morocco: Continuing arrests, "disappearances" and restrictions on freedom of expression and movement in Western Sahara-, and another in April. Morocco: Breaking the wails of silence -the "disappeared" in Morocco.
In oral statements to the un Commission on Human Rights in March and to its Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August, Arrmesty International included reference to its concerns in Morocco. In April Amnesty Intemational submitted information about its concerns in Morocco
and the Westem Sahara for un review, under a procedure established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728f/1503, for confidential consideration of communications about human rights violations.
In a letter sent in January, the President's office of the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic denied cases previously raised by Amnesty Intemational of detention of prisoners of conscience, long-term incommunicado detention, torture and deaths in custody of political opponents which had been reported between 1976 and 1991 in the camps near Tindouf in Algeria under the control of the Polisario Front. In its February report on Morocco (see above) Amnesty International made public these concems.
