TADZHIKISTAN
Extrajudicial executions and "disappearances" at the hands of pro-government forces continued on a large scale into early 1993, claiming the lives of scores of people who were targeted mainly because of their regional origin. Later in the year there were further "disappearances": the victims included political activists. One prisoner of conscience was conditionally released following trial, and two probable prisoners of conscience were convicted on allegedly fabricated charges of illegal possession of firearms. Four political prisoners were tortured in detention. At least six people were sentenced to death, including at least one political prisoner who may have received an unfair trial. Armed forces apparently subordinate to a self-proclaimed opposition "govemment-in-exile" were reported to have deliberately and arbitrarily killed captured govern* ment soldiers and civilians.
TADZHIKISTAN
Armed conflict between government forces, who were supported by army units from Russia and neighbouring Central Asian states, and armed opposition groups continued sporadically throughout the year. The fighting was mainly in areas along the southern border with Afghanistan and in eastern Tadzhikistan. The government headed by Supreme Council Chairman Imamali Rakhmonov rejected appeals by foreign mediators for direct peace negotiations with the leaders of a self-proclaimed opposition "govemment-in-exile" formed in early 1993 in northern ! Afghanistan.
In June the Supreme Court banned four opposition parties and organizations linked to the previous coalition government which had resigned in November 1992 (see Amnesty International Report 1993). The ban was imposed on the Democratic Party, the Islamic Renaissance Party, and the Rastokhez (Renaissance) and Lali Eadakhshon (Ruby of Badakhshan) organizations on the grounds that they had abandoned parliamentary methods to achieve their political goals, in favour of the violent seizure of power.
The wave of extrajudicial executions and "disappearances" which began after the capital, Dushanbe, fell to government forces in December 1992 at the climeix of the civil war (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1993) continued during January and February. Scores of people, mainly from the Pamir and Garm regions of eastern Tadzhikistan, were reportedly summarily executed or "disappeared" after being detained by forces of the People's Front of Tadzhikistan, a paramilitary group linked to the government. Extrajudicial executions and "disappearances" in Dushanbe were reported to have followed checks of identity papers on the streets and at the airport, and during house-to-house searches. Some people were reportedly executed on the spot, others were detained and their bodies found later in the street or the city morgue. The fate of others remained unknown. Isolated similar cases were reported later in the year in Dushanbe and in southern rural areas.
In April Democratic Party activist Ayniddin Sadykov "disappeared" after being taken from a bus in Dushanbe by armed men. In July member of parliament Saidsho Shoyev and his brother Siyarsho Shoyev "disappeared" after being seized by
armed men from a Dushanbe street. In both cases the circumstances of the "disappearances" suggested that they were the work of forces operating with government complicity: the car used by the abductors of the Shoyev brothers was reportedly identifiable from its number plates as belonging to the Ministry of Defence.
Prisoner of conscience Bozor Sobir, a leading poet and former Democratic Party activist, was arrested in March. He went on trial before the Supreme Court in October and at the end of December was convicted of attempting to overthrow the government, attempting to inflame inter-ethnic discord and participating in unsanctioned demonstrations. He was given a two-year suspended sentence and was irrunediately released. He was acquitted of two other charges.
Two probable prisoners of conscience were sentenced to prison terms in March following separate trials on charges of illegal possession of firearms: there were grounds to believe that the charges had been fabricated because of their opposition political activities. Dzhumaboy Niyazov, a Democratic Party activist, was sentenced to seven years' imprisonment by the city court in Khudzhand, Leninabad Region, for illegal possession of cartridges for an automatic weapon. Nuriddin Sadiriddinov, a Rastokhez activist, was sentenced by the district court in Asht, Leninabad Region, to 10 years' imprisonment for illegal possession of a pistol and bullets. In both cases sources claimed that the firearms and ammunition had been planted during police searches of their homes.
Four political prisoners - Mirbobo Mirrakhimov, Akhmadsho Kamilov, Khayriddin Kasymov and Khurshed Nazarov - were tortured in pre-trial detention in investigation-isolation prison No. 1 in Dushanbe. All were reported to have been beaten during interrogation, as a result of which Khayriddin Kasymov was reported to have suffered a broken nose and had several teeth knocked out. Akhmadsho Kamilov was allegedly not allowed by his interrogators to sleep or to sit for long periods. Mirbobo Mirrakhimov had been the director of the state radio and television company under the previous coalition government and was charged with treason in the form of "conspiracy to overthrow the government", and defamation. Akhmadsho Kamilov, formerly director of national
TADZHIKISTAN
television, and Khayriddin Kasymov and Khurshed Nazarov, who were television journalists, were charged with "agitation and propaganda calling for the violent overthrow of the government" and theft of state property. They were arrested in January in neighbouring countries (Mirbobo Mirrakhimov in Turkmenistan and the three others in Kyrgyzstan) reportedly by local law enforcement officers, and forcibly returned to Tadzhikistan. They were still in pre-trial detention at the end of the year.
The death penalty remained in force for 18 peacetime offences as well as others in wartime. At least six people were sentenced to death. They included Adzhik Aliyev, a political prisoner and Islamic Renaissance Party activist, who was sentenced to death in August for crimes including treason, terrorism and murder following a possibly unfair trial. He was still awaiting the results of an appeal against his sentence at the end of the year.
Forces apparently subordinate to the opposition "government-in-exile" and based in the Kalai-Khumb district of the Gorno-Badakhshan Autonomous Region were reported in June to have deliberately and arbitrarily killed nine government soldiers whom they had taken prisoner. In July up to 200 civilian residents of the village of Sarigor, Khatlon Region, were reportedly deliberately killed by opposition forces based in Afghanistan who entered the village after overrunning a nearby border post.
Amnesty International continued to call on the Government of Tadzhikistan to investigate all reports of extrajudicial executions and "disappearances", and to bring those responsible to justice. In February Amnesty International wrote to Chairman Rakhmonov about statements by security officials indicating that security forces had been authorized to carry out summary executions. It urged the government to take all measures necessary to ensure that forces under government control were aware of and conformed fully to international standards on the use of force. Amnesty International also requested the government to confirm or deny media reports that illegal possession of firearms in certain circumstances had been made a capital offence. In a detailed reply received in June, the Chairman of the National Security Committee gave assurances that death sentences had not been passed on people found to be
illegally in possession of firearms. He also asserted that the security forces used firearms only in self-defence or to protect the lives of others. However, he confirmed that the statements about which Amnesty International had expressed concern had indeed been made, albeit only as a warning against criminal activity. Amnesty International replied in July stating that even if intended only as a warning, such statements were unacceptable, since they could be interpreted as giving official authorization to summary executions.
Amnesty International called for the release of Bozor Sobir and for a judicial review of the cases of Dzhumaboy Niyazov and Nuriddin Sadiriddinov. It called on the government to ensure that detainees were not subjected to torture or any other form of ill-treatment. It called for a review of the case of Adzhik Aliyev on the grounds that he may not have received a fair trial. It urged commutation of all pending death sentences and continued to call for complete abolition of the death penalty.
In August Amnesty International wrote to the leaders of the Democratic and Islamic Renaissance Parties, as representatives of the self-proclaimed "Govemment-in-exile of the Republic of Tadzhikistan". Amnesty International expressed concern about the reported deliberate and arbitrary killings of captured government soldiers and civilian residents of Sarigor and made clear its total condemnation of such deliberate and arbitrary killings and hostage-taking. It called on the party leaders to ensure that all armed forces subordinate to or acting with the approval of the "govem-ment-in-exile" fully respect human rights and the basic humanitarian standards set out in the Geneva Conventions and other relevant international standards.
In May Amnesty International published a report, Tadzhikistan: Hidden ferror - political killings, torture and "disappearances" since December 1992. The press centre of the Interior Ministry responded in June by denouncing Amnesty International as an organization whose main aim was "the publication and dissemination of slanderous material". Amnesty International published a further report, Tadzhikistan: Human rights violations against opposition activists, in October.
In an oral statement to the UN Sub-Com-mission on Prevention of Discrimination
TADZHIKISTAN/TAIWAN
284 and Protection of Minorities in August, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns in Tadzhikistan, including "disappearances" and political killings.
