UZBEKISTAN
Several convicted prisoners of conscience received suspended prison sentences or were released under an amnesty. A probable prisoner of conscience already serving a prison term was tried on new charges and given an additional prison sentence. Two opposition activists arrested on firearms possession charges were probable prisoners of conscience. Government opponents were assaulted by unidentified attackers, possibly with official complicity. An opposition leader was feared to have "disappeared". At least four people faced the death penalty.
In January the Supreme Court suspended the activities of the opposition movement Birlik (Unity) for three months on the grounds that it intended to organize public demonstrations. Later Birlik was effectively outlawed after it failed to satisfy the terms of a March decree requiring all political organizations to re-register by I October. The main opposition party, Erk (Freedom), also reportedly failed to reregister. A ban on unauthorized public meetings and demonstrations imposed in 1990 remained in force.
Six men were convicted in August by the Supreme Court of "conspiracy with the aim of seizing power" (Article 54 of the Criminal Code). The charges arose from their activities as organizers of a non-viol-ent social organization called Milli Mejlis, National Council (see Amnesty International Report 1993). They received suspended sentences of between one and five years' imprisormient. The suspended sentences resulted in the release of three defendants, Babur Shakirov and Khazratkul
Khudayberdi, who had been in pre-trial detention since August and December 1992 respectively, and Salavat Umurzakov, who had been held since May 1993. Two others, Olim Karimov and Otanazar Aripov, had already been released after spending several weeks in detention after their arrests in December 1992 and January 1993 respectively. All were prisoners of conscience. The sixth defendant, Abdulaziz Makhmu-dov, was not held in pre-trial detention.
Abdumannob Pulatov, a prisoner of conscience who had been abducted from Kyrgyzstan in December 1992 by Uzbek se-ciu-ity officials (see Amnesty International Report 1993), was tried in the Supreme Coiul in January. He was charged with "infringement upon the honour and dignity of the President", under Article 191-4 of the Criminal Code. He was sentenced to three years' imprisonment but was immediately granted an amnesty and released. In February Vasilya Inayatova, a poet, was tried in the City Court of Tashkent, the capital, on the same charge and sentenced to two years' imprisonment. She was also immediately released under an amnesty.
Several opposition activists were detained for short periods, apparently to prevent them meeting visiting foreign dignitaries or travelling abroad. On 13 September, for example, Otanazar Aripov and at least one other person were taken into police custody to prevent them meeting a visiting us government representative.
Probable prisoner of conscience Pulat Akhunov, who was serving a sentence of 18 months' imprisonment for an allegedly fabricated criminal offence (see Amnesty /nfernaiiona/ Report 1993), was charged in February with illegal possession of narcotics and assault on a prison guard. Unofficial sources alleged that these new charges were also fabricated. In August Pulat Akhunov was convicted by Andizhan Regional Court and sentenced to a further three years' imprisonment. In September he was sent to serve his sentence at a labour camp for especially dangerous criminals at Kyzylteppa, Navoi Region. Sources described conditions at this camp as the worst in Uzbekistan,
In November Birlik activists and probable prisoners of conscience Nosyr Zokhir and Akhmadkhon Turakhonboy-ugly were arrested separately on the same day after a single hand grenade was found in each of their homes in Namangan during police
UZBEKISTAN/VENEZUELA
searches. Unofficial sources alleged that security forces planted the grenades in order to fabricate criminal charges against these two men.
There were at least three further incidents which followed a pattern reported in 1992 in which government opponents were assaulted by unidentified attackers. There were allegations that the attacks were carried out with the complicity of the authorities. In May Shukhrat Ismatullayev, co-chairman of BirUk, suffered a fractured skull after three men hit him with iron bars in a Tashkent street. In September Shukrulla Mirsaidov, Uzbekistan's Vice-President until he resigned in 1992, was severely beaten in a Tashkent street by five men whom he alleged were government agents. In October Samat Muratov, first secretary of Erk, was seized from a street in the town of Keo-shi and driven to a rubbish dump, where he was beaten unconscious. Furthermore, in November three political exiles from Uzbekistan were attacked in their apartment in Moscow by suspected Uzbek government agents.
There was no news of Abdullo Utayev, leader of the unregistered Islamic Renaissance Party, who apparently "disappeared" after being detained in Tashkent in December 1992 by armed men believed to be government agents. The authorities denied holding him.
The Uzbekistan Criminal Code retained the death penalty for 19 peacetime offences as well as others in wartime. No new death sentences were reported, but one person convicted in 1991 and one convicted in 1992 were still under sentence of death at the end of 1993. The fate of two others convicted in 1992 and known to be under sentence of death at the beginning of 1993 could not be confirmed.
Amnesty International appealed to President Islam Karimov for the release of all prisoners of conscience, and for all possible steps to be taken to end attacks on opposition figures for exercising their fundamental human rights. It called for the repeal of Article 191-4 of the Criminal Code which appeared to place unwarranted restrictions on freedom of expression. Amnesty International called for a judicial review of Pulat Akhunov's criminal convictions and expressed concern that he had been placed in the Kyzylteppa colony deliberately to put him at risk of violence from fellow inmates. It sought further
information on the charges against Nosyr Zokhir and Akhmadkhon Turakhonboy-ugly. It called on the authorities to clarify the whereabouts and legal status of Abdullo Utayev. Amnesty International continued to press the authorities to abolish the death penalty.
Amnesty International sought to send an observer to the trials of the Milli Mejlis organizers and of Pulat Akhunov. No reply was received to a request for official support for a visa application.
In June Amnesty International published a report, Uzbekistan: Clampdown on dissent, and in September it published Uzbekistan: Clampdown on dissent - an update: prisoners of conscience on trial.
