GERMANY
There was a marked increase in the number of reports of police ill-treatment; most of the victims were foreign nationals. Police officers were also accused of failing to protect the victims of racist attacks in previous years. At least one prisoner detained under anti-terrorist legislation was held in prolonged isolation. One person was shot in disputed circumstances. An
amendment to the Constitution and a new law on asylum procedures came into force, severely restricting the right to seek asylum in Germany.
The Federal Republic of Germany acceded to the (First) Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in August.
In September the Berlin Regional Court sentenced three former senior East German officials—former Defence Minister Heinz Kessler, his deputy, Fritz Streletz, and district Communist party leader Hans Albrecht—to prison sentences of between four and a half and seven and a half years for their part in kiUings at the border between the two Germanies before 1989. Proceedings against other senior figures, including former East German head of state Erich Honecker, were stopped earlier in the year on grounds of ill-health.
There was a marked increase in the number of reports of police ill-treatment; most of the victims were foreign nationals. In January Habib J., an Iranian student who had been granted asvlum in 1988, alleged that after being assaulted bv a bus driver in Berlin he was violently arrested by the police and later taken to a police station where he was hit and racially abused by •officers. A witness confirmed that she had seen the bus driver assault Habib }. and also seen officers violently throw the victim into the back of a police van.
In September the Bremen prosecuting authorities rejected a complaint lodged by Mehmet S., a 14-year-old Turkish Kurd, that he had been ill-treated by police in March 1992 (see Amnesty International Report 1993). According to the Bremen Ministrv of Justice, the investigation into Mehmet S.'s complaint had failed to
GERMANY
establish how his injuries had occurred or who had been responsible for them. Mehmet S'. successfully' appealed, against the decision to close the investigation and it was reopened in November.
. Police officers were also accused of failing-to protect victims of racist attacks.. In' January it was alleged that the police in Rostock had withdrawn from the scene of racist attacks on an asylum hostel in August 1992, .following negbtiations- with rioters, despite being aware that over 100 Vietnamese housed next to..the hostel would be left in danger.' During the-pólice, •withdrawal rioters set - fire to (he hostel forcing those inside-to escape on to the roof of the building. These allegations 'were made .during an inquiry, into the events of August 1992 by the parliament of Mecklen-burg-West Ponierania. "	' . - -
In March three police- officers, who had failed to intervene during a racist attack on Amadeu Antonio Kio.wa. an Angolan national, in November 1990 (see Amnesty International Report 1993), were charged with causing him bodily harm leading to his death.
In February two German victims of police ill-treatment were awarded compensation by the Hamburg Regional Court. Lutz Priebe had alleged that in August 1989 officers at Station 16 in the St Pauli district of Hamburg had' struck his face against the edge.of a counter, breaking his nose. Frank Fennel had alleged that in July 1991 officers from the same station had punched, kicked and hit him with batons; as a result he was in hospital for a week. No criminal charges were brought against any of the police officers involved in the two incidents.
At least one prisoner detained under anti-terrorist legislation was held in prolonged isolation. Such isolation may have serious physical and psychological effects on prisoners and may constitute cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Birgit Hogefeld was arrested in June in Bad Kleinen in northern Germany during a police operation in which suspected Red Army Faction member Wolfgang Grams and a police officer died. In July she was transferred from Frankfurt to Bielefeld prison where she reportedly had no contact with her fellow prisoners. A decision of the Federal High Court in July prohibited Birgit Hogefeld from participating in church services or any other communal activities.
In the same police operation, Wolfgang Grams was shot dead following a gun battle with members of the gsg-9 anti-terrorist unit at Bad Kleinen railway station. According to eye-witness reports. Wolf-, gang Grams was shot in iHe head at close range by a.member of the unit as he lay - motibnlciss on the ground.
On "I July an amendment to the German Constitution [Grimdgesetz or Basic Law) and. a new asylum law came into effect. 'Prior to this date anyone claiming asylum had the right to receive a full examination of their claim with.rights of appeal in the courts. Since 1 July- people who travel to Germany throiigh. countries where they could have claimed .asylum, are deriied the right of asylum ih Germany. These "so-called "safe" third countries include'the' member states, of the European'Union (eu) and other specified countries which are party to and apply the. .1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and the' European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms". including all countries which share borders with Germany. The measures also restrict the right to asylum in Germany for people, who have come from countries of origin (listed in the law) where they are presumed not. to risk human rights violations. Asylum-seekers can rebut this only in an accelerated asylum procedure which has limited appeal rights and which does not contain all the safeguards nec.essary to ensure the protection of those at risk.
In June Amnesty International asked the Berlin authorities whether charges had been brought against the officers accused of ill-trpating Habib J. In the same month, the organization was informed that investigations were still continuing into complaints brought against tho police officers involved, against the bus driver and against Habib J. himself
In February Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Justice of Mecklen-burg-West Pomerania expressing concern that police officers may have failed in their duty to protect Vietnamese citizens during the Rostock riots. It urged that a thorough and speedy investigation take place into allegations about their actions: some of those allegations had been made for the first time during a parliamentary inquiry. In May the organization was informed that an investigation into the actions of the minister responsible during the riots and of
GERMANY/GHANA
senior police officers was continuing.
In October Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Justice of Brandenburg expressing concern about the delay in judicial proceedings against the three officers accused of failing to come to the assistance of Amadeu Antonio Kiowa. Charges against the officers had been brought more than six months previously. In December the Minister of Justice of Brandenburg informed Amnesty International that a Berlin court had ordered further investigations to be conducted by the prosecuting authorities before it could decide whether the officers in question should be tried.
In a letter to the Hamburg authorities in March Amnesty International expressed concern about reports it had received that officers based at Station 16 had ill-treated people in their custody. In May it asked whether, following the rulings by the Hamburg Regional Court, charges would be brought against the officers who ill-treated Lutz Priebe and Frank Fennel. In the same month Amnesty International was informed that the rulings in the two cases would be examined to find out whether there were grounds for reopening investigations. Later in the year the organization learned that this re-examination had not resulted in charges being brought against the officers who had assaulted Lutz Priebe and Frank Fennel.
In December Amnesty International wrote to the Federal Ministry of Justice about the prolonged isolation of Birgit Hogefeld. The organization asked whether the restrictions on her association with other prisoners remained in force and whether a review of them was planned. Amnesty International also asked what measures the prison authorities had taken to alleviate the physical and psychological effects of prolonged isolation on Birgit Hogefeld.
In a letter to the Schwerin Public Procurator in July. Amnesty International expressed concern about the circumstances surrounding the shooting of Wolfgang Grams. The organization noted that many of the statements made by government, justice and police officials following the incident had been confusing and in some cases contradictory. The organization pointed out the relevant international standards regarding the use of force and the deprivation of life and urged that the inquiry into the death of Wolfgang Grams
be as wide-ranging as possible. The Schwerin Public Procurator informed Amnesty International that he was unable to give any details about the investigation into Wolfgang Grams' death.
In March Amnesty International appealed to members of the Bundestag (the lower house of parliament) not to adopt the amendment to the Constitution and the new asylum law. The organization expressed concern that countries which had serious deficiencies in asylum procedures, or which still had fragile systems for refugee protection, had been specified as "safe" third countries. It also expressed concern about the systematic use of a list of "safe" countries of origin and that asylum-seekers from such countries would have their claims examined in an inadequate and accelerated procedure.
In June Amnesty International published a report. The alleged ill-treatment of foreigners in the Federal Republic of Germany: A summary of recent concerns.
