SYRIA
Over 500 long-term political detainees, including prisoners of conscience, appeared before the Supreme State Security Court (sssc) whose procedures fall far short of international fair trial standards. Dozens of defendants were sentenced to lengthy prison terms; most hearings were still in progress at the end of the year. Several thousand other political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, remained held. Some were serving prison sentences, but most were held without charge or trial under state of emergency legislation that had been in force for over 30 years. Other political prisoners continued to be detained beyond the expiry of their sentences. Torture of detainees continued to be reported. At least 14 people were executed.
In April the People's Council (parliament) passed a law to make it an offence punishable by death to produce or traffic in drugs. This took effect in July but no one was known to have been sentenced under it by the end of the year.
Trials of suspected government opponents before the sssc, which began in 1992 (see Amnesty International Report 1993), continued throughout 1993. Over 500 long-term political detainees, including prisoners of conscience, appeared before the sssc charged with membership of. or activities linked with, various unauthorized political parties and organizations. Some were charged with offences which carry the death penalty. All the defendants had been arrested between 1980 and 1992 and held without charge or trial. By the end of the year dozens had been sentenced to lengthy prison terms, but the cases of the others
were still in progress.
Those sentenced were all convicted of membership of or links with Hizb al-'Amal al-Shuyu'i (pca), the Party for Communist Action, and were given prison terms ranging from three to 15 years. All were denied the right of appeal as the sssc's verdicts are final. They included Rustum Ahmad Rustum and Malik al-As'ad, both prisoners of conscience, who were each sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment. Both had been detained since 1982.
Most of the defendants whose trials were still in progress were charged with having links with the pca; a!-Hizb al-Shuyu'i al-Maktab al-Siyassi (cppb), the Communist Party Political Bureau: Hizb al-Ba'th al-Dimuqrati al-Ishtiraki al-'Arabi (asdbp), the Arab Socialist Democratic Ba'th Party; Hizb al-Ittihad al-'Arabi al-Ishtiraki fi-Suriya, the Arab Socialist Union Party in Syria; al-Tanzim al-Sha'bi al-Dimuqrati al-Nasiri, the Nasserist Democratic Popular Organization; and Kurdish organizations. The defendants included prisoners of conscience such as Mufid Mi'mari, a teacher accused of supporting the cppb, and Usama 'Ashur al-'Askari, a student charged for having links with the pca. They had been held since 1980 and 1982 respectively.
Most of the defendants, including those who were convicted and sentenced, were represented by volunteer lawyers, although the majority of those charged in connection with the cppb were said to have refused legal representation in protest against their trial before the sssc. All had been denied access to legal assistance in lengthy pretrial detention, including during interrogation by the sssc prosecutor in preparation for the court hearings. The defendants first had contact with their lawyers during their initial appearance in court for questioning. Invariably, the lawyers had no prior access to their clients' files and were not aware of specific accusations brought against them. Access to this information was granted only after the defendants' first appearance before the court. In some cases lawyers were denied the right to meet their clients in private or to call defence witnesses. Access to the trial was mostly limited to defendants' relatives, but some sessions were attended by Amnesty International observers who visited Syria in May.
All those detained as suspected supporters of the asdbp were referred for trial
SYRIA
except Ahmad Suwaidani, a former diplomat and member of the Ba'th Party Regional Command who has been held without charge or trial since 1969. Similarly, those detained in connection with the cppb were referred for trial with the exception of the organization's first secretary, Riad al-Turk, who remained in detention without charge or trial. In August he was reportedly allowed the first visit by his family since his arrest in 1980.
Several thousand other political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, continued to be held. Ten of them, all prisoners of conscience, were serving prison sentences imposed in 1992 (see Amnesty International Report 1993] but the overwhelming majority were detained without charge or trial.
One of the 10 sentenced prisoners of conscience, Nizar Nayyuf, a sociologist serving a 10-year sentence, reportedly staged a hunger-strike in February in protest against conditions in Sadnaya Prison. He was said to have been transferred to Tadmur Prison where conditions are known to be particularly harsh. The other nine were believed to be still held in Sadnaya Prison at the end of 1993, They included Aktham Nu'aysa, a lawyer serving a nine-year sentence, who was reported to be in poor health.
Those who remained held without charge or trial included suspected members or sympathizers of unauthorized organizations. former government officials, members of professional associations, Palestinians and Lebanese nationals. Most of them had been held for many years.
Eight prisoners of conscience, all former members of the official Ba'th Party, including former government ministers, continued to be detained without charge or trial since their arrest between 1970 and 1972 (see previous Amnesty Internationa! Reports). All were said to be in poor health. One of them, Salah ladid, a former Chief-of-Staff of the Syrian army and senior official of the Ba'th Party, died in custody in August in al-Mezze Military Prison after almost 23 years in detention. The authorities said he died of natural causes, although there was no independent autopsy or inquest into his death. Salah Jadid was the third prisoner in this group to die within nine months. The other two were Dr Nur al-Din al-Attassi, a former President of Syria, and Muhammad Rabah al-Tawil, a
I
former Minister of Interior, who died in December 1992 and April 1993 respectively, months after their release in August
1992.	Six other prisoners of conscience from the same group were released in
1993,	including Hakem al-Faiz and Kamil Hussain who had been detained since 1971.
Most uncharged political detainees were held for their alleged cormections with al-Ikhwan aI-Mus!imun. the Muslim Brotherhood (see previous Amnesty International Reports). Most remained in incommunicado detention and their whereabouts were unknown. They included Muhammad Zahed Derkal, who was said to have been arrested in mid-1980 in the Abu Khair Mosque in Damascus. His whereabouts remained unknown until 1986 when former prisoners reported that he was held in Tadmur Prison. It was not known whether he was still held there. There was new information suggesting that Bara al-Sarraj, held since 1984 for alleged links with the Muslim Brotherhood, had been sentenced in 1989 to 20 years' imprisonment. No details about his trial or whereabouts were available,
Dozens of members of professional associations, notably doctors and engineers, were believed to be still held without charge or trial following their arrest in 1980 (see previous Amnesty Internationa! Reports). They included Tawfiq Draq al-Siba'i, a medical doctor who was arrested in Homs in 1980. His whereabouts were unknown. In May the SSSC concluded that the case against an engineer, Salim Khir-bik, had elapsed and he was released.
Scores of Lebanese nationals and Palestinians arrested in previous years in Lebanon or Syria as suspected members of Lebanese and Palestinian political organizations remained held (see Amnesty International Report 1993). Most were held incommunicado and their whereabouts were unknown. They included a Lebanese national, Elias Yusuf al-Souri, who was arrested in 1980 in Beirut and has since been held in Syria.
Other political prisoners continued to be detained beyond the expiry of their sentences without further charges being brought against them. They included Mah-mud Muhammad al-Fayyad, an army officer, whose 15-year prison sentence expired in 1985. He was believed to be in al-Mezze Military Prison.
SYRI/V/TADZHIKISTAN
Torture of political detainees reportedly remained common with methods including beatings on all parts of the body; falaqa (beatings on the soles of the feet); and dul-¡ab (the "tyre" method — hanging the victim from a suspended tyre and beating him or her with sticks and cables). Many of the defendants who appeared before the sssc testified that they had been tortm-ed in previous years and that confessions made dvu--ing interrogation were extracted under duress. However, the court did not order medical examinations for such defendants or investigations into their allegations.
At least 14 people were executed. Nine had been convicted of rape and murder and five others, who were executed in May, had been convicted of setting fire to al-Hasaka Prison in March, causing the deaths of 57 inmates and injuring others. The speed with which the five were tried, sentenced and executed may have undermined the additional guarantees and safeguards required by intemational standards in death penalty cases.
New information was received suggesting that two political prisoners, Al-Hakam Karkoukli and Muhammad Jamal Tayyem, had been sentenced to death in 1980. No details were available about their trial or whether the sentences had been carried out.
Amnesty Intemational continued to appeal for the immediate and unconditional release of all prisoners of conscience, for all other political prisoners to receive fair and prompt trials or be released, for impartial investigation of all torture allegations and deaths in detention, and for an end to the use of the death penalty. Unlike in previous years. Amnesty Intemational received a number of replies from the Syrian authorities giving information in response to some of Amnesty International's queries.
In May two Amnesty Intemational representatives visited Syria and observed some of the proceedings of the sssc (see above). In meetings with government officials they urged the authorities to release all prisoners of conscience, drew attention to evidence of torture and other irregularities in the pre-trial detention of those being tried before the sssc, and called for such defendants to be given fair trials or released.
Officials told Amnesty International's delegates that torture was not tolerated in Syria and that some members of the security forces were serving long prison
sentences for having used torture, but no details were provided either of such cases or of any investigations into torture mounted by the Syrian authorities.
In an oral statement to the un Commission on Human Rights in February, Amnesty International included reference to its concems about arbitrary detention under the State of Emergency Law in Syria. In April Amnesty Intemational submitted information about its concems in Syria for un review under a procedure established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728f/1503, for confidential consideration of communications about human rights violations.
