ITALY
There were new allegations of ill-treat-ment of detainees and prisoners by law enforcement and prison officers. Several inquiries were under way into such allegations.
A series of judicial investigations begun in 1992 into political corruption implicated over 3,000 people, including former prime ministers and government ministers, discrediting all the major political parties which had participated in government since 1945. In April a national referendum voted to reform the electoral system and. at the request of the President of the Republic, Oscar Luigi Scalfaro, the Governor of the Bank of Italy, Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, took office as Prime Minister and formed a new government.
Responsibility for a series of bomb attacks which took place in Florence, Milan and Rome during the year, killing 10 people, was claimed by Falange Armata, Armed Falange. Little was known about this group. However, there was widespread speculation that Falange Armata was a cover name for a secret alliance of elements within state and public institutions working in collaboration with organized crime to impede the process of political and institutional reform resulting from the judicial investigations into corruption. Extremist political groups were also suspected of involvement in the bombings and other apparent attempts to destabilize the country.
After repeated delays parliament reexamined a bill reforming the existing system of conscientious objection to compulsory military service. The bill had been approved by parliament in January 1992 but rejected by the then President of the
ITALY
Republic, who had returned it for further consideration. At the end of the year a new text, substantially similar to the 1992 text, had been approved by the Chamber of Deputies (the lower chamber of parliament) and was awaiting consideration by the Senate.
In February a majority of the Chamber of Deputies put forward a bill, whose terms had been drawn up with input from Amnesty International, proposing the elimination of the death penalty from the Wartime Military Penal Code, thus abolishing the death penalty for all offences. The Chamber of Deputies approved the bill in July and at the end of the year an analogous bill was awaiting examination by the Senate.
Numerous allegations of ill-treatment by prison officers were made by prisoners held in connection with common criminal offences, including Mafia-related activities; some of the allegations related to incidents in 1992. They were frequently accompanied by reports of severe overcrowding, poor sanitation, inadequate medical assistance and increased tension within the prisons. The most common forms of ill-treatment alleged were repeated kicks and punches as well as sustained beatings with batons, sometimes inflicted on groups of prisoners.
From late 1992 onwards lawyers, newspapers, parliamentary deputies and a parliamentary committee for prison affairs reported receiving allegations from inmates at Secondigliano prison, Naples, who said that they were subjected to "systematic beatings and gratuitous ill-treatment" by prison guards. In April the commandant of the prison guards and five superintendents were temporarily suspended from duty in connection with possible criminal charges, including abuse of authority, striking prisoners and committing perjury. The commandant had allegedly instigated the beating of inmates by prison guards, opened prisoners' outgoing letters and threatened them with violence if they failed to remove passages referring to ill-treatment. It was reported that by June over 100 guards were under investigation in connection with the alleged ill-treatment.
There were also further allegations of ill-treatment by law enforcement officers, often concerning people of non-European ethnic origin.
Mahrez Chanouf, a Tunisian, and Salim Sfouli, an Egyptian, were arrested by Milan
police on 19 August after a car chase which ended when they ran into a police car and crashed into a tree. Anonymous callers to a local radio station, who claimed they had witnessed the arrests, alleged that the two men had been dragged from a car, handcuffed and repeatedly kicked and punched for around 20 minutes while on the ground by over a dozen male and female police officers. When Mahrez Chanouf and Salim Sfouli appeared in court the following day accused of stealing a car and resisting arrest, they reportedly displayed cuts and bruises and alleged that they had been repeatedly kicked and punched by numerous police officers, both on the street and later in the police station. A forensic examination confirmed their injuries but was apparently unable to determine their cause.
At a further hearing on 25 August, four officers who had participated in the car chase and had been the first at the scene of arrest told the court that the detainees had tried to assault them and escape. A witness testified in court that she had seen the two detainees being beaten by the police and that they had made no attempt to escape. The court found that the statements made by the police officers contained clear contradictions and were unreliable. Mahrez Chanouf and Salim Sfouli were acquitted of resisting arrest and the charge of car theft was apparently dropped. The affair was referred to the Public Prosecutor's office for further investigation regarding possible charges against Mahrez Chanouf and Salim Sfouli of insulting the police and damaging property, and regarding possible charges against the four police officers of abusing their authority and committing perjury.
Amnesty International made inquiries throughout the year about official steps being taken to investigate allegations of ill-treatment and about the progress and outcome of inquiries opened into such allegations. The authorities supplied no information concerning allegations of ill-treatment made during 1993 but the Ministry of the Interior informed Amnesty International that Daud Addawe Ali, a Somali citizen who alleged he had been ill-treated by police in Rome in 1992 (see Amnesty International Report 1993), had violently resisted arrest. The Ministry denied that he had been ill-treated or suffered injuries and stated that the case had been
ITALY/JAMAICA
passed to the judicial authorities. These authorities did not respond to Amnesty International's requests for further information.
Amnesty International welcomed the reforms contained in the proposed legislation on conscientious objection but expressed concern that the text made no provision for conscientious objection developed after joining the armed forces. It reiterated its belief that conscientious objectors to military service should be able to seek conscientious objector status at any time. It also welcomed the moves taken towards abolishing the death penalty.
