BRAZIL
As in previous years hundreds of adolescents, street children and other people were killed by the police and death squads in the major cities; others "disappeared". Peasants and indigenous people continued to be extrajudicially executed or to "disappear" in rural areas and the Amazonian rain forest. There were further reports of torture and ill-treatment in police custody. Human rights workers received death threats.
By the end of the year the country was in deep political and economic crisis, with inflation running at over 35 per cent a month and widespread allegations of corruption against several leading members of Congress.
Hundreds of adolescents, street children and adults were killed by the police and death squads, which often included off-duty police officers, in Rio de Janeiro and other cities. According to official figures, 328 children and adolescents were killed
in Rio de Janeiro state alone during the first half of 1993.
In July, eight street children and young people aged between 10 and 20 were killed when hooded men fired on a group of over 50 street children sleeping rough in the vicinity of Candelaria church, in the centre of Rio de Janeiro. Four boys died instantly, a fifth was killed as he ran away and two others were shot dead in nearby gardens. Another youth, Marcos Antonio Alves da Silva, died of his wounds four days later. Following a national and international outcry, three military police officers were charged with the killings. They had not stood trial by the end of the year.
In November two youths, Marcos José do Espirilo Santo, aged 17. and Hemisfério Peres Ferreira, aged 16, were apparently extrajudicially executed in the town of Varzea Grande, Mato Grosso state. According to testimonies, the two youths were taken in a police car, together with two other boys, to a lake near the town where they were shot dead and their bodies thrown into the water. The two other boys, who witnessed the killings, were later released unharmed. Although a civil and a military police inquiry were opened into the killings, by the end of the year nobody had been charged with the murders and the police officers suspected of the crime continued on active duty.
In January Edméia da Silva Eugenio and a friend, Sheila da Conceigao, were shot dead in broad daylight by two men in downtown Rio de Janeiro. Edméia da Silva Eugenio was the mother of Luiz Henrique da Silva, one of 11 youths abducted in July 1990 from a farm in Magé, Rio de Janeiro, allegedly with the involvement of civil and military police officers, and whose fate was unknown (see Amnesty International Report 1991]. She had been campaigning for an investigation to locate the youths and had received repeated death threats.
In March Reinaldo Silva was extrajudicially executed by a group of over 40 imiformed military police officers who stormed the hospital in Corumba, Mato Grosso do Sul state, and shot him in his hospital bed. He was under police guard and receiving treatment for a bullet wound sustained in a gun battle in which he had allegedly killed an off-duty police officer.
Also in March a local councillor was extrajudicially executed. Renildo losé dos Santos was abducted from his home in
BRAZIL
Coqueiro Séco, Alagoas state, by a group of heavily armed men believed to be off-duty military police officers. His headless body, which bore marks of torture, was found two days later on waste ground. Renildo José dos Santos had repeatedly denounced death threats which he had been receiving since 1989. He attributed the threats to political differences with local politicians and to his homosexuality which he had publicly acknowledged.
In August, 21 people were killed when over 30 hooded and heavily armed men attacked the shanty town of Vigano Geral, Rio de Janeiro, for two hours during which they shot indiscriminately at local residents. Among the dead were seven men playing cards in a bar and eight members of a family, including a 15-year-old girl. Twenty-eight military policemen, three civil policemen and two members of the state public security department were charged with the killings but had not been brought to trial by the end of the year. The attack was reportedly committed in revenge for the killing two days earlier of four military police officers, allegedly by drug traffickers based in the shanty town.
Also in August Jorge Carelli, an employee of the state-owned Oswaldo Cruz Medical Foundation, "disappeared" after witnesses reportedly saw him being beaten and then detained by police during a raid in the shanty town of Varguinha, Rio de Janeiro. The police denied that they had detained him and his whereabouts remained unknown.
During the year some action was taken by the authorities in relation to killings in previous years. In March a military court charged 120 members of the Sao Paulo military police with homicide, attempted homicide and causing injuries while on active duty. The charges related to the killing of 111 prisoners in October 1992 during a disturbance at the House of Detention prison in Sao Paulo (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1993). None of those charged had been brought to trial by the end of the year. The national and international outcry caused by the prison massacre was followed by a sharp fall in the number of people killed by the military police in Sao Paulo city, from an average of 114 a month in the first five months of 1992 to an average of 27 a month over the same period in 1993.
In May the courts upheld a 21-year
prison sentence given to a man convicted of acting as an intermediary in the killing of lawyer and former state deputy Paulo Fontelles de Lima in June 1987 in Para state (see Amnesty International Report 1988]. In September and December a police investigator and a prison guard were respectively sentenced to a total of 516 years' and to 45 years' imprisonment for ordering 51 prisoners to be locked in a nearly airless punishment cell in a Sao Paulo prison, causing 18 deaths, in February 1989 (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
Peasants and indigenous people were killed in rural areas and the Amazonian rain forest; others "disappeared". The abuses continued against a background of government failure to investigate past or current violations or to take action to protect those in danger.
In January Màrcia Maria Eugenio de Carvalho, a lawyer who frequently defended rural workers in labour suits against local landowners, was killed by unknown gunmen who ambushed her car near Recife, the state capital of Pemambuco. A friend travelling with her was also killed.
In February Antonio Inacio Faria and Luis Rodrigues dos Santos "disappeared" in the mxmicipality of Conceigao de Araguaia, Farà state. They were among a group of peasants who had occupied land on a local estate. They "disappeared" on 9 February shortly before the peasants and local rural union representatives were due to meet to discuss the protest. Friends who went to meet the two men at Luis Rodrigues dos Santos' hut found an unfinished meal and signs of struggle, as well as prints of boots similar to those used by the military police.
In March Diniz Bento Teixeira da Silva, a leader of the Movimento dos Traba!hadares Sem Terra (mst). Landless Peasants' Movement, in Campo Bonito, Paraná state, was reportedly extrajudicially executed after surrendering to military police. He had been wanted by the police for allegedly killing three military policemen.
In June Amancio Francisco Dias, president of the Rural Workers' Union of Belém de Maria, Pemambuco state, was killed in circumstances indicating that he may have been extrajudicially executed. He was reportedly shot dead in his home in Belém de Maria by two men who claimed they wanted advice on labour matters. He had allegedly received several death threats in
BRAZIL
the weeks prior to his killing. According to the Roman Catholic Church's Land Pastoral Commission, Amando Francisco Dias was the seventh rural worker to have been assassinated in Fernambuco in 1993.
In July and August at least 16 Yanomami Indians were killed during a series of attacks by gold prospectors [garimpeiros) on the village of Haximu. In early July, four Yanomami men were killed and one wounded by the garimpeiros. Yanomami Indians subsequently killed two garimpeiros in separate incidents. In retaliation, on 22 or 23 July, garimpeiros killed 12 Yanomami women, teenage girls, children and an old man collecting fruit while the Yanomami men were away visiting another village. A police investigation revealed that the killings had occurred on the Venezuelan side of the border, but arrest warrants were issued for 19 Brazilian garimpeiros who had illegally invaded the Yanomami reserve. To Amnesty International's knowledge, of 16 cases of killings of Yanomami Indians recorded between 1984 and 1992 in which police investigations were actually opened, not one had resulted in a conviction.
The Assistant Attorney General of the Republic reportedly stated that his office was investigating 173 cases of rural murder involving paid gunmen. Of these, the office found that 72 cases involved military policemen and eight involved members of the civil police. In almost no cases of killings of peasants and rural leaders recorded over the years have the alleged perpetrators been detained or tried. In three trials that finally did take place - for the murder of indigenous leader Margal de Souza Guaraní in 1983 (see Amnesty Irìterrìotional Report 1984], and the 1988 murders of trade union president José Francisco Avelino and of two Macuxi Indians, Damiao Mendes and Mario Davis — the accused were all acquitted.
In February Darci Alves da Silva and Darli Alves da Silva, respectively convicted of and charged with the murder of the rubber tappers' leader Francisco "Chico" Mendes (see Amnesty Internationa! Reports 1989 to 1991), escaped from jail in Rio Branco, Acre state. This was the latest in a number of similar escapes over the years by people imprisoned in connection with serious human rights violations.
There were new reports of torture and ill-treatment in police custody. In April in Fortaleza, Ceará state, a commission of
inquiry into torture in police stations came across police officers torturing Antonio Ferreira Braga, a criminal suspect, in a police station. It also found a stock of instruments of torture. The local branch of the Brazilian Bar Association subsequently published a dossier containing 26 well-documented cases of torture, including two deaths in custody in the state. This revealed a disturbing pattern of impunity: police officers previously implicated in torture had been allowed to remain in office and the Public Ministry had failed to mount proper investigations. Following the commission of inquiry's initial findings, the local police chief and four police officers were suspended, the state Secretary of Public Security was dismissed, the Civil Police Statute was altered and a new State Security Council was set up.
In September Osorio Barbosa de Barros, a rural worker, was taken to the police station of Xinguara, Pard state, to be interrogated as a witness to a murder. He alleged that during four days of questioning he was beaten, suffocated and given electric shocks. He was then released but was unable to work for nearly three weeks owing to the injuries he had sustained.
Human rights workers were harassed and threatened with death. In April Pedro Horacio Caballero, a priest who worked with street children in the Cathedral Square, Sao Paulo, was verbally abused, threatened and beaten by military police when he attempted to stop them beating a street child. In July sister Elsa Rosa Zotti and other Franciscan nuns who work with indigenous people in Escondido, Mato Grosso state, reportedly received death threats. The threats were believed to have been initiated by local landowners and agents of lumber companies, because of the nuns' defence of Indian rights, and the authorities made no attempt to bring those responsible to justice.
Amnesty International repeatedly expressed concern to the government about alleged extrajudicial executions, "disappearances", torture and threats against human rights workers and others.
In January Amnesty International published a report, BrazH: 'We are the land' -Indigenous peoples' struggle for human rights. In May the organization issued another report, Brazil: 'Death has arrived' -Prison massacre at the Casa de Deten^do, Sao Paulo. The report concluded that there
BRAZIL/BULGARIA
was compelling evidence to show that military police had killed prisoners in cold blood, the vast majority of them after surrender. In June the Secretary of Justice of Sao Paulo visited Amnesty International's International Secretariat in London to present the state government's formal response to the report. The reply did not contest the report's contents but argued that the state government had done everything in its power to investigate the case. In September Amnesty International urged President Itamar Franco to review the entire structure of the Brazilian police forces and to end the persistent violations committed by the military police in almost all states.
Amnesty International also repeatedly urged the government to ensure the safety of child witnesses in what had become known as the "Candelâria massacre" of street children in July (see above).
In an oral statement to the un Working Group on Indigenous Populations in July. Amnesty International included reference to its concerns in Brazil.
