BOLIVIA
In the past year, 65 new prisoner cases were taken up by Amnesty International in Bolivia. Twenty-seven prisoners under adoption or investigation were released - many into immediate exile - while 45 remain imprisoned. None was formally charged, although most were accused in press statements from the ministry of the interior of "conspiracy" against the government of President Hugo Banzer Suarez. Prisoners include trade union and student leaders, as well as leaders and activists in political groups.
In November 1974 a series of decree laws were promulgated which suspended indefinitely all political parties, trade unions and professional associations and banned all meetings that could in any way be considered political or related to trade unions. However, the trade union movement was not severely
89	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

affected until a meeting of representatives to the labour federation Central Obrera Boliviana (COB) was broken up in the mining town of Oruro on 12 July 1975.
AI cabled President Banzer on 18 July protesting against the arrests on the grounds that they directly contradicted international norms regarding trade union rights and freedom of assembly. Twenty-four of the principal leaders of Bolivian organized labour were detained, and Minister of the Interior Colonel Juan Pereda Asbun alleged that they had conspired "to provoke social chaos and a general strike". Colonel Pereda added that Bolivian authorities "consider no price too high to guarantee the tranquillity needed for the progress of the nation", and that those who attempt to disturb that tranquillity "run the risk of being drastically repressed". All of the detained trade unionists were adopted by AI.
All but five of the prisoners detained at Oruro have now been released or sent into exile. Mirna del Rio, head of the La Paz Teachers' Union, and a representative of her union to the COB, was one of AI's Prisoners of the Month in December. She was released at the end of December but shortly afterward re-arrested and summarily exiled to Chile.
A significant improvement was observed during the first half of the period covered by this report in the reported treatment received by political prisoners. Nearly all of 1975 was characterized by a notable absence of the allegations of torture which had been all too frequent in previous years.
But in December 1975, the detention of nine people for alleged links with guerrilla movements was reported. Among them Antonio Peredo, journalist brother of Inti and Coco Peredo, companions of the Cuban revolutionary Ché Guevara in 1967. Four were Chilean exiles. The gravity of government allegations - despite the fact that no guerrilla activity has been reported in Bolivia for some years - as well as unofficial reports that the prisoners were manacled and subjected to torture, led to actions on their behalf by the Campaign for the Abolition of Torture (CAT) department on 23 December and 9 January.
On 16 February, AI cabled President Banzer requesting information on the detention on 29 January of other alleged guerrilla conspirators. One of them, Serafín Gil Cubreuil, is reported to have died under torture.
In March 1976, Minister of the Interior Pereda Asbun told the newspaper Presencia that Antonio Peredo was not in government custody. This contrasted sharply with an earlier statement by him on 11 December that Antonio Peredo had been detained.
In the face of fears that Antonio Peredo, and other prisoners accused of guerrilla activities may be tortured, or may have died under torture, a CAT appeal was made in April for Antonio Peredo and others detained at the same time.
