THE PHILIPPINES
Since September 1972, The Philippines has been governed under martial law imposed by President Ferdinand Marcos, with the Department of National Defense and military units responsible for almost all aspects of detention of martial law prisoners. Since 1972, more than 50,000 people have been detained
146
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
at one time or other by the martial law authorities.
In November 1975, Thomas C. Jones, an American lawyer and member of the board of Amnesty International's United States Section, went to Manila with Huang Wen-hsien of the Research Department, bpth as AI delegates. The mission discussed questions relating to the imprisonment of martial law detainees with President Marcos, Secretary of National Defense Ponce Enrile, Solicitor General Estelito Mendoza, Commanding General of The Philippines Constabulary Fidel V. Ramos and military officers responsible for martial law detention.
The delegates requested interviews with specific prisoners and interviewed 107 people held without trial in detention centres in Luzon. Of those prisoners interviewed, 71 gave detailed accounts of torture and ill-treatment, especially during the interrogation process. It was clear from their testimony that newly arrested prisoners were likely to be taken out for interrogation by various military intelligence and national security units, often to undesignated houses where the prisoners were subject to brutal treatment. It was a pattern that disclosure of arrest was not made to families of prisoners until a relatively long period had elapsed, and prisoners had extremely restricted access to their lawyers.
Although the government does not publicly discriminate between common law and political prisoners in the generic description of martial law detainees, in practice political prisoners are kept in special detention centers and are investigated by specialized units. Most of the prisoners were alleged to be members of or associated with the Communist Party of The Philippines. It is remarkable that in the four years since the imposition of martial law by President Marcos, not a single case of a prisoner alleged to have taken part in rebellious activity has been concluded in the courts. In many cases the prisoners have merely been charged, while others have not been charged at all. Of those actually brought to trial, no legal proceedings have been concluded to demon-« strate the official case against the prisoners. The mission report was sent on 24 May to President Marcos, together with 15 detailed recommendations for the release of prisoners and the prevention of torture.
The prisoners interviewed by the delegates are being taken up as AI cases. Of the long-standing AI cases, Benigno Aquino was interviewed by the delegates in his prison quarters, to which he was restricted in solitary confinement and which were subject to constant bugging. Mr Aquino said that he could not expect a fair trial before the special military tribunals set up to try cases of political prisoners under martial law. In May 1975, Mr Aquino went on a hunger strike lasting 40 days in protest against his continued detention and his trial before a military tribunal.
