PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF YEMEN
As a result of an Amnesty International legal and research mission to the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen (PDRY - South Yemen) in May/June 1975 (see Annual Report 1974/75), AI submitted a report to President Salem Rubia Ali in October 1975. In the report AI expressed concern at the arbitrary nature of arrests for political offences in South Yemen, the widespread use of short and long term detention without trial and the total inadequacy of basic legal and penal rights. The report noted the many allegations of torture, sometimes resulting in death or nervous or mental disorders, which were difficult to dismiss in the absence of procedural safeguards. It pointed to the frequent use of the death penalty in cases of sabotage, espionage and economic crimes.
AI also drew attention to the large numbers of detained persons who have disappeared and whose families have been unable to trace them. The report further noted the alarming number of incidents of non-judicial executions where groups of political prisoners have been killed "while trying to escape", or where personally motivated or political murders have been committed by members of the police or security forces, or by the National Front, in abuse of their authority.
193	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

AI submitted a number of recommendations with the report, suggesting that the names of all political prisoners be published and that a general amnesty be considered for all untried political detainees against whom the government is not intending to bring immediate charges. Citing norms drawn up by the United Nations, AI recommended the formulation of official detention procedures, as well as independent investigations of interrogation methods, into all allegations of torture, and into incidents of non-judicial executions. AI said compensation should be available to both torture victims and to the families of persons who have been executed without due trial. AI suggested that abolition of the death penalty be considered and, as a first step, that the number of capital offences be reduced.
Finally, AI drew the attention of the government to the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Offenders and recommended that international humanitarian organizations be allowed regular access to all prisons in the country. (AI's delegates to the PDRY had been allowed to visit AI Mansura prison in Aden where conditions are relatively good. The authorities however denied the existence of any other prisons in the country, although AI has collected the names of up to 50 detention centers.)
No response from the government to the report has been received. In May 1976, AI published a Briefing Paper on the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen, partly based on the report and partly on more recently acquired information. The briefing paper considers the legal and judicial system of the country in relation to political offences and the identity of those liable to arrest for political reasons. It estimates the number of political prisoners as fluctuating at any one time between 2,000 and 10,000. It describes detention centers and prison conditions which, apart from AI Mansura prison, reportedly fall far short of the basic minimum requirements.
The paper in addition mentions that the indiscriminate use of torture has apparently lessened since an espionage trial in May 1975 - the first to be held in public - when the defendants publicly alleged severe torture. The paper also refers to the newly drafted penal code promulgated in March 1976 which strongly advocates the observance of basic human rights and which provides for lighter sentences and fewer death penalties for political offences than does previous legislation.
AI groups have been active throughout the year on 17 adoption cases and 12 investigation cases. There has been increased activity for Tawfiq 'Az'azi, a lawyer from Aden who disappeared from his flat on 31 March 1972 after refusing to convict some political detainees. AI's delegates to the PDRY were informed by the director of prisons that he had been released from AI Mansura prison in August 1974 and was now working in the Arabian Gulf. AI, however, after making inquiries into his present whereabouts, has concluded that the person referred to was another with a similar name, and that Tawfiq 'Az'azi is still a "disappeared" person.
Another prisoner, Ali Atif Kalidi, a former federal minister of health sentenced in 1968 to 10 years' imprisonment on charges of high treason and feudalism -and whom AI delegates to the PDRY met in AI Mansura prison - was one of 12 long term detainees publicized during Prisoner of Conscience Week.
Sixteen new cases taken up this year have included Abdul Malik Ismail Muhammad, who had been the PDRY's ambassador to Cairo since December 1972. He was arrested at Aden airport in May 1975, allegedly for his criticism
194
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
of the government's economic policies, and is being held in A1 Fatah camp in Aden. Another case is that of Muzafferali Azimuddin Bukhari, a chartered accountant of Indian nationality, who was arrested three times for refusing to disclose to the authorities the financial affairs of his clients, but who was charged with breach of profession. His last arrest in January 1975 took place as he was, apparently, attempting to leave the country illegally.
A third case is that of Hassan Ali Nouba Auiaqi, a South Yemeni pilot with North Yemeni (Yemen Arab Republic) airlines, arrested in April/May 1973 in the PDRY while visiting his family. AI groups, along with three medical groups in Denmark, Holland and the United States, have taken up the cases of three prisoners held in Al Fatah camp: Salim Al Azami, Farag Al Kaila and Badr Salim Mahrawi. All are believed to be members of the National Front, the country's sole political party, and all reportedly have been very badly tortured.
AI has received information of a number of releases which have taken place in the PDRY over the past year, but none has concerned AI adopted prisoners. An amnesty announced on 22 June concerned some imprisoned members of the National Front and two United States citizens who had been arrested in 1973 on suspicion of spying were released in September.
One of the results of the AI mission to the PDRY was a proposal submitted to the government to allow AI groups to correspond with their adopted prisoners and to send them English-language reading material on request, in particular textbooks. This proposal has been accepted in principal by the government but is not yet in effect.
