LIBYA
This year has seen a decline in the human rights situation in Libya. Popular dissatisfaction with President Mu'ammar AI Gaddafi's economic and foreign policies has manifested itself in various ways: an alleged coup attempt by army officers; university student demonstrations against the government; and the emergence of opposition groups outside Libya.
In response to this growing opposition, President Gaddafi has ordered the arrest of all his opponents. He has also amended the penal code to provide the death penalty for membership of illegal political parties and has given the police wider powers to handle internal security matters.
Reports of an alleged coup attempt in July/August 1975 were followed by reports of the arrest of up to 126 officers and soldiers. They included Major Bashir Hawadi, a member of the Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) and three Libyan diplomats recalled from their posts abroad. As far as is known most are still detained, but none have been brought to trial.
At the beginning of September about 10 civilians were reported to have been arrested after an alleged secret political organization was discovered. Arrests have continued since then, and although exact numbers are not known, Amnesty International received in May the names of 25 civilians arrested since September who have not been brought to trial. They include teachers, government employees, businessmen and students. AI is in the process of taking up their cases.
At the beginning of January 1976 students from Benghazi University demon-
189	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

strated in protest against government-rigged student union elections. In violent clashes with the police, numbers of students were reportedly wounded, killed or arrested. In a cable to President Gaddafi on 14 January 1976, AI asked for clarification of the incident and, on humanitarian grounds, urged "that details of those detained or wounded be made available to families concerned". In a reply, the Minister of State for the Affairs of the RCC, Taher Sherif Ben Amer, maintained that the police were not involved, that the injured students were receiving treatment and that there had been no arrests and no deaths. Other Libyan sources, however, claimed that the number of students killed was between seven and 13.
Further clashes took place at the beginning of April between Tripoli University students and security officers, after President Gaddafi had called for the "cleansing" from the universities of "reactionary" students. AI again cabled President Gaddafi on 23 April requesting clarification of reports that 800 students had been arrested and 250 injured. No reply nor any further details of the incident have been received.
AI continues to work for about 40 Libyans (alleged Marxists, Trotskyists and members of the Moslem Liberation Movement) who were arrested in April 1973 for their membership of illegal political parties and who have been held since then despite a court order for their release in December 1974. On 26 June 1975 AI wrote to President Gaddafi requesting the release of this group of prisoners, but received no reply. In July AI national sections appealed to President Gaddafi for a general amnesty on 1 September, the anniversary of the Libyan revolution. In December these prisoners were taken up as a group adoption. In May 1976 the names of all these detainees became available for the first time, and AI is now taking up their cases individually.
For the first time for some years AI has received allegations of torture from Libya. They include reports that three people died in March 1976 as a result of ill-treatment in prison: Major Ahmad Bouliffa, Lieutenant Farag Muftah Bin Ai and Captain Muhammad Farag AI Toumi. In a letter to President Gaddafi on 19 May 1976 AI expressed concern at these disturbing reports. AI urged a full investigation of the circumstances of their deaths and that the results be made public.
New legislation has placed further restrictions on fundamental human rights. Amendments to the penal code issued by the RCC in July 1975 introduced the death penalty for establishing, or membership of, an illegal organization (since 1970 all political parties, except the Arab Socialist Union, have been banned). It is not known whether this legislation has been or will be applied. Despite the existence of capital offences in the penal code, it is believed that there have been no official executions in Libya during the period of President Gaddafi's rule.
In October 1975 a law was passed providing for the creation of an Office for the Security of the Revolution. This contrasted sharply with President Gaddafi's statement in November 1974 that he considered an office for state security to be a "manifestation of terrorism" and would not introduce it. This law gives the police greater powers in their handling of security cases, since they are not obliged to follow the strict legal procedures laid down for criminal cases. The police can detain for investigation purposes a political suspect for 45 days -extendable to 60 days - before allowing him access to a judicial authority.
During the year information was received concerning a United States citizen,
190
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
William Thomas, who had been arrested on 29 July 1975 on suspicion of having spied for Israel during the 1960s but released on 1 December 1975. Although cases of espionage fall outside Al's statute, Mr Thomas' legal and penal treatment gave cause for concern. He had reportedly been held for more than three weeks in solitary confinement during his period of interrogation.
In December he appeared before a judicial tribunal and was acquitted for lack of evidence, but at the same time he was informed that his case was still being investigated by the Office for the Security of the Revolution. He was therefore not allowed to leave the country (and join his family abroad).
On 2 March 1976 AI wrote to the Libyan authorities saying: "We believe that Mr Thomas may have been detained in error, that during his period of detention he was deprived of the legal rights he is entitled to, and that the present restrictions imposed on him, in view of his acquittal, are extra-legal." According to information received by AI, Mr Thomas' case may be representative of more than a hundred foreign nationals in prison in Libya awaiting completion of investigation or trial.
Al's International Executive Committee has authorized a mission to Libya, and the agreement of the Libyan authorities has also been obtained. The mission will take place later in 1976.
