UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
During the past year three American prisoners adopted by Amnesty International have been released as a result of campaigns organized on their behalf by AI and others. In September 1975 Freddie Lee Pitts and Wilbert Lee were granted an executive pardon by Governor Reuben Askew of Florida. They were released after spending 12 years in prison for a crime that the authorities now agree they did not commit. In December 1975 Governor Hugh Carey of New York State granted executive clemency to Martin Sostre. Mr Sostre was released from prison in February 1976 after nearly 9 years' imprisonment for allegedly selling heroin. AI took up his case after learning that the key witness against him had retracted his testimony.
The case of Martin Sostre was referred to in an appeal to President Gerald Ford on 16 November 1975 to free all American prisoners of conscience. The appeal also asked President Ford to declare an unconditional amnesty for United States conscientious objectors who went into exile rather than participate in the Vietnam war. The AI appeal came after US United Nations representative Daniel Patrick Moynihan on 12 November 1975 presented a draft resolution (subsequently withdrawn) under which the General Assembly would appeal to all governments to free all political prisoners.
Other actions on behalf of Martin Sostre included the preparation of a detailed brief on his case which was sent to Governor Carey in November 1975, together with a letter from AI once again appealing for a pardon.
The psychological training allegedly given to US military personnel was raised in a letter to President Ford on 16 July 1975. The letter pointed out that in the context of the AI Campaign for the Abolition of Torture there is a parallel between such training and the methods used to condition men to torture other people. A further letter on 26 March 1976 addressed to US Secretary of Defence Donald Rumsfeld expressed concern about the existence of training programs in "resistance to torture" sponsored by the US Navy in California and Maine.
AI exchanged correspondence with US authorities on the subject of behaviour modification programs and in February 1976 AI submitted a paper entitled "Behaviour Modification: Standard Minimum Safeguards for the Protection of Prisoners" for the consideration of the National Commission on the Protection of Human Subjects. (See section on Campaign for the Abolition of Torture).
During the past year AI has been greatly concerned about moves to bring back the use of the death penalty in the US. Letters appealing for the commutation of death sentences have been sent to various state governors. On 31 October 1975 AI wrote to Senator James Eastland, chairman of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary which was considering the Criminal Justice Codification, Revision, and Reform Act (S.l). AI outlined the case against capital punishment to the committee. On 8 March 1976 the US Supreme Court granted AI leave to file an amicus curiae brief in the case of Jesse Thurman Fowler v North Carolina. The brief argued that international standards, similar to those of the US constitution, require the abolition of capital punishment.
In March and May 1976 Brian Wrobel, a British lawyer, attended on behalf
112
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 1975-1976
of AI court hearings concerning Dennis Banks, a well-known native American activist and a leader of the American Indian Movement (AIM). Mr Banks faced charges of possessing firearms and explosives, but he denied the charges and attributed his arrest to police harassment because of his work for AIM. All charges against Mr Banks in Oregon were dismissed by the court prior to trial. But in July 1975 he was convicted on a charge of "assault with a deadly weapon without intent to kill" in South Dakota. He is now in California awaiting a hearing for extradition to South Dakota .
On 7 May 1976 AI Secretary General Martin Ennals appealed to US Attorney General Edward Levi on behalf of Joanna Le Deaux, an American Indian woman imprisoned because of her refusal to testify to a grand jury. In the letter the Secretary General wrote: "I urge you to consider that Joanna Le Deaux should be at least temporarily released from prison on humanitarian grounds, until the birth of her child, bearing in mind that she has not been imprisoned for a criminal offence but as a result of her conscientious refusal to testify to a Grand Jury." On 25 May 1976 a reply to this letter was received from Norman A. Carlson, Director of the US Bureau of Prisons. Mr Carlson said that Joanna Le Deaux had been released for the birth of her child and would not be returned to prison.
AI groups are working on eight cases of American prisoners. Other cases are being investigated by the Research Department. It is impossible to estimate the number of political prisoners in the US. People are not officially imprisoned because of their political views or actions, or because of their ethnic origin. But in some cases it is difficult to avoid the suspicion that an individual's imprisonment may be due to his political actions, rather than to the crime which he or she is alleged to have committed.
