NICARAGUA
Torture, arbitrary detention and "disappearance" appear increasingly characteristic of the human rights situation in Nicaragua. Amnesty International is currently studying the cases of more than 100 prisoners detained in the custody of military courts under the state of siege that has been in force since December 1974. The state of siege suspends personal guarantees - including the right to habeas corpus - and permits indefinite administrative detention incommunicado. Many of these prisoners have alleged periods of up to four months in complete isolation. Most have allegedly suffered severe torture.
The state of siege was decreed following a guerrilla assault on a private house on 27 December 1974 in which high government officials and wealthy businessmen were present. There were four deaths in the attack, and guerrillas held the party-goers present hostage until a ransom of reportedly more than US $1,000,000 was paid. The guerrillas and 14 political prisoners were permitted to fly to Cuba. The guerrillas were members of the Frente Sandinista de Liberación Nacional tFSLN), a leftwing armed opposition group. Rene Nuñez Tellez, a 28-year-old engineering student, was one of hundreds
106
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 1975-1976
of suspected FSLN sympathizers detained immediately after the 27 December
1974	action. AI appealed on his behalf in August 1975. Detained on 28 December 1974, he had "disappeared" for 123 days, during which time he suffered severe torture. Reliable reports received in August 1975 said that he had received severe head injuries as well as severe fractures.
In October 1975, further Al action on his behalf was taken, following a report by his own doctor that Señor Nuñez was in urgent need of intensive medical treatment for tuberculosis: he underwent a lung operation for tuberculosis in 1966.
AI recently received a copy of a doctor's report stating that on 5 January
1975	- one week after the arrest of Rene Nuñez - he was brought to Leon hospital by the National Guard and was treated for head wounds and other "diverse injuries".
Señor Nuñez had been indicted by the Permanent Military Court of Investiga tion on the basis of alleged joint responsibility for violent crimes of the FSLN,
Another student who "disappeared" after arrest was Luis Armando Guzman Luna who was detained on 8 August 1975. AI's Campaign for the Abolition of Torture department appealed on 12 September for his safety, but the authorities denied his detention. However, on 28 October 1975, Señor Guzman was suddenly produced as a witness before the Military Court of Investigation. As a witness, he had no right to a defence lawyer. He confessed to having been a collaborator of the FSLN, although not in the 27 December 1974 assault, He was indicted shortly afterwards on charges based on FSLN actions. When he testified a second time, after indictment, he told the court that he could on'y in part endorse his prior testimony, as he had been in total isolation for over two months. During this time he had been badly tortured. In addition, some of his testimony on that occasion had apparently been wrongly recorded or altered.
The broad range of human rights violations under the state of siege can be largely attributed to the unchecked action of the combined army-police force, the Guardia Nacional. Its commander is President Anastasio Somoza Debayle, who is the third member of his family to occupy the presidency and the command of the Guardia Nacional - a family rule that has lasted over 40 years.
The Guardia Nacional carries out extensive police functions, as well asa major judicial function under the state of siege.
Police action by the Guardia Nacional can broadly, be seen to be countering the armed opposition movement of the FSLN. But their actions affect a vastly larger population than the small group actively composing and assisting this movement. The unprotected rural population bears1 the brunt of abuses of human rights incurred as a result of counter-insurgency measures. AI has lists of more than 200 campesinos (peasants) who "disappeared" or were killed, reportedly at the hands of Guardia Nacional troops.
Reports from members of the clergy in remote rural areas - especially in Matagalpa and Nueva Segovia Departments and along the Atlantic coast -describe massive detentions of peasants. Local leaders reportedly are tortured and murdered as a routine method to uncover FSLN guerrillas and to discourage local support. While many allegations nave been received of "concen tration camps" in these remote areas, AI information indicates that such camps are generally cattle corrals used for the relatively short-term detention of large groups of people.
Prisoners believed to be members or important collaborators of the FSLN
107	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
are generally brought to Managua, the capital, and turned over to the Oficina de Seguridad Nacional (National Security Office), the investigative arm of the Guardia Nacional. There, prisoners are held incommunicado for months at a time and a variety of tortures - including nooding for long periods, electric shocks, immersion and beating the soles of the feet - are allegedly routinely applied. Prisoners are taken directly to the military court from the Oficina de Seguridad to testify as witnesses. After their initial testimony, formal detention orders are issued by the court. They are then transferred to the penitentiary Cárcel Modelo in the nearby town of Tipitapa.
Although more than 100 prisoners are now known to be detained by military authorities, AI believes there may be as many as 500 political prisoners now in custody in Nicaragua. Under the state of siege, security forces may detain "any person to investigate acts perturbing public order [and] . . . hold these detainees incommunicado, for a prudent period, as long as this measure should be necessary for the efficacy of the investigation". Because of this provision and the suspension of habeas corpus, it is impossible to determine at any one time the total detainees population.
A mission to Nicaragua was carried out in Máy 1976 by Dr Kurt Madlener of the Max Planck Institute of the Federal Republic of Germany and Michael McClintock of the International Secretariat. Unfortunately, only one government member - the Minister of Government - was willing to meet with the delegates. A report on the mission is being prepared at the time of writing.
