PORTUGAL
Since the assumption of power by the Armed Forces Movement (AFM) in 1974, the emphasis of Amnesty International's work has been on direct contacts with members of the new government and other relevant authorities.
A mission including AI .Secretary General Martin Ennals went to Portugal in June 1975 to discuss the situation with President Francisco da Costa Gomes and other officials as well as with the Ordem dos Advocados (Order of Advocates) and the families of prisoners. The main issues in the talks were
165	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

the apparent irregularities in the arrest and detention procedures for political prisoners and what appeared to be a lack of any judicial procedure governing their release.
As a result, AI sent a memorandum in November 1975 to President Costa Gomes. While acknowledging the progress made in establishing a judicial machinery to handle the trials of political prisoners, the memorandum urged the Portuguese government to introduce human rights guarantees effectively founded in law. It specificially recommended that this should be done jointly with the Order of Advocates and the judiciary. The aim should be the reconciling of the rights of the individual and the collective needs of society. Furthermore, it urged that certain prisoners, held without charge, should either be tried in open court or released. The President's office, in reply, stated that AI's recommendations were under consideration and that the government felt that the issues raised could soon be resolved.
AI estimated that at the time of the mission there were approximately 1,600 people imprisoned for political reasons. This figure included more than 1,000 members of the former political police (PIDE), 200 members of the "Maoist" Party (Movimento Reorganizativo do Partido do Proletariado - MRPP) and more than 100 people suspected of being involved in the attempted coups d'état of 28 September 1974 and 11 March 1975. In addition, there were a small number of bankers and businessmen and also former government ministers. Following the attempted leftwing coup of 25 November 1975, more than 100 military personnel and civilians were arrested. By the end of May 1976 the majority of prisoners in these very diverse categories had either been released or were free on remand. The few prisoners remaining are mostly former PIDE personnel.
In December 1975 disturbing press reports mentioned possible deportations of foreign refugees resident in Portugal. AI therefore wrote to the Council of the Revolution and the leaders of the four main political parties expressing its concern at the reports. It requested that the greatest care be taken to avoid returning political refugees to countries where they might face persecution. So far AI has received no reports that any persons have been exposed to this risk. But a decree law was issued in March 1976 permitting the expulsion of foreigners whose activities are contrary to the interests of national security and public order.
AI also welcomed the establishment of a committee to investigate reports of violent treatment of prisoners held by the military authorities and finally the recognition given in the new constitution, published in April 1976, to human rights. The new constitution guarantees inter alia the right of assembly, the right to strike, habeas corpus (which had been suspended) and conscientious objection. It also states that the death penalty (abolished in Portugal in 1867) must never be applied, and it prohibits the use of torture.
