FRANCE
The French judiciary continues to pass severe sentences on conscientious objectors (COs). Amnesty International at present has.21 imprisoned COs under adoption, most of them sentenced to the maximum of 2 years' imprisonment for refusal to obey call-up to military service or an officially designated civilian alternative service.
During the last year there has been an intensive campaign on the part of the many CO and new anti-militarist groups against the Tribunaux Permanents des Forces Armées (TPFA), the military courts in which objectors who have been refused CO status are tried. The cases of two leading activists in this movement, Bernard Remy and Jean-Louis Soulié, have received widespread publicity. Bernard Remy was released on 31 March 1976 after serving an 18-month sentence for refus d'obéissance (refusal to obey). Jean-Louis Soulié was given the relatively light sentence of one year's imprisonment on 3 February 1976 for "refusal to obey" and "insubordination". He was released in April but was at once re-arrested and charged with "refusal to obey".
In November a large number of conscripts and some civilians who had taken part in attempts to form a trade union movement within the army were arrested under article 84 of the penal code for "participation in a venture to demoralize the armed forces". On 18 December AI wrote to President Giscard d'Estaing calling for the release of all those detained who had not been also accused of violence or other common law crimes. The AI appeal, which was made public, stated that although Al could take no stand on the question of structural reforms within the French armed forces, "the imprisonment of persons advocating such reforms was AI's concern in that it violated the principle of freedom of expression". Al also expressed concern at the fact that the accused faced proceedings in a special state security court (Cour de Sûreté de l'Etat).
160
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
On 5 March 1976 the last of these "syndicalists" (whose number since December had increased to 53) was released from prison. AI continued, however, to receive reports of soldiers being detained in their barracks instead of at the prisons. Although none of those arrested has yçt been tried, many of them remain under indictment.
On 15 January AI appealed to President Giscard d'Estaing on humanitarian grounds for commutation of the death sentence passed on a 17-year-old minor, "Bruno T". "Bruno T" was sentenced to death by the court of Beauvais in October 1975 for the murder of an elderly woman, and his death sentence was confirmed by the supreme appeal court, the Court of Cassation. The AI appeal also expressed AI's opposition to any use of the death penalty and was supported by action on the part of several AI national sections. On 11 February 1976 it was announced that the President had commuted "Bruno T" 's death sentence to life imprisonment.
AI's attention was also drawn to the imprisonment of eight members of the Breton autonomist movement at the prison of La Santé in Paris. These and four others, who were not imprisoned but were under "judiciary control", were formally charged with reconstituting a banned movement (the Front de libération de la Bretagne) and variously with attempts to cause an explosion or with illegal possession of explosives. One of the prisoners, the well-known Breton leader Yann Fouéré, was about to be adopted by AI (which was satisfied that he had not used or possessed explosives for any violent or criminal purposes) when news came early in February of his release. This followed wide publicity and protest, including questions in the European Parliament from two United Kingdom members, Tom Ellis and Mrs Winifred Ewing. However at the time of writing, Yann Fouéré, who has dual French-Irish citizenship, still faces the charge of reconstitution of a banned movement and is not allowed to leave France.
