PAKISTAN
The pattern of arrest and detention in Pakistan of critics of the government - mainly under the emergency laws - has continued over the past year. Those arrested include writers, editors, printers and, on one particular occasion, even lawyers assisting in cases of a political nature.
The National Awami Party, the main parliamentary opposition party, was banned in 1975. Its leaders, who were arrested in 1973, remain in detention. But some party workers, arrested after unrest in the North West Frontier Province in 1975, were released after a relatively short period of detention.
As a result of demands for greater autonomy for the two western provinces of Baluchistan and North West Frontier Province, many suspected activists remain detained, particularly in Coolie Camp (Quetta), Khuzdar Jahalwar (Khalat), Lorelai and Sibi, all camps in Baluchistan administered by the army.
In December 1975, Attorney General Yahya Bakhtiar stated that there were only nine political prisoners in Pakistan. Amnesty International feels that this figure in no way reflects the true scale of political imprisonment. The official figure relates only to the number of habeas corpus petitions made on political grounds and pending in the courts. But the figure does not take into account the hundreds of arrests which have been made during the past year under section 16 of the Maintenance of Public Order Ordinance and article 32 of the Defence of Pakistan Rules (DPR) - both emergency laws allowing for preventive detention - and under other DPR clauses by which prisoners can be charged with specific offences relating to the security of the state.
In addition, many are held on suspicion of having committed offences punishable under the Suppression of Terrorist Activities Act, the Explosive Substances Act and the Pakistan Penal Code (particularly in the North West Frontier Province and Baluchistan). And although an increasing number of these are being tried before special courts and special tribunals, where different rules of evidence apply, the majority of these are still held without trial.
In November 1975 unofficial estimates of the number of political prisoners in Pakistan ranged as high as 38,000. The figure appears to be based on a statement given by the government of Sindh province, giving the total of prisoners detained during 1974 under preventive detention laws (other than DPR) as 36,279. Figures of a similar range were given by the government for 1972 and 1973.
Since most preventive detention is usually for a relatively short period of time, the majority of these prisoners would now have been released. AI estimates on the basis of these and other reports, however, that at least several thousand prisoners are currently in prison for political reasons. In view of the wide range of laws under which political prisoners can be detained -including those laws applicable to criminal offences - is is difficult to give a more precise estimate.
Constitutional amendments have further restricted the powers of the high courts to grant relief to political prisoners. The constitutional Fourth Amendment, passed by the National Assembly on 15 November 1975, withdraws the power of the high courts to grant bail to persons detained under laws providing for preventive detention and to issue orders protecting persons from arrest under such laws. The amendment has severely limited the common practice of high courts of granting bail to political prisoners.
On 31 October 1975 the Supreme Court of Pakistan upheld the government's
144
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
order of 10 February 1975 banning the main opposition party, the National Awami Party (NAP). The Supreme Court found the party guilty of resorting to subversion and sabotage. It held that the party and its leaders were guilty of promoting the concept of five nations and nationalities in an attempt to destroy the idea of a single Moslem nation on which Pakistan was founded,
However, it is important to note that the Supreme Court in this case was allowed to make its own rules of evidence. Consequently, the evidence on which the judgement was based would not have been admissible in any ordinary court of law in Pakistan. Although the judgement was given against the NAP, the findings of the Supreme Court will be admissible evidence in the cases against individual members of the party now on trial in Hyderabad (see below).
In the wake of the Supreme Court judgement, the constitution was amended to introduce a five year disqualification period from public life for sitting NAP members of parliament or provincial assemblies.
On 29 December 1975 the government set up a special court, consisting of three high court judges, to try exclusively offences affecting the security, integrity or sovereignty of the state, including high treason. Under this law -Criminal Law Amendment (Special Court) Ordinance - the rules of evidence have been changed in order to allow for evidence otherwise not admissible, Contrary to customary procedures, the prosecution has been given the power to add new charges against each individual accused at any time during the case until judgement has been pronounced.
Forty-four members and office bearers of the former National Awami Party, including its leader, Abdul Wali Khan, are now being tried before the Special Court which started proceedings inside a prison in Hyderabad on 15 April 1976. Although the trial is said to be open, official permission needs to be obtained to attend it. Such permission can be refused for any security reasons.
Apart from Wali Khan, whose case is at present under investigation by Al, the three Baluchistan leaders of the party, Mir Ghaus Baksh Bizenjo, Khair Baksh Marri and Sardar Atuallah Mengal, are among those on trial. All three were adopted by Al after spending three years in detention without trial.
On 14 April 1976, one day before the trial was due to start, more prominent opposition leaders of the former NAP were arrested for trial in Hyderabad. Hashim Mohammed Gilzai, a member of the newly formed National Democratic Party and leader of the opposition in the Senate of Pakistan, was among those arrested. Also arrested were two other senators, Ghulam Ahmed Bilore and Syed Hussain Shah. Five of the 12 opposition members in Senate, a body consisting of 40, are now in detention on political charges.
An Al delegation visited Pakistan from 22 April to 12 May 1976 to discuss with government officials, members of the judiciary and the bar, as well as other contacts, recent developments affecting human rights in Pakistan. Professor Miimtaz Soysal, a Turkish constitutional lawyer and member of AI's International Executive Committee, and Yvonne Terlingen of the International Secretariat had detailed discussions with Minister of Law Malik Muhammad Akhtar, as well as with officials in the Home Department and the Advocate General's Office.
The delegates met with judges, lawyers and members of families of political prisoners. The mission was keen to establish the degree to which fundamental rights were safeguarded at trials of political prisoners. In this context, one of
145	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
the mission delegates attended the trial proceedings of the Special Court in Hyderabad on 10 May 1976.
A report on the mission's findings is being prepared at the time of writing this report, and will be submitted to AI's International Executive Committee. It is expected that the report will reflect AI's increasing concern at the practice of trying political prisoners before special tribunals and courts. These trials are often held inside jails where the normal safeguards designed to ensure an open and fair trial do not apply.
AI is now working on a relatively small number of cases, which in no way reflect the scale of political imprisonment in Pakistan. There are 15 adoption and 23 investigation cases, but it is envisaged that the adoption program will be enlarged in the near future.
Among those AI has adopted as a prisoner of conscience is member of parliament Chaudri Zahur Elahi who, together with members of his family, has been charged with more than 100 alleged offences under criminal and emergency laws. He is now being tried in Karachi Central Jail before a special tribunal on charges of making "objectionable speeches". Two other adopted prisoners are Altaf Hussain Qureshi and Dr Ijaz Hussain Qureshi, editor and printer respectively of the Urdu Digest, who have been arrested many times. Their latest arrest, for publishing articles critical of the government, took place in March this year under article 49 of the DPR.
Also adopted are Tariq Ashraf, a journalist and editor of the Sindhi language paper Suhirii, arrested in September after participating in a campaign for the defence of Sindhi literature and demanding the lifting of the ban on all publications, and 86 year old Abdul Ghaffar Khan, the veteran opposition leader and father of Wali Khan. He has been held in preventive detention since April last year. Hassan Hameedi, one of the lawyers defending the NAP leaders, was arrested on 24 September and involved in a gambling charge which was not brought to court. AI believes that, after his arrest, pressure was put on him to withdraw from assisting in defending Wali Khan. He was adopted by AI and released in December.
Many AI members made special appeals for the release of Sardar Ataullah Khan Mengal, a former chief minister of Baluchistan. He is a heart patient who was reported to be in a serious condition last summer.
Over the year, AI has received a number of allegations of police brutality against persons alleged to have committed offences under the Explosive Substance Act, particularly in the North West Frontier Province and Baluchistan. One of these allegations related to Mohammed Aslam Kurd, a member of the NAP arrested on 23 September 1975 without warrant in Quetta. It was allaged that during the first seven days of his interrogation he was ill-treated and that his beard was pulled out. AI sent a cable to the Prime Minister Zhulfikar Ali Bhutto requesting that the report be immediately investigated. AI asked for an assurance that Mr Kurd be held in accordance with basic constitutional rights. No such assurance has been received.
