ROMANIA
Amnesty International is currently working on 14 Romanian cases, of which the two main categories remain persons imprisoned for religious beliefs and members of ethnic minorities, in particular the Hungarian and German communities.
Two of AI's best known adopted prisoners, Zoltan Kallôs and Vasile Rascol were both released in 1976, and both before completing their sentences. Zoltan
166
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
Kallós, an eminent folklorist and musicologist of Hungarian origin had been sentenced in December 1974 to 2\ years' imprisonment for alleged homosexual connections. AI adopted Mr Kallós as a prisoner of conscience because it was probable that the genuine reason for his imprisonment was his persistent efforts to preserve and compile works of Hungarian culture. He was released on 26 June 1976.
Vasile Rascol, a Pentecostal minister sentenced in July 1974 to 2 years' imprisonment, was released on 12 October 1975. After his arrest, according to reports, he had been first detained in a common law prison in Bucharest, subjected to hard labour and interrogated on the charge of distributing bibles printed abroad - regarded as illegal in Romania. He was later moved to the prison of Jilava after having been declared a political prisoner. In Romania it is customary for sentences to be reviewed half way through their course. Mr Rascol, who retained his religious beliefs, was refused parole at this half way point, but it was granted after a second review of the case. An indication of the importance attached to world public opinion in this case is that the Romanian consular service issued specially printed forms with notification of Vasile Rascol's release.
Typical of cases involving those who were apprehended trying to flee across the border is that of a whole family, members of the German ethnic minority in Romania. This family, Elisabeth and Konrad Formanek and their son, together with the daughter and son-in-law, Edeltraut and Richard Didicher, were sentenced to terms ranging from 14 months to 12 months' imprisonment after being arrested on the Romanian-Yugoslav border. Another family, Willi and Hildegard Krisch were also sentenced to 14 months' imprisonment after trying to cross the border in a caravan together with their two small sons. All were adopted by AI as prisoners of conscience.
It is now known that Richard Szattinger, against whose death sentence AI appealed in 1974, has had his sentence on the charge of industrial espionage reduced to 18 years' imprisonment and is in the military prison of Bucharest. AI's Research Department is trying to obtain more information about this trial.
Romanian criminal law includes articles prescribing imprisonment for disseminating politically "subversive" literature. It is disturbing that a number of literary critics have been subjected to official attacks in the context of a governmental campaign for ideological conformism which became especially vigorous after the summer of 1975. It may have been in connection with this campaign that Camil Demetrescu was arrested in the autumn of 1975. Mr Demetrescu, who had been imprisoned for 16 years from 1946, was charged with propagation of subversive material. This was in connection with some critical notes which he had written in a copy of a book describing the role of the Romanian Communist Party in the 1944 coup against the then-fascist government of Romania. He was sentenced to 6 years' imprisonment but was released early in 1976.
