MEXICO
Since 1970, there have been few prisoners of conscience known to Amnesty International in Mexico. Inadequate information coupled with reports that in some cases criminal charges are brought against dissenters (a practice which was true for those arrested in 1968) has made normal case work diffcult. There are an estimated 500 political prisoners in Mexico.
In June 1975, AI sent a mission to Mexico. The delegates were Dr Lisandro Martinez, a Colombian lawyer, and Nigel Rodley, the International Secretariat's Legal Adviser. The mission's term of reference was to inquire into allegations received by AI concerning arbitrary arrests and detention for political reasons, disappearances, torture and unconstitutional trial delays.
The mission visited two prisons, Lecumberri and the Cárcel de Mujeres Santa Marta, where they were able to talk with individual prisoners. Nearly all claimed to have been held without warrant for more than the statutory 24 hours.
The AI delegates met Federal Attorney General Licenciado Pedro Ojeda Paullada and discussed specific reports of human rights violations, such as the maltreatment of prisoners held in Lecumberri and the deaths of two suspected guerrillas at the University of Mexico City in June 1975 at the hands of the police. Although the attorney general did not concede that human rights had been violated by the Mexican authorities, he did express his willingness to examine and respond to any questions raised by AI.
There are frequent allegations of arbitrary arrest and detention and the mission found that although the Mexican constitution contains stringent provisions regarding these procedures, they are commonly disregarded. One of the main reasons for this situation is possibly the existence of a multiplicity of police bodies which act in a law-enforcing capacity and which exceed the legal
105	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

limits of detention by transferring detainees from one authority to the next. (This also creates difficulties in tracing missing persons.) Therefore the mission felt that the Mexican authorities should reduce the number of police forces and carefully define areas of competence for those remaining.
Given the present situation, reports are often heard about the use of excessive force by the police and army when making arrests, which result in injury and sometimes death. The failure of the law-enforcing bodies to comply with the statutory obligation which requires them to have warrants for arrests, and to present the detainees before a judge within 72 hours of his arrest, has led to numerous allegations of maltreatment, torture and even disappearances. The mission considered that torture is virtually encouraged by the prevailing legal doctrine in Mexico which places undue importance on confessions while giving little weight to retractions. It was of the opinion that abuses would be less likely to occur if any statement by a defendant not made before his lawyer and judge was rendered inadmissable.
It was generally felt that where unconstitutional trial delays occur, the accused be released automatically.
The mission was convinced that the Political Constitution of the United States of Mexico provides the basis for the genuine protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms for all and has assured that there are many highly placed Mexican officials who are concerned to make that objective a reality.
On 26 March 1976 a general amnesty was declared for all those implicated in the student disturbances of 1968 which had culminated in the Tlatelolco massacre. The amnesty affected about 250 people who were still awaiting trial five years after the event. This gives an indication of the slow machinery of Mexican justice.
On 28 April 1976, AI sent urgent cables to the Mexican authorities on behalf of four students who had been arrested and allegedly beaten in
Querétaro.
AI has adopted one prisoner in Mexico and is investigating five other cases at present.
