ARGENTINA
This report is broadly divided into two parts. The first concentrates on the human rights' situation prevailing in Argentina prior to the coup d'état of 24 March 1976, the second with events since the military take-over. Nevertheless, as can be seen from the latter section, most of the problems which concerned Amnesty International during the presidency of Isabel Perón remain and the situation in certain respects has worsened.
Widespread corruption, soaring inflation, labour unrest, and the escalation of political assassinations by both leftwing and rightwing extremist groups, had characterized Isabel Perón's term of office. The state of siege, introduced in November 1974, led to the detention without trial (for unlimited periods) of more than 4,000 people. But in January 1976 the Supreme Court declared the state of siege unconstitutional on two grounds: it had not been ratified by Congress and its duration had never been specified. This effectively meant that the 4,000 prisoners were being held illegally, but the coup forestalled any intervention the judiciary might have initiated.
Throughout 1975, the number of abductions and assassinations attributable to groups like the AAA (Alianza Anti-Comunista Argentina - Argentinian Anti-Communist Alliance) dramatically increased, and in August 1975 Amnesty International prepared a survey of 461 murders that occurred in the period between July 1974 and June 1975. In all cases some political motive could be identified. The survey was sent to President Perón with a commentary drawing attention to the fact that almost two thirds of the victims appeared to have been executed by rightwing death squads. AI urged the Argentinian government to take steps to bring to trial those guilty of such activities.
On 24 September, while Señora Perón was convalescing from illness, AI wrote to the provisional President of the Republic, Italo Luder, to express concern at the apparent impunity with which the para-military groups were operating in Argentina. A new and disturbing feature of the retaliatory activities of the AAA had been the extermination of whole families. In one case, on 14 August 1975, the parents, brother and sister of Mariano Pujadas (a guerrilla killed in 1972) were kidnapped from their home and shot. Their bodies were then destroyed by dynamite.
It was notable that the Argentinian government, which has tried to quell leftwing guerrilla activities and has mounted a huge anti-guerrilla operation in the northern province of Tucuman, detaining several key guerrilla leaders, has made remarkably few arrests in connection with the AAA, an organization which has carried out more than 2,000 political assassinations since 1973. There is strong evidence to suggest that highly placed officials have condoned or actively supported rightwing acts of terrorism. AI has made urgent appeals in over 133 cases of abductions in the last year.
Another cause for concern in this period was the increase in the number of allegations of torture received by AI. Olga Talamante, an American
86
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
citizen released shortly after the March 1976 coup, stated that when she was detained in Azul, in November 1974, she was tortured in the local police station. Centers of torture most frequently referred to are: Escuela Número 31 de Famailla in Tucuman, Brigada de Investigaciones de Ban field and the military barracks of Campo de Mayo in the Province of Buenos Aires, and the Superintendencia de Seguridad Federal in Buenos Aires (formerly known as the Coordinación Federal). However, torture is allegedly a routine practice in many local police and military headquarters throughout the country.
Many of the prisoners adopted by AI during the year were members of trade unions, for the exceptional measures taken by the government to combat armed insurrection inevitably led to the repression of lawful trade union activity. The case of Raimundo Ongaro, leader of the Printers' Union in Buenos Aires, is typical of this aspect of repression. After leading a strike which was declared illegal by the minister of labor, Señor Ongaro was removed from the leadership of the union, and arrested in October 1974 on a charge of illegal possession of firearms. In December 1974, a judge acquitted Señor Ongaro and ordered his release. Señor Ongaro was immediately placed in preventive detention at the disposal of the executive power.
In May 1975, while Señor Ongaro was still detained, the AAA kidnapped and shot his 21-year-old son Alfredo. One week later there was an attempt on the life of another son, Raimundo. After spending one year in prison, Señor Ongaro decided to exercise his legal right and opt for exile.
Other sectors of the legal opposition, such as the Partido Socialista de los Trabajadores (PST - Workers' Socialist Party), have also been affected by the state of siege provisions. About 20 PST members were placed in preventive detention after they had given their support to the two-month long strike at Villa Constitución which paralyzed the steelworks complex on the River Parana in April/May 1975. AI groups are working on behalf of the five who remain in detention. The PST has also been a target of rightwing violence: eight of its members were murdered in 1975, and many of their local offices have been attacked and blown up.
The freedom of lawyers to practise their profession was progressively undermined throughout 1975. Lawyers formed one of the largest categories of prisoners held under the state of siege provision, usually because they had defended political prisoners. In addition, members of the legal profession were one of the main targets of intimidation and often assassination at the hands of organizations such as the AAA. Even judges who were regarded as "too lenient" with subversives received death threats. The cumulative effect was that in some areas lawyers refused to defend political prisoners.
AI worked on behalf of 32 lawyers held in preventive detention during 1975-76, two of whom obtained their release and three others exercised their constitutional right to opt for exile. (This right has been withdrawn by the new government.)
There has been a steady deterioration in prison conditions, partly as a result of overcrowding. Most Argentinian prisons now house political prisoners. In November 1975, many of the prisons came under military jurisdiction and a new regimen was applied which caused considerable suffering. In almost all prisons there is now heavy censorship of mail, severe restriction on exercise and a ban on any activities (prisoners are not permitted to read or study and even singing can be a punishable offence).
Hortensia Rodriguez de Porcel, a former provincial deputy of the Justicialista
87	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

party in Salta, stated in a letter to the President of the Liga Argentina por los Derechos Humanos (Argentinian League for Human Rights) in December
1975:
Since November 1975 we are not allowed any parcels or food. Nor will they sell us anything at the prison shop. Many of the female prisoners are ill from eating prison food. ... I hope to God that this situation will not last long so that the babies will not have to suffer with their mothers any more.
One prisoner, Jorge Nicaner Fernandez, committed suicide on 28 December 1975, allegedly as a result of the bad conditions.
It is difficult at the moment to assess the effects of the 1976 military coup on the human rights' situation in Argentina. The new President, General Jorge Rafael Videla, in his inaugural speech promised that there would be proper respect for human dignity and that the use of force would be the exclusive reserve of the state. But the initial moves by the new government are far from reassuring. Congress has been dissolved, all political parties have been suspended, the central trade union organization. Confederación Nacional del Trabajo, has been placed under military control, the state of siege is to continue in force, a form of martial law has been established, the entire judiciary has been suspended. The death penalty has been introduced and there are severe penalties for crimes such as "disturbing the public order".
On 25 March 1976, AI wrote to the new Argentinian head of state urging the speedy release of all those held in preventive detention. AI also asked for an effective curb on rightwing atrocities and a guarantee that refugees from other Latin American countries would not be deported.
Several thousand people were arrested immediately after the coup, including officials of the previous government and many others such as trade unionists and suspected leftwing sympathizers. The new government has indicated that some of- the 4,000 already in preventive detention at the time of the coup will be released in the near future. Those who are considered to be "subversive" will face court martials.
Furthermore, the situation of the hundreds of thousands of recognized or de facto refugees has been made extremely precarious. A government communique issued on 26 March 1976 said that any refugee who carries out activities which "affect social peace, national security or public order" will be expelled. The government has said that it will not necessarily deport refugees back to their countries of origin. Nevertheless, there is close collaboration between the police forces of neighbouring countries such as Chile, Paraguay, and Uruguay, who seem to operate freely inside Argentina (arresting and even torturing their own nationals). This provides cause for grave disquiet.
On 19 December 1975, Senator Hipolito Solari Yrigoyen of the Unión Cívica Radical, denounced in Congress the activities of DINA (Chilean security police) in Argentina.
There are unconfirmed reports that a leader of the Chilean MIR (Movimiento de Izquierda Revolucionaria), Edgardo Enriquez, who disappeared in Buenos Aires on 10 April with Brazilian Regina Marcondes, was handed over to DINA on 29 April. Reports from other sources suggest that Señor Enriquez may have been assassinated in Argentina. Both the Chilean and Argentinian governments have denied any responsibility for his disappearance.
On 20 May, AI issued a news release concerning the abductions of two prominent exiled Uruguayan parliamentarians, Zelmar Michelini and Hector
88
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
Gutierrez Ruiz. They were taken from their homes in Buenos Aires on 18 May. The news release also cited a young Uruguayan couple, William White-law and Rosario Barredo, and their three children, who were kidnapped on 13 May, also in Buenos Aires. On 29 May the children were found alive and well. In a further news release on 23 May, AI expressed its shock and horror at the murder of the four adults whose bodies were found riddled with bullets in a car on the outskirts of Buenos Aires on 21 May.
Another parliamentarian, Wilson Ferreira Aldunate (leader of Uruguay's center National White (Blanco) Party and former presidential candidate in the 1971 elections) went into hiding and eventually managed to obtain asylum in an embassy before finally leaving the country. On 21 May the mutilated bodies of five Chileans were found near the Campo de Mayo.
In the two-week period following the coup, the AAA were thought responsible for more than 100 murders, while leftwing guerrillas in a single day killed three policemen, a navy captain and a United States businessman. There are at least five political assassinations daily in Argentina. Reports have alleged that the majority of these killings have been perpetrated by rightwing military factions who wish to create havoc among the civilian population and force General Jorge Rafael Videla (who is regarded as a moderate) to resign.
There are no official figures for those in detention, although estimates received by AI claim that the number of those in detention is as high as 20,000. The new authorities have not as yet made available lists of prisoners. An indication of the scale of the repression may be drawn from a concrete example. In the small industrial townships of Berisso and Ensenada 60 kilometres from Buenos Aires, more than 1,500 workers from two companies, Frigorífico Swift and Astilleros del Estado, were detained in early April. The workers had apparently demonstrated against the coup.
Intellectuals have been singled out for repression. Hundreds of psychiatrists and psychologists have been sacked or suspended from their posts in hospitals throughout Argentina and others have been killed, abducted or arrested. Journalist and writer Haroldo Conti was abducted in Buenos Aires on 4 May and is still missing.
AI continues to be alarmed at the manner in which people are arrested by the police and military without a warrant. In April 1976, a well-known sociologist, Emilio de Ipola, and his wife Gloria Rojas were abducted from their home in Buenos Aires. Only after a week had elapsed did the authorities admit they were being held in a prison.
At present, AI is beginning a large-scale adoption program in Argentina.
