UNITED KINGDOM
The past year saw more than 20 United Kingdom (UK) citizens brought to court under the Incitement to Disaffection Act. This legislation makes punishable by imprisonment any attempt "maliciously and advisably" to "seduce any member of Her Majesty's forces from his duty or allegiance to Her Majesty". It also makes it a crime to possess "any document of such a nature that the dissemination thereof among members of Her Majesty's forces would constitute such an offence".
During most of the time since its enactment in 1934, this law has only rarely been applied. However in recent years some British citizens, notably pacifists who oppose the British military role in Northern Ireland, have communicated their views to British soldiers and have subsequently been charged under the act. Amnesty International has adopted any persons imprisoned for "incitement to disaffection".
Among those brought to trial in 1975 on this charge were 14 members of the British Withdrawal From Northern Ireland Campaign (BWNIC). All were additionally charged with conspiracy to violate the act, and this charge increased the maximum possible sentence to life imprisonment. In June 1975 in a letter to Attorney General Samuel Silkin and in a press statement, AI reiterated the organization's view that the Incitement to Disaffection Act "constitutes an unacceptable limitation on freedom of speech" and urged an end to court proceedings against the 14. AI also stated that it would adopt as prisoners of
176
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
conscience any of the 14 who were imprisoned.
The "BWN1C 14" were brought to trial in September 1975. An American lawyer, Adrian DeWind, observed the trial on AI's behalf. On 10 February 1976 all of the accused were acquitted on the incitement and conspiracy. charges. Prosecution was similarly unsuccessful in all "the other cases under this legislation in the past year. As of May 1976 it appears that the prosecuting authorities have suspended initiation of cases under this legislation. However the Incitement to Disaffection Act remains applicable, as do the controversial conspiracy laws.
On 11 December 1975 the House of Commons debated and voted on a motion to restore the use of the death penalty (abolished in the UK in 1965) in cases of terrorist murder. Ten days prior to the vote AI wrote to every member of Parliament urging them to vote against restoration. The AI letter expressed the organization's unqualified opposition to any use of the death penalty and reminded members of parliament of the trend throughout Western Germany in recent years away from executing persons convicted of politically motivated acts of violence. Several AI national sections also wrote to UK political party leaders urging that capital punishment not be restored. The motion to restore the death penalty was defeated by 369 votes to 217.
In December 1975 the last persons detained in Northern Ireland under the Emergency Provisions Act were released from the Long Kesh prison camp. Since 1971 when detention under this act began, 1,981 persons suspected of terrorist acts had been detained without trial.
In 1974 and 1975 AI investigated the workings of the Emergency Provisions Act and criticized both the lack of procedural guarantees for suspects' rights and the treatment of detainees. (See AI Annual Report 1974/75.) Professor Alfred Heijder, Dutch member of AI's International Executive Committee who had investigated the Emergency Provisions Act and recommended reforms to the UK government, wrote to the Northern Ireland Office in December 1975 to offer congratulations for the "wise change of course" in ending detention without trial.
On 23 January 1976 AI wrote to Home Secretary Roy Jenkins expressing concern at the serious ill health of Frank Stagg, an inmate of Wakefield Prison serving sentence on a conviction of conspiracy to commit arson and criminal damage. Mr Stagg, an official of the Provisional wing of the Irish Republican Army (IRA), was near death on a hunger strike which he had maintained since mid-December 1975 to support several demands for changes in his conditions of detention. Among his demands was for a guarantee that he not be returned to solitary confinement in which he had been held through most of 1975 for refusal to do prison labour.
The present policy of the UK government is not to "force feed" hunger striking prisoners. AI never adopted Mr Stagg as a prisoner of conscience in view of the violent nature of the charges on which he was convicted. But in its letter to the Home Secretary AI supported Mr Stagg's demand that he not be returned to solitary confinement and urged that it be granted. On 11 February 1976 Mr Stagg died after fasting for 61 days.
AI's intervention in the Frank Stagg case was due partly to humanitarian concern at the risk to his life and partly to opposition to his being subjected to prolonged solitary confinement. Solitary confinement as a punishment for disciplinary offences is laid down by UK prison regulations. While each award
177	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
of solitary confinement is limited to a maximum of 56 days, the award may be repeated, and there is no statutory upper limit on the total duration of solitary confinement. AI's Research Department is investigating possibilities for initiating a study of the application of solitary confinement in UK prisons as a prerequisite for future work for revision of present regulations governing its use.
