NEPAL
The release of political prisoners under amnesties declared by King Birendra of Nepal to mark his 31st birthday constituted a major advance in the field of human rights. Shortly after the new cabinet, headed by Prime Minister Tulsi Giori, came to power in December 1975, the release of political prisoners began.
On 15 December Krishna Prasad Bhattarai was released with 15 other prisoners. Mr Bhattarai, a former speaker of Nepal's first parliament and former secretary general of the Nepali Congress Party, had been imprisoned for 10 years without trial since 1960, was re-arrested in August 1972, and was adopted on both occasions by Amnesty International.
Another 27 political prisoners were among the 250 prisoners released under a royal amnesty on the King's birthday on 31 December 1975. Those released included Ram Raja Prasad Singh, a Supreme Court lawyer who had been elected to parliament in 1971, but had been held without trial under the Security Act since 14 October 1971, and Sher Bahadur Deupa, a president of the Nepali Student Organization and member of AI, who had been imprisoned without trial since June 1974. AI wrote to King Birendra on 31 December 1975, congratulating him on the amnesty.
Shortly before the official amnesty announcement, Al's Asian Field Secretary, Richard Reoch, was received by the Prime Minister, and informed that all political prisoners detained under the Security Act would be released in the next three months, excluding those who were thought to have committed acts of violence. It was anticipated that this program would also relate to political prisoners held under the Raj-Kaj Act, whose total number was estimated at the time to be approximately 200. (This statement corresponded with a suggestion made by AI one year earlier for a general amnesty in a letter to the King of 24 October 1974.)
In a letter of 26 January 1976 to the Prime Minister, AI asked for the official list of political prisoners so far released under the royal amnesties. AI asked whether the government planned to revoke the Special Powers Act and the Raj-Kaj Act, legislation providing for detention without trial, under which all prisoners whose cases had been taken up by AI were detained. At the same time, all AI groups and national sections working for Nepalese prisoners wrote to the government congratulating it on the amnesty and inquiring about the status of their individual prisoners.
AI is still awaiting the government's list of released prisoners, but 16 of the 65 prisoners for whom AI groups were working in December, are now known to be free. Even prior to the amnesties, the government had released 10 political prisoners for whom AI groups had been working.
Earlier, in May 1975, the government pardoned 12 persons who had been sentenced to long terms of political imprisonment for alleged anti-state activities committed after the royal take-over in 1960, and for whose release AI had appealed in 1974.
On 2 December 1975, AI sent a telegram to King Birendra, requesting a pardon for Yagya Bahadur Thapa, a former army captain, who had been sentenced to death for promoting armed rebellion in the eastern districts of Nepal. AI was given to understand by the government that the risk of execution was remote,
143	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
