BULGARIA
Amnesty International groups are now working for the release of seven Bulgarian prisoners and are investigating the cases of 13 others. A disturbing pattern has emerged whereby some Bulgarian citizens who have had extended contact with West European countries have been convicted of espionage on what appear to be specious or non-existent grounds. The case of Dr Heinrich Spetter and Solomon Ben-Joseph (both officials) were described in AI's Annual Report 1974/75. Dr Spetter was sentenced to death but was eventually pardoned after a major international campaign and is presently living in Israel. Mr Ben-Joseph is still serving a 121-year prison sentence (reduced on appeal from 15 years).
A similar case which came to AI's attention in 1975 is that of Nicolas Stefanov Charmurlisky, a clerk in a cooperative who was arrested in Sofia in September 1974. Mr Chamurlisky was charged with espionage on the basis of his contact
157	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
with an employee at the Italian embassy in Sofia through whom he sent letters to relatives in the United States of America. His arrest appears to be directly related to his attempts to obtain a passport and to his openly critical views He was sentenced to death, and in February 1976 AI appealed to Bulgarian President Todor Zhivkov urging commutation of this death sentence. The appeal against the sentence was heard by the Supreme Court in March 1976, but the result is not yet known. Mr Chamurlisky is being held in the Vratza city prison and his case has been assigned to an AI group for investigation. It should be noted that all three of the above-mentioned defendants are Jewish.
AI received a report in January 1976 that the prison camp at Belene was again being used to house political prisoners. Belene, an island in the river Danube, was a notorious prison in the 1950s, but was then reportedly closed. However, a former Bulgarian citizen who was imprisoned there until autumn 1974 has provided detailed information about its present operation, including the statement that around 1,300 prisoners are being held there, most of them for political reasons. Of these prisoners, it is alleged, about 500 are Pomaks, ethnic Bulgarians of Moslem faith, many of whom have resisted official efforts to assimilate them by (for example) forcing them to change their Moslem names to Bulgarian names. Another 380 prisoners are Macedonians from the southwest of Bulgaria, who do not have official rights as an ethnic minority.
Apart from these imprisoned members of cultural minorities, it has been reported that another 280 prisoners in Belene include former social democrats, members of the Peasant Party, and dissident communists. A further allegation is that torture is being used in the Belene prison and that some prisoners are reported to have died from this treatment.
Bulgaria still practises banishment or "compulsory settlement" to labour corrective communities. At present eight of AI's adoption and investigation cases are known to have been banished to remote towns or villages. They include Christo Kolev, a distinguished trade unionist and anarchist communist who was transferred to the village of Balvan in the district of Velik Trnovo in the spring of 1975 and whose case was brought to the attention of the World Confederation of Labour in the second half of that year. He is one of a group of several libertarian or anarchist communists (who played an important part in the Bulgarian anti-fascist resistance during World War Two) to be deported without trial for an indefinite term of "corrective labour".
