MOROCCO
In spite of the calls for a general amnesty by the major Moroccan opposition parties at the end of 1974 and during the first months of 1975, the number of political prisoners exceeded 600 throughout 1975. In a campaign designed to coincide with the initiative by the opposition parties, Amnesty International national sections, Morocco coordination groups and adoption groups made a concerted effort to publicize the fate of Moroccan political prisoners in the weeks leading up to 9 July 1975, the birthday of King Hassan II. In a letter to the king on his birthday, AI asked for an amnesty "in furtherance of the spirit of national unity" which the royal government had been fostering during previous months in the wake of Morocco's territorial dispute with Spain over Spanish Sahara.
No amnesty was granted in July 1975, and AI groups therefore continued to work on over 140 adoption and investigation cases - the highest case load of any independent African state. Further arrests occurred in December 1975 in several Moroccan towns. The Research Department continued to receive allegations of torture.
In August 1975 a group of 70 persons, who had been under arrest for political offences since November 1974, appeared before a juge d'instruction in Casablanca. They formed part of a group of leftwing activists arrested in November and December 1974 and held virtually incommunicado since that time. One of their number died under torture during interrogation. It was not until January 1976 that a final group of 26 persons belonging to the same category of prisoners appeared before the juge d'instruction. As late as the end of May, none of the prisoners had received a trial.
A partial amnesty was announced by the Moroccan authorities on 13 December 1975 to mark the Islamic festival of Aid AI Kebir. This followed a decision by King Hassan to commute part of their sentences. Fifty-five prisoners, both criminal and political, received reductions in their prison terms. The freed prisoners included three former cabinet ministers serving prison sentences for corruption, and 11 persons sentenced for political crimes at a trial at Marrakesh in 1971.
In the latter group were a number of AI adoptees, including Ahmed Benjelloun, a leading militant of the opposition Union Socialiste des Forces Populaires (USFP) who was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment at the Marra kesh trial. His release was marred by the murder, on 18 December 1975 of his brother, Omar Benjelloun, who was stabbed and beaten to death outside his home in Casablanca. Omar Benjelloun had a long record of opposition to the government of King Hassan and had been imprisoned on several occasions, and adopted by AI. Those thought to be responsible for his death were arrested shorly after the killing.
Early in 1976, AI, along with other international human rights bodies, prepared to undertake a series of high-level missions to Morocco in an attempt
67	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

to obtain a general amnesty for political prisoners. In May AI sent Jean Hoss, a Luxembourg lawyer, there as its representative.
