BENIN (formerly DAHOMEY)
In June 1975 the government of President Mathieu Kerekou announced that the Minister of the Interior, Captain Michel Aikpe, had been shot dead after having been found in adultery with the President's wife. Captain Aikpe's death was followed by angry demonstrations against the government and by widespread arrests, especially among teachers and trade unionists. About 60 people were detained without trial in prisons and military camps in Cotonou and other
57	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 1975-1976

towns. Although they were reportedly subjected to ill-treatment, many were ultimately released in January 1976.
In October 1975 the government announced once more that it had uncovered a "gigantic plot" allegedly organized by former President Emile Zinsou, who was one of seven alleged plotters against President Kerekou's regime sentenced to death in absentia in March 1975. A wave of arrests took place during October and November, mainly in Cotonou and Porto Novo. According to data reaching the Research Department, some of the prisoners were seriously mistreated and even tortured during their detention.
A further political trial took place in Cotonou in January and early February 1976, at which time the ruling Revolutionary Council of Benin, transformed into a revolutionary tribunal, considered the cases of the persons allegedly involved in the October 1975 plot. As a result, 11 persons were sentenced to death (eight in absentia), three to life imprisonment (one in absentia) and one to 20 years' imprisonment. Four persons were acquitted. On 4 February AI cabled President Kerekou calling for a commutation of the death sentences.
AI groups are currently handling five adoption and two investigation cases in Benin, mostly persons arrested in October and November 1975.
According to reports reaching AI, three former Presidents of Benin (then Dahomey) who were arrested after the coup in October 1972 which brought President Kerekou to power, were still being held under house arrest at Avrankou, a small village northeast of Porto Novo. They are Hubert Maga, Justin Ahomadegbe and Sourou-Migan Apithy.
