CUBA
Amnesty International has concentrated, during 1975-76, on encouraging group actions for individual adopted prisoners of conscience, some of whom have been in prison since 1959. It has pursued, in addition, a program of research in order to overcome the difficulties presented by the lack of detailed information on political prisoners in Cuba and the continuing refusal, in nearly all cases, of the government to reply even to specific inquiries about individual prisoners.
An exception to this practice was made in the case of the cable, sent in July 1975 by Ivan Morris, chairman of AI's United States Section, to Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro, and to Carlos Rafael Rodriguez, Vice Prime Minister and Minister for International Relations, expressing concern over the health of a prisoner jailed in 1965. Assurances were received that every member of society "including criminals" received adequate medical attention.
Typical of the difficulties encountered by groups is the case of Dr Miguel Angel Loredo Garcia, a Franciscan priest sentenced in April 1966 to 15 years' imprisonment for concealment of a political refugee. He was adopted by two groups, one in Sweden and one in Germany, who made continuous appeals for information to no avail. In November 1975 he was included in the worldwide campaign run by AI for Prisoner of Conscience Week. He was released conditionally in February 1976, after serving two-thirds of his sentence. However, the Cuban authorities failed to reply to any of the inquiries.
Similar difficulties have been encountered in attempts to arrange discussions
97	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

on subjects of mutual interest. For example, no reply was received to AI's request to the Cuban Embassy in London for a meeting prior to the 5th United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Prisoners which was held in Geneva n September 1975. Even where Cuban delegates have given recommendations to AI on the procedure to be followed, no replies have been received.
A letter was sent to the minister of justice with details of the cases of 18 adopted prisoners who were reportedly still detained after the expiry of their sentences, in accordance with the request of the delegates at the 1975 Conference of the International Association of Democratic Lawyers in Algiers. Over a year later no reply has been received.
However, in 1975-76 delegates from AI have held occasional and informal discussions with Cuban delegates using the forum provided by the UN and its specialized agencies in New York and Geneva. The aim has been to present the work of AI and to seek the views of the Cuban government on specific human rights issues.
The new constitution of Cuba was ratified at the 1st Congress of the Communist Party of Cuba held in Havana in December 1975. This document provides, in theory, protection of certain basic human rights. It guarantees inter alia the inviolability of the personal integrity of the citizen and denounces the use of violence or pressure of any kind against people to force them to testify. It furthermore assures the right to freedom of speech, religion and assembly but only within the framework of the objectives of socialist society. It finally establishes as a principle that the exercise of any of the freedoms, contrary to the constitution, law or the existence of the objectives of the socialist state, can be punished by law.
Cuba has never denied the existence of political prisoners. However the government has traditionally been vague about both numbers and their identity. The best estimate of numbers is of approximately 4,000-5,000 based on recent Cuban government statements to visitors and public speeches by officials.
It is more difficult to identify the groups which make up the total due to the problems of definition presented by the continually evolving system of law under which individuals can be classified as political prisoners for offences as diverse as currency speculation, absenteeism, sabotage, guerrilla warfare, treason and possession of counter-revolutionary literature. It is likely that only a minority of the total number of political prisoners could be classified as prisoners of conscience.
By category, one could cite (a) religious and conscientious objectors; (b) former revolutionaries and trade unionists who disapproved of the acceptance by the revolutionary leaders of communist theories and in consequence tried to dissociate themselves from the movement; (c) political groupings such as the Movimiento de Recuperación Revolucionaria, Movimiento Revolucionaria del Pueblo, Agrupación Cato, Confederación de Trabajadores Cubanos, etc, who briefly exercised a legitimate role in opposition but became increasingly penetrated by foreign based and controlled movements.
AI has adopted prisoners in all three categories. The persistance of the fear, real or imagined, of counter-revolutionary conspiracies was primarily responsible for the early excesses in the treatment of political prisoners. By the same token, the removal of that fear has been largely responsible for the improvement in conditions.
98
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
By status, prisoners are now divided into two major categories: those who have accepted the rehabilitation plan and those who have rejected it. The first category has the great majority of political prisoners. In return for committing themselves to political indoctrination courses and work programs, prisoners become eligible for greater privileges which lead eventually to a spell in relatively comfortable open prisons (usually farms) with monthly visits and finally release after two-thirds of their sentence have been served. The second category are held in maximum security jails about which there is little recent or reliable information as to the conditions inside.
The earliest reports were of uniformly bad, in some cases appalling, conditions with deficient diet, brutal forced labour, solitary confinement in specially darkened cells, beatings and frequent torture. However the worst of these institutions have now been closed and such indications as there are, suggest much improved conditions with the possible exception of Boniato Prison where reports indicate that some prisoners died in late 1975 as a result of brutal treatment by prison guards.
