INDIA
The large scale arrest of members of all opposition parties in India (except the Communist Party), which followed the declaration of a national state of emergency on 26 June 1975, was perhaps the most significant event of the year in terms of human rights in Asia. The state of emergency was declared because of "internal disturbances". It added a new dimension to the emergency declared for external reasons which had existed since the Bangladesh war in 1971.
The declaration followed a growing anti-corruption campaign led by the widely respected veteran politician, Jaya Prakash Narayan, a follower of Mahatma Gandhi, which had attracted support from most opposition parties. The immediate cause for the imposition of the emergency was a call by the
128
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
opposition parties that Prime Minister Indira Gandhi resign pending a Supreme Court appeal against her conviction by the Allahabad High Court on charges of electoral malpractice.
The government immediately took severe emergency measures, which have been criticized internationally, but which the government claims are allowed by the constitution. On the day of the declaration, strict censorship was imposed and the leaders of the joint opposition parties who had appealed for the Prime Minister's resignation were arrested. They include prominent Indian politicians from both right and left politically, many of whom had taken a leading part in the country's independence movement. Among them were Jaya Prakash Narayan, former Deputy Prime Minister Morarji Desai, former Congress Party minister Asoka Mehta, deputy leader of the Communist Party of India (Marxist) Jyotirmoy Bosu, and also members of the ruling Congress Party itself, such as Chandra Sekhar, a member of parliament. Thousands of members of opposition parties and Gandhian workers were arrested after a 4 July government order banning 26 right and leftwing political groups. Arrests were continuing at the time this report was written.
Shortly after the emergency declaration, President Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed also suspended the right of Indian citizens to apply to the courts for the enforcement of the following constitutional rights: equality before the law (article 14), protection of life and property of the citizen (article 21), protection against arrest and detention without being informed of the grounds for arrest (article 22) and habeas corpus within 24 hours of arrest (article 22). Article 19 of the constitution, providing for the right of freedom of speech, expression and peaceful assemblies and association, was suspended in January 1976.
Parliament also approved a number of important amendments to the constitution. In the courts a number of detainees challenged the legal validity of the emergency declaration. But in August the 38th amendment was introduced barring judicial review of the president's reasons for declaring an emergency. The 39th amendment prevented courts from ruling on electoral irregularities involving senior officials, including the prime minister. The 40th constitutional amendment gives the prime minister immunity from civil and criminal proceedings.
Most political prisoners are held under preventive detention legislation, such as the Maintenance of Internal Security Act (MISA) and the Defence of India Act, whose detention provisions were made applicable for situations of internal disturbances. The MISA was amended several times: the first amendment of 29 June removed the detainee's right to be informed of the grounds for his arrest and made it possible for state governments to detain persons for "dealing effectively with the emergency". Detention could be extended beyond the initial 12-month period, and independent review procedures (by an advisory board) were replaced by a four-monthly government review body.
The second MISA amendment of 16 July withdrew the right to make appeals against detention to a court of law and made criminal code procedures concerning absconders applicable to persons wanted for arrest under the MISA. The third amendment of 10 October 1975 made it an offence to disclose the grounds for detention to anyone, including the courts. The current position of persons detained under emergency legislation was recently summed up by Home Minister Brahmananda Reddy when presenting his annual report to parliament in April 1976. He stated:
129	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
In the case of persons whose detention is declared to be necessary for effectively dealing with the emergency, the grounds of detention shall be treated as confidential matters of state whose disclosure will be against the public interest, and shall not be communicated to the person detained. The latest amendment of 16 November specifies that the expiry or revocation of a detention order shall not bar the making of a new detention order. In effect, these changes in the law introduced indefinite detention without trial and suspended habeas corpus.
This series of measures was aimed at preventing appeals in the courts against detention, which, in spite of the strict emergency regulations, had been made in the courts. The legal basis for these appeals was article 226 of the constitution, which confers the right of citizens to approach high courts for habeas corpus and other writs. The article does not form part of the fundamental rights chapter in the Indian constitution and can therefore not be suspended under emergency powers. Thus, high courts had admitted habeas corpus petitions after the declaration of emergency on the grounds that they could still scrutinize whether detention orders had been made bona fide and whether they conformed to principles of natural justice and common law. However the courts recognized that they could not interfere with detentions on the ground that they violated fundamental rights, which had been suspended under the emergency. Thus, nine state high courts had admitted habeas corpus petitions of 43 persons, including four members of parliament.
But on 28 April 1976, the Supreme Court of India upheld the government's objection against this practice by ruling that habeas corpus petitions were not admissable in any court so long as the emergency remained in force and fundamental rights were suspended. The Supreme Court also upheld as valid the amendment to the MISA which prohibits the disclosure of the grounds of detention to any person.
The Supreme Court judgement was passed by a majority of four to one. In his dissenting judgement, Justice H. R. Khanna was of the opinion that the constitution does not confer the power to any authority to suspend the power of the courts to issue writs of habeas corpus during the period of the emergency. If the Supreme Court were to uphold the government's contention (which it did), this would have serious consequences for the rule of law: "... . the position would be that, so far as the government officers were concerned, they would not be governed by any law, they would not be answerable to any court, and they would be wielding more or less despotic powers in matters relating to the life and personal liberty of citizens" (The Statesman, 29 April 1976). Thus he described the situation of detention of political prisoners as prevailing at present.
On the day following the emergency declaration, 27 June, Amnesty International made a public appeal to Prime Minister Indira Gandhi to free all political prisoners arrested under the MISA. In a cable, AI said the arrests constituted a "departure from the long standing traditions of democracy in India". AI national sections visited Indian embassies to express- their concern. One month later, on 16 July 1975, AI proposed to Foreign Minister Y. B. Chavan that an AI mission should visit India to discuss the measures taken tinder the emergency. However, no response has yet been received.
On learning of the first arrests, the Research Department began to collect data on individual prisoners as the basis for a large scale adoption program.
130
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
AI groups are now working for 120 adopted prisoners, a figure which is expected to rise in the near future.
On 6 October 1975, five members of parliament presented a report to Minister of Home Affairs Brahmananda Reddy requesting an independent inquiry into reports that political prisoners had been seriously beaten in New Delhi's Tihar Jail on 2 October. On 8 October, AI launched an urgent action campaign through its national sections asking parliamentarians to send telegrams to the minister requesting that a full and independent inquiry be made into allegations of ill-treatment.
The Indian authorities have shown considerable sensitivity in the face of these approaches.
In August, in an interview with Socialist India, Prime Minister Gandhi charged that AI was "very active in the hate India campaign". Deputy Secretary General Hans Ehrenstrale, in a letter of 15 August, replied that the work of AI was well known to the Indian government. He said AI was concerned about the detention of political prisoners in all countries, irrespective of political, ideological or geographical considerations. "Any suggestion that we are engaged in a hate campaign against any country is totally unfounded", he said. But on 19 September the Prime Minister charged that AI was among the organizations "not at all worried over events in countries under open authoritarian rule where people were killed, but raised its voice if some people were detained".
The strict censorship regulations in force, by prohibiting publication of news on political imprisonment, have encouraged widely varying unofficial estimates of the numbers detained, which range as high as 175,000. Government claims that many detainees have been released are certainly true. Equally, although there is no comprehensive official figure for arrests under the emergency, the government has conceded that a large number of political prisoners remain in detention.
On 23 August 1975, Minister of Information V. C. Shukhla stated that the total of arrests since the emergency did not exceed 10,000. He claimed that the majority of arrests since the emergency had been made among economic offenders, of which a number were arrests made on purely political grounds. In one of India's 22 states, Maharashtra, alone. Chief Minister S. B. Chavan stated on 17 November 1975 that 3,000 persons remained in detention out of the 13,500 originally arrested in that state.
But large scale arrests continued to take place over the year. More recent examples include the arrest of thousands of persons taking part in a satyagraha (non-violent) program which was initiated in November 1975, the arrest of 16,000 persons in West Bengal, mainly trade unionists, on and after 6 January 1976 for participating in strikes against the government's Bonus Act, and the arrest of hundreds of opposition members in Tamil Nadu following the recent imposition of president's rule on 31 January 1976. Most recently, Minister of State for Home Affairs Om Mehta announced on 17 May the arrest of more than 7,000 people in a government move to stop circulation of clandestine literature opposing the emergency.
On the basis of these and other official figures made in various states, AI is certain that a minimum of 40,000 persons are now detained without trial under emergency regulations for political reasons, although many more may actually be held. Reports by independent observers, estimating the total of
131	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

dissidents at 100,000, possibly indicate the true scale of political imprisonment. On 16 March 1976, AI published a list of parliamentarians in prison in all countries. More than half the names on the list are of 59 Indians, members of the Rajya Sabha, the Lok Sabha and state legislatures.
Of the cases AI has taken up, three prominent political prisoners are among those so far released. Jaya Prakash Narayan, aged 73, whose kidney illness had seriously deteriorated during the period he was detained in Chandrigarh Hospital in isolation from any other prisoners, was finally released on 4 December 1975 from a Bombay hospital after 30 days' parole. Charan Singh, aged 73, chairman of the Bharatiya Lok Dal, was released on 7 March after spending eight months in detention. Asoka Mehta, general secretary of the Congress (Opposition - O) Party and former cabinet minister, aged 64, was released from solitary detention in Rohtak Jail on 17 May 1976. He had been suffering from a liver ailment. AI had organized a campaign for his release in September 1975.
In a letter of 30 April 1976 to the Prime Minister, AI appealed for a return to full constitutional rule on the first anniversary of the emergency declaration. It urged the< government to consider announcing a general amnesty for political prisoners held without trial on that occasion. The letter reviewed legal and constitutional developments which appear to contravene the provisions of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights and asked for verification of reports regarding the detention under which some of the political prisoners were arrested and detained. Reports were cited that former Deputy Prime Minister Morarji Desai and Mrs Mrinal Gore, a socialist member of the legislative assembly, are among the political prisoners being kept in total isolation from other political prisoners.
AI also requested the Indian government to investigate reports of ill-treat-ment of political prisoners. These reports allege that the prisoners have been severely beaten after arrest on sensitive parts of the body, hung upside down or suspended with hands tied behind their backs, and also that prisoners had been burned with candles. AI sought assurances from the Indian government that the provisions of the UN Resolution on Torture and the General Assembly resolution on torture would be implemented.
On 5 December, AI cabled its deep concern at the hanging of two members of the Communist Party of India (Marxist), commonly known as Naxalites, who were executed on 1 December 1975. Kista Gowd and Jangam Bhoomiah, both peasants from Andra Pradesh, who had awaited execution for nearly three years, were hanged for participation in politically motivated killings in the state. AI had earlier made several representations for clemency on their behalf.
The substance of the allegations made in the Report on Prison Conditions in West Bengal (see Annual Report 1974/75) concerning prisoners held in Bihar and West Bengal for alleged involvement with extremist leftwing political activities were substantiated by Mary Tyler, who was released from five years' detention without trial in Bihar jails. Her detailed account confirms that such prisoners are held in insanitary and overcrowded conditions (for example, Jamshedpur District Jail, built for 137, housed 1,100 prisoners in the summer of 1975), that political prisoners in Bihar have very little chance of ever being brought to trial and that, when released, political prisoners are often re-arrested under preventive detention laws like the MISA. Her report
132
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
confirms that some prisoners, alleged Naxalites, have been kept in iron fetters in Bihar jails for four years.
