PERU
Amnesty International groups continued working for 11 peasants accused of guerrilla activity in Cajamarca Province. Detained between July 1972 and December 1974 under the military Law of Justice, all alleged severe torture and the murder of members of their communities during counter-insurgency campaigns by the Guardia Nacional in mid-1972. All were detained when troops assaulted the isolated community of Huarango, and they were forced
109	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

to confess to actions they had no part in. Following the trial and conviction of the 11 by a military court in Lambayeque in March 1975, when sentences ranging from 2 to 9 years were passed, the cases were reviewed by the Research Department and it was decided to adopt them, despite the original charge of violent activities.
President Velasco Alvarado was replaced by General Francisco Morales Bermudez in a coup in August 1975. Al wrote to the new President on 17 September 1975 in order to introduce the work of AI and to express recognition of his decision to decree an unrestricted amnesty for the numerous journalists, trade unionists and political activists exiled during the previous government. AI also suggested that a general amnesty for all political prisoners should be announced on the anniversary of the Peruvian Revolution on 3 October.
On 12 December, AI learned of the incommunicado detention on 4 December of Dr Genaro Ledesma, lawyer and legal advisor to the Peruvian Federation of Mine and Metallurgical Workers. A cable was immediately sent to Minister of the Interior General Cesar Campos Quesada expressing concern at the detention. It was later learned that three other labour lawyers had also been detained and held completely incommunicado. Their whereabouts were unknown even to their families until early January.
On 21 January, AI again cabled President Morales Bermudez expressing concern over the continued detentions of the four. The same day, AI national sections were asked to take immediate action on the case, and a news release was issued. A visit was also made by AI Deputy Secretary General Hans Ehrenstrale to the Peruvian Ambassador in London, Adhemar Montagne, who agreed to transmit AI's representations to his government.
The four lawyers were detained in their offices on 4 December by agents of the Peruvian Investigative Police (PIP), whereupon they effectively disappeared, since authorities denied they had been detained. A letter smuggled from the Amazon jungle penal colony of El Sepa to the families of the four in early January was the first indication the four were truly in detention. The letter told how they had been transferred from jail to jail in Lima during their first week in detention - a state of affairs resulting in the rejection of habeas corpus proceedings by civil courts, as it could not be proven the four were in custody. They were finally taken to El Sepa by a military aircraft.
AI also took action on the related cases of Victor Cuadros and Hernán Cuentas, leaders of the National Federation of Mine and Metallurgical Workers. Although information on their cases was received much later, they were detained at about the same time as the labour lawyers and received similar treatment. They were transferred to three different Lima police stations. On 25 February, after three months' incommunicado detention, the wives of the prisoners learned that their husbands had been on hunger strike since 21 February. They eventually located the two in the Lima Police Hospital, but their insistence on seeing their husbands resulted in the removal of the two very sick men from hospital and their immediate transfer to El Sepa.
On 11 March, AI cabled President Morales Bermudez requesting immediate presidential intervention to guarantee the hunger strikers proper medical attention. AI also requested the immediate release of Señor Cuadros and Señor Cuentas, as well as other trade unionists and labour lawyers detained without charge.
On 25 March, AI issued a news release reporting the receipt of a letter from
110
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 1975-1976
the four detained labour lawyers announcing they were joining the hunger strike begun by Hernan Cuentas and Victor Cuadros. Shortly afterwards, the six hunger strikers were returned to Lima where they received medical attention.
AI adopted the six detained trade unionists and the five trade union legal advisers. During April and May all nine adopted trade unionists and legal advisers were released in an amnesty.
A total of 14 Peruvian prisoners are currently under adoption or investigation by groups.
