IRAQ
Iraq remains one of the most serious violators of human rights in the Middle East. Amnesty International continues to receive reports of arbitrary arrests, routine torture, summary executions and inadequate legal safeguards. It is, however, difficult to give a comprehensive picture of political imprisonment because of the paucity of detailed and reliable information. This is due largely to the secrecy which surrounds arrests, detentions and executions in Iraq. Equally, it is difficult to apply traditional AI techniques where information is so inadequate, and where the government tends to be highly sensitive about what it considers as interventions in its internal affairs.
There are no official or unofficial figures for the number of persons currently imprisoned for political reasons. Throughout the eight years of Baath Party rule, all opposition has been systematically suppressed, and has been considerably reduced as a result. But the government continues to react strongly
184
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
to what it believes to be a threat to it. Despite being almost impossible to give even a rough estimate of the numbers of political prisoners, or even of categories, a summary of the information in AI's possession and of the initiatives AI has taken this year, will indicate the identity of those liable to arrest.
AI believes that there are up to 20 persons, mostly former members of the government or closely associated with it, who have been in prison since 1968-69, although it has little information about them. There may be others still detained following the numerous coup attempts that have taken place since 1968. Abdul Khaliq Sammarrai, a former member of the Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) is believed to be the only one implicated in the June 1973 coup attempt who was not executed. His death sentence was commuted to life imprisonment with hard labour. In early 1976 an alleged coup attempt led to the arrest of a number of Baath Party members and officers, including Abdul Salloum Sammarrai, formerly Minister of Interior and more recently Ambassador in India, who is reported to have been sentenced to 7 years' imprisonment on charges of conspiring against the state.
Membership of the Communist Party, although legal for Iraqi civilians, is banned for members of the armed forces. Sometime towards the end of 1975 about six members of the Iraqi armed forces were reported to have been executed for their alleged connections with the Iraqi communist party.
During the Kurdish hostilities of 1974/75, reports of arrests were widespread. More than 550 Kurds, including women and children, were reported detained, although unconfirmed reports claim all are now released. Also arrested at this time as potential opposition were between 200-250 former freemasons, all very elderly professional men. An unknown number were tried in December 1974 on charges of being foreign intelligence agents. Five were sentenced to death, but their death sentences were later commuted to life imprisonment. Others received prison sentences of up to 20 years. It is not known how many remain in prison.
The Shia community in Iraq, a majority in terms of numbers but treated by a Sunni-dominated government as a minority, have traditionally been a source of opposition. During 1974-75 they were critical of the government's handling of the war with the Kurds, and consequently a group of about 30, including religious leaders, were arrested. Five of them were executed in December 1974 for alleged membership of an illegal organization. It is not known whether the others are still in prison.
The past year has seen unrest in the Shia theological center of Najaf over the government's proposed nationalization of educational institutions in the area. Demonstrations in protest resulted in the arrest of several university students, including the son of the Shia religious leader, Ayatollah Khumeini. AI wrote to Foreign Minister Saadoum Hammadi on 5 December 1975 expressing concern at their detention. No reply was received, but AI later learned that all students had been released by the end of the year. Reports of further arrests in February 1976 of Iraqi Shias and pilgrims to the holy Shia town of Karbala have recently been received and are being investigated.
Rigorous censorship and restrictions on freedom of expression are imposed by the Iraqi government. One way to circumvent this is to publish abroad. One young writer, 26-year-old Abdul Sattar Nasir, was arrested in January 1975 and severely tortured after a short story he wrote, indirectly critical of the government, was published in Beirut, Lebanon. He was reported to have been
185	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

tried by a "publications" court, but his case was later referred to the state security court in connection with charges of espionage, an offence punishable by death.
On 28 October, AI wrote to Foreign Minister Hammadi asking for details of the exact charges against Mr Nasir, the date of his proposed trial, and assurances that he was allowed access to a defence lawyer of his choosing and to his family. Although Iraq has a strong legal tradition and a sophisticated legal system, political prisoners tend to fall outside the legal framework. Trials, if held at all, would be by a secret revolutionary (military) court, and a defence lawyer, if allowed, would be chosen by the state.
The Jewish community in Iraq has now dwindled to several hundred, but two members of the Jewish community for whom AI continues to work are Shua Soffer and Akram Baher. They were arrested in 1968 and 1969 respectively, although there has never been any official acknowledgement of their imprisonment and unconfirmed reports suggest that they may have died in prison. Following the Iraqi government's adoption on 26 November 1975 of a resolution entitling all Iraqi Jews who left Iraq after 1948 to return home and enjoy equal rights with Iraqi citizens in accordance with the law, AI wrote to President Ahmad Hassan AI Bakr appealing for information about Mr Baher and Mr Soffer, but no reply has been received.
An unknown number of Kurds, arrested since the Iraq/Iran peace agreement of March 1975, are reported to be currently detained in Iraq. This is despite the government's overt policy of reconciliation and the announcement of general amnesties for Kurdish soldiers and civilians, for Kurdish refugees in Iran, for deserters from the Iraqi army and for Kurds convicted of crimes specifically related to incidents in Kurdistan. As the Kurdish Democratic Party (KDP) and the Kurdish Nationalist Union (KNU) (founded in Syria in June 1975 under the leadership of Jalal Talabani) began to reorganize themselves inside Iraq, reports were received of the arrest of groups of members of both parties. In October/November 1975 about 200 members of the KDP and 70 members of the KNU were reported to have been arrested for distributing pamphlets.
On 5 December AI wrote to Foreign Minister Hammadi expressing concern at these reports. AI asked for information on the grounds for the arrests and for assurances that the detainees were given full legal rights. No reply has been received. As far as is known, these persons are still in detention in Baghdad. Others liable to arrest, according to reports received by AI, are deserters from the Iraqi army (even those who took advantage of the amnesty) and Kurds who illegally cross into Iran and who can be extradited back to Iraq in accordance with the Iraq/Iran agreement.
The torture of political prisoners is still reported to be routine procedure for the purpose of eliciting information, extracting confessions, intimidating other potential opponents and preventing prisoners talking about their treatment after their release. During 1974-75, AI received the names of 43 Kurds who were reported to have died as a result of torture.
During the year of the present report AI received for the first time for many years a first-hand account of torture. A deserter from the Iraqi army who was arrested in April 1975 and detained in a camp in the town of Diwaniyah, but who later escaped, alleges that detainees in the camp were maltreated when being interrogated for details of their families and the Kurdish
186
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
armed forces {pesh merga). He said he himself was beaten, stabbed with a bayonet and threatened with execution, after refusing to join the Baath Party.
The incidence of reported executions in Iraq is probably the highest in the Middle East. However, precise and well documented information on executions is difficult to obtain. This is due to the official policy of silence on such events and the uncertainty of even the families, since bodies are often not returned to them after execution. Most executions take place summarily after a military trial. The right of appeal is never permitted in cases of death sentences, although officially the actual execution should not take place before confirmation by the President who can commute the sentence.
During 1974-75 AI received reports of the execution of 91 persons, including two women. This year further reports of executions have been received, in particular of Kurds. On 3 June 1975 AI cabled President Al Bakr requesting the commutation of death sentences passed on 39 Kurdish students detained in Abu Ghreib prison. It is not known whether the sentences were commuted.
On 10 February 1976 another letter was sent to Foreign Minister Hammadi asking for clarification of reports that up to 150 Kurds had been executed since the Iraq/Iran agreement, and that 70 Kurds were currently awaiting execution in Abu Ghreib prison and others in Mosul prison. Kurdish sources claimed that those who had been executed included:
—	a number of Kurds detained before the Iraq/Iran agreement;
—	some of those who fled to Iran and took advantage of the amnesty to return to Iraq, such as members of the Kurdish armed forces (pesh merga), of the Kurdish intelligence service (Paras tin), and others closely associated with the Kurdish leader, Mulla Mustapha Barzani;
—	and a member of the legislative assembly of the autonomous region in Iraq, Raouf Mustapha Ghafour, a lawyer from Suleimaniya. He was one of 34 Kurds shot in Kirkuk in May 1975, and the only one of the group whose body was reportedly returned to his family.
On 19 February 1976 the Iraqi ambassador in London replied to Al's inquiries by saying:
I would like to seize this opportunity to assure you that the faulty allegations regarding "the death sentences and executions in Iraq" referred to in your aforesaid letter are sheer fabrications of some quarters who have the intention to damage the good reputation that Iraq has been enjoying since the outset of its progressive nationalist revolution of July 17 1968.
He affirmed that the government of Iraq "has declared a general amnesty in respect to those who have taken part in Kurdish armed movement in the northern part of Iraq".
A more widely reported execution was that of Alexander Leon Aaronson, a 38-year-old Jewish male nurse from the Netherlands, who travelled to Kurdistan in the summer of 1974 to give medical assistance to the Kurds. He was arrested in Kurdistan in March 1975 following the Iraq/Iran agreement. He was sentenced to death by a revolutionary court on charges of spying for Israel and acting as an adviser to the Kurdish leader, Mulla Mustapha Barzani. The Iraqi News Agency on 4 November reported that he was executed on 24 October. The Iraqi ambassador to the Netherlands two days later confirmed the death sentence but denied that Mr Aaronson had been executed.
On 7 November AI sent a letter to Foreign Minister Hammadi asking for
187	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

clarification of these conflicting reports. On 19 November AI sent a cable to President Al Bakr urging that, if Mr Aaronson was still in detention, his medical condition be taken into consideration and the sentence be commuted. The Dutch government received confirmation only in mid-March 1976 that Mr Aaronson had been executed three months previously.
At the time of writing, AI is awaiting a reply from the Iraqi government to its proposal to send a mission to the country during 1976.
