SINGAPORE
Amnesty International estimates that more than 60 men and women are presently detained without trial in the Republic of Singapore. Among these are four men who have been held without trial since 1963. Others have been held for periods of up to 10 years.
Although more than 20 detainees were released in 1975 (including the lawyer T. T. Rajah, who was adopted by AI and who was released with others in December), arrests have continued. The detainees are alleged by the government to be members or sympathizers of the illegal Malayan Communist
147	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

Party (MCP) or of MCP satellite organizations. They are held without trial under the provisions of Singapore's Internal Security Act.
The detainees include a number of prominent opposition politicians, particularly members of the Barisan Sosialis (Socialist Front) party, journalists, trade unionists and students.
At the time of writing, individual AI groups are active on the cases of 45 men and women who are believed to be detained without trial in Singapore, including a number held indefinitely under banishment orders.
On 28 January 1976 AI wrote to Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew strongly urging that Said Zahari, Dr Lim Hock Siew, Ho Toon Chin and Lee Tse Tong, four adopted political prisoners who have been detained without trial since 1963, should be released immediately and unconditionally. AI urged that men and women who are held without trial in Singapore should either be brought to a fair trial or released from detention. AI noted that no reply has been received from the Prime Minister in response to a letter of 25 September 1974 which pressed for the ending of the practice of caning certain convicted criminals. AI urged that steps be taken to abolish the death penalty in Singapore. No reply to this second letter has yet been received.
In February 1976 AI published a Briefing Paper on Singapore. The briefing paper describes the use of the Internal Security Act and complex citizenship and banishment laws as means of repressing and discouraging legitimate, nonviolent political activity in the island. It notes the use of caning which leaves permanent scars, the practice referred to in AI's letter of 28 January 1976, as punishment for certain criminal offences, and the frequent imposition and carrying out of the death penalty as punishment for certain crimes in Singapore.
The briefing paper also draws attention to the control and intimidation of the press by the government, which has led to the arrest and detention of journalists. In addition, it refers to consistent allegations by ex-detainees and detainees' families that political prisoners are subjected to "mental and physical tortures", primarily for the purpose of breaking their resistance and securing statements of political confession and recantation. The briefing paper notes the consistent complaint that detainees wearing only light clothing are interrogated in very cold air-conditioned cells, and that during round-the-clock questioning they are often forced to do repeated and strenuous exercises, resulting in severe strain and fatigue.
