YEMEN ARAB REPUBLIC
In November 1975 Amnesty International submitted a report to the government of the Yemen Arab Republic (YAR - North Yemen) based on the findings of a legal and research mission to the YAR in May 1975 (see AI Annual Report 1974/75). During this mission AI delegates had visited three prisons in Sanaa, the capital of the country: the Citadel, Al Rada' prison, and a women's prison. They discussed with Minister of the Interior Yahya Al Mutawakkel and prison officials the problem of political imprisonment, the legal system in relation to political offences and prison conditions. The report contained a list of recommendations covering prisons and prison conditions, detention and legal procedures and capital punishment.
The report drew attention to the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Offenders, recommended that government plans to build a new prison should be considered a priority, and that the Citadel, where most political prisoners are held, be closed down as soon as possible. It also recommended that facilities for workshops, literacy classes and sport should be provided where possible (none of these facilities are at present available in any prisons), that better accommodation be found for women prisoners and that separate accommodation be provided for the insane. It was further suggested that food provisions for prisoners be improved.
In connection with detention procedures, the report noted that recent official directives had limited to one week the time a detainee could be held before referral to a court, and to three months the time a prisoner could be detained without trial. But the report stressed the importance of stricter and more defined legal procedures as a means of preventing ill-treatment or torture. The detainee should therefore have access to a judicial authority within 24 hours, should be
195	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

allowed regular visits from his family or someone representing his family and have someone to defend him, either a lawyer or a friend.
The report also recommended that any allegations of torture be investigated and that convicted prisoners be informed, verbally or in writing, of their sentence, so that they and their families know how long they can expect to be detained. (Two prisoners whom AI delegates met in Al Rada' prison claimed they did not know the length of their sentence.)
The report further noted that in the Yemen Arab Republic, the death sentence was regularly passed on persons convicted of murder or political acts of sabotage, and that from April to December 1973 about 50 executions had taken place. On the other hand, it appeared that a number of offences previously punishable by death, such as adultery, were now punishable by imprisonment only. Since the Yemen Arab Republic's legal system is in the process of development, AI urged the government to consider abolishing the death penalty.
Finally, the report drew attention to two documents, the United Nations Draft Principles on Freedom from Arbitrary Arrest and Detention and the 1975 Declaration of The Hague on an International Code of Police Ethics (see p 41). It suggested that they be used in the training of all police and security personnel, and that human rights, as embodied in international covenants, be included in the curricula of the many new schools currently being built in the country.
At the time of writing, no reply to this report has been received from the YAR government.
AI has no adopted prisoners in the Yemen Arab Republic. This is due to lack of information and to the difficulty of identifying those political prisoners who would come within AI's statute. It is estimated that there are several hundred prisoners, from both the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen (PDRY) as well as from the Yemen Arab Republic, who are convicted or detained for alleged political acts of sabotage. Despite plans for economic and political union between the YAR and the PDRY, reports of infiltration and acts of aggression between the two countries continue, and the PDRY authorities are alleged to take advantage of social and economic unrest in the south of the Yemen Arab Republic to recruit saboteurs.
Political opposition also comes from tribal groups, who oppose the present government's attempts to centralize authority and so reduce the traditional powers of tribal leaders. A pro-royalist coup attempt in August was followed by an unknown number of arrests. It was allegedly instigated by the exiled Prince Muhammad bin Husain, a cousin of the former Imam of Yemen, with tribal support. There is also opposition from leftwing elements in the country who are critical of the government's internal social and economic policies and its strengthening ties with Saudi Arabia and other "rightwing" countries. The only reports of arrests of leftwingers received by AI this year concern some members of the Yemeni branch of the World Peace Council, but AI has been unable to establish whether they are still detained.
According to the information available, it would appear that non-violent political opponents or critics of the government are not usually subjected to long term imprisonment. Those in ministerial or official positions are either dismissed from their posts, or dispatched abroad as ambassadors, or placed under house arrest. Those who are imprisoned, are usually detained for a very short period of time only.
196
