YUGOSLAVIA
In 1975-76 one manifestation of the efforts of the Yugoslav government to ensure the future stability and security of their state was a dramatic series of political arrests and trials. The number of prisoners whose cases are under adoption or investigation by Amnesty International groups has risen to over 100, and a considerable number of other cases are being studied by the Research Department.
Most known political arrests and trials in the past year have been of groups rather than single individuals. According to a statement in early 1976 by the Yugoslav Federal Minister of the Interior, Franjo Herljevic, 200 people were arrested in 1975 in connection with "activities against the people and state". To these must be added an estimated 86 persons arrested for political offences in the first four months of 1976. As this report is being written, AI has 101 prisoners in Yugoslavia under adoption or investigation by its groups.
President Josip Broz Tito, in a March 1976 radio interview in Sweden, admitted the scale of the problem when he acknowledged the existence of a considerable number of political prisoners in Yugoslavia, most of whom he described as "Stalinists". Indeed, the high rate of arrest of communists officially regarded as sympathetic to Moscow (and therefore referred to as "Comin-formists", after the international communist organization from which Yugoslavia was expelled in 1948) was the principal element in the increase of political imprisonment in Yugoslavia in 1975-76.
Over the past year the Yugoslav authorities have continued to allow AI officials to come to Yugoslavia to study and discuss with them cases of political imprisonment. Professor Frits Riiter, of Amsterdam University in the Netherlands, who had earlier attended the trials of Dr Djura Djurovic and Mihajlo Mihajlov (see AI's Annua! Report 1974/75) twice visited officials of the ministry of justice, who allowed him to see the prisoner Dr Djurovic in December 1975. At the same time agreement in principle was reached for an AI mission to visit Belgrade in the summer of 1976 to discuss with high level Yugoslav authorities human rights problems in the Yugoslav and international contexts.
In February 1976 AI sent an official observer, Dr Marius Broekmeyer of the University of Amsterdam, to the trial in Belgrade of four "Cominformists" charged with "crimes against the state" in connection with their alleged criticism form the Cominformist point of view of developments in Yugoslavia since 1948. The trial was officially designated as closed to the public and Dr Broekmeyer was not admitted to the proceedings, although he was courteously received by state officials and allowed to inform himself about the case from official documents.
The four defendants, Dusan Brkic (a former prime minister of the Croatian republic), Milovan Stevanovic (an ex-editor of the national news agency Tanjug), Ljubomir Radulovic and Radovan Zigic, were sentenced respectively to 8, 10, 71 and 64 years' imprisonment. From information available to A I,
178
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
it appears that they were convicted for expressing their critical opinions to acquaintances, and there was no substantial evidence that they were involved in any insurrectionary conspiracy warranting such sentences.
Other Cominformist trials in the past year have invariably produced guilty verdicts, and sentences have ranged from several years' to 15 years' imprisonment. In December 1975 AI's Research Department produced and circulated a comprehensive background paper regarding the imprisonment of "Comin-formists" with a view to informing the international public of the nature and extent of the problem.
In addition to the campaign against "Cominformists", other Yugoslav citizens have been imprisoned in the past year for offences related to nationalist activities or other types of political dissidence. Such cases vary from Serbians, Croatians and Albanians (in the autonomous region of Kosovo) imprisoned for pursuing nationalist aims, to Yugoslav lawyers imprisoned for their civil rights activities.
In the latter category the cases of Srdja Popovic, a Belgrade lawyer who has defended many persons charged with political "offences" in the past 10 years, attained considerable international prominence because his was the first known case in which a Yugoslav lawyer was convicted and imprisoned directly on account of his courtroom defence of a client. AI's Swedish Section sent an observer, Gunnar Berg, to the March 1976 trial of Mr Popovic. It was charged that Mr Popovic had "spread hostile propaganda" during the 1974 trial of Professor Dragoljub Ignjatovic (who was adopted by AI) when he had argued that Mr Ignjatovic's critical statements about the Yugoslav political and economic situation should be considered true unless they could be proved in court to be false. Mr Popovic was convicted and sentenced to one year's imprisonment. AI protested publicly against the conviction. In May 1976, an appeal court suspended Mr Popovic's prison sentence. But at the same time he was disbarred from legal practice for one year.
On 6 December 1975 two adopted prisoners of A I, the leading dissident writer Mihajlo Mihajlov and the Croatian Christian writer and French citizen Mirko Vidovic, began a hunger strike in the prison of Sremska'Mitrovica together with an Orthodox priest. They embarked upon this hunger strike as a protest against underheated cells, lack of reading material and the fact that political prisoners are not recognized by the Yugoslavs as a separate category. The hunger strike was marked throughout by conflicting reports. In view of unofficial information that one of the three, Mr Mihajlov, was in very bad health, AI adoption groups and national sections undertook a press and letter campaign on behalf of the three prisoners.
Less is known at the time of writing about the present circumstances of Mirko Vidovic, who was sentenced on 16 July 1971 to 4 years' imprisonment on a charge of undermining the unity of Yugoslavia and its system, and whose sentence had been increased after he apparently had refused to give evidence against other prisoners. It is known that he is already suffering from severe stomach troubles, and that his health has deteriorated during his imprisonment.
At the beginning of 1976 AI learned that the Croatian Miljenko Hrkac had been sentenced to death for the fourth time in connection with his alleged role in a bomb explosion in a Belgrade cinema in 1968. In February 1976 national sections of AI cabled and wrote to President Tito urging commutation of the death sentence on humanitarian grounds.
Middle East
The greatest obstacle to Amnesty International's work for political prisoners in the Middle East is still the lack of reliable and detailed information. This is particularly true for those countries, such as Iran and Iraq, where the human rights situation gives the greatest cause for concern, and, to a somewhat lesser extent, for Oman, Syria and Libya. Allegations of torture, or reports of death sentences may come too late for AI to initiate the necessary action on a prisoner's behalf. Equally, information on political arrests may be too vague to enable the Research Department to identify prisoners of conscience or to intervene effectively on their behalf with the governments concerned. In the case of Saudi Arabia, the Yemen Arab Republic and some of the Gulf States, the inadequacy of information inhibits any informed assessment of the human rights situation in these countries.
The reasons for this general paucity of information on political imprisonment in the Middle East are various.' In the case of Iran and Iraq, and also to some extent Libya and Syria, repressive systems have intimidated the population, including the legal profession, into silence. Strict press censorship imposed by most Middle Eastern governments is another reason and Lebanon, once the Arab world's center for information and the news media, is no longer able to function as such since fighting broke out in mid-1975.
There is also a general lack of awareness in the Middle East of individual legal rights, both nationally and internationally. There is also no tradition, when human rights have been violated, of seeking the assistance or intervention of independent legal institutions. There is also a general lack of information about - and in some cases a suspicion of - international, humanitarian organizations like AI.
AI's activities this year have therefore focused as much on finding ways to increase awareness of its statute and activities as on work for individual prisoners. Attempts have been made to disseminate more information into the Middle East about AI and its activities, particularly material in the Arabic language. A 12-page booklet in Arabic entitled "Amnesty International, Its Aims and Activities" was published in April 1976, and a version in Farsi is being considered. A briefing paper on the legal and human rights situation in the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen, published in May 1976, is also to be translated into Arabic. Both publications are being widely distributed to Arab governments, embassies, the news media, lawyers' associations and universities.
Attention is also being paid to the importance of keeping individuals and organizations in the Middle East informed about Ai's concerns, and of increasing Middle Eastern participation in AI's activities. Every opportunity is taken to
180
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
introduce AI to leading personalities from the Middle East when they travel abroad or attend conferences. An example was the International Islamic Conference held in London in April 1976, which was attended by eminent Moslem scholars, officials and lawyers.	4
AI has also tried to send observers to political trials whenever possible, since this gives AI first hand information on a country's legal system and its court procedures. During the past year lawyers were sent to observe trials in Egypt and in Israel. Most political prisoners in the Middle East, however, are held without trial, or their trials are held in secret, or information about trials reaches AI after the event. Thus the opportunity to send an observer to a trial in the region arises very infrequently.
Legal and research missions to the Middle East are also important in an area where traditionally personal contact has always been more effective than communication by correspondence. Certainly AI's written interventions with most Middle Eastern governments on behalf of individual prisoners have tended to go unanswered, whereas governments with whom AI has established direct contact are more responsive.
Although no major missions have taken place this past year, a number are being planned for the near future. A mission to Libya has been accepted by the Libyan authorities, while the agreement of the governments of Syria, Iraq and Bahrain is still being sought for missions to these countries. The government of Oman, on the other hand, has refused permission for AI to send a mission there.
