POLAND
Freedom of expression is limited in Poland by the existence of such legislation as article 271 of the penal code, which prescribes imprisonment for
164
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
"whoever disseminates false information which could cause serious damage to the interests of the Polish People's Republic ... or passes on the same information to foreign organizations regarded as hostile to the interests of the Polish People's Republic".	k
In 1975-76 Amnesty International's attention was drawn to several cases of imprisonment under this law. One such case was that of Emil Morgiewicz. Mr Morgiewicz served a 4-year prison sentence from 1970 for his political activity. On the basis of this prison experience he wrote a detailed "memorandum" on the treatment of prisoners in Poland. The Morgiewicz memorandum contained serious allegations regarding overcrowded and insanitary conditions in some Polish prisons and the subjection of some prisoners to brutal mistreatment. Mr Morgiewicz signed the document and sent copies to the legal commission of the Polish Sejm (parliament) as well as to international organizations including AI.
In July 1975 AI wrote to Polish Minister of Internal Affairs Stanislaw Kowalczyk urging an official inquiry into the allegations made by Mr Morgiewicz. In August 1975 Mr Morgiewicz was arrested and charged under the above mentioned article with "disseminating false information about Polish penitentiary institutions". At the same time Adam Wojciechowski was arrested as an accomplice to Mr Morgiewicz's crime. Although both men were released within three weeks, at the end of May 1976 both were still under indictment, AI adopted Mr Morgiewicz as a prisoner of conscience and in October 1975 members of the International Secretariat visited the Polish ambassador in London to express AI's concern at his imprisonment.
Another case in which a Polish citizen was arrested under legislation which deliberately restricts freedom of expression was that of Stanislaw Kruszynski, a student and bookseller. Mr Kruszynski was sentenced to 10 months' imprisonment in the autumn of 1975 on charges of "disseminating false information aiming to disrupt the political, social and economic order of the Polish People's Republic". This charge appears to have related solely to the contents of the defendant's personal correspondence with members of his family.
During the past year a number of letters and petitions were sent to the Sejm in protest against amendments officially proposed for the Polish constitution, which, it was feared, would adversely affect human rights. A memorandum signed by 59 Polish intellectuals urging effective guarantees of fundamental human rights was followed by several similar memoranda, which were acknowledged by the Polish authorities and which did contribute to the amendment of certain clauses.
However, many signatories of the various unofficial submissions have since been subjected to blacklisting and withdrawal of their work from publication. As far as is known to AI, none of them has been arrested.
