ISRAEL
< In June 1975 John Mortimer, a British lawyer, went to Israel on behalf of Amnesty International to observe the trial of Muzna Nicola, an Israeli Arab nurse. She was charged with being a member of the Al Fatah guerrilla organization, performing services for it and gathering information likely to damage Israel's security. The trial took place before a civil court in Haifa. Miss Nicola was sentenced to 4 years' imprisonment, of which 2\ years were suspended.
Many individual cases were raised during the year in letters to the Israeli authorities. In particular, an inquiry was made on 13 February 1976 about the treatment of Shawki Khatib, who is serving an 8-year sentence for alleged espionage. On 23 March 1976 AI asked for information about the reported arrests of 89 Palestinian students in the occupied territories while on vacation from their studies at Egyptian universities.
In a letter of 9 September 1975 to Minister of Justice Haim Zadok, AI referred to two allegations of torture which were the first relating to Israel received by AI for more than a year. An investigation into the allegations was requested.
On 28 May 1976 further allegations of torture were raised by AI in a letter to Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin. AI pointed out that in many cases these new allegations were supported by doctors' reports. The Prime Minister was requested to "institute an independent inquiry into the treatment of detained persons. . . ."
On 7 January 1976 AI wrote to Prime Minister Rabin and Minister of Defence Shimon Peres about eight Jehovah's Witnesses, imprisoned because of their refusal to perform military service. They were subsequently released and in a letter to AI dated 7 March 1976, Israeli Attorney General Aharon Barak wrote: A committee has been appointed to investigate all aspects of the problem as it appears in our country. The findings of this committee will serve as the basis for determining our future policy. We should be pleased to receive additional information on legislation in other countries concerning the Jehovah's Witnesses as well as your report* on the subject when it becomes available.
AI groups are working on behalf of 27 administrative detainees held under the Defence (Emergency) Regulations, 1945, in the occupied territories and one Israeli Jewish prisoner, Rami Livneh, who is serving a 4-year sentence for allegedly having contact with an enemy agent. There are approximately 2,500 Arabs imprisoned in Israel and the occupied territories for alleged security offences.
•Report on Imprisoned Conscientious Objectors in Europe, now in preparation by AI.
