SENEGAL
During mid-1975 Amnesty International received further data about a group of prisoners arrested between December 1974 and March 1975 in connection with the production of an underground pamphlet, Xaré-Bi (The Struggle). They were tried in April 1975 and received prison terms of up to 2 years. The most prominent of them was Landing Savané, a well-known Senegalese demographer of international standing.
In June 1975 a further 12 persons were arrested in connection with the Xaré-Bi affair. They were tried on 17 and 18 October 1975 before the Cour de Sûreté de l'Etat (State Security Court) in the capital, Dakar. Nine were sentenced to prison terms ranging from 6 months to 18 months.
The trial was public, and was attended by an AI observer, French lawyer Marie-Claire Picard, as well as by the news media. Maître Picard reported that trial procedures had been respected, and that the accused and their lawyers had been able to speak freely. On the other hand, eight of the accused declared that they had been tortured, and all complained of the conditions under which they had been held during investigation.
In December 1975 AI adopted Landing .Savané. In the following month AI
73	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

Deputy Secretary General Hans Ehrenstrale was able to raise human rights questions in informal conversations with the Senegalese authorities during his attendance at a conference on Namibia in Dakar (see Namibia). On 3 April 1976 Mr Savané and the other persons sentenced in connection with the Xaré-Bi affair were freed under a general amnesty announced by President Leopold Sedar Senghor.
AI now has no adoption or investigation prisoners in Senegal. SIERRA LEONE
On 19 July 1975 eight people were executed at Pademba Road Prison in the Sierra Leone capital, Freetown, after being found guilty of involvement in plotting the unlawful overthrow of the government. The charges stemmed from an incident on 30 July 1974, when a bomb exploded at the residence of Minister of Finance C. A. Kamara Taylor.
The executions were the sequel to a major treason trial which took place during the latter part of 1974 and a court martial in January and February of 1975. Fifteen persons were sentenced to death before the civilian court and seven before the court martial. One civilian subsequently won his appeal against the death sentence and was freed. Of the remaining 21, 13 reportedly had their sentences commuted to life imprisonment by President Siaka P. Stevens.
Among those executed were former Minister of Finance Mohamed Forna, who resigned from Mr Stevens' government in 1970, and former Sierra Leone armed forces commander Brigadier David Lansana, who had previously been sentenced to death in a 1970 treason trial but was subsequently pardoned and released.
Following the executions, which were not announced in advance, Amnesty International cabled President Stevens on 23 July 1975 to express the organization's "profound shock and dismay" at the deaths of the eight. The cable reaffirmed AI's categorical opposition to capital punishment. It expressed deep regret that the commutation of sentences granted to the 13 other prisoners under death sentence had not been also extended to the eight who were executed.
An unknown number of people remained in detention without trial in Sierra Leone during 1975 under the provisions of the Public Emergency Regulations, which were first introduced in October 1970, and which provided for indefinite preventive detention. Although a small number were taken up by AI as investigation cases, lack of data on individual prisoners precluded a large-scale adoption campaign.
In late 1975 the Research Department received indications that the Public Emergency Regulations had been lifted making detention without trial no longer possible under the Sierra Leone legal system. This was confirmed by a reply from the Sierra Leone government in April 1976, which indicated that the emergency regulations had been lifted with effect from 8 October 1975.
