GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC
No official statistics are available on the incidence of political imprisonment in the German Democratic Republic (GDR). It is reasonably estimated that several thousand GDR citizens are imprisoned for exercising those fundamental rights contained in the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights. By far the greatest proportion of such prisoners are GDR citizens who were convicted of attempting illegally to emigrate, usually directly to the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG), but in a number of cases via other East European countries such as Hungary and Bulgaria. The latter two states invariably refuse to grant any protection for would-be escapers who come into their custody and instead hand them back to the GDR authorities for inevitable prosecution.
There are also a number of prisoners in the GDR who are imprisoned for exercising their right to free expression. The latter right is restricted by article 106 of the GDR penal code under which citizens of the GDR may be charged with "incitement hostile to the state" (staatsfeindliche Hetze) for activities which are interpreted as "harming the socialist order of state and society of the GDR".
Presently Amnesty International groups are working for some 130 adopted GDR prisoners, most of them imprisoned for attempting to leave the country. Sometimes imprisonment is simply for planning to emigrate, and in other cases
161	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

it is for helping others to escape. There are occasions on which whole families try to leave illegally with the consequence that both husband and wife are sentenced to several years in prison. Another disturbing fact is that sometimes when prisoners are released and allowed to leave the country, they are faced with long uncertainty as to whether their children will be allowed to join them or whether the children will be taken into the care of the state authorities on the grounds that their parents are disqualified from bringing them up.
Many prisoners benefit from the continuous negotiations between the GDR and the FRG authorities to "buy out" GDR citizens who seek emigration to the FRG. A large proportion of prisoners are released and allowed to emigrate after they have served half of-their prison sentence. AI has no involvement in this process, which reportedly led to the early release of some 1,200 prisoners in 1975.
One example of an AI adoption case involving imprisonment for exercising freedom of expression is that of the writer Siegmar Faust. Herr Faust (born in 1944) was arrested in 1971 on suspicion of "incitement hostile to the state", but was released under an amnesty in 1972. He was arrested in 1974 on the same charge, based on his persistently nonconformist literary activity, his application to emigrate to the FRG (which he formally justified with reference to his harrassment by security police) and his having collected signatures for a petition advocating greater civil liberties in the GDR.
Herr Faust was sentenced to 4y years' imprisonment. While serving his sentence in Cottbus prison he has been subjected to long periods of solitary confinement as punishment for continuing his dissident activity among fellow prisoners. AI is particularly concerned that Herr Faust has been kept in solitary confinement in spite of the fact that, according to recent reports, he is seriously ill (after a heart attack he is suffering from impaired blood circulation and. failing eyesight).
Another example of intervention by AI is the case of Dr Wolfgang Dietrich, on whose behalf AI addressed a written appeal to GDR Attorney General Josef Streit in December 1975. Dr Dietrich and his wife Erika were arrested in August 1973 for allegedly preparing to leave the GDR illegally. In November 1974 they were given to understand that they were due to be released under a pardon. But they were subsequently told that this decision had been reversed, and the full sentence would have to be served until February 1976. Subsequently, after a suicide attempt, Frau Dietrich was released from prison, although she was denied custody of the three Dietrich children. To support his wife's demands to be reunited with her children, Dr Dietrich began a hunger strike in January 1975. For this he was severely punished, segregated from his fellow prisoners and, from February or March 1975, detained in solitary confinement reportedly under unhygienic conditions and without an adequate diet. Dr Dietrich was released in December 1975.
