FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY
In 1975-76, Amnesty International gave considerable attention to the case of four Turkish citizens charged in the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG) with "participation in a criminal association". The charge was in connection with their activities in the Turkish Liberation Front (Patriotisches Einheitsfront Titrkei), a Marxist-Leninist organization of Turks living in Western Europe. The four Turks, Omer Ozerturgut, Hatice Yurtdas, Mustafa Tutkun and
162
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
Yiiksel Ugurlu, were held in preventive detention in Cologne for 18 months after their arrest in May 1974 and in solitary confinement from May 1975 until their trial.
AI took an interest in the case because, although the accused were charged with a criminal offence, the charges were based on their political activity and in particular on their exercise of the right to free assembly and association. AI sent a Swiss lawyer, Elisabeth Ziegler-Miiller, to observe the trial, which took place in Cologne from September 1975 to January 1976.
In her report to AI, Maitre Ziegler-Miiller drew attention to the apparently excessive duration of the defendants' pre-trial detention. She also noted a number of procedural irregularities which took place during the trial itself, for example threats by the judge to expel some defence lawyers from the courtroom because of his objection to their interventions on behalf of their clients. The political nature of the case was underscored by the fact that much of the prosecution's evidence consisted of published literature found in the defendants' possession.
On 30 January 1976 the four defendants were found guilty and sentenced to prison terms ranging from 18 months to 2 years, taking effect from the date of their arrest. After widespread reports that expulsion orders had been issued against three of the defendants, AI wrote to the Federal Minister of the Interior, the Minister of the Interior of Nordrhein-Westfalen and the Cologne Auslanderamt expressing concern that Omer Ozerturgut, Hatice Yurtdas and Mustafa Tutkun faced possible imprisonment for their political activity abroad if they were forced to return to Turkey. At the time of writing, no decision has been made by the authorities on applications for political asylum by the four.
AI's attention was drawn in 1975-76 to a number of other cases in the FRG where defendants were subjected to prolonged pre-trial detention and to solitary confinement. One such case is that of Karl-Heinz Roth, a doctor who has been active for a number of years in leftwing political organizations. Herr Roth was arrested in Cologne in May 1975 after a shooting incident. As of April 1976, he had been held in solitary confinement for much of the time since his arrest, despite the fact that he was convalescing from serious gunshot injuries. In March 1976 AI wrote to legal authorities in Cologne expressing concern at the possible effects of prolonged solitary confinement on the prisoner's physical and mental health.
