TUNISIA
The situation in Tunisia during the period 1975-76 has been marked by new student unrest and an increasingly repressive attitude by the authorities towards young leftwing dissidents. In response to this, Amnesty International has increased its adoption program: groups are now handling more than 60 cases, in contrast with the 40 adoption and investigation cases which had been taken up by May 1975.
Most of the new adoption cases are students and teachers arrested in a wave of detentions between February and April 1975, which was followed by a series of political trials extending from July 1975 through January 1976. These resulted in leftwing activists being sentenced to prison terms ranging from 6 months to 7 years on such charges as plotting against the security of the state, forming an illegal organization, insulting the head of state and spreading false information. The two largest trials, in July and September/October 1975, involved 42 and 101 defendants respectively. International legal observers sent by human rights organizations to observe these trials were in both cases ex pelled from Tunisia. Further clashes between the government and students took place in May 1975. In the same month a court in Tunis sentenced to death a Libyan, Mohamed Ali Nayel, who was accused of planning to kidnap members of the Tunisian cabinet.
During early 1976, AI widened its efforts to assist prisoners of conscience. In January the Research Department produced a background paper on Tunisia In February, Nejib El-Euch, a Tunisian student who had been sentenced to Î years' imprisonment in August 1974, was featured as an appeal case in the Campaign for the Abolition of Torture after AI received reports that he was in a state of permanent nervous breakdown and almost constant delirium.
AI's French and German coordination groups on Tunisia, in cooperation with their national sections, undertook actions to publicize the plight of Tunisian political prisoners on 20 March, the 20th anniversary of Tunisia's independence Also in March 20 new Tunisian cases were adopted, and planning began for a major campaign to call for a general amnesty in Tunisia in June. On 17 May, AI wrote to President Habib Bourguiba appealing for such an amnesty. The appeal was backed up by a letter and petition campaign involving adoption groups and national sections.
