PARAGUAY
The situation in Paraguay has changed little in the last year. The number of political prisoners can only be estimated; in some cases detainees disappear after arrest and their detention is never formalized. Equally, the fact that prisoners may be held in small groups in a large number of police stations, many in rural areas, makes precise information scarce. The estimates for the last year range between 338 and 450.
It is also necessary to differentiate between long-term prisoners and those who are detained for less than a year. Of the first category, approximately 40 prisoners (mainly communists), three have been in jail for 18 years, five for 15 years and 30 for between 8 and 12 years - all without trial.
Political detentions have recently taken place on a large scale. In November 1974 between 800 and 1,200 people were arrested in connection with an alleged plot to oust President Alfredo Stroessner. In early February 1975, so many members of the Peasant Leagues (Ligas Agrarias) were arrested that Amnesty International tried a "group adoption" technique for the first time in Latin America in order to deal with the large number of detainees about whom there was little individual data. By mid-1975 thanks to worldwide pressure all the peasants had been released, although apparently they have not been allowed to return to their villages.
AI appealed to President Stroessner on 9 February 1976 for the release of some 100 prisoners arrested in November and December 1975. Many of those arrested were allegedly members of the illegal Communist Party, including its secretary general, Miguel Angel Soler, whose whereabouts are still unknown and who is feared dead.
Also arrested at the same time were five members of the Marandu Project, an Indian information and aid scheme connected with the Catholic University of Asunción. One member was subsequently released. The four who remained
108
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 1975-1976
in detention have been adopted by AI. These are Professor Miguel Chase-Sardi, Professor Mauricio Schwartzman, Victorio Suarez and Gloria Estrago. Also arrested were members of the legal opposition Liberal Radical Party who had been outspoken in the press and congress about violations of human rights.
Early in 1976, AI had 63 cases under adoption or investigation.
While it could be maintained that the use of torture is general, this does not mean that it is applied systematically. It appears to vary with the place and length of detention or the personality of the jailors. Reports state that prisoners are subject to forms of torture during the first stages of interrogation, which usually take place in the Departamento de Delitos y Vigilancia of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Following the receipt of torture allegations, two Campaign for the Abolition of Torture (CAT) actions were issued (December 1975 and January 1976) for members of the Marandu Project and others detained at the same time. In April 1976, following allegations of the discovery of a guerrilla network, the regime denounced the involvement of priests in subversive activities and arrested hundreds of its political opponents.
Although the 1967 constitution contains basic human rights' guarantees, this protection has been countered by legislation enabling the executive power to restrict any opposition activity considered to be of a "subversive" character. Furthermore, individual rights may be curtailed under successive states of emergency which have been renewed every three months since the mid-1950's and are lifted only on election days.
On 10 March 1976, AI submitted a complaint to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States, requesting investigation of 55 named cases of arrests or disappearances. This was followed by a news release on 17 March 1976.
Political detainees are only rarely charged or sentenced. An important exception has been the trial of 13 prisoners implicated in the alleged attempted coup of November 1974, all of whom were sentenced in March 1976 to imprisonment and heavy fines. (Most of these are under adoption or investigation.) On 3 March 1976, AI's request for permission to observe the trial was turned down.
Article 149 of the constitution provides Congress with the right to declare an amnesty for any type of prisoner, and article 180 allows the President to commute sentences, but these options have never been used. Releases tend to be as arbitrary as arrests. In some cases a released prisoner may be deported to a neighbouring country. As releases do not follow, any formal judicial procedure, the uncertainty adds to the torment in which prisoners live.
A further important aspect of AI group work is relief to families of prisoners of conscience. This material humanitarian aid is most valuable, as poverty is widespread in Paraguay and, if the breadwinner is detained, the family may have no alternative source of support.
