ZAMBIA
Faced with mounting economic and political difficulties, aggravated by the situation in Angola and in Rhodesia, President Kenneth Kaunda of Zambia invoked full emergency powers on 28 January 1976. It was widely regarded as an attempt to stifle internal criticism of his government's policies towards Angola and the white-ruled states of southern Africa.
In February, the emergency powers were used to detain six lecturers and 17 Zambia University students, all of whom were suspected of supporting the MPLA (Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola), one of the three rival nationalist groups in Angola. Five of the detained lecturers, all expatriates, were subsequently released and deported in late March. But at least 16 students and one lecturer were still reported detained at the time of writing. The detainees, who have not been charged, are all believed to be Zambian citizens.
Amnesty International has appealed against their detention to President Kaunda and has adopted their cases.
The Research Department has also been concerned with the continued detention without trial of more than 50 members of the Zimbabwe African National Union (ZANU), the Rhodesian liberation movement. They were detained following the assassination of the ZANU national chairman Herbert Chitepo in Lusaka on 18 March 1975. Several of the detainees were tortured during the first two months of their imprisonment. But the use of torture was reportedly discontinued after AI asked President Kuanda to intervene personally to ensure that the detainees were accorded fair and humane treatment.
With one exception, all the detainees were held without charge while a Special International Commission appointed by President Kaunda investigated the circumstances of Mr Chitepo's death. The exception, Tyupo Shumba Chigowe, went on trial in January 1976, charged with the murder of another ZANU official, Edgar Madekurozwa. He was convicted and sentenced to death in April 1976. The case is now on appeal.
Following the publication of a report of the Special International Commission's findings in March 1976, three other detainees were charged with the murder of Mr Chitepo. They included Josiah Tongogara, the former head of ZANU's guerrilla operations. Their trial was expected to begin in June 1976.
In April 1976, the Zambian authorities detained more than 50 members of another nationalist movement, the South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO), when it became evident that divisions within the leadership might lead to open violence. At the end of May, a commission of inquiry was established to investigate the causes of the SWAPO dispute.
In December 1975, President Kaunda granted an amnesty to 96 political detainees who had been held without charge since 1973 in connection with an alleged plot to overthrow the government. This followed the trial of William Chipango, the former mayor of Livingstone, and three other men. They were accused of planning the conspiracy and organizing the recruitment of Zambians for military training in Namibia in preparation for the alleged attempt to overthrow the Kaunda government. Although the trial was completed at the end of 1975, the verdict was still awaited in May 1976.
Two South Africans arrested on suspicion of espionage in early 1974 were also freed in December 1975. Like several other detainees in Zambia, they had been detained by presidential order after having been acquitted in court of all charges brought against them,
The Americas
Throughout 1975-76 there has been a slight but unmistakeable deterioration in the overall human rights' situation in the Americas, particularly in the cono sur (southern cone) countries of Latin America. This introduction concentrates on this region. The specialized problems of such countries as Cuba, the United States of America and those in the English-speaking Caribbean are discussed in their individual sections in the following pages.
The cono sur countries — Chile, Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay — present the department's greatest workload, because they contain the heaviest concentration of political prisoners in Latin America. Approximately 30,000 political prisoners are believed held in these four countries alone. This figure represents nearly 90% of the total political prisoners population of the whole continent (excluding Cuba). It is true that more than half the population of Latin America lives in the cono sur. But it is equally true that the proportion of the population detained for political reasons is also the highest there.
In Uruguay, with a population of only 2} million, one out of every 500 persons is a political prisoner - the highest ratio in the Americas. This was one consideration in the selection of Uruguay as the target of a worldwide Amnesty International campaign during February and April 1976 to draw international attention to the use of torture and deaths under torture there over the past two years.
One factor common to all the countries of the cono sur has been a reaction by the military to what they conceived to be a threat to the established center of power from either violent guerrilla movements or even the democratically-elected leftwing (as was the case in Chile). Significantly, Latin American countries which have fewer political prisoners have not experienced such an alleged threat to their stability.
Furthermore, all four countries have the highest socio-economic and cultural standards in Latin America. Whereas less developed countries such as Paraguay, Nicaragua and Haiti, with stable autocratic régimes, had the highest number of political prisoners more than 10 years ago, today the reverse is true. It is notable that in the richer countries, repression is characterized by a systematic and well organized apparatus which has at its disposal advanced technology and highly sophisticated equipment. The poorer countries do nofr have such "resources", so torture tends in these places to consist of beatings and more basic forms of maltreatment. The greatest number of allegations of torture emanate from the cono sur
Figures for the number of political prisoners are misleading if they fail to take into consideration political assassinations. This particularly Latin American pattern of political repression is especially prevalent in Guatemala and
84
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
Argentina. It is also impossible to calculate accurately the numbers of those who are killed or who simply disappear as a consequence of extra-legal activities of terrorist death squads. In Argentina, victims of such squads for 1975 numbered 1,000. In Guatemala 15,000 people are estimated as having been killed in this way between 1970 and 1975.
There is strong evidence to suggest that in some countries these activities are condoned if not encouraged by the authoriites. Few people are brought to trial or convicted for participation in death squads despite the fact that such groups often operate in broad daylight. The function of the death squads is to eliminate actual or potential opposition to the régime. Those most vulnerable to attack, therefore, are trade unionists, lawyers who defend political prisoners, students and political leaders. In Brazil at least, the death squads extend their work to executing petty criminals and tramps: statistics for those killed in this category are understandably incomplete.
An important secondary motive for political assassinations is the creation of a climate of fear and uncertainty to discourage any form of opposition to the ruling élite. Therefore, the methods of assassination are deliberately shock ing: often the victim has been tortured first. The Research Department intends to devote much of the forthcoming year to analyzing this phenomenon.
In countries where there was an active and armed opposition, guerrillas form the largest proportion of political prisoners. The next largest groups of detainees are members of the communist party, members of other leftwing organizations and members of the radical wing of the Roman Catholic Church Only in very exceptional circumstances are rightwing groups detained. Generally most political prisoners are young, and those most liable to arrest are students, followed by trade unionists, journalists, lawyers and peasants.
In Latin America, human rights' problems do not in most cases arise out of a need for constitutional or legislative reform, but out of an abuse of or disregard for the law.
In Chile and Bolivia, AI has been most concerned about the use of forced exile as a punishment for alleged political opponents of the régime. In many cases those exiled have had no hearing before a court of law and are punished by exile for unspecified crimes or offences.
There has been an increasing awareness in the department of the need to approach the problems of human rights from a regional perspective. At present, the department is working for a total of 967 prisoners. Collaboration with the Campaign for the Abolition of Torture (CAT) department on urgent actions for individual torture victims has been an important aspect of our work. Indeed more than 80% of all CAT urgent actions have dealt with Latin America. This reflects both the relatively high incidence of torture and extralegal detentions in this region and the development of increasingly fast and reliable sources of information.
Efforts have been made to expand the work of the department into areas which have not been the focus of AI research until recently, or about which little reliable information has been obtainable. Consequently in June 1975 a mission went to Mexico, and in April 1976 AI delegates visited four central American countries: JSicaragua, Guatemala, El Salvador and Honduras.
Submissions to the United Nations Human Rights Commission concerning Chile and Brazil were made in 1975 and 1976. Information on individuals detained in Paraguay and Haiti was also forwarded to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States. In
85	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

November 1975 members of the department attended the Second Interparliamentary Conference of the European Community in Luxembourg where they were able to discuss several matters relating to AI concerns with parliamentarians from both Europe and Latin America.
Campaigns on Chile and Brazil were conducted in September 1975 and April 1976 respectively. The CAT Campaign on Torture in Uruguay was, however, the major project of the department for the year.
