DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
The human rights situation in the Dominican Republic in 1975-76 remained as bad as in previous years. Allegations of torture, harrassment of political opponents, mainly trade unionists, illegal arrests and detentions are regrettably common.
In December 1974 the United States Section of Amnesty International proposed to send a mission to the republic to press for the release of five AI-adopted prisoners, including Julio de Pena Valdes of the Movimiento Popular Dominicana (MPD). The objectives of the mission were later enlarged to include other human rights problems. As a result of a change of the Dominican Republic's envoy in Washington was rescheduled to begin on 2 May 1976. The delegates named were Thomas Jones, an American lawyer from Washington DC and Judge Carro, Judge at the Criminal Court of the City of New York.
Extensive communications had taken place between the AI delegates and the Dominican Republic authorities through its envoy in Washington. However a few days before the mission was due to arrive in Santo Domingo, the Dominican Republic government refused its permission on the grounds that a mission would not be appropriate at that time.
AI wrote to the Ambassador of the Dominican Republic in Washington Dr Horacio Vicioso Soto, on 3 May expressing its disappointment at his government's last minute decision not to allow AI delegates into the country.
99	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

In the letter, AI requested the ambassador to ask his government to advise which date would be considered appropriate for the delegates to visit the country.
A most disturbing and continuing feature of the situation in the Dominican Republic is the re-arrests and mass round-ups of prominent trade unionists and politicians. In June 1975 hundreds of arrests took place following a supposed landing of a nucleus of a guerrilla force lead by Claudio Camano, a well-known politician who had been living in exile. Among those arrested were many former Al-adopted prisoners who were immediately re-adopted. However, the majority of them were soon freed without trial. AI cabled President Joaquin Balaguer on 25 June expressing its concern and urging that the detainees receive the full protection of the law. A news release was issued reporting the situation.
In addition to the Dominican Republic detainees, three Puerto Rican citizens were arrested and charged with having transported the guerrilla force. They were found guilty and sentenced to 30 years' forced labour on the basis of confessions in a trial strongly condemned by observers from the American Civil Liberties Union for its legal irregularities. This was reduced on appeal to 5 years, and subsequently the three prisoners. Angel Gandia. Raul Garcia and Jonny Sampson were pardoned by the President and released on 22 December 1975.
