SOUTH AFRICA
Renewed waves of detentions and a series of major political trials punctuated the course of events in South Africa during 1975-76. At the same time, the South African government introduced new legislative enactments designed to reinforce the machinery of repression and further limit freedom of political expression in the country.
The trial of nine members of the South African Students' Organization (SASO) and the Black Peoples' Convention (BPC) continued throughout the year. This followed the dismissal of charges against three of the original 13 defendants and a decision that one other defendant should be tried separately.
The defendants, whose cases have been taken up by Amnesty International, were all charged in January 1975 under the Terrorism Act, which carries a mandatory minimum sentence of five years' imprisonment upon conviction and a maximum sentence of death. They were detained together with more than 30 other supporters of SASO and the BPC following an attempt to hold a pro-FRELIMO (the liberation movement in Mozambique) rally in Durban on 25 September 1974, the 10th anniversary of the FRELIMO-led war for the liberation of Mozambique. The rally was banned in advance by the government and did not actually take place.
Nevertheless, the security police began a series of raids against members of organizations like SASO and the BPC which promote the "black consciousness" movement in South Africa. Such raids continued throughout 1975 and into 1976 and resulted in more than 250 people being detained without charge for various periods of time. Nine detainees arrested in late 1974 were held until October 1975 before being released uncharged.
An AI observer, Dean Charles Duncan of Howard University Law School in Washington DC, attended the SASO/BPC trial in February 1976.
In November 1975, a Natal University law lecturer, Raymond Suttner, went
75	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

on trial in Durban on charges under the Terrorism Act and Suppression of Communism Act. After two other detainees testified against him, he was convicted of furthering the aims of the banned African National Congress (ANC) and sentenced to 1\ years' imprisonment.
Two other critics of apartheid were also jailed in November. Eric Molobi, a member of the BPC, was convicted on two charges under the Suppression of Communism Act on 24 November and sentenced to 5 years' imprisonment. Two days later, the distinguished Afrikaans poet and painter Breyten Breyten-bach was jailed for 9 years after admitting that he had travelled to South Africa incognito in an attempt to establish an underground wing of the banned ANC. The 9-year sentence was imposed despite the prosecution's request that Mr Breytenbach be given the minimum five year sentence required by the Terrorism Act.
Two major trials resulted in acquittals. Molefi Pheto, director of a black drama group called "Mehloti", was acquitted of charges under the Suppression of Communism Act at his trial in Johannesburg in December 1975. In February 1976, the Rand Supreme Court found Bernard Bloem not guilty of various charges under the Suppression of Communism and Terrorism Acts. However, during the course of his trial two of Bloem's friends, Raymond Burgers and Patrick McGlua, were each jailed for one year for contempt of court when they refused to give evidence for the state. Both men are AI adoptees.
Five members of the National Youth Organization (NAYO), another of the groups prominent in the "black consciousness" movement, were also acquitted of charges under the Terrorism and Suppression of Communism Acts in the Pretoria Supreme Court during May. However, two other defendants were sentenced to terms of 5 years' imprisonment after being convicted of inciting people to undergo unlawful military training outside the country. This trial, commonly known as the NAYO trial, commenced in Johannesburg in March 1976, but it was transferred to Pretoria following clashes outside the Rand Supreme Court between police and crowds demonstrating in support of the defendants.
One of the acquitted defendants, Phumza Dyantyi, was immediately re-detained as she left the court and was charged with possessing illegal literature. She was later refused bail, although she had been in detention since August 1975. Miss Dyantyi is adopted by AI
One other important trial was in progress at the time of writing. In Johannesburg, five white student leaders, former members of the executive of the National Union of South African Students (NUSAS), went on trial in April 1976 on charges under the Suppression of Communism Act. They are alleged to have promoted the policies of the ANC and South African Communist Party - both banned organizations - by organizing amongst other things the 1974 NUSAS campaign for the release of all South African political prisoners. AI has taken up their cases.
Substantial allegations concerning the ill-treatment of detainees by security police were made by witnesses and defendants at several political trials. Vincent Selanto, a state witness in the Molobi trial, alleged that he had been forced to make a false statement under extreme security police pressure. Jairus Kgokong, who gave evidence at the NAYO trial, similarly asserted that he had been forced to sign a false statement for use against the accused while detained incommunicado by the security police. Both Mr Selanto and Mr Kgokong were immediately re-detained and charged with perjury after giving evidence. At
76
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
the end of the NAYO trial, the judge, Justice Irving Steyn, criticized the investigation methods adopted by the security police.
Allegations like those made by Mr Selanto and Mr Kgokong were given added substance in March 1976 by the death of Joseph Mdluli, within 24 hours of his arrest by Durban security police, in as yet unexplained circumstances. No inquest had been held by the time of writing and the findings of a post-mortem examination of Mr Mdluli's body had not been made public. However, press reports indicate that Mr Mdluli's body, when identified by his wife, bore signs of a possible assault. Griffiths Mxenge, an attorney representing Mrs Mdluli, was himself detained shortly after accompanying her to identify her husband's corpse.
A court action brought in April 1976 by the wife of Harold Nxasana, another man detained by Durban security police, alleged that he had been severely tortured. However, the security police refuted Mrs Nxasana's allegations and their denial was accepted by the judge. Mr Nxasana was not allowed to appear in court.
Joseph Mdluli's detention occurred during the most recent wave of arrests carried out by the security police. They concentrated on the Natal area and involved more than 50 people, including many former members of the banned ANC and former political prisoners. However, two of those arrested, Cleophas Ndlovu and Joseph Nduli, are alleged to have been forcibly abducted from Swaziland by the South African security police. Together with eight others, Mr Ndlovu and Mr Nduli appeared in the Pietermaritzburg Supreme Court in May 1976, charged with offences under the Terrorism and Suppression of Communism Acts. Their trial is expected to commence in July 1976.
Similar waves of arrests during the second half of 1975 were directed both against members of "black consciousness" organizations and against white critics of the regime. An estimated 100 detainees were held without charge at the end of May 1976, more than 50 of them in Natal.
Despite the continuous round of detentions and trials, several prominent opponents of the government were released from the terms of their banning orders in 1975. In August, the former Roman Catholic priest Cosmas Desmond had his banning order under the Suppression of Communism Act lifted 8 months before it was due to expire. In September, the 5-year banning orders against Winnie Mandela, wife of the imprisoned ANC leader Nelson Mandela, and against Peter Magubane, expired but were not renewed.
However, the banning of four supporters of SASO and the BPC during the same month indicated that the government has no intention of phasing out its use of banning orders to restrict political opponents. Each of the banned SASO and BPC members had previously been detained without charge for several months under the Terrorism Act. In May 1976, 5-year banning orders were also imposed on two other detainees, Johnny Ramrock and Weizmann Hamil-ton, at the time of their release. They are adopted by Al.
In April 1976, considerable speculation was aroused following reports that Chief Kaiser Matanzima, Chief Minister of the Transkei, had asked the South African government to grant a general amnesty to all political prisoners from the Transkei on 26 October 1976 - the date on which the Transkei is due to become "independent". However, after considering Chief Matanzima's request, Minister of Justice James Kruger stated that the authorities would continue to imprison Nelson Mandela and other Transkeian-born political prisoners currently serving sentences on Robben Island.
77	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

In view of the South African government's continued use of its existing powers of banning, detention without trial and imprisonment in order to contain internal criticism, perhaps the most disturbing feature of the year was the introduction, in early 1976, of two new security measures. In January, the government introduced the Parliamentary Internal Security Commission Bill which passed through Parliament to become law in May 1976. This provides for the creation of a 10-member parliamentary commission to investigate matters which, in the opinion of the state president, affect matters of internal security.
The commission has been given the powers of the Supreme Court to summon witnesses on oath and will report periodically to the prime minister, who may then withhold from parliament all or parts of the commission's report. Witnesses who refuse to testify before the commission are liable to successive six-month terms of imprisonment.
Parliamentary opposition to the bill was unusually strong. The main opposition United Party - which cooperated with the ruling National Party when previous legislative measures involving internal security were enacted - and the smaller Progressive-Reform Party, both saw the bill as heralding the creation of a permanent commission similar in form to the Schlebush-Le Grange Commission. The latter's investigations in 1974-75 led to NUSAS and the anti-apartheid Christian Institute being declared "affected organizations", thus cutting them off from overseas financial assistance.
In April 1976, the government introduced the Promotion of State Security Bill. This" bill, which has not yet become law, proposes that the minister of justice be empowered, without reference to the courts, to order the detention of any person for an indefinite period on security grounds. Such a detainee would not be informed of the specific grounds for his arrest. His case would be reviewed annually by a committee which would meet in camera and make recommendations to the minister. However, the minister will be under no obligation to disclose to the review committee the evidence upon which he has acted or to implement the committee's recommendations.
This bill has also provoked much criticism of the government and is opposed in parliament and by the various Bar Councils present in South Africa. The overall parliamentary majority of the National Party makes it inevitable that the bill will become law.
AI groups continued throughout the year to work on the cases of more than 170 prisoners and former prisoners in South Africa. In addition, AI provided substantial relief and rehabilitation assistance to prisoners and their families.
