BAHRAIN
On 5 September 1975 Amnesty International wrote to Sheikh Isa bin Sulman Al-Khalifa, Amir of Bahrain, to express concern about the arbitrary arrest of more than 30 people, many of whom were former AI adoptees. The arrests took place on 23 August 1975, the day before Prime Minister Sheikh Khalifa bin Sulman Al-Khalifa, the ruler's brother, handed in the resignation of his cabinet. This in turn was followed on 26 August by the dissolution of the national assembly. AI's letter referred to allegations that those arrested had been tortured, in particular Ahmad Zainal. It appealed to the Amir to take all steps necessary to ensure that no ill-treatment of prisoners could occur in the future.
On 15 December 1975 Muhsin Marhoun, a lawyer who has in the past defended political prisoners and is a former member of the national assembly, was arrested. On 3 February 1976, the day after his return to Bahrain from Sweden, Abdul Hadi Khalaf, one of AI's former adopted prisoners was again arrested. He was released on 2 May 1976.
Some prisoners were released on 16 December 1975 to mark Bahrain's national day. AI groups are working on 33 cases at the present time, but some of these prisoners may have been among those released in December. The total number of political prisoners is thought to be no greater than 35.
EGYPT
The past year has seen mounting criticism at home, particularly among workers, and abroad over Egypt's foreign policies, namely the second Sinai disengagement agreement with Israel, the increasing move away from the Soviet Union and President Anwar Sadat's "open door" economic policy.
181	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

The Egyptian authorities claim the Egyptian Communist Party has been responsible for this opposition. Dissolved in 1964, the party, according to a Beirut proclamation in August 1975, has now been reconstituted to mobilize the "patriotic and Nasserist forces within the regime". (All parties other than the Arab Socialist Union have been banned in Egypt.)
Those arrested this past year therefore have either been alleged members of illegal leftwing or communist organizations, or workers and trade unionists. Early in July 1975, 20 Trotskyists were arrested in Cairo. They were allegedly leaders of the "International Communist League" which is said to have connections with the Revolutionary Communist Party in Lebanon and the French Communist Party. They were charged under article 98 of the criminal law with aiming to overthrow the country's political and economic system. Most were released shortly after their arrest. AI took up the cases of four who were initially refused bail: two Iraqi school teachers and two Egyptian textile workers detained in Cairo. In April 1976 they were granted bail, and the Iraqis have now been allowed to leave the country. No date has been fixed for a trial.
In March 1976 worker strikes and demonstrations in Alexandria, Mahalla Al Kubra and Damietta led to reports of wide scale arrests, particularly of trade unionists. In April it was reported that 20 "communists" were arrested in Alexandria and charged with subversion. Further details, and the names of the detainees are being sought so that their cases may be taken up.
This year the trial of two groups of alleged communists, arrested in 1972 and 1973, finally took place. In March 1976, four persons were sentenced to a total of 11 years' imprisonment with fines amounting to E £1,800 (US $3,600). They included an Iraqi national sentenced in absentia. They had been arrested in 1972 and charged with setting up a communist front called the Arab Socialist Party and inciting workers against the government. AI is in the process of taking up their cases.
On 27 May 1976, 19 persons for whom AI groups have been active were finally acquitted, reportedly for lack of evidence. They had been arrested in June 1973 and charged under article 98 of the criminal law with forming, or being members of, a communist organization with the aim of overthrowing the government. The court had ordered their release on bail only on 23 March 1975. (AI had sent an observer to these proceedings.) Their trial however was postponed to 22 June, when AI sent another observer, a Turkish lawyer, Dr Ugur Alacakaptan, but the proceedings were again postponed.
On six occasions during the past year AI has sent cables to President Sadat urging the commutation of death sentences. Four persons were charged with spying for Israel and were subsequently sentenced to death. One of them, Samir Basili, had been sentenced to death in January 1975, when Al made its first appeal. The date of execution was postponed until 12 January 1976. It was further postponed after Mr Basili claimed he had been tortured while in detention and the public prosecutor ordered an investigation. On 23 January AI again appealed for commutation.
Two others sentenced to death by a military tribunal for spying were Ibrahim Saeed Shahin and his wife Insrah Ali Musa. In January 1976 AI learned that President Sadat had ordered the release of Insrah Ali Musa to allow her to bring up her children. On 28 January, Al, while commending this act of leniency, urged President Sadat to commute the sentence of her husband. The
182
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
third person was Ragub Abdul Ati. AI sent a cable on 2 June 1975 urging commutation of sentence. It is not known whether either sentence has been carried out.
Three members of the underground Islamic Liberation Party were sentenced to death by the State Security Supreme Cotirt in May 1975. They had been involved in an armed attack on Cairo Military Academy in April 1974 in which 11 people were killed and 27 wounded. A1 sent a cable on 2 June 1975 appealing for clemency, and one of the death sentences was later commuted to life imprisonment, but the two others were confirmed by President Sadat on 12 October 1975. AI again appealed on 16 October 1975, but the result is not known.
The Egyptian government has continued to award compensation to prisoners tortured during President Gamal Abdul Nasser's regime and to prosecute responsible officials. In July 1975 the trial was announced of President Nasser's chief of intelligence, Salah Nasr, and two of his assistants, on charges of ordering the torture of Mustapha Amin. Mr Amin, a journalist, had been arrested in 1965 on spying charges and was released only in 1974.
In September the family of a man who had died in prison after torture was awarded E £10,000 (US $20,000) compensation. And on 22 May 1976 the trial started of three retired generals, formerly associated with Cairo military prison. They were charged with torturing imprisoned army officers in August/ September 1967 to force them to confess to complicity in a plot against the state security.
Two major amnesties were declared in 1975. The first, on 8 July 1975, benefited those who had been tried and convicted of political crimes, or who had been deprived of constitutional rights for political reasons, before 15 May 1971. On this occasion AI sent a cable to President Sadat welcoming the news of the amnesty, but requesting that clemency be extended to political prisoners arrested since that date. The second amnesty, on 23 July, when 1,384 criminal prisoners were released, marked the anniversary of the 1952 revolution.
AI has four cases under investigation in Egypt, all are currently released on bail pending trial. AI believes there may be several hundred persons currently detained for political reasons. Further information is being sought about them so that their cases can be taken up.
