NIGERIA
Reports of the detention without trial of suspected critics of the government of General Yakubu Gowon continued to reach Amnesty International until 29 July 1975, when the government was overthrown in a bloodless coup while General Gowon was attending an Organization of African Unity summit meeting in Kampala, Uganda.
Two weeks later, the new government, headed by Brigadier Murtala Mohammed, announced the release of 50 political prisoners. These included a number of civilian critics of the Gowon government who had been detained without trial under the provisions of the 1967 Emergency Regulations - among them several AI adoptees. Also freed were five military officers who had been detained for their alleged part in the coup of January 1966 which overthrew Nigeria's last civilian government. This represented the final and apparently complete implementation of a promise General Gowon made on 1 October 1974 to free all military personnel in detention. The amnesty of August 1975 was accompanied by a warning from Brigadier Murtala's military government that it would not tolerate any subversive activities.
The new government proceeded with a thorough purge of the Nigerian civil service, judiciary and military, replacing many individuals who had occupied
70
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
high positions under General Gowon. In October 1975 a constitutional commission was set up to draft a new constitution for a return to civilian rule in 1979. The internal structure of the Nigerian federation was modified by the addition of seven new states. However, the 1967 Emergency Regulations, under which persons may be detained without trial, were retained, provoking further requests from the Nigerian Bar Association for their repeal.
On 13 February 1976 the government's plans were suddenly disrupted by a coup attempt, apparently staged by Lieutenant Colonel B. S. Dimka. Although the coup failed, Brigadier Mohammed was killed. Lieutenant General Olusegun Obasanjo took his place as head of state, and arrests of those thought to be involved in the coup followed, although Lieutenant Colonel Dimka managed to escape.
On 5 March 1976 Lieutenant Colonel Dimka was captured, four days after the government announced that a special military tribunal would be set up to try those accused of involvement in the 13 February coup attempt.
On 11 March, after summary trials, 30 persons, including Major General I. D. Bisalla, the former federal defence commissioner, were publicly executed by firing squad in Lagos. The Nigerian government announced that a total of 32 persons had been sentenced to death. It also stated that 125 persons had been arrested in connection with the February 13 coup attempt, and 40 had been released. A1 learned of the executions the next day and immediately cabled Lieutenant General Obasanjo stating the organization's opposition to the death penalty in all circumstances and urging him to exercise his prerogative of mercy as head of state to ensure that there would be no further executions of persons convicted of involvement in the 13 February coup attempt. On 15 May, however, Lieutenant Colonel Dimka was executed by firing squad in Lagos, along with another six others.
