BANGLADESH
Martial law was imposed in Bangladesh on 15 August 1975 following the assassination of President Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. The new government was itself ousted by a military coup on 3 November 1975, and this second new regime in turn was overthrown by a military counter-coup four days later. Through these events, a number of leading Bangladeshi figures were killed. Many political prisoners were reportedly released, although others were arrested and trials began before martial law tribunals.
Immediately after the overthrow of President Mujibur Rahman, the new government under President Khondkar Mushtaque Ahmed retained the constitution but made its provisions subject to the martial law proclamation and regulations. The government also announced that human rights would be recognized at every level. It started a modest process of liberalization, which included the lifting of bans on certain papers and the release of approximately 1,000 political prisoners on 4 October. These included a number of persons still held on charges of collaboration with the Pakistan army in 1971.
The government also commuted the death sentences on certain prisoners and promised the release of all those who were seriously ill, or were below 16 and above 55 years. But at least 29 officials of the Mujibur Rahman government were also arrested, including five members of parliament and seven former ministers.
On 27 August, Amnesty International sent a cable to the government expressing concern about these arrests and at the introduction of the death penalty, also under martial law regulations, for crimes including corruption and possession of arms. AI expressed regret at the decision to try civilians before martial law tribunals and requested an assurance that trials be open and that the defendants have full rights of defence and appeal.
On 3 November, a second military coup took place, which removed the group of young army officers who appeared to be in power since the killing of the late President. On the night of 2/3 November preceding the coup, four of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman's former closest associates were killed in Dacca Central Jail, an incident unprecedented in the history of Bangladesh. They included two former Prime Ministers: Tajuddin Ahmed and Mansur Ali.
AI cabled President Mohammad Sayem, who had assumed office after the killings, and requested that the new government take immediate steps to guaran-
121	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
tee the full safety and protection of all persons under detention for political reasons. This appeal was released to the news media. AI also expressed its support for the commission of inquiry announced by the new government "to investigate the jail incident and to inquire into the circumstances under which some of the criminals were given safe passage out of the country". But AI has not received any information that the committee announced to have been set up, consisting of Supreme Court judges, did actually start functioning. Le Monde of 13 November 1975 reported that it had been formally disbanded.
A counter-coup by the armed forces took place four days later, on 7 November 1975. Justice A. M. Sayem remained in power as Head of State and became Chief Martial Law Administrator. Martial law remained in force and a series of Martial Law Amendment Regulations were promulgated by the new régime. The Martial Law Fourth Amendment Regulation of 1975, taking effect from 2 November, provides jîlinishment for any activity prejudicial to the defence, security or inter-service code, or any other anti-state activity. Persons found guilty of such offences may be sentenced to imprisonment up to life and may even be sentenced to death.
The Martial Law Seventh Amendment Regulation of 1976, promulgated on 8 January 1976, makes it a punishable offence to criticize the imposition, operation or the continuation of martial law, and to create disaffection towards any of the martial law administrators. Offenders can be punished with imprisonment up to 10 years. Martial law tribunals were set up to try offences punishable under martial law. These are summary tribunals, consisting of one military judge, and special martial law courts, headed by a sessions judge or a military officer not below the rank of lieutenant colonel. Of the other two members, only one has to be a magistrate.
So far, AI has received reports that only three officials serving under the Mujibur Rahman administration have been sentenced by martial law courts. They received terms ranging from 5 years to life imprisonment on charges of corruption and misappropriation of wealth. AI wrote to President Sayem on 30 April 1976 to ask for a transcript of their trial before the martial law courts. The letter also referred to the Martial Law Amendment Regulations made by the new government, especially the limitations on constitutional guarantees for freedom of speech and conscience. The wide definitions used in both amendments, AI argued, would open the possibility for misuse by the detaining authorities for personal or political ends, and would thus contravene article 9 of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights. AI expressed deep concern that such severe punishment as the death penalty could be imposed for offences of a political nature, and urged that the government consider repealing these provisions before the elections scheduled for 1977.
On 7 November 1975, President Sayem had announced that political prisoners who had been detained for reasons of political ideology would be released without delay. And on 11 November, some prominent political prisoners, including Major Abdul Jalil and Abdur Rab, both leaders of the Jatiya Samajtantrik Dal, whose cases were being investigated by AI, were released. On 5 December 1975, AI wrote to the President and all civilian members of the Council of Advisers to the government, congratulating the government on the amnesty and requesting details of the review committee which had been set up to examine the cases of political prisoners against whom criminal
122
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
charges were made.
In view of the long period that many of these prisoners had already been detained without trial, AI urged that the review committee's mandate should be as wide as possible and include all prisoners detained under the Emergency Power Regulations and the Special Powers Act, even if additional charges had been brought. AI submitted that all detainees against whom there was no substantive evidence of criminal offences should be released and requested that the government publish the number of prisoners still detained under these laws, as well as the number of those to be released.
In the first three months of 1976, the government published release statistics, which showed that by 11 March 1976, 765 political prisoners had been freed. AI had submitted a list of 383 political prisoners known to have been detained under the government of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman but no reply has yet been received as to whether any of these benefited from the amnesty.
In spite of the releases under the amnesty, a large number of prisoners remain in detention, and new arrests have taken place under the Special Powers Act and the Emergency Powers Regulations. Hundreds of members of the Jatiya Samajtantrik Dal, including their recently released leaders, were arrested throughout Bangladesh after members of the party allegedly took part in an attack on the Indian High Commissioner on 27 November 1975. At the same time, reports said that 800 students were arrested at Dacca University for political reasons.
AI knows that thousands of political prisoners are still detained without trial. Information emanating from independent sources inside Bangladesh in January put the total of political prisoners detained at 62,000. Although many are prisoners detained by the Mujibur Rahman government, AI, in a letter to the President on 29 April 1976, expressed concern about the slow process by which the government implements its release program.
