TURKEY
Many arrests and imprisonments have taken place over the past year of people charged under articles 141 and 142 of the Turkish penal code. These prohibit forming organizations "aimed at establishing the domination of a social class over other social classes" and making "communist propaganda".
As the number of arrests has increased so have the allegations of torture. On several occasions Amnesty International wrote to the Turkish authorities to express concern at reports of torture in Turkish prisons. A letter of 11 July 1975 to Minister of Justice Ismail Muftuoglu urged that an official investigation should be held into the alleged subjection of a prisoner to electrical shocks, On 5 March 1976 two further cases of alleged torture were raised with Prime Minister Suleyman Demirel and again "a formal inquiry into the circumstances surrounding these allegations" was requested.
In April 1976 a considerable amount of detailed information about alleged torture was received by AI. On 26 April 1976 Secretary General Martin Ennals once again raised the question of torture in a letter to Mr Demirel: "... the amount of detailed information that we have received suggests that at least two police stations - Ankara Emniyet Sarayi and the First Bureau of the Istanbul Police at Gayrettepe - the torture of political prisoners has become routine practice." Examples of allegations relating to 1976 were provided, as were the names of alleged torturers. In conclusion, the Secretary General said: The number of allegations and the circumstantial detail contained in them are in themselves most convincing and I understand have given rise to demands within Turkey for an investigation. I urge you most strongly to initiate an investigation as soon as possible.
On 13 January 1976 letters were sent to Minister of Defence Ferit Melen and the First^ Army Commander in Istanbul, General Adnan Ersoz, about the alleged medical neglect of Yusuf Kupeli, a political prisoner, who had previously suffered from tuberculosis and rheumatism of the heart and who was reported to be in extremely bad health. AI groups are working for the release of 23 Turkish prisoners and other
171	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

cases are under investigation by the Research Department. The exact number of political prisoners in Turkey at the present time is not known.
UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
In November 1975 Amnesty International published a major report, Prisoners of Conscience in the USSR: Their Treatment and Conditions. The report described the treatment of Soviet prisoners of conscience primarily in its legal context and showed both the deficiencies in Soviet legislation related to imprisonment and psychiatric detention and the ways in which this legislation is applied in violation of proclaimed human rights standards both domestic and international.
"Most Soviet prisoners of conscience are detained in the colonies and prisons of the corrective labour system. According to Soviet law the corrective labour system aims at the "correction and re-education" of prisoners rather than at "inflicting physical suffering or degrading human dignity". However, the conditions described in the AI report are such that "medical neglect dovetails with chronic hunger and with overwork to give to Soviet penal institutions a more punitive character than is justified by any standards, let alone by the high standards proclaimed by Soviet authorities."
The report ascribed mistreatment of Soviet prisoners in part to deficiencies in current legislation which, for example, legitimizes the use of hunger as a means of punishing and disciplining prisoners. Additionally, prisoners are subjected to the punitive tradition of the ministry of Internal Affairs (MVD) officials who administer the places of imprisonment. Prisoners who refuse to recant dissenting opinions and voice them to others are especially liable to be punished by confinement to punishment cells (with reduced rations), deprivation of correspondence and visiting rights and a variety of forms of harassment.
A large part of the AI report dealt with the confinement of some political and religious dissenters to psychiatric institutions. The brunt of AI's criticism was directed at Soviet legal norms regarding the detention of persons charged with criminal offences and suspected of being mentally ill. The report stated that Soviet law is wholly inadequate in this respect and lays the way open for wrongful incarceration either on account of political considerations or through the errors and prejudices of psychiatrists and courts. The report stated that in a number of cases examining psychiatrists and courts have ruled Soviet citizens to be mentally ill on direct account of their having expressed or acted upon dissenting political or religious beliefs.
Often when the friends and relatives of such persons have argued against the verdict of insanity, they have been told that "seeming normality" is not a decisive criterion of mental health. Most political or religious dissidents whom AI knows to have been forcibly confined to mental hospitals have had no record of violent activity. Yet, at least until recently, Soviet courts have usually chosen the most severe course of treatment for such persons: confinement to a special psychiatric hospital.
The report was deeply critical of the latter institutions, which it describes as being more like prisons than like hospitals. The inmates have no access to any mechanism of appeal or complaint. Convicted criminal prisoners are employed as orderlies in a number of special psychiatric hospitals, and there have been regular reports that these have abused and beaten inmates. Inmates have no influence over their medical treatment and their families have no power
172
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
to countermand the decisions of the doctors, who may even remain anonymous. In special psychiatric hospitals, where patients are kept in almost total isolation from society and where non-medical criteria influence the appointment of psychiatrists, the anonymity of psychiatrists and the unchallengeable character of their decisions invite medical practices which are positively dangerous for patients. The report described the treatment of some political inmates with powerful drugs, which are frequently administered without sound medical justification and without regard for the inmates' medical safety.
Since publication of the report, information reaching AI has confirmed its findings. In an important development a number of samizdat documents have emerged describing, in greater detail than was previously available, conditions of daily life, compulsory labour and disciplinary punishment in Vladimir prison, a maximum security prison in which around 40 political prisoners are held. (Samizdat are unofficially-published materials which are circulated on the chain letter principle.)
Important information has also been provided by Leonid Plyushch, who emigrated from the USSR immediately after being released from the Dnepropetrovsk (Ukraine) special psychiatric hospital. Mr Plyushch, a Ukrainian cyber-neticist and a Marxist by conviction, was arrested in early 1972 and charged with "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda" on the basis of his authorship of a number of samizdat writings on political and human rights questions in the USSR. He was officially diagnosed as suffering from "creeping schizophrenia" and confined from July 1973 to January 1976 in the Dnepropetrovsk institution. A widespread international campaign led by a committee of mathematicians and supported by AI contributed to his ultimate release.
Among the most important revelations made by Mr Plyushch since his release is his estimate that around 60 of his fellow-inmates in the Dnepropetrovsk special psychiatric hospital had been arrested and declared mentally ill in connection with their political or religious actions, although he added that some of these same inmates may genuinely suffer from mental disorders. Mr Plyushch has also given the opinion that there may be as many as 1,000 political inmates of psychiatric hospitals in the USSR. Both of these figures are higher than AI's previous estimates for incidence of this form of political imprisonment.
It remains difficult to obtain reliable information on prisoners of conscience detained in this way, partly because of the unwarranted secrecy which surrounds psychiatric hospitals (especially of the "special" variety) and partly because Soviet citizens who attempt to make known details of such cases are liable themselves to be imprisoned for spreading "slander", as happened to current Al-adopted prisoners Vladimir Bukovsky. Semyon Gluzman, Sergei Kovalyov and Andrei Tverdokhlebov.
One new case of psychiatric detention for clearly political reasons which came to AI's attention in 1975-76 was that of Vyacheslav lgrunov (born in 1947), an electrician from Odessa. Mr lgrunov was arrested in March 1975 and charged with "anti-Soviet slander" on the basis of his having possessed and circulated several samizdat documents. During the investigation which followed, Mr lgrunov refused to answer questions. He was examined by an officially-appointed forensic psychiatric commission which diagnosed him as "schizophrenic". This diagnosis was approved by a court in Odessa in early 1976. In
173	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

a possibly significant departure from past practice in such cases, the court ordered that Mr Igrunov be confined to an ordinary psychiatric hospital rather than to one of the more severe and secretive special psychiatric hospitals like that in Dnepropetrovsk.
Published with the report Prisoners of Conscience in the USSR: Their Treatment and Conditions were AI's recommendations to the Soviet authorities for amelioration of the abuses described in the report. With regard to the misuses of psychiatry as documented in the report, AI recommended a careful reform of Soviet criminal and criminal procedural law. The aim would be to build in safeguards for the rights of genuinely or purportedly mentally ill persons. AI also recommended the establishment in law of detailed and publicly available regulations for the operation of psychiatric institutions and the work of their staffs.
AI also urged Soviet authorities to undertake a program of penal reform, starting with a public discussion of the present operation of the corrective labour system. As long as the day-to-day working of the Soviet penal system is treated as a state secret, AI said, it "will continue to generate suspicion and mistrust, certainly abroad and to some extent within the Soviet Union itself".
The Soviet authorities did not respond positively to AI's requests that they discuss with this organization the problems described in the report and AI's recommendations for their solution. However, in view of the importance of public discussion for amelioration of the problems of imprisonment in the USSR, it is significant that in response to considerable international interest in these problems in late 1975 official Soviet spokesmen made a number of public pronouncements on the issues mentioned above. While in each case Soviet officials denied all allegations of abuses, they showed a marked tendency to discuss problems in greater detail than is traditional. First Deputy Minister of Justice Alexander Sukharev suggested in January 1976 that the Soviet corrective labour system is open to study and comment by foreign experts.
In response to published criticism of the AI report by Dr Samual Zivs, vice-president of the Association of Soviet Lawyers, Thomas Hammarberg, vice-chairman of AI's International Executive Committee urged publicly in February 1976 that Soviet authorities allow and encourage Soviet penologists, jurists and psychiatrists to engage in frank problem-solving consultation with their counterparts in other European countries.
It remains a risk for Soviet citizens to exercise freedom of conscience in ways disapproved of by the Soviet governmental authorities. Soviet citizens who communicate to others ideas or information critical of official practice, or who refuse to submit to official restrictions on expression of religious belief, or who attempt to leave the country without first obtaining official permission, are subject to measures of punishment and deterrence. In many cases the official reaction to unapproved exercise of freedom of conscience is confined to warnings, questionings and searches by the police, job dismissal or a variety of other forms of harassment. But imprisonment is an option allowed the authorities by laws restricting freedom of conscience. In 1975-76 the authorities continued to exercise this power of imprisonment.
By contrast to many countries with a high incidence of political imprisonment, the arrest, investigation, trial and imprisonment of prisoners of conscience in the USSR is carried out with constant reference to relatively stable legal acts and norms. With few known exceptions (these being persons confined to
174
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
psychiatric hospitals under civil instructions), all Soviet prisoners of conscience are imprisoned under criminal law and are treated formally as convicted criminals. All of them receive trials (or in some cases court hearings which decide on their mental fitness), all are imprisoned under sentence, and all are released from imprisonment exactly on expiry of their sentence, unless, as happened to the Crimean Tatar Mustafa Dzhemilyov, the prisoner is faced with new charges before his release.
While AI knows of some cases where prisoners of conscience are serving sentences passed for alleged criminal offences not formally related to political or religious activity (for example "accepting bribes" in the case of Dr Mikhail Shtern, or "hooliganism" in the case of Alexander Feldman), the charges most often preferred relate specifically to exercise of freedoms of conscience: for example "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda", "anti-Soviet slander", "flight abroad or refusal to return from abroad to the USSR", or articles limiting religious freedom. AI has never heard of any defendant being acquitted by a Soviet court on any of these political charges.
In the face of international criticism during the past year official Soviet spokesmen on a number of occasions denied that such laws provide imprisonment for expression of opinion. Illustration to the contrary is provided by the cases of Dr Sergei Kovalyov and Andrei Tverdokhlebov, respectively a member and the secretary of AI's Moscow group. Dr Kovalyov, who was arrested in December 1974, came to trial in December 1975 in Vilnius (Lithuania) on charges of "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda". The accusation was that Dr Kovalyov had spread information which he knew to be false and slanderous, one indicted instance of this being statements in A Chronicle of Current Events to the effect that Leonid Plyushch (see above) was detained in a psychiatric hospital without medical justification. Dr Kovalyov was convicted and sentenced to 7 years' imprisonment in a strict regime corrective labour colony to be followed by 3 years in internal exile.
His AI colleague Andrei Tverdokhlebov was brought to trial in April 1976 on charges of "disseminating fabrications known to be false which defame the Soviet state and social system". Mr Tverdokhlebov too was found guilty of circulating information in defence of persons imprisoned for political actions. The indictment against him specified as "lying slanders" statements by him that former prisoners of conscience Victor Fainberg, Pyotr Grigorenko and Leonid Plyushch were not in need of compulsory psychiatric treatment. The indictment similarly cited a collection of documents which he had edited and which alleged mistreatment of inmates of Soviet corrective labour institutions. Mr Tverdokhlebov was sentenced to 5 years in exile (effectively reduced to 2 years in exile because of the length of time he had already spent in detention).
AI adoption groups and national sections campaigned vigorously on behalf of both Mr Tverdokhlebov and Dr Kovalyov. The organization was not successful in persistent efforts to obtain permission to send an observer to their trials.
The Soviet news media announced the passing of a number of death sentences in 1975-76, and it is clear that in at least some cases, the death penalty was carried out. Soviet criminal law allows application of capital punishment for 18 different offences in peacetime, including a number of non-violent crimes. In the past several years the Soviet media have announced around 30 death sentences each year, although it is impossible to estimate how many of these have been carried out. Although AI knows of no recent death sentences being
175	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

passed in political cases, it continued in the past year to protest death penalties passed by Soviet courts.
In a novel development, a number of samizdat documents emerged in 1975 which provided a highly credible record of systematic beatings and tortures of non-political prisoners in a Georgian prison. The central document was an unofficial transcript of the April 1975 trial of two inmates of Investigation Prison Number 1 in Tbilisi on charges of beating a fellow inmate to death. One of the defendants, Yury Tsirekidze, testified that he had beaten the victim on instructions from prison authorities, and that he had undertaken this sort of task many times since 1958 to help obtain "confessions", mostly from prisoners charged with corruption or spying.
The trial transcript and other materials indicate that investigative officials of the prison, abetted by certain local officials, had employed convicted prisoners in this way. Among the methods allegedly used were beatings, burning victims with cigarettes and subjecting them to homosexual rape. The material further indicated that over the years several prisoners had died as a result of such treatment.
When this situation came to light in connection with the Tsiredikze case several officials were transferred from their positions, and the judge in the Tsirekidze trial said that some implicated officials should be brought to criminal responsibility. In November 1975 AI wrote to USSR Procurator General Roman Rudenko requesting a full investigation of these allegations and that the officials responsible be brought to justice. Issue number 38 of A Chronicle of Current Events (dated 31 December 1975) reported that criminal charges had been brought against two members the prison's staff.
At the time of writing AI has around 300 Soviet prisoners of conscience under adoption or investigation.
