Bahrain
Amnesty Intemational's concems during 1983 were the long-term detention without charge or trial of political prisoners; the imprisorunent of possible prisoners of conscience; the prolonged incommunicado detention and imprisonment of both untried and convicted individuals; and allegations of ill-treatment of prisoners.
327
During the year the organization investigated the cases of 27 political prisoners, 11 of whom had not been tried, the others having been convicted of membership of illegal organizations. Amnesty Intemational learned of the release of 11 convicted prisoners and untried detainees.
Sixteen of those whose cases were being investigated were Bahrainis sentenced to between one and seven years' for membership of, or for forming, one of the following illegal organizations: the Organization of Islamic Unity, Movement of the Revolutionary Cell or the Constituent Committee of the Bahraini Workers' Union.
Amnesty Intemational was also investigating the cases of 11 prisoners who had been held without charge or trial for between two and seven years, under the State Security Law of 1974 {sqq Amnesty Intemational Report 1983). Four of these prisoners had been held since November 1981 and only came to the organization's attention during the year. They were Salam Abdul Aziz Ali, a govemment employee; Nader Abdullah Abu Drees, a student; his brother Abdul Aziz, who was released during the year, and Sayed Hashim al Musawi. Amnesty Intemational asked the authorities why they had not been charged and tried, what specific acts they were alleged to have committed, whether they had been able to appeal against their detention (as provided for under the State Security Law), whether the detainees were represented by a lawyer, and where they were being held. The organization also sought assurances concerning the prisoners' state of health.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about 73 political prisoners -60 Bahrainis, 11 Saudis, one Kuwaiti and one Omani - who were reported to have been held incommimicado since May 1982, when they were convicted on chaises of involvement in a December 1981 plot to o\tvÛ[K)yNÛiQ%ovQrnmQïA{seQAmnesty Intemational Report 1983). It was also reported that they had subsequentiy been subjected to ill-treatment and that no official information had been given regarding their place of imprisonment
Amnesty Intemational wrote to the authorities in May 1983 urging that all the prisoners be given immediate and regular access to their relatives and lawyers and requesting clarification about their whereabouts.
During the year Amnesty Intemational received allegations that political detainees had been ill-treated while in the custody of the Bahrain security forces. Ja'afar Al Wardi, an electrical engineering teacher, was arrested on 26 August 1983 after being deported from Qatar. He was reported to have been ill-treated in prison while suffering from diabetes. Anmesty Intemational urged the authorities to investigate these reports and soumit assurances that he was receiving appropriate
328
medical attention. Amnesty Intemational also received reports of ill-treatment regarding the 73 convicted political prisoners and the detainee Sayed Hashim A1 Musawi (see above).
Although Amnesty Intemational was not able to verify these allegations of ill-treatment, the reports gave rise to concem because prisoners were often subjected to prolonged periods of incommunicado detention, and the authorities were unwilling to allow the independent investigation of such allegations. Amnesty Intemational received no reply from the authorities to its inquiries throughout the year about matters of concem to the oi^anization.
