Algeria
During 1983, Amnesty Intematicmal was concerned about the long-term detention without trial of individuals on political grounds, prolonged incommunicado detention and reports of the ill-treatment of detainees. To Amnesty International's knowledge, no executions were carried out during 1983.
Twenty-one leading members of Islamic movements who had been arrested in December 1982 were reportedly still in prison at the end of the year. They were arrested several weeks after, and allegedly in connection with, clashes between students at the University of Ben-Aknoim outside Algiers that led to one death and many injuries. All were charged with, among other things, plotting against the authority of the state and the integrity of national territory. However, neither they nor two others who were arrested at the same time but were provisionally released a short time later, had been tried by the end of 1983. On 29 December 1983 Amnesty International wrote to the Algerian Minister of Justice Boualem Baki, listing the names of 19 of the individuals concerned and calling for prompt and fair trials for all the detainees or their immediate release. Amnesty International feared that dozens of other individuals also arrested in November and December 1982 in connection with these and related events were still being held without trial
Amnesty International was concerned about a mmiber of arrests that took place in early October 1983. Former officials in governments of the early 1960s under President Ahmed Ben Bella, including Muhammad Seghir Nekkache, former Minister of Health, and the well-known lawyer Abdennour Ali Yahia, who had been active in the defence of arrested Berber activists, were among those arrested and
326
subsequently held in Berrouaghia prison. Shortly after receiving reports of the arrests, Amnesty Intemational sent a telex to the Minister of Justice seeking official information on the legal status of the detainees. In his response to Amnesty Intemational's inquiry, the Minister of Justice stated that individual rights were guaranteed by the Algerian constitution, that no one could be arrested unless they had committed an offence, and that no cases could be "tried without the presence of a laviyer".
Shortly afterwards, Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the reported state of health of one of the detainees, the lawyer Ali Yahia, who was known to be a diabetic and w^ said to be receiving inadequate medical treatment On 4 November, the organization expressed its concem about this case to the Minister of Justice and in mid-December, after receiving fiirther reports that the lawyer's condition was deteriorating, issued an urgent appeal on his behalf. In late December Ali Yahia was reported to have been transferred for treatment to Maillot military hospital in Algiers; shortly thereafter he was returned to prison.
In a letter to the Algerian Minister of Justice on 29 December, Amnesty Intemational summarized its concems about the arrests that took place in October and the continued detention of those arrested Amnesty Intemational referred to reports that the time limits on garde a vue, incommunicado detention by the police, had been exceeded and that detainees' families had not been told the whereabouts of those arrested
In its letter of 29 December, Amnesty Intemational also referred to allegations that some of those arrested in early October had been ill-treated while in garde d vue immediately after tiieir arrest, before being transferred to Berrouaghia prison. Amnesty Intemational received other occasional allegations that people held in custody had been ill-treated during the year but was unable to confirm them.
