Indonesia and East Timor
Amnesty Intemational was conœmed about the persistent use of extralegal methods by the security forces, which resulted in extrajudicial executions; the illegal detention of people without charge or trial cm political grounds; torture; and "disappearances". Several thousand alleged members of criminal gangs were victims of a campaign of extrajudicial killings in which there was considerable evidence of official complicity. As in previous years targets of extralegal practices ^so included people suspected of supporting secessionist movements in Irian Jaya and Aceh, people suspected of resisting the Indonesian occupation of East Timor, and Muslims suspected of trying to establish an Islamic state. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed that political detainees who had been arrested in connection with the alleged coup of September 1965 continued to serve lengthy prison terms imposed in many cases after trials which failed to meet intemational standards. The organization was also concemed about the lack of uniformity in the application of policy regarding the sentencing of and the granting of remission and parole to these prisoners; the imposition and canying out of the death penalty; and the continuing detention for long periods of prisoners held under sentence of death.
There was strong evidence that an officially sanctioned nationwide anti-crime campaign of extrajudicial killings had taken the lives of approximately 4,000 suspected criminals by the end of the year. These killings were carried out without any judicial process to determine the guilt of the victims, who were frequentiy reported to have been in the custody of the authorities when they were killed. Official comment indicated approval of and acknowledgement of responsibility for the killings. The Minister of Justice, Lieutenant General Ali Said, described the killings as "surgical operations to save the life of the patient". The former Minister of Information, Lieutenant General Ali Murtopo, admitted in July that the killings were being done "in accordance with the regulations of the Ministry of Defence and Security". The many similarities in the circumstances of the killings, the choice of the victims, and the simultaneous outbreak of the killings in provinces throughout Indonesia also pointed to an officially sanctioned campaign. The killings were reportedly being carried out by squads from the army paratroop special unit, Kopassandha, working with lists of suspected criminals supplied from police files. From 29 July 1983, Anmesty
226
Intemational issued repeated appeals to the Indonesian Govemment to stop the killings. Criticism of die campaign by politicians and human rights organizations within Indonesia and intemational representations had not persuaded the authorities to halt the campaign, which was still continuing at the end of the year.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the continued detention of approximately 300 so-called "A Category" prisoners, who had been arrested and tried in connection with the alleged communist coup of September 1965, many of whom may have been prisoners of conscience. Ainnesty Intemational took up for investigation a further 46 of these prisoners during the year, most of them detained in Balikpapan, East Kalimantan and Pamekasan, Madura. The organization was concemed that they may have not received a fair trial and that many were receiving unequal treatment with regard to implementation of mles relating to sentencing,reniission and parole.
An instmction issued in November 1978 enabled "A Category" prisoners to have the period of pre-trial detention deducted from their sentences, and in November 1979 they were made eligible for remission and parole on the same terms as ordinary criminal prisoners. During the year Amnesty Intemational leamed of the release of some "A Category" prisoners who had benefited from remission, parole or deduction of pre-trial detention from sentence. One prisoner of conscience, Ismail Bakri, was released in August 1983. He had been arrested in June 1967 and had received a life sentence in September 1973. Five years later, his sentence had been commuted to 20 years' dated from the time of his arrest and he subsequentiy received remission. Three women prisoners, Sudjinah, Ubed Djubaedah and Ratna Djuwita, were released from Tanggerang prison near Jakarta, also in August 1983. Ubed Djubaedah had been sentenced to 14 years' imprisonment in September 1974, with no deduction of pre-trial detention, but was eligible for release on parole after receiving remission. However "A Category" prisoners were not treated imiformly. Sundari Abdurachman, whose case was being investigated by Amnesty Intemational, was a former member of parliament who had been arrested in October 1968 and sentenced to life imprisonment in October 1976. Her sentence was commuted to 20 years in August 1982, as permitted by the remission decree, but her eight years of pre-trial detention were not deducted "A Category" prisoners faced other administrative problems. Where prosecutors or convicted prisoners had appealed against a verdict, sentences sometimes did not begin to mn until the prison commander was formally notified of the decision of the appeals court Release could be further delayed by the failure of the authorities to issue release papers. On 30 December 1983, Amnesty Intemational wrote to President Suharto pointing out some of these
Ill
difficulties and urging him to review these cases and to consider taking steps to ensure the consistent application of existing guidelines on sentencing, remission and parole.
The same letter also urged that the procedural safeguards of the Kitah Undang-Undang Hukum Acara Pidana (KUHAP), Code of Criminal Procedure, enacted on 31 December 1981, be extended to cover people charged with offences which had been specifically excluded from the protection of the code, including the offences of subvereion with which people arrested in connection with 1965 events had been charged The letter pointed out that such exclusions had been described by the code itself as temporary and that, with the two-year transition period for introduction of the code due to end on 31 December 1983, it might be an appropriate time to consider extending the KUHAP to offences so far excluded
People detained for political reasons did not generally enjoy the legal protection available to criminal prisoners under the new code. The code provided for pre-trial judicial investigation; maximum periods for detention without charge or trial; compensation for wrongful detention or conviction; and access to legal assistance, including during interrogation. In August/November, for example, approximately 25 people, most of them students and civil servants, were arrested without warrant in Jayapura, Irian Jaya, by members of Kopassandha for allegedly having links with the Organisasi Papua Merdeka (OPM), Free Papua Organization, and at least some of them were held incommunicado in an unauthorized place of detention. Once charged, political detainees often experienced long periods of imprisonment without trial. Six women, who had been arrested in August 1980 for allegedly having hoisted the Papuan flag and whose cases were being investigated by Amnesty Intemational(see/4m«ej^/niemfl/zona/i?e^i?rriP52), were finally tried and sentenced in July 1983. Amnesty International continued to investigate the cases of 10 Muslims arrested in Central Java in 1978/79, of whom six were still awaiting trial at the end of 1983. They were reportedly held for allegedly having supported the aims of the so-called Kommando Jihad to establish an Islamic state through armed insurrection. Several of them had reportedly been tortured immediately after arrest and one was reported to have been tried without having had access to a defence lawyer. On 4 November 1983 Amnesty International appealed on behalf of 13 individuals who were reported to have been tortured after arrest during the previous four months in Aceh, North Sumatra, on suspicion of having supported the secessionist National Liberation Front of Aceh-Sumatra (NLFAS).
Amnesty International was concerned about new reports of serious human rights violations in East Timor, including the "disappearance" and extrajudicial killing of non-combatants and the torture and ill-
228
treatment of people taken into the custody of Indonesian forces. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about the arrest and detention without trial of people held on suspicion of opposition to the Indonesian occupation. Since the Indonesian invasion of East Timor in December 1975 Amnesty Intemational had received reports indicating that Indonesian forces there had persistently resorted to torture and the ait)itrary killing of non-combatants. In July, Amnesty Intemational received a copy of manuals issued to Indonesian troops in East Timor which indicated that such practices were officially condoned The manuals contained guidelines condoning the use of torture in certain circumstances during interrogation and the issuing of threats to the lives of people undergoing interrogation to ensure their cooperation. After taking steps to establish the authenticity of the manuals Amnesty Intemational issued a news release on 20 July 1983 disclosing their existence. Amnesty Intemational wrote to President Suharto the same day, expressing its concern that the instmctions contained in the manuals and the practices which were their foreseeable consequence violated intemational human rights standards prohibiting torture in all circumstances. The letter stated: "Rather than comply with these standards, these military instmctions, while describing the use of force and threats during interrogation as something generally to be avoided, explicitly allow for the possibility of torture and provide guidelines to prevent its exposure." On 2 September 1983, Amnesty Intemational delivered a statement in New York to the United Nations Fourth Committee on Decolonization in which it presented a review of its concems in East Timor since the invasion in December 1975. The statement also expressed Amnesty Intemational's concem about reports that a new military offensive had recently been launched, since in the past the torture, killing and "disappearance" of non-combatants had been associated with increased military activity. Amnesty Intemational subsequendy leamed of the arrest in connection with the offensive of several hundred people in the areas of Dili, Baucau and Viqueque. Amnesty Intemational was unable to confirm reports that individuals arrested since the August offensive had subsequendy been sent to Atauro, an island off mainland East Timor which the Indonesian authorities have used since 1980 to detain people held without charge or trial, and to regional military headquarters in Bali. On 21 September 1983, Amnesty Intemational appealed on behalf of seven named people and others who had reportedly been arrested and might have been sent to Atauro and Bali but whose precise circumstances were not known.
Amnesty Intemational also received reports of several separate incidents involving the killing of non-combatants. One such report alleged that as many as 200 people in the village of Kraras, Viqueque,
229
had been killed by Indonesian troops reportedly in reprisal for the killing of 16 Indonesian soldiers on 8 August 1983.
Amnesty International was concerned that a number of people were imprisoned under sentence of death in Indonesia. They included as many as 50 prisoners who had been sentenced in connection with the alleged 1965 coup and had been detained for many years. Amnesty International appealed to President Suharto on 25 August 1983 to commute the sentences of two of these prisoners, Mohammed Munir and Ruslam Wijayasastra, after learning that their appeals had been rejected by the Supreme Court. It has not been the government's practice to execute prisoners sentenced to death in connection with the alleged 1965 coup and Amnesty International urged the government to commute their sentences so that they could become eligible for eventual release. On 25 April 1983, the organization sent a telegram to President Suharto expressing its grave concern about the execution earlier in April of Imran bin Muhamad Zein, who had been sentenced to death for his role in the March 1981 hijacking of an Indonesian aircraft flying to Bangkok and an attack on a police station. Three of Imran's followers were also under sentence of death, one of them being sentenced in April 1983. Amnesty International learned of others being sentenced to death for non-political crimes such as premeditated murder. On 8 March 1983, in Langsa, Aceh, two Taiwanese citizens became the first people to be sentenced to death in Indonesian courts for drug trafficking. In July, the Minister for Social Affairs stated that it was the government's intention to impose the death penalty regularly for drug trafficking.
