Nigeria
Amnesty International was concerned about reports that large numbers of people were detained during national elections in August, although it was not clear whether any of tiiose detained were held solely on account of non-violent political opinions or activities. At least three people were sentenced to death during 1983 but it was not known how many executions took place.
Presidential and legislative elections took place in August President Shehu Shagari was re-elected to a second four-year term, and his National Party of Nigeria (NPN) won a majority of seats in the Federal House of Representatives. However, there were widespread allegations that voting had been rigged in several states of the federation. Some results were successfully challenged in the courts. On 31 December, President Shagari's government was overthrown in a coup led by Major-General Muhammadu Buhari.
Over a thousand people were detained in August during the national elections, which were disrupted by political violence. Arson, intimidation and ballot-rigging were widely reported, and hundreds of people were killed in clashes between supporters of rival candidates. There were allegations that several candidates for election to the office of state governor maintained private armies of hired thugs. The most serious violence was reported in Oyo and Ondo states, both of which were won by NPN gubernatorial candidates against incimibent candidates from the Unity Party of Nigeria (UPN). However,a UPN candidate was eventually declared to have been elected as governor of Ondo after the Supreme Court had overturned the election of the NPN candidate. Over 600 people were reportedly detained in Ondo state alone in August and September, while other detentions were reported from almost every state in the federation. Most of those detained were held on suspicion either of electoral fraud or of crimes of violence including arson and murder. Representatives of the UPN and the Nigerian People's Party (NPP) alleged that some of their supporters had been detained on account of their party affiliation and that many detainees were held without charge. Both federal and state police authorities reportedly denied these allegations, stating that all those held in connection with offences during the August elections had been formally charged before a magistrate. Some reports estimated that the number of people held on political grounds in October, including those who had not been charged, may have been up to 150 in Niger state, 200 in Bomo, 100 in Imo, 600 in Oyo and 500 in Ondo. In late October, the national press reported that two senior officials of the opposition UPN had been
84
prevented by security officers fi^om boarding a flight to London, and had had their passports confiscated. They had reportedly intended to give Amnesty Intemational information concerning UPN supporters who had allegedly been arrested for political reasons.
Three people were known to have been sentenced to death in 1983 after being convicted of murder. It was not known how many other death sentences were imposed or how many executions were carried out In Oyo state, the authorities instituted an inquiry in November into the imposition of death sentences on people convicted in connection with violent protests against heavy taxes in 1980. According to the governor of Oyo, Dr Victor Olunloyo, there were fears that some of those sentenced to death may have been wrongfully convicted
