Guatemala
Amnesty Intemational was concerned that the regular seciuity and military forces, as well as paramilitary groups acting under government orders or with official complicity, continued to be responsible for massive human rights violations including large-scale torture, "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions. Victims included individual leaders of public opinion such as clergy, teachers and students at the Universidad de San Carlos (USAC), University of San Carlos, lawyers, doctors, trade unionists, journalists and community workers, as well as peasants and Indians and the urban poor.
During the government of General Efrain Ríos Montt (March 1982-August 1983), Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about the promulgation of emergency legislation including a state of siege and Decree 46-82 of July 1982, which established Special Military Tribunals empowered to pass the death penalty for a wide range of political and politically-related offences after summary proceedings, which Amnesty Intemational considered fell far short of intemational standards for fair trial Amnesty Intemational was particularly concemed about reports that several of the 15 people executed between September
158
1982 and March 1983 under its provisions had been convicted solely on the basis of information extracted under torture while held in unacknowledged detention. They had reportedly not been present or legally represented during the proceedings which convicted them.
Initially, the government of General Ríos Montt had restructured several of the security units most commonly cited as responsible for "disappearances" and extrajudicial execution but testimony from former members of the security agencies in question indicated that their personnel and operating methods remained essentially the same.
Following a pattern established by previous governments, the Ríos Montt government blamed torture, "disap|>earances" and individual execution-style killings in the cities on extremist groups of the left and right-wing "death squads" which they maintained were outside official control. Amnesty International, as a matter of principle, condemns the torture or execution of prisoners by anyone, including opposition groups. The organization concluded that most such abuses were carried out under superior orders by regular and reservist military or security agents acting either in uniform or in plain clothes.
Over a period of two decades, incumbent Guatemalan governments claimed that many victims died in confrontations between the security forces and guerrilla groups or had been killed or made to "disappear" by the armed opposition. Amnesty International did receive reports of individual execution-style killings being carried out in rural areas by opposition groups. The organization believed, however, that the Guatemalan military and official civilian defence squads acting under military supervision were responsible for the large-scale extrajudicial execution of non-combatant civilians in the countryside.
Amnesty International wrote to the then President Ríos Montt on 28 April 1983 calling on the authorities to investigate specific abuses which had allegedly occurred since the Ríos Montt administration came to power. These included the reported extrajudicial execution of more than 300 Indian villagers by the Guatemalan army at Agua Fría, Rabinal, Alta Verapaz, on 13 September 1982 and the unresolved "disappearance" of Graciela Morales Herrera who was abducted with her three children on 11 September 1982 from her home in Guatemala City by men in plain clothes who were believed to be members of the security forces.
Amnesty International also appealed for information concerning Yolanda Urízar de Aguilar, who " disappeared" after she was abducted on 25 March 1983 in southern Guatemala by a group of men in civilian clothes, who were believed to be members of the security forces. Urízar had returned to Guatemala following an amnesty declared by General Ríos Montt in March 1983, which permitted political opponents of the administration to return freely to the country. The organization also
159
reiterated its disappointment at General Ríos Montt's failure to carry out promises made when he first came to office, according to which structures were to be established to investigate thousands of unresolved past "disappearances", including the "disappearance" of 25 trade unionists from the Central Nacional de Trabajadores (CNT), Guatemalan Workers Congress, after they were arrested in June 1980 at CNT headquarters in Guatemala City by plainclothes and uniformed members of the National Police.
Although it repeatedly claimed that it was open to investigation from human rights monitoring groups, the Ríos Montt administration never replied to Amnesty International's communications, nor did it address the substance of the organization's concerns.
Following the military overthrow of the Ríos Montt government in August 1983, the Minister of Defence General Oscar Humberto Mejia Víctores was named as Guatemalan Chief of State and announced his intention to lift emergency regulations imposed by President Ríos Montt and to abolish the Special Military Tribunals.
However, Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports of human rights violations including a notable increase in "death squad"-style "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions in Guatemalan cities. By the end of September, the Guatemalan press had itself reported more than 80 such "disappearances".
Those who "disappeared" included catechists, staff and students at USAC, as well as people working on mral education programs ftinded by the US Agency for Intemational Development (AID) who "disappeared" in October 1983 after being arrested in Guatemala City by men in plain clothes. In November, the authorities announced that the partially charred bodies of three AID workers had been recovered from a bumt-out car. Local police and firefighters maintained that they had died when their car crashed into a cliff and burst into flames. However, eye-witnesses said the car had been pushed to the cliff, soaked with gasoline and set alight Colleagues said that the victims could not drive. The government in announcing their deaths implied that documents found in the car had provided evidence that the victims had been involved in "suspicious" activities.
Many others who reportedly "disappeared" after General Mejia Víctores came to power remained missing despite repeated appeals on their behalf by Amnesty Intemational and other organizations. They included the agronomist Jorge Alberto Rosal Paz, who was abducted by armed men on 12 August 1983 on the road between Zacapa and Teculután,
While there were fewer reports at the end of the year of the large-scale "disappearance" and extrajudicial execution of non-combatant civilians in the countryside then under military control, reported abuses increased
160
in departments still in contention such as San Marcos and Alta Verapaz. In December 1983, Amnesty Intemational called on the new administration to conduct immediate investigations into reported killings by the army; in one such case the army allegedly killed 32 people, including 14 children, on 8 August 1983 at a displaced persons camp between Cuxpemech and Peñas Blancas in Alta Verapaz.
Amnesty Intemational also expressed its concern about reports received in November, according to which large numbers of non-combatant Kekchi Indian peasants were then in danger of extrajudicial execution at the hands of the Guatemalan military in the Chama mountain region in Alta Verapaz. Amnesty Intemational was unable to confirm the reports but was concemed about them in the light of previous extrajudicial executions of Indians in mral areas by the security forces.
Finely, Amnesty Intemational's December letter expressed the organization's disappointment that the new administration had not made any attempt to establish responsibility for past "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions. In the one case known to Amnesty Intemational in recent years where military personnel were detained in connection with abuses committed against civilians, the commander of the unit allegedly responsible for the arrest and extrajudicial execution in February 1983 of AID-employee Patricio Ortiz Maldonado and three others was subsequently released in August 1983 by the new administration. General Mejia Víctores announced that he had been absolved because there was no evidence linking him with the killings. Other sources stated that he was released because junior officers threatened a rebellion if the commander was punished for having carried out orders to eliminate Ortiz which had come directly fi-om central military headquarters in Guatemala City.
Amnesty Intemational's December letter to Chief of State Mejia Víctores welcomed the abolition by the new administration of the Special Military Tribunals, but expressed the view that their proceedings had been so arbitrary and had so violated generally agreed standards for fair trials that all such cases should be re-tried before regular courts. The letter also expressed concem that the whereabouts and state of proceedings against many of those originally arrested under Decree 46-82 had not been made known by the Mejia Víctores administration. Amnesty Intemational received reports that some missing 46-82 detainees might have been held in secret detention in Guatemala City, and that others faced the danger of secret executioa
A letter allegedly smuggled out of the Centro de Orientación Femenina, Women's Readaptation Centre, by an acknowledged 46-82 detainee detailed the cases of three women whom the writer said had originally been arrested under Decree 46-82 but had subsequently
161
"disappeared". Two of the missing women were arrested along with the acknowledged detainee in November 1982. One was her sister. General Ríos Montt had publicly announced the committal of the second woman to the Special Military Tribunals for trial. Ileana del Rosario Castillo, the third woman, was reportedly seen by the letter writer in custody in November 1982 at the Escuela Politécnica, Military School.
Amnesty International asked General Mejia Víctores to make public infonnation on the whereabouts of the missing prisoners and the state of proceedings against them. It urged that representatives of international humanitarian organizations be invited to inspect the locations where such prisoners were allegedly held in order to ensure that the conditions of detention conformed to the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners.
Amnesty International also raised its human rights concerns in Guatemala under the Mejia Víctores administration during a meeting held in Brussels in September between representatives of the organization and the Guatemalan Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs, at the tatter's request Similar discussions were held in December in New York between Amnesty International's Secretary General and the Guatemalan Ambassadors to the United Nations (UN) in Geneva and New York.
Amnesty International presented its human rights concerns in Guatemala to regional organizations and other international bodies. In October 1983, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (lACHR) of the Organization of American States (OAS) reported that military actions against Indian communities considered to be pro-guerrilla had resulted in "grave violations of human rights, in some cases including the destruction and sacking of entire villages and massacre of the inhabitants".
A July 1983 session of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights of the OAS considered whether Decree 46-82 was consistent with obligations undertaken by Guatemala under the American Convention on Human Rights. A Court advisory opinion subsequently found that Guatemala's reservation to Article 4 of the Convention, by which Guatemala retained the death penalty for common crimes connected to political crimes, did not release it from its obligation under Article 4.2 not to extend the death penalty to crimes for which it did not apply at the time Guatemala became a party to the Convention and only then for the most serious crimes pursuant to a final judgment rendered by a competent court.
In September, the UN Sub-Commission on the Prevention of Discrimination and the Protection of Minorities passed a resolution calling on the Guatemalan Government to refrain from the "enforced displacement of the Indian communities and their confinement in strategic
162
hamlets, as well as massacre, scorched earth policies and forced 'disappearances' ".
In March 1983, a nominee proposed by the Chairman of the UN Commission on Human Rights to act as the commission's Special Rapporteur to inquire into the human rights situation in Guatemala was accepted by the Guatemalan Government; the Commission had first sought to make such an appointment in 1981. Following on-site investigations, the Special Rapporteur reported to the UN General Assembly in November 1983. He had been unable to verify all the allegations he had received concerning human rights violations under Generals Ríos Montt and Mejia Víctores, but had found no reason to doubt that the Guatemalan military had been responsible for at least some of the massacres attributed to it, such as the extrajudicial execution of mòre than 300 men, women and children at San Francisco, Nentón, Huehuetenango in July 1982. He also found it "virtually inexplicable" that the government continued to be so "completely unsuccessful" in resolving the cases of "disappeared" persons.
Amnesty International also expressed its concern on a number of occasions to the Mexican authorities and the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) regarding the reported abductions and extrajudicial execution of Guatemalan refugees in Mexico by Guatemalan military and paramilitary units. The organization urged that any repatriation program involving the return of Guatemalan refugees from Mexico to their country of origin should ensure the security of any returned refugees, and that individual interviews be held in collaboration with appropriate agencies such as the UNHCR, to ensure that any Guatemalan repatriated to Guatemala retumed on an entirely voluntary basis.
163
