Zimbabwe
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the detention without trial of alleged political opponents of the government under emergency powers authorizing inr definite imprisonment at the government's discretioa There were substantial allegations of torture of political detainees and many people taken into military custody during counter-insurgency operations, particularly in Matabeleland North Province, were tortured and ill-treated. At least several hundred other people, including children, were extrajudicially executed in the same area, mostly by soldiers of the army's Fifth Brigade. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about the continued use of the death penalty.
The government faced armed opposition from so-called "dissidents" who allegedly included former guerrilla fighters belonging to the Zimbabwe People's Revolutionary Army (ZIPRA) and other insurgents who were said by the authorities to have received military training in South Africa At the beginning of the year several civilians were killed and government installations were sa^taged by "dissidents" active in
121
Matabeleland North Province. In late January, the government imposed a curfew throughout much of the province and deployed the army's Fifth Brigade, which was subsequently accused of large scale atrocities against the civilian population, several hundred of whom sought refuge in Botswana.
The state of emergency, which has been in force continuously since 1965 and which had been reimposed at six-monthly intervals since independence in 1980, was further renewed in January and July. The government equipped itself with new powers under the emergency regulations to provide, among other things, for the prosecution and imprisonment of joumalists who report, without government authorization, on security force activities in designated areas and for the arrest and imprisonment of people suspected of vagrancy. In March, however, emergency powers introduced in 1982 to give government ministers and members of the security forces immunity from prosecution for any acts which they might commit" in good faith" for the preservation of national security were amended following criticism of their provisions. The Attorney General was empowered to bring criminal prosecutions in certain circumstances, but the amending regulations did not permit private prosecutions and stipulated that the government should not be liable for damages even in respect of prosecutions brought by the Attorney General.
As a result of the maintenance of the state of emergency, the police and security forces continued to exercise wide powers of arbitrary arrest and detention without trial. Many of those arrested were supporters of the Zimbabwe African People's Union (ZAPU), the second largest party in parliament, or its former military wing ZIPRA. The ZAPU leader, Joshua Nkomo, was dismissed from the government in 1982 following the discovery of arms caches on property owned by the party but several other ZAPU members retained posts in the government and remained in office in 1983. In March, Joshua Nkomo left the country, apparently in fear of his life, and sought temporary refuge abroad following a raid on his home in Bulawayo in which security forces shot one of his employees. His wife, daughter and lawyer were all briefly detained; John Ndhlovu, his daughter's husband, was also arrested and was detained without trial for several months before being released uncharged.
The security force operation in Bulawayo in early March in which Joshua Nkomo's home was raided reportedly resulted in the arrest of several hundred people. Those detained included Sidney Malunga, a ZAPU member of parliament, who a government minister had earlier accused of membership of a secret ZAPU war council linked to the "dissidents". He was held imtil early April and then released uncharged No evidence to link him with the "(¿ssidents" was produced. Following
122
his arrest. Amnesty Intemational issued an intemational appeal on his behalf. He had previously been adopted as a prisoner of conscience by the organization when he was detained without trial for several years in the 1970s.
Another ZAPU member of parliament and former prisoner of conscience, Vote Moyo, remained in custody throughout the year. He had been arrested in Jime 1982 allegedly in connection with an incident in which shots were fired at the home of Prime Minister Robert Mugabe. He was charged and remanded in custody but the charges against him were dropped before he could be brought to trial and he was then served with an indefinite administrative detention order by the Minister of Home Affairs. In October, the High Court ordered his release because his detention had not been considered within one month by a Review Tribunal, but the govemment then imposed a new detention order and he was still being held at the end of 1983.
On 31 October, Bishop Abel Muzorewa, a former Prime Minister and the leader of the United African National Council party was also arrested under security legislation shortly after returning from a visit to Israel The govemment said that he was suspected of subversive activities but no charges had been brought against him by the end of the year. He went on hunger-strike to protest against his detention but gave it up after relatives expressed fears for his health. Amnesty Intemational issued an intemational appeal on his behalf and called on the govemment to bring him to trial or release him without delay.
On several occasions, ministerial detention orders of unlimited duration were imposed on defendants acquitted after political trials. In April, Lookout Masuku and Dumiso Dabengwa, who had both formerly held leading positions in ZAPU, and four others who stood trial with them, were detained indefinitely after the High Court acquitted them of treason and other offences. They had all been arrested in early 1982. They were still held at the end of 1983. In November, the High Court declared their detention invalid and ordered their release because their detention had not been subject to review within 30 days, but the Appeal Court subsequentiy overruled this decision on the grounds that the govemment was not responsible for the Review Tribunal's delays.
In August, six air force officers were also detained immediately after their acquittal in court They had been charged with sabotage following the destruction of several aircraft at the main Thomhill air base in July 1982. Their redetention after a trial in which they gave detailed testimony of their torture under interrogation caused intemational protest and Amnesty Intemational appealed for their release. Three of the detainees were freed after two weeks but John Cox, Barrington Lloyd and Neville Weir were held until 22 December when they were
123
released on the recommendation of the Review Tribunal, which had apparently given priority to hearing their cases.
In Matabeleland North Province, many hundreds of people were believed to have been taken into police or military custody following renewed "dissident" activity and the imposition of a curfew in January. Large numbers of civilians suspected of holding anti-goverrmient views or of supporting the "dissidents" were reportedly rounded up and held in detention camps at Tsholotsho, Lupane and Nkayl Another camp, reportedly administered by the Fifth Brigade, was said to have been established at Cewali in the Dandanda area north of Lupane. Many of those held in such camps were apparently held without legal sanction and there were many allegations of torture and ill-treatment The govemment did not admit the existence of such camps and disclosed no information about their inmates, many of whom may have been released after a time but some of whom apparently remained imaccoimted for at the end of the year. In May, Amnesty Intemational representatives visiting Zimbabwe submitted to the Deputy Prime Minister a list of the names of 16 people whose cases appeared typical, and requested information about the reasons and legal basis for their imprisonment The Deputy Prime Minister imdertook to inquire into their cases but the govemment had not provided Amnesty Intemational with any information about them by the end of the year.
There were substantial allegations of torture made during the air force officers' trial which ended in August Five of the six defendants testified that they had been tortured during interrogation in 1982, in some cases with electric shocks, and the sixth alleged that he had been threatened with torture. There was also evidence that they had been denied their legal right to access to lawyers, had been subjected to solitary confinement and, in at least one case, had been held in leg-irons. Police denials that torture was used were contradicted by medical evidence and were not accepted by the trial judge, who ruled inadmissible "confessions" extracted from the defendants under duress and acquitted all six accused. Further allegations of torture were made later in the year by several alleged ZAPU members charged with an attack on the Prime Minister's residence in niid-1982.
Most torture allegations, however, related to incidents in Matabeleland North Province, particularly following the deployment there of the Fifth Brigade. In late January and Febmary, members of parliament representing Matabeleland North Province, joumalists who had visited the area and local church leaders alleged that the Fifth Brigade had embarked on a reign of terror against the local population as part of its operations against the "dissidents". They alleged that many civilians were being killed and that large numbers of people had been detained and assaulted In March, Zimbabwe's Catholic bishops repeated these
124
allegations and stated that hundreds of innocent people had been killed or maimed by the security forces. Prime Minister Robert Mugabe responded by denouncing the Catholic bishops and denying that the army was responsible for large scale atrocities. In September, the Minister of State for Defence annoimced that a commission of inquiry had been appointed in June comprising three lawyers and a former army commander but by late October it had still not begun to take evidence.
In February and March, Anmesty Intemational called for urgent measures to be taken in Matabeleland North Province to prevent further killings and torture, for the establishment of an impartial inquiry and for the withdrawal of indemnity provisions granting immunity to the security forces. With regard to detainees. Amnesty Intemational urged the govemment to publish their names, disclose their places of imprisonment, allow them access to relatives and legal counsel, and ensure that they would be released without delay if no criminal charges were to be brought against them
The two Amnesty Intemational representatives who visited Zimbabwe in May to inquire into developments at first-hand received information confirming widespread detentions and the use of torture. They also interviewed individuals, including one child, who alleged that they had been beaten or shot and wounded by soldiers and received convincing evidence that significant numbers of extrajudicial executions had been committed by govemment security forces in Matabeleland North Province.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the use of the death penalty. Six executions reportedly took place during the yean in April, two French nationals were hanged for murder and in December four other prisoners convicted of murder were executed A number of other people were sentenced to death during the year, mostly for murder, but had not been executed by the end of 1983.
