Ethiopia
Amnesty International was concerned about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience. It was also concerned that real or suspected opponents of the government were being detained indefinitely without charge or trial, some having been held for over nine years. The authorities continued to fail to account satisfactorily for some 15 political prisoners and an abducted church leader who "disappeared" in 1979. Amnesty International received allegations of the widespread use of torture and harsh conditions of imprisonment
There was continued armed conflict between the government and armed opposition organizations in Eritrea, Tigray, the Ogaden and other regions. In these areas civilians were reportedly subjected to violations of their human rights, including arbitrary imprisonment and executions, although independently verified details were often difficult to obtain. On two separate occasions, in April and August, the opposition Tigray People's Liberation Front abducted several people, including foreign nationals, but released them some weeks later.
Amnesty Intemational was not able to make any reliable estimate of the total number of prisoners of conscience or other political prisoners in the country. The political prisoners known to the organization were only a small proportion of the several thousand believed to be imprisoned in 1983. Details concerning those imprisoned and the grounds for their imprisonment were difficult to obtain because the authorities disclosed no information on political prisoners and because relatives and friends of those arrested feared reprisals if they publicized arrests. Arrests were made without legal formalities and prisoners had no legal recourse. Many arrests were not officially acknowledged and some of those arrested were feared to have "disappeared". The majority of political prisoners were detained for an indefinite period without charge or trial. Their cases were subject to review by a committee of police, security and justice officials but the findings of the committee were not published and were not binding on the government
Amnesty Intemational continued to appeal for the release of 19 close relatives of the late Emperor Haile Selassie who had been detained without trial since 1974, and 21 members of the Oromo nationality (or ethnic group) who had been detained without trial since 1980. All were adopted as prisoners of conscience. The late Emperor's relatives were apparently being held for their family connections with the overthrown government They had been arrested in Addis Ababa
42
during the 1974 revolution and were transferred in 1975 from house arrest to Alem Bekagne ("End of the world") prison, where they were still being held in 1983. Nine of them were freed in an amnesty in September 1983 when the government announced the release of 117 political prisoners among a total of 1,163 prisoners freed on the occasion of the ninth anniversary of the revolution. Among those released was Rebecca Asrate. Amnesty Intemational had appealed to the authorities for her to be allowed specialist medical treatment for a severe skin disease. Those still detained at the end of 1983 included Tenagnework Haile Selassie, the late Emperor's daughter, and her four daughters, one of whom, Hirut Desta, underwent surgery for skin cancer diuing 1983 and was reportedly still ill and seriously underweight at the end of the year.
The 21 Oromo prisoners of conscience had been detained without trial since February 1980, when large nimibers of Oromos in Addis Ababa were arrested for allegedly having links with the opposition Oromo Liberation Front Amnesty Intemational believed that they had been arrested principally because of their nationality (ethnic origin) and had not used or advocated violence. Five of them were released during 1983. The others, who included Zegeye Asfaw, who was Minister of Law and Justice when he was arrested, Tsehai Tolessa, the wife of the Reverend Gudina Tumsa (see below), and Martha Kumsa, a journalist, were still detained at the end of the year.
Among others believed to be imprisoned for their non-violent beliefs were over 30 officials of the Ethiopian Evangelical Mekane Yesus Church, which is a member of the Lutheran World Federation. Desta Buba, the Secretary of the Church's Central Synod, who was arrested in April 1979, and Reverend Glana Lemu, President of the church's Westem Synod, who was arrested in September 1982, were still being held uncharged at the end of the year in Nakamte prison in WoUega region, in westem Ethiopia. Many other pastors and lay officials of the church had been arrested between 1979 and 1982 and further arrests, particularly in Wollega region, were reported in 1983. The authorities, while reiterating the official policy of freedom of religious worship, appeared nonetheless to suspect members of this church of having links with the opposition Oromo Liberation Front, which the chiych authorities denied. Members of smaller protestant churches such as the Meserete Christos Church, Kale Hiwot Church, Baptists and Jehovah's Witnesses, were also reportedly imprisoned in 1983. Some members of the Beta Yisrael community (known as Falashas or Ethiopian Jews) were allegedly imprisoned for their religious activities or for trying to evade the severe restrictions on emigrating to Israel. Leaving the country illegally is a serious political offence in Ethiopia punishable by
43
lengthy imprisonment or even under certain circumstances the death penalty.
Five employees of the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa in Addis Ababa continued to be held at the beginning of 1983 after being arrested on political grounds on separate occasions between 1979 and 1982. Two were released during 1983 but at the end of the year Azeb Abaye, a secretary, and two others were still held in incommunicado detention without having been charged. Amnesty International was investigating whether they were prisoners of conscience.
Reports were received in December of a new wave of arrests in Addis Ababa of alleged political opponents of the government The goverrmient subsequently announced that Asegahegn Araya, a former senator, and 17 other alleged leaders and sympathizers of the clandestine opposition Ethiopian People's Democratic Alliance had been arrested on 8 December and were being held for investigation into anti-revolutionary activities.
Several hundred political prisoners were reportedly held in the Central Revolutionary Investigation Department known unofficially as the "third police station'", in Addis Ababa Those arrested on political grounds in the capital were reportedly first taken there for interrogation. Some detainees were said to have been held there for three years or more. InAlem Bekagne pnsoti, over 1,500 of the 5,000 or more people imprisoned (who were said to include convicted criminal prisoners and prisoners captured in armed conflict situations) were said to be political prisoners arrested in recent years on suspicion of belonging to or collaborating with clandestine political opposition groups, such as the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Party or the All-EtWopia Socialist Movement {Me'isone), or armed opposition organizations such as the Eritrean People's Liberation Front, the Tigray People's Liberation Front or the Oromo Liberation Front Political detainees were also being held in regional prisons around the country, particularly in Asmara, Gondar, Dessie, Dire Dawa and Harar.
Amnesty International was also investigating allegations that people were arrested in 1983 for attempting to leave the country illegally for political reasons, for allegedly having been in contact with opposition organizations while studying or travelling abroad, or for refusing to join the militia.
A Voluntary Repatriation Program for Ethiopian reftigees in Djibouti was initiated on 1 February under a tripartite agreement between the Governments of Ethiopia and Djibouti and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. The Ethiopian Government had promulgated a decree granting amnesty to refugees returning to Ethiopia from Djibouti. Amnesty International was investigating during the year
44
whether any Ethiopian refugees in Djibouti were returned to Ethiopia against their will or whether any refugees were imprisoned on their return. However, the organization was unable to verify any cases of forcible repatriation or of the imprisonment of returning refugees. By the end of the year over 7,000 of the 35,000 Ethiopian refugees in Djibouti had apparently returned voluntarily and safely to Ethiopia.
The authorities provided no further clarification on the fate or whereabouts of 15 political detainees who "disappeared" in July 1979 after being taken from the prison where they had been held. The government denied that they had "disappeared" but by the end of 1983 had not provided any evidence that they were still in detention. Their relatives had had no knowledge of their whereabouts or fate since their "disappearance". Most were widely feared to have been secretly executed soon after their "disappearance". They included nine members of the former government who were arrested in 1974; the former Patriarch of the Ethopian Orthodox Church, Abuna (Archbishop) Tewoflos, who was arrested in 1976; and five leaders oiMe'isone who were arrested in 1977 for opposing the military goverrunent
No further information was received concerning the fate of the Reverend Gudina Tumsa, General Secretary of the Ethiopian Evangelical Mekane Yesus Church, who "disappeared" after being abducted in July 1979. His abduction appeared to have been carried out by people acting for the government but the authorities denied responsibility and claimed that he had left to join the opposition Oromo Liberation Front
Amnesty International received new reports of torture of political prisoners in 1983. Torture was reportedly routinely used to interrogate prisoners in the "third police station" in Addis Ababa and elsewhere. Torture methods reportedly included beatings on the body and on the soles of the feet while the victim was suspended upside down; crushing of the bones of the hands; and electric shocks. The detainees under interrogation were held incommxmicado in overcrowded unhygienic conditions - their detention in many cases not being officially acknowledged. Several prisoners allegedly died following torture or the denial of appropriate medical treatment
Prison conditions in Alem Bekagne prison and other prisons where political detainees were held were said to be poor, although detainees were allowed to receive their daily food, basic necessities, some correspondence and occasional visits from relatives. Medical treatment was reportedly often inadequate and delayed.
45
	
7	
J V ' ' . Y	
	
	■ T (
	\ ' ■ • I ■ •
	Wd-
