Gabon
Amnesty International was concerned about the continued imprisonment of 18 prisoners of conscience, 17 of whom were sentenced to long prison terms in November 1982 after a trial which was not in accordance with internationally recognized standards for a fair trial. The organization also received disturbing reports of prisoners being subjected to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment
Gabon acceded to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights on 21 January.
On 11 March, the eve of the 15 th anniversary of the establishment of the Parti démocratique gabonais (PDG, Gabonese Democratic Party, President El-Hadj Omar Bongo announced a fìve-year reduction in the sentences imposed in November 1982 on 29 prisoners who had been convicted of threatening state security and insulting the head of state. All were adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International. The oi^anization believed that following the clemency decree annoimced on 11 March, all but 17 of those convicted in November 1982 had been released. The 17 remaining, however, continued to be imprisoned throughout the year. They included Jean-Marc Ekoh, a prominent educationalist and former government minister, and Michel Ovono, a mining engineer. They had all been accused of belonging to an illegal political group, the Mou vement de redressement national (MORENA), Movement for National Recovery.
An Amnesty International delegate, who had observed the trial of suspected members of MORENA in November 1982, reported that the trial was unfair, notably in that no substantive evidence was produced before the court to support the charge of threatening state security. Amnesty International informed the government of its fmdings in relation to the trial on several occasions and repeatedly appealed for the release of the 17 prisoners.
The other prisoner of conscience known to Amnesty International was Serge Edouard Etsine who was reportedly sentenced to three years' imprisonment by the Tribunal correctionnel de Libreville, Libreville Criminal Court, on 5 December 1981, having been accused of writing a document which criticized the Minister of Public Works. He was allegedly beaten and held in chains for some time while in pre-trial detentioa
Amnesty International investigated the cases of three prisoners who may have been prisoners of conscience. Abbé Noël Ngwa-Nguema, a
46
Catholic priest and philosophy teacher, was reportedly sentenced to one year's imprisonment, subsequently increased to four years at an appeal hearing on 10 June. Three other people were believed to have been sentenced to similar terms, although their names were not known to Amnesty Intemational. All four were apparently convicted of organizing opposition to the government Two other prisoners whose cases were being investigated were Bidza Bonaventure, who had been sentenced to eight years' imprisonment in 1981 apparently for writing a magazine article critical of the government, and Jean-Marie Mbieleu Fosso, a Cameroonian sentenced to one year's imprisonment increased to 10 years' imprisonment on appeal. He was convicted of conspiracy and possession of firearms, but information received by Amnesty Intemational suggested that he had no connection with the alleged conspiracy and may have been implicated simply because of his non-violent association with another defendant
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports of harsh conditions of imprisonment in the cases of both political and criminal prisoners at Libreville's main prison, Gros Bouquet, where all the prisoners of conscience known to Amnesty Intemational were believed to be held. It was alleged that some prisoners who became ill received inadequate medical attention and that some prisoners, both criminal and political, were held in chains for considerable periods as a form of punishment In October Amnesty Intemational wrote to President Bongo to draw these allegations of the chaining of prisoners to the government's attention. The organization sought to clarify whether the use of chains as a form of punishment constituted government policy. Such practices are contrary to the provisions of the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. However, no reply had been received from the government by the end of 1983.
47
