Chad
Amnesty International was concerned about alleged extrajudicial executions and by the detention without trial of real or suspected political opponents of the government headed by President Hisséne Habré.
There was renewed fighting between forces loyal to Hissène Habré, who took control of the capital, N'Djamena, in June 1982 and whose government was officially constituted in October 1982, and those supporting former President Goukoimi Oueddei''s Gouvernement d'union nationale de transition (GUNT), Transitional Government of National Unity. During the year the GUNT's military forces were organized into the Armée nationale de libération ( ANL), National Liberation Army. The GUNT came under the command of a new political body, the Conseil national de libération (CNL), National Liberation Council. The most serious armed clashes between forces
33
loyal to President Habré and ex-President Goukouni occurred between May and August By the end of that period GUNT forces occupied virtually the entire northern part of the country centred on the town of Faya-L^geau, which changed hands several times. There was foreign involvement in the conflict the GUNT received Libyan support and Libyan aircraft flew missions in support of GUNT forces, ^though Libya denied having any troops on Chadian soil French and Zairian troops were deployed in support of President Habré's government
Both government forces and those supporting the GUNT were alleged to have extrajudicially executed prisoners taken in the course of the conflict Both sides claimed to have taken over 1,000 prisoners. Most of the allegations of extrajudicial executions were made against President Habré's forces, which allegedly committed them for political reasons not only in areas of armed conflict but also in other parts of the coimtry xmder government control. In such areas there was evidence to suggest that some victims were real or suspected critics or opponents of the government who were not involved in armed conflict On 3 March Amnesty International expressed its concern to President Habré about these alleged killings, citing individual cases of people who had reportedly been killed or who had "disappeared" in 1982, and calling both for an inquiry and for urgent measures to be taken to prevent further such killings.
In November, members of President Habré's administration in a meeting with Amnesty International delegates referred to two of the cases mentioned by Amnesty International In the case of Raymond Matha, an engineer, they claimed that he had died of ilhiess on the night of29-30 August 1982 while in detentioa They denied that he had been extrajudicially executed. They also claimed that the former Prefect of Moundou, Karhyom Ningayo, had been a victim of armed conflict rather than having been extrajudicially executed as Amnesty Intemational had reported. The Chadian delegation undertook to inquire into the whereabouts of other prisoners whose names were submitted by Amnesty Intemational.
There were other reports of political killings by government forces in 1983, particularly in southem Chad. In April, as many as 40 civilians were reportedly killed in the Doba region in retaliation for attacks carried out in the area by armed opponents of President Habré's government In July, eight police officers were reportedly the victim of extrajudicial executions at Kélo after they had been suspected of being connected with an attack on installations of the national cotton company, Cotontchad. Yacob Bawoyeu Langue, Police Commissioner of Lai', was taken to N'Djamena and detained in connection with the same attack. His body was reportedly found in N'Djamena on 15 August bearing signs of torture. In November, Chadian delegates
34
agreed that Yacob Bawoyeu Langue had died while in custody on that date but denied that his death had resulted from torture or other deliberate ill-treatment.
Forces loyal to ex-President Goukouni may have extrajudicially executed up to 15 suspected political opponents at Abéché between 8 and 10 July, but Amnesty International was unable to confirm whether such executions had taken place. On 9 September the organization wrote to ex-President Goukoimi requesting further information about the allegations but received no reply.
On 10 October, after it had addressed several inquiries to President Habré's government without response, Amnesty International publicly expressed its concern about more than 160 reported extrajudicial executions since mid-1982. In response, the Information Minister Mahamat Soumaila reportedly declared on 11 October that Amnesty International's information was based on the testimony of "people of bad faith" and that the organization was welcome to send a mission to Chad to investigate its concerns. He said it was possible, however, that some people had been killed accidentally during the armed conflict between government and GUNT forces. He also reportedly called on Amnesty International to denoimce alleged kilUngs by GUNT forces. Mahamat Soumaila did not mention any of the specific cases cited in Amnesty Intemational's previous communications to the government On 8 November, Amnesty International wrote to Mahamat Soumaila stating that the organization had received unconfirmed reports that civilians had been extrajudicially executed by GUNT forces, but that Amnesty International considered that such reports did not diminish the responsibility of the government to uphold the fundamental rights of government-held prisoners. Amnesty Intemational also requested that the government indicate a suitable date for an Amnesty Intemational mission. The organization had not received a reply by the end of the year.
Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about reports that the government security forces detained suspected political opponents. Some of these detainees may have been prisoners of conscience. There were fears for the physical safety of some of those thus detained. Pierre Ousmane Touadé, a lawyer and joumalist and a former leader of the Parti national pour le développement du Tchad (PNDT), National Party for the Development of Chad, was arrested in Moimdou in August 1982 and transferred to a place of detention in N'Djamena, where he was reportedly still detained in March. Although the authorities are reported to have stated that he was still alive after that date. Amnesty Intemational was unable to establish his whereabouts and was concemed that he might have "disappeared". Maurice Lapia, the former parliamentary Deputy of Bongor, was also reported to have
35
been arrested in iate 1982 and to have been transferred to N'Djamena. Neither Maurice Lapia nor Pierre Ousmane Touadé were known to have been charged, Iwth apparently being detained because they were suspected of being actual or potential opponents of the government Amnesty International made several appeals for further information about them but received no reply.
Amnesty International received reports from several towns and villages in southern and eastern Chad that people had been detained by government troops either because they were suspected of complicity with anti-government forces or held as hostages for members of families known to be opposed to the government At Abéché, over 150 people, including the Imam of the central mosque and members of the family of the Sultan of Abéché, were detained in July apparentíy because they had made contact with advancing GUNT forces, pleading with them not to bombard the undefended town. Amnesty International considered that the 150 were probably prisoners of conscience. Possible prisoners of conscience detained in other southern towns included Babouh Yakouma and Kimitine Tangoina at Eré, who were detained apparently because they were related to people who were suspected of havmg launched a guerrilla attack in the area in July.
On 7 June, the first anniversary of the capture of N'Djamena by his forces. President Habré announced an unconditional amnesty for people imprisoned for offences against state security and a reduction of sentences for some common law prisoners. At the same time the authorities announced that all Chadians in exile were free to retum. Between 21 and 23 June, 223 prisoners were officially said to have been released in accordance with this amnesty. They comprised 113 civilians whom the government announced had been detained for crimes against state security, and 110 people said to have been combatants. Although the government published the names of those released. Amnesty International was unable to establish imder what circumstances they had been detained or where they had been held. However, the organization noted that a number of prisoners whose names had been reported to the organization in preceding months, such as Maurice Lapia and Pierre Ousmane Touadé, were not included among the names of those released under the terms of the amnesty. The organization was unable to establish whether or not they had been released by the end of the year.
