Egypt
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the continued use of legislation to arrest and imprison people for the non-violent expression of their beliefs, and about certain judicial procedures related to the state of emergency, which appeared contrary to internationally accepted standards for fair trial. There continued to be insufficient safeguards to protect detainees from being tortured, and Amnesty Intemational received several allegations of torture or ill-treatment during the year. The organization appealed for the commutation of two death sentences and leamed of four executions.
On 16 Febmary 1983 Amnesty Intemational published Egypt: Violations of Human Rights, based on a memorandum submitted to the Egyptian Govemment on 24 June 1982. The report outlined the organization's concems in Egypt since the constitution was promulgated in 1971 and described laws under which people are arrested and imprisoned for the non-violent expression of their conscientiously held beliefs. The report featured the cases of several prisoners of conscience, including that of the joumalist Hussein Abdid Raziq, who had been arrested and detained five times within a five-year period and in 1983 still faced charges in three cases, including a retrial on charges of which he had earlier l^en acquitted. Extracts from medical reports on injuries to detainees who claimed to have been tortured between October 1981 and March 1982 were also included in the publication. These reports concluded that the available medical evidence was consistent with the torture allegations. Amnesty Intemational recommended that the govemment review the legislation used to arrest and punish prisoners of
329
conscience, free all such prisoners, guarantee fair trials for political prisoners including the right to appeal, and take steps to put an end to torture and ill-treatment
Amnesty Intemational subsequentiy sent a mission to Cairo at the invitation of the government, and talks took place between 17 and 25 May 1983 with the Ministers of Justice and the Interior, the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, the Prosecutor General, the Socialist Prosecutor General and the Director of the Bureau of Prisons, as well as other officials.
On 26 August 1983 Amnesty Intemational submitted a further memorandum to the government, drawing on the talks conducted during Amnesty Intemational's mission as well as new information related to the organization's statutory concems. It contained a re-examination of legal issues of concem to Anmesty Intemational, taking into consideration changes in legislation which had occurred during the preceding year. It also dealt with prisoners of conscience, political prisoners and their right to a fair trial, allegations of torture and ill-treatment and the death penalty. It acknowledged those areas where improvements had occurred but concluded by making the following recommendations:
(1)	That a review be made of legislation relating to political activity, with particular reference to Articles 19, 21 and 22 of the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to ensure: the protection from arrest and imprisonment of individuals non-violentiy expressing their human rights; the fiill observance of the principle of independence of the judicial function; and the right of defendants in all cases to appeal against conviction and sentence in a court of law.
(2)	That all physical restrictions imposed on the Coptic Orthodox Pope Shenouda III be lifted;
(3)	That an inquiry be held into all allegations of torture and ill-treatment since October 1981, and that the procedures as well as the findings be made public;
(4)	That any officer found responsible for inflicting such treatment be brought to justice, and the victims compensated;
(5)	That a review be made of the procedures followed for the inspection of prisons, and the investigation of prisoners' complaints of torture, ill-treatment or ill health.
On 29 October 1983 the Egyptian Ministry of Justice sent a six-page memorandum to Amnesty Intemational in response to the organization's memorandum and reccmimendations. The Egyptian Govemment affirmed the principles of the supremacy of the law and respect for human rights as guaranteed by Egypt's constitution, as well as by intemational instruments to which Egypt is a party. It stated that two laws relating to
330
political activity had recently been abolished, including Law 2 of 1977, which had been described by Amnesty Litemational in its February
1983	publication as being inconsistent with provisions contained in Egypt's constitution as well as with the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The government's response also dealt with prisoners of conscience and Amnesty Intemational's concerns relating to political prisoners and allegations of torture and ill-treatment (see below).
This exchange of communications between Amnesty Intemational and the Egyptian Government, follovdng Amnesty International's mission in May 1983, was to be pubUshed by the organization in early
1984	as Egypt: Update to 1983 Report.
Duringàeir mission in May 1983, Amnesty Intemational delegates raised the issue of prolonged detention without trial, following reports that some individuis had been held without charge or trial for periods in excess of one year in connection with the Jihad case (see below). The delegates were informed by the Minister of the Interior that, as of May 1983, approximately 40 people remained in detention, and that they had been arrested after October 1981. Subsequentiy, on 29 October 1983, the Ministry of Justice stated that the number of detainees had been reduced to 27.
The only adopted prisoner of conscience during the year was the Coptic Pope Shenouda III, who had been physically restricted to a monastery since September 1981. The organization raised his case with government officials during its mission in May 1983, as well as in its subsequent memorandum to the government The Ministry of Justice, in its response, stated that Pope Shenouda was staying voluntarily at the monastery. Despite these assurances. Amnesty Intemational remained concemed that the Coptic Pope was still being physically restricted against his will. While the conditions of his confinement were said to have improved towards the end of 1983, Amnesty Intemational continued to regard him as a prisoner of conscience and to work for his unconditional release. The organization had insufficient information to determine whether other detainees held on political grounds during 1983 were prisoners of conscience.
Several political trials involving large numbers of defendants continued during 1983, but none had been concluded by the end of the year. One such trial involved 302 alleged members of the Jihad organization, the majority of whom were arrested in connection with the violent events in Assiut that followed the assassination of President Sadat in October 1981. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that the defendants would be denied the right to judicial appeal, according to procedures applicable in trials before the Emergency Supreme State Security Court
331
Two trials of alleged members of the banned Egyptian Communist Party, involving 30 and 47 defendants respectively, continued during 1983, as did the retrial of 176 defendants in connection with the so-called "Food Riots" of 1977 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1983). None of these defendants were believed to be in detention. Amnesty Intemadonal was concemed about the lack of the right to appeal and the fact that convictions in all three cases may result in the imprisonment of individuals for the non-violent expression of their beliefs.
In its publication Egypt- Violations of Human Rights, Amnesty Intemational quoted medical reports supporting allegations that political detainees had been tortured and ill-treated between October 1981 and March 1982. During the mission to Egypt, Amnesty Intemational delegates discussed possible safeguards to protect detainees from such abuses with the govemment and other authorities, including procedures for inspecting prisons, particularly those where untried detainees are held, and for investigating prisoners' complaints of torture, ill-treatment or ill health.
On 26 August Amnesty Intemational wrote to the government, submitting the names of five individuals who had reportedly died while in detention following their arrest in October 1981, and requesting clarification of the reports. In a detailed response on 29 October the Ministry of Justice concluded that in two cases death was due to natural causes. In the remaining three cases, however, investigations were continuing: in one case because the Prosecutor General had ordered a review of the first investigation, in the second, because a complaint had been lodged by the family that death was due to torture and beating, and in a third because of problems in identifying the body.
In another letter to the government, dated 22 September, Amnesty Intemational expressed concem about reports that some individuals had been subjected to torture or ill-treatment following their arrest during the summer of 1983, and that at least two detainees, Ahmed Muhammad Abdul Gawad A1 Touni and Mahmoud A1 Farghali Mahmoud Muslim, had reportedly been hospitalized as a result. Amnesty Intemational urged that the results of the relevant medical reports be made public, and that additional safeguards against torture and ill-treatment, such as those oudined in Amnesty Intemational's memorandum, be introduced. No reply to this letter had been received by the end of the year.
Amnesty Intemational learned of five cases during the year in which compensation had been awarded to people who had been tortured in the 1950s and 1960s. In April two Cairo courts awarded £E40,000 and £E25,000 respectively to a lawyer and a teacher who were tortured following their arrest in 1954 and again in 1965. In May the Cairo
332
Court of Appeal awarded two retired army officers £E60,000 as compensation for their imprisonment and torture during the 1960s (in one case, the officer died before the court ruling, and the compensation was awarded to his family). The Court of Appeal also awarded £E20,000 to a former army major and his family as compensation for the torture he suffered during 1962.
Amnesty Intemational appealed to President Mubarak to commute the death sentences passed on two men, on charges of murder and robbery, in Febmary and June respectively. Amnesty Intemational leamed of four executions during the year of people convicted of wilful murder and murder and theft. The organization was also concemed about the possibility that some of the 302 défendants in the Jihad case might face the death penalty. Charges agamst 299 of the 302 provided for the death penalty. The trial was still in progress at the end of 1983.
