Zambia
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the detention without trial of alleged political opponents of the government, some of whom were taken up for adoption or investigation as prisoners of conscience. The organization was also concerned about allegations of cmel, inhuman and degrading treatment of certain prisoners under sentence of death and by reports of the death in custody in December of two criminal suspects. At least 30 people were reportedly sentenced to death during the year. Of these, seven were convicted of treason and the remainder were either convicted of murder or armed robbery with violence.
The authorities continued to use the Preservation of Public Security Regulations to authorize the detention without trial of people alleged to constitute a threat to public security. They included people suspected of opposing the govemment and others arrested as a result of their alleged association with Adamson Mushala, whom the goverrunent claimed was trained as a guerrilla fighter by South African forces in Namibia and was responsible for various acts of banditry in North Westem Province until his death in 1982. In November 1983, an alleged former associate of Mushala appealed to the Lusaka High Court to order his release after he had spent more than six years in detention without trial.
119
However, no ruling on his case was known to have been made by the end of the year.
Amnesty Intemational continued to press for the release of Nkaka Chisanga Puta, a lawyer who was adopted as a prisoner of conscience following his arrest in July 1981. The government alleged that he had conspired with others to secure the escape from prison of several people then awaiting trial on treason charges, one of whom, Valentine Musakanya, was a legal client and relation. However, no formal charges had been laid against Nkaka Chisanga Puta and he had not been brought to trial by the end of 1983, by which time he had been in detention for more than two years.
Several other people detained since 1981 in connection with the alleged escape plot also remained in custody throughout the year. However, Geoffrey Haamaundu, a lawyer whose case had been taken up for investigation by Amnesty International, was released uncharged ^er ahnost two years in detention.
Judgment in the long-running trial of Valentine Musakanya and seven others accused of treason was given on 20 January. All eight defendants were convicted and seven of them were sentenced to death. They included Valentine Musakanya, a former Govemor of the Bank of Zambia, and Edward Shamwana, a lawyer and former High Court Commissioner. Four of those sentenced to death were refugees from Zaire. The eighth defendant received a 10-year sentence. All the defendants had been charged in connection with an alleged conspiracy to overthrow the government and kidnap President Kaimda in October 1980. The main evidence against them was given by former Air Force Commander Major-General Christopher Kabwe, who was originally one of those charged with treason but who was released after he agreed to testify as a state witness. The defendants lodged an appeal against their convictions and sentences but these had not been heard by the end of the year.
Amnesty Intemational issued an intemational appeal to seek clemency on behalf of these prisoners and called on President Kaunda to commute their sentences should they be confirmed on appeal
Following their conviction, the prisoners sentenced to death in January were moved to Kabwe Maximum Security Prison. In May, six of them look legal action against the prison authorities alleging that they had been subjected to cmel, inhuman and degrading treatment They alleged that they had been denied proper medical treatment, subjected to solitary confinement in breach of prison regulations and denied the same access to visitors and newspapers as permitted to other prisoner. The court action was opposed by the state and had not been concluded by the end of 1983. However, in November it was reported that the six prisoners had decided to initiate legal proceedings against three named
120
prison officers who, tiiey alleged, had placed them in leg-irons in May, thereby contravening the Prisons Act A magistrate ruled that the prison officers had a case to answer and adjourned the hearing until 1984.
Two criminal suspects, who were held for questioning about an armed robbery which took place at the end of November and which resulted in the deaths of a civilian and a police officer, reportedly died in police custody at Ndola. Alfred Mailoni had apparently jump>ed to his death fn>m an upper floor window while being questioned by three police officers on 3 December. The next day, another suspect, Cornelius Musopelo, was found dead in his cell at Ndola police station. A police investigation into the deaths was ordered and the circumstances in which they occurred had not been disclosed by the end of the year.
Amnesty Intemational remained concemed about the use of the death penalty. In addition to the seven prisoners sentenced to death for treason, at least 23 other people convicted of criminal offences were reported to have been sentenced to death during the year. A number were convicted of murder but approximately half were sentenced to death after being convicted of armed robbery with violence.
	
	
	
	y hQ / ■
