German Democratic Republic
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the imprisonment of people for the non-violent exercise of human rights, in particular the right to freedom of expression and the right to leave one's country. During the year, the organization worked on behalf of over 200 such prisoners of conscience or likely prisoners of conscience, but believed the total number to be much ¿¿ler.
The secrecy surrounding political imprisonment made it difficult to establish the total number of prisoners of conscience. Once arrested, they are unable to communicate the reasons for their arrest to their families in letters or visits. Trials in such cases are held in camera, with even close relatives being excluded in nearly all instances known to Amnesty Intemational. Prisoners' relatives or fiiends risk arrest and harassment if they pass information out of the country.
The GDR auAorities deny the existence of political imprisonment, but certain articles of the penal code directly restrict the non-violent exercise of human rights and individuals are regularly tried and convicted under them, Basic human rights, with the exception of the right to leave one's country, are included in the Constitution but limitations are set on the exercise of such rights. In referring to the right to freedom of expression the official Commentary to the Constitution states that there is a "constitutional duty to oppose... the spreading of anti-socialist ideology which is practised in the name of 'freedom', 'democracy' or 'humanity'... Obviously, expressions of opinion of an insulting or slanderous nature do not enjoy the protection of the Constitution either..The penal code itself proscribes a somewhat wider range of activity. In addition to forbidding the discrediting of "social conditions" (under Article 106 - "incitement hostile to the State") or distributing writings which are "liable to disturb the socialist way of life or bring the State or public order into contempt" (under Article 220 - "public vilification"), it places severe restrictions on sending information out of the country. Article 99 ("treasonable passing on of information") proscribes sending information to "foreign organizations ... and their helpers" if it is "to the disadvantage of the interests" of the GDR, The law explicitly concems information which is not classified as "secret" and the Commentary to the law makes it clear that people may be prosecuted even where the information was accurate.
284
These laws continue to be applied, in the majority of cases known to Amnesty Intemational, not to people who had expressed anti-socialist or even critical views, but to would-be emigrants who persisted in trying to obtain exit visas. Many contacted foreign organizations in the hope that support or publicity would improve their chances of emigration and were convicted under Article 99 of the penal code, the "information" passed on apparently being copies of their applications for exit visas, photographs, and descriptions of the authorities' reactions to these applications. Typical of these prisoners was Horst Lorbeer, a steel-worker, who was arrested in the autumn of 1982 and sentenced on 19 January 1983 to three years' imprisonment under Article 99 after information about his efforts to obtain permission for himself and his family to emigrate had been publicized in foreign news media.
Article 99 was also applied to detain people who sent information about unofficial peace activities out of tiie country. These included Ulrike Poppe and Barbel Bohley who had been involved in a number of peace initiatives organised by women and were arrested on 12 December. Ulrike Poppe had, among other things, organized a non-state nursery for parents who did not wish their children to be subjected to military propaganda Information about these initiatives was passed on to a visiting journalist from New Zealand who was also briefly detained under Article 99. The article was also applied to a group of people in Jena, following publicity in the foreign news media about an attempt to hold a silent peace demonstration on 24 December 1982 and about activities in support of some imprisoned friends, including Roland Jahn whose case is described below. The group were arrested in the second half of January but released again on 25 February, vdthout having been brought to trial.
Amnesty Intemational attempted to send a delegate to the trial of Roland Jahn, whom it had adopted as a prisoner of conscience. However, the delegate was effectively denied a visa to the country. Roland Jahn, who had been arrested after riding a bicycle through Jena bearing a small Polish flag with the words "Solidarity with the Polish people", was sentenced on 17 January to one year and ten months' imprisorunent for "public vilification" (Article 220 of the penal code) and "misuse of state symbols" (Article 222 of the penal code). On 25 Febmary he was released together with those arrested in January. A few months later members of the group were given permission to leave the country at short notice. Roland Jahn, who did not wish to leave, was locked on board a train bound for the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG).
As in previous years, a number of would-be emigrants who tried in various ways to persuade local authorities to grant them exit visas were prosecuted for "impeding the activity of public bodies" under Article
285
214 of the penal code. Among these was a group in Jena who had applied unsuccessfully for exit visas and subsequently gathered silently for an hour in a circle outside the government offices responsible for handling their applications on Saturday mornings during July and August. They wore white to underline the non-violent nature of their demonstration and became known as the "White Circle". After a series of such demonstrations, a number of them were arrested at the end of August, six of them being charged and later sentenced to prison terms under Article 214. Amnesty International received reports of similar gatherings of would-be emigrants in other towns, some of whom were also arrested and convicted under Article 214.
During the year, Amnesty International called on the GDR to change laws under which people were imprisoned for the peaceful exercise of their right to freedom of expression and to release prisoners currently held under these laws, stating that such laws were incompatible with the GDR's international commitment to respect the right to freedom of expression, as spelt out in Article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The organization further expressed its concem about the regular practice of holding trials in camera contrary to Article 14 of the Covenant
Amnesty International received no direct response from the GDR authorities and GDR embassies refused to meet delegates fi-om the organization. In response to other inquiries a few GDR embassies denied the existence of political imprisonment in the GDR,
Amnesty International also adopted as prisoners of conscience those imprisoned for attempting to leave the country without permission, a crime under Article 213 of the penal code. Amnesty International considered that their imprisonment violated Article 12 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which sets out the right to leave one's country. A typical case was that of Roger Stoof, a craftsman, who was arrested in Czechoslovakia while trying to cross the border to the FRG (GDR citizens may travel to Czechoslovakia without visas). He was returned to the GDR by the Czechoslovak authorities and subsequently sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment under Article 213.
Amnesty International also worked for the release of conscientious objectors to military service. The GDR makes some provision for those who object "for religious or similar reasons" to armed military service by allowing them to work in "construction units" on the construction of military installations and similar tasks. However, as there is no alternative service outside the country's military and defence system, Amnesty International adopted as prisoners of conscience those imprisoned for refusing for reasons of conscience to do either armed or unarmed service. Reports were received for the first time during the year
286
of the imprisonment of conscripts who had applied for and had been refused the option of service in the "construction units".
In April 1983, Amnesty Intemational submitted the cases of 14 prisoners of conscience in the GDR to the United Nations under the procedure for monitoring human rights violations set up under ECOSOC (Economic and Social Council) Resolution 728F.
As in previous years, prisoners were released to the FRO before completing their sentences in return for payment by the FRG Government Press reports indicated that over 1,000 were released in this way during 1983. Amnesty Intemational believed that the majority of these were prisoners of conscience. While welcoming these releases. Amnesty Intemational sought to remind the GDR Govemment of its obligations in intemational law to release prisoners of conscience without conditions.
