Burma
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive occasional reports of arrests on political groimds and was ccmcemed tiiat some of those arrested were said to be held without charge or trial. There were also allegations that some of these detainees were ill-treated Many of those arrested belonged to ethnic minority groups and lived in areas where there was armed opposition to the government Often the information received by Amnesty Intemational related to the period before 1983. Five people were known to have been sentenced to death during 1983.
Political detainees may be held without formal charge or trial under the 1975 Law for the Protection of the State from Subversive Elements which provides a loose and broadly fomiulated definition of" subversion''. The authority to order arrests is vested in a committee known as the Central Body, chaired by the Minister for Home and Religious Affairs, with the members being the Ministers of Defence and Foreign Affairs. The Central Body is empowered to order detention of a suspect for renewable two-monthly periods up to a maximum of 180 days imder Section 10(a) of the 1975 law, following which advance approval by the Council of Mnisters must be sought The Council of Ministers can extend the period up to three years under detention orders which are renewable at 180-day intervals (Sections 12 and 14). Detainees can appeal against the detention order, to the Council of Ministers when detention is authorized by the Central Body and to the highest judicial authority, the Council of People's Judges, when detention has already been authorized by the Council of Ministers. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that the 1975 law made no specific provision for detainees to be informed of the grounds of arrest, or for legal representation during the appeals process.
Some detainees arrest^ under the anti-subversion law were reportedly held incommunicado and beaten during interrogation by personnel of the Military Intelligence Service (MIS) (also known as the Defence Services Intelligence), the main operating agency of the National Intelligence Bureau which was reported to control sdl intelligence and security activities. Article 15 9(b) of the consititution of 1974 states: "No citizen shall be placed in custody for more than 24 hours without the sanction of a competent judicial organ", but this safeguard does not apply to detainees held imder the anti-subversion law.
The Government of Burma does not issue information conceming arrests and detention. Amnesty Intemational continued to face difficulties
215
in obtaining information on individual cases of political detention without charge or trial and about other human rights violations. Amnesty Intemational investigated reports that political arrests occurred in Arakan and Karen states both before 1983 and during the year. In some cases detention was apparently short-term but some detainees were said to have been held for several months without formal charge or trial. Members of the Burmese Army deployed in counter-insurgency operations in Karen and Shan states were allegedly responsible for the politically motivated killing of non-combatants, but Amnesty Intemational was unable to substantiate these allegations.
Five people were sentenced to death in Burma during 1983, the first death sentences recorded by Amnesty Intemational since 1978. One woman. Daw Ni, and two men were sentenced to death in late October 1983 for murder. In the second case, two North Koreans, Major Zin Mo and Captain Kang Min-chul, were sentenced to death under Article 302 of the penal code for murder. They were found guilty of a bomb attack at the Aung San Mausoleum in Rangoon in October 1983 in which 21 people, including four South Korean cabinet ministers, died. On both occasions, Amnesty Intemational appealed to President U San Yu for clemency should the death sentences be confirmed by the appellate court to which all these prisoners were entitled to appeal under Artcle 101 of Burma's constitutioa Amnesty Intemational also wrote to the Minister of Home and Religious Affairs, Major General Min Gaung, on 3 November 1983, noting that few death sentences have been handed down in recent years and ui^g that consideration be given to abolishing the death penalty for all offences or, at least as a first step, limiting the number of offences for which the death penalty may be imposed. The number ofjudicial executions in Burma since the country's independence in 1948 is reported to have been fewer than 10.
