Madagascar
Three prisoners of conscience whose cases had been taken up by Amnesty International were released. One had served a one-year prison sentence, while another had been held without charge for eight months, and the third was released after receiving a suspended sentence of five years' imprisonment on charges of threatening state security. Sixty-four people were tried on charges relating to state security between September and the end of November, in four separate trials. Three defendants appearing in one of the cases had been held for six years without trial and Amnesty Intemational received allegations that the trial might not have been fair. Amnesty Intemational also received reports of poor prison conditions, particularly at Antanimora prison in Antananarivo.
Manana Bosthene Ratsimandresy, a medical student who had been adopted as a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty Intemational, was apparently released from prison on 10 August although the organization was unable definitely to confirm his release. He had been sentenced to one year's imprisonment on 11 August 1982 after he had been overheard criticizing President Ratsiraka while waiting for a flight at Ivato airport. Another prisoner of conscience, Monja Jaona, the leader of the Madagasikara Otronin' ny Malagasy (MONIMA), Madagascar for the Malagasy Party, one of seven permitted political parties, was released uncharged in August He had been detained in December 1982 after calling for a general strike in protest against alleged ballot-rigging during the presidential election of November 1982, when he had stood as a candidate in opposition to President Didier Ratsiraka.
At least 17 other prisoners whom Amnesty Intemational considered to be prisoners of conscience or whose cases were being investigated by the organization were released as a result of court decisions.
In April, four members of the Mpitolona ho amin' ny Fanjakan' ny Madinika (MFM), the Party for Proletarian Power, who had been convicted of threatening public security during riots in March 1982, were released after their sentences had been reduced upon appeal. The
63
four - Gilles Lejamble, Rajoanesa, Yves Dzaozara and Paul André -had originally been sentenced to four years' hard labour by a criminal court in Hellville, on Nossi-bé island. At their appeal hearing their sentences were reduced to three years' suspended imprisonment
In October, a further 13 people were released after five had been acquitted and eight had been sentenced to suspended terms of imprisonment by an Antananarivo criminal court on charges of threatening state security. The 13 had been detained since January 1982 after being accused of plotting to assassinate President Ratsiraka and overthrow the government They included Colonel Auguste Rasolofo; a student; a Catholic priest; a civil servant; and a woman accused of being a sorceress. At least one of the 13 was beaten while being interrogated at the headquarters of the security police, the Direction générale de l'information et de la documentation (DGID), the General Directorate for Information and Documentation, in its headquarters at Ambohibao, near Antananarivo. The evidence against the defendants consisted almost entirely of statements made while they were being held by the DGID, many of which were subsequentiy retracted by the defendants in court After allegations had been made during the hearing that the DGID had acquired information from the defendants illegally, the public prosecutor applied for the case to be heard by an appeal court, reportedly so that the value of evidence obtained by the DGID could be re-examined. At the end of the year the appeal was still pending.
On 5 October, a political trial opened before a military tribunal involving three defendants whose cases had been taken up by Amnesty Intemational for investigation. Richard Andriamaholison, a former government minister and officer of the gendarmerie, Jean-Astier Rakoto-Abel, also a gendarmerie officer, and Marson Rakotonirina, a former army officer, had been detained since October 1977. On 12 October Richard Andriamaholison and Marson Rakotonirina were sentenced to deportation for life, probably to the Nossi-lava prison island, after being convicted of threatening state security, conspiracy, and possession of firearms. Jean-Astier Rakoto-Abel was sentenced to 10 years' hard labour. At the end of the year Amnesty Intemational was studying reports which indicated that the trial might not have been fair. All tfie witnesses renounced, at least in part, statements which they had made to the DGID, allegedly because tiieir initial statements had been made under duress. Amnesty Intemational was also concerned about the length of time which the defendants had been detained before the hearing.
At the end of the year, Amnesty Intemational knew of only one untried political detainee. The organization had taken up for investigation the case of Rakotomalala, a journalist who had been detained without
64
trial since 1979 apparently for writing a newspaper article criticizing the government
Amnesty International received disturbing reports of poor prison conditions at Antanimora prison in Antananarivo where prisoners were held in grossly overcrowded conditions. The diet was reported to be inadequate and many prisoners suffered from scabies or other diseases contracted because of poor sanitary conditions or malnutrition. The population of Antanimora prison reportedly included people who had been detained without trial for up to 10 years, although people held on political grounds were not known to be among such detainees.
