United Kingdom
Amnesty Intemational expressed concem to the authorities about judicial procedures in political cases in Nor-them Ireland and publicized these concerns. The organisation sent an observer to a trial in Wales, and gave special attention to investigating a number of shootings by security forces in Northern Ireland Amnesty Intemational had no adopted prisoners of conscience during the year.
In August 1983 Amnesty Intemational submitted material documenting its concem about the so-called "Diplock courts" in Northern
316
Ireland to Sir George Baker, an English judge who was appointed by the govemment to conduct an inquiry into the workings of the Emergency Provisions (Northem Ireland) Act of 1978. The "Diplock courts" differ from normal courts in several respects, the most important being that they have no jury but only a single judge.
Amnesty Intemational submitted a detailed analysis of the legislation together with a summary of the concerns which it had submitted to the Secretary of Slate for Northern Ireland in December 1982, in which it had expressed concem that the proceedings in the "Diplock courts" might not conform to international standards for fair trial. The organization noted that most of those convicted in such courts were convicted solely on the basis of confessions and pointed out that several features of the system created a risk that people might be convicted and sentenced to imprisonment on the sole basis of such confessions which could have been obtained by oppressive methods and might therefore have been unreliable (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1983).
In its submission to Sir George Baker, Amnesty International raised the case of Michael Culbert, a social worker from Belfast, who was arrested in 1978 and convicted in 1979 of murdering a policeman and membership of the Provisional Irish Republican Army. After his arrest he was interrogated for long periods but not physically ill-treated. He allegedly made a verbal (unsigned) confession, and this was the only evidence produced against him. He later denied having made such a confession and maintained that at the time of the alleged confession he was completely disorientated as a result of continuous interrogation, lack of sleep and being made to stand for long periods during interrogation.
At his trial by a non-jury court in October 1979, the only issue was the admissibility of his alleged verbal confession. The court held that the confession was admissible, convicted him of murder and membership of the Provisional Irish Republican Army, and sentenced him to life imprisonment. Amnesty Intemational, believing the case raised fundamental issues of principle, had sent an observer to his appeal hearing in January 1982. His subsequent appeal was turned down.
On 3 October 1983 Amnesty Intemational wrote to the United Kingdom Govemment expressing concem about the practice in Northem Ireland of bringing prosecutions solely or mainly on the basis of the testimony of former accomplices of the accused During the previous year about 3(X) people had been charged with or tried for crimes involving politically motivated violence on the basis of the testimony of 20 individuals who were themselves implicated in such offences. The defendants included alleged members of both Republican and Loyalist paramilitary organizations.
In its letter, Amnesty Intemational asked the Secretary of State for
317
Northern Ireland to ensure that this subject be included in the terms of reference of the inquiry into the operation of the Emergency Provisions (Northern Ireland) Act of 1978. Amnesty Intemational sent a copy of its letter to the judge conducting that inquiry. Sir George Baker.
While noting that it was against neither intemational standards nor the United Kingdom's laws for the testimony of accomplices to be admitted in evidence in criminal trials. Amnesty Intemational said that a number of features of prosecution practice in such "supergrass" cases had emerged which, taken together, raised doubts about the quality of proof in such cases. In particular
—	Many defendants were convicted solely on the basis of the uncorroborated testimony of former accomplices;
—	Although in English law the normal mles of evidence mled out testimony obtained by "hope of advantage . . . held out by a person in authority", in some " supergrass" cases testimony had been admitted in evidence which was given by people who had themselves been offered immunity from prosecution for serious crimes;
—	Some such witnesses had been in custody for long periods - well over a year- before a trial, giving the police ample opportunity to influence the testimony unduly;
—	Whereas in normal trials judges were required to wam juries of the dangers of convicting defendants on the sole basis of such evidence, in the"Diplock courts" in Northern Ireland there were no juries - and so judges had to "warn" only themselves.
On 21 November 1983 the Secretary of State forNorthem Ireland replied to Amnesty International's letter of 30 October. He referred the organization to a statement by the Attomey-General in Pariiament outlining the criteria and safeguards employed by the authorities in cases similar to those described by Amnesty Intemational. The Secretary of State also referred to the safeguard offered by the right of appeal against sentence to the higher courts. He told Amnesty Intemational that witnesses, held either in custody or under police protection, were not subjected to police pressure and that their right to access to relatives, friends or lawyers was respected.
The inquiry by Sir George Baker was still in progress at the end of 1983.
In September an Amnesty Intemational observer attended the trial in Cardiff of seven Welsh nationalists accused of the bombing or attempted bombing of buildings in Wales and England (see Amnesty Intemational Report ¡983). (An eighth defendant failed to appear at the trial.) The defendants were charged with conspiracy and various explosives charges. Amnesty Intemational's attendance was motivated by concem about defendants' allegations that incriminating evidence
318
had been planted by the police and that their confessions had been fabricated or made under duress. Two defendants were found guilty of possessing explosives and were sentenced to three and nine years' imprisonment. The other five defendants were all acquitted. In his report, Amnesty International's observer expressed concem about the length of pre-trial detention (up to 17 months in one case) and about allegations of selective investigation by the police (attempts to implicate leaders of Welsh nationalism). By the end of 1983 police conduct in the case was being investigated by a senior police officer sent from another part of the United Kingdom. The Attorney-General, Sir Michael Havers was investigating whether pre-trial detention had been unreasonably prolonged.
In October Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Secretary of Stale for Home Affairs, Leon Brittan, to express concem about allegations which had been published in the national press that four people in police custody in Birmingham had been subjected to ill-treatment, including suffocation with plastic bags, to induce confessions in separate incidents over the previous two or three years. The news media had reported that the police were conducting an inquiry into the allegations in one of these cases.
Amnesty Intemational urged that all the allegations be investigated and that a full report of the findings be made public even if criminal proceedings were not undertaken. It also urged the Home Office to publicize measures taken to prevent any recurrence of the abuses, if the allegations were substantiated.
The Home Office subsequently sent Amnesty Intemational a detailed reply saying that a police investigation would be undertaken into the two cases where the prisoners had made complaints, and that the investigating officer would seek statements from the other two alleged victims, who had not made complaints, if they were willing to see him and if he felt it would help him in his inquiries. The Home Office also said that the matter would be publicized if charges were brought and if anyone were brought to trial, and that the Home Office would also consider publicizing any disciplinary proceedings brought against police officers in connection witii the allegations. At the end of 1983 Amnesty Intemational had not leamed of the outcome of the police investigations.
In July the House of Commons rejected by 368 votes to 223 a motion for restoration of the death penalty for murder. (Since 1969 the death penalty has been retained only for treason and piracy and for certain wartime offences imder military law). Amnesty Intemational had made public appeals against the introduction of the death penalty.
During 1983 Amnesty Intemational studied a series of shootings by members of the security forces in Northem Ireland with a view to
319
assessing allegations that there was an official government policy to have suspected members of paramilitary groups deliberately killed instead of arresting them.
These allegations had been made during the last few months of 1982 when in four incidents seven unarmed individuals had been killed by the security forces. During 1983 17 people, some of them armed, were killed by army and police personnel. The circumstances of these Idllings varied. In all but two cases the authorities said either that the security forces' personnel responsible had had reason to suspect that the victim was armed and threatening danger or that the victim had been accidentally killed in cross fire. In the two exceptional cases, the victims had been unarmed and were killed in front of many witnesses.
By the end of 1983 13 members of the security forces had been charged in connection with seven of the killings.
Amnesty Intemational was continuing to gather information on the matter. By the end of 1983 there had been an inquest on only one of the killings, other inquests having been postponed pending completion of police investigations or judicial proceedings. None of the security forces' personnel charged had been brought to trial by the end of the year.
