Hungary
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the imprisonment of conscientious objectore to military service and about the short-term arrest and harassment of people, some of them pacifists, who exercised their right to non-violent freedom of expression. The organization leamed ft"om unofficial sources of several political trials and was concemed about the reported restriction of public access to the courtroom in each case. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about four executions.
According to the Procurator General there were fewer offences against the state in 1983 than in the previous year when there were 57 such cases. It was thought that most of these offences in previous years had been related to people charged with "incitement". Under Article 148 of the criminal code people who incite hatred of Hungary's constitutional order or allies, or national, racial or religious hatred, may be imprisoned for one to five years. If the offence is committed before a " large public", or as a member of a group, the punishment is two to eight years' imprisonment Balasz Benda, an 18-year-old high-school student, was reportedly tried by a court in Szeged on 2 May on charges under Article 148 of "incitement" carried out before a"large public". He was reportedly accused of having posted up bills in several places in Szeged in March demanding freedom of the press, freedom of conscience, speech and assembly, an independent peace movement, Hungary's political and economic independence, the withdrawal of foreign troops from Hungary and the unification of Transylvania(part of present-day Romania) with Hungary. The presiding judge reportedly refused members of the public entry to the courtroom. The trial was held in camera. Balasz Benda was found guilty, but received a sentence below the prescribed minimum: he was sentenced to six months' imprisonment suspended for two years.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about an increase in the harassment and short-term arrest of people for non-violently exercising their right to freedom of expression. Most of those involved were editors or publishers of unofficial publications. In January police briefly detained Janos Kis, Gyorgy Petri, Miklos Haraszti and Ferenc Koszeg, who were members of the editorial board of an unofficial magazine. In Febmary they were fined for unauthorized publishing. In March police were reported to have raided several apartments in Budapest and detained six people ovemight on charges of unauthorized publishing and distribution of unofficial literature. By May up to 100 people had
288
reportedly been interrogated by police in connection with unofficial publishing acivities.
In late September Gabor Demszky, aged 31, the founder of the independent publishing house AB, was stopped by police close to his home while driving his car. He had previously been detained and questioned by police a number of times about his connection with and other dissident activities and had also been fined for unauthorized publishing. On this occasion, the two police officers reportedly searched his car and took a bag which contained a letter. Gabor Demszky was said to have protested and to have tried to recover the letter. In the course of an altercation which followed he was tear-gassed and beaten, resulting in his confinement in hospital for four days with concussion and bruises. In October he was charged with assaulting police officers, under Article 229 of the criminal code. Pending trial he remained at liberty. At his trial on 21 December police reportedly admitted beating the accused, but stated that Gabor Demszky had struggled with them and had kicked one of them. They themselves reportedly did not claim to have suffered serious injury. Gabor Demszky denied the charges against him, but was found guilty and sentenced to six months' imprisonment suspended for three years. Court officials restricted access to the trial and an observer sent by Amnesty Intemational was not permitted to attend court proceedings, thus preventing the organization from making a proper assessment of the evidence in the case. It noted, however, that the accused had a history of being harassed by the authorities in connection with his exercise of the right to freedom of expression.
Military service is compulsory in Hungary and the law does not provide for alternative civilian service outside the military system for those who refuse conscription for reasons of conscience. People who refuse conscription may be punished under Article 336 of the criminal code with up to five years' imprisonment (five to 15 years in time of war). Since 1977, however, members of several numerically small Christian sects, including the Nazarenes, have been allowed to do unarmed military service. According to one unofficial report, in mid-1983 there were some 130 conscientious objectors serving sentences in Baracska prison (where conscientious objectors are generally sent), nearly all of whom were Jehovah's Witnesses. Amnesty International did not have details of these cases, but adopted five Roman Catholic conscientious objectors, three of whom were sentenced and imprisoned in 1983 under Article 336. Janos Magyar, Laszlo Mohos and Laszlo Habos received sentences of between 30 and 34 months' imprisonment for refusing conscription on grounds of conscience. Janos Magyar and Laszlo Mohos, both members of pacifist Roman Catholic communities from Szekesfehervar, were arrested in early 1983.
289
There were also reports that other pacifists, members of an unofficial "Peace Group for Dialogue", had been briefly detained. In July it was reported that 15 peace activists from Western Europe had been arrested and expelled from the country and that 20 Hungarian citizens, members of the Dialogue group, had been detained by police but released after questioning. At the end of July the group announced that it had decided to dissolve itself because of harassment by the authorities.
In November 1983 Amnesty Intemational appealed for the release of Kurt Krimmel, a citizen of the Federal Republic of Germany who was arrested on 24 September after he had attempted to smuggle his sister-in-law's child from Hungary into Austria. The mother, a citizen of the German Democratic Republic, had crossed from Hungary into Austria several days before without official authorizatioa Following his arrest Kurt Krimmel was allegedly held for 40 days in solitary confinement and his health was reportedly poor. His trial began on 15 December but was adjourned until 29 December so that he could receive a medical examination. At the hearing on 29 December the court ordered his release on condition that he leave the country immediately.
Amnesty Intemational leamed of four executions and of the imposition of two death sentences; in all cases those accused had been convicted of murder. The executions of Laszlo Tibor Bencsik and of Mihaly Nyiri were reported on 4 January and 13 July respectively. Amnesty Intemational had previously appealed to the Presidential Council to commute their death sentences after it had leamed that these had been confuroed by the Supreme Court It was also reported that Kalman Orsos and Jozsef Kondics were executed on 15 July and 2 December respectively.
