Honduras
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about arbitrary arrests and detentions; torture; "disappearances"; and the apparent extrajudicial execution of both Honduran and foreign citizens, including refugees. The organization was also concemed that previously reported cases of "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions remained unresolved Amnesty Intemational was not in a position to provide precise figures conceming the occurrence of such human rights violations in 1983, but believed that the statistics issued by human rights monitoring groups in Honduras, including the independent Comité para la Defensa de las Derechos Humanos en Honduras (CODEH), Committee for the Defence of Human Rights in Honduras, provided an indication of the scale on which they had occurred The committee reported that 26 people had "disappeared", and that 24 others had died in political killings where security force or military agents were reportedly responsible. The committee recorded that 41 people were arrested for political reasons in 1983; the majority "disappeared" temporarily until they were either fortuitously located in custody or their arrests were officially acknowledged and they were consigned to court In addition, 400 peasants were acknowledged by the governmental body, Instituto Nacional Agrario (INA), National Agrarian Institute, to have been arrested for short periods under the provisions of the Ley Anti-Terrorista, Anti-Terrorist Law, Decree 33 of May 1982, apparently because they had occupied land. Decree 33 defined a large number of acts, including the occupation of land, as subversion against the state.
Victims of human rights abuses included trade union and peasant leaders, teachers, students and politicians, as well as Salvadorian, Guatemalan and Nicaraguan refugees in the country. The abuses were
169
reportedly carried out by uniformed members of the Honduran army and the Fuerza de Seguridad Pública (FUSEP), Public Security Force, by plainclothes agents of the Dirección Nacional de Investigaciones (DIN), National Directorate of Investigations, and by special new antirterrorist units formed in 1982, including the Tropas Especiales para Operaciones de Selva y Nocturnas {TESO^), Special Troops for Jungle and Night Operations, and the " Cobras", the Cuerpo de Policía Anti-Subversivo, Anti-Subversive Police Corps.
Plainclothes and uniformed security and military agents from El Salvador and Guatemala who crossed the border into Honduras, on some occasions with the tacit or overt assistance of Honduran security agents, were implicated in the detention, torture, "disappearance" and extrajudicial execution of refugees from El Salvador and Guatemala.
Amnesty Intemational also received reports that the Honduran authorities and military officials had offered both tacit and logistical support to irregular units opposed to the current govemment in Nicaragua. These groups, known as the contras (counter-revolution-aries), operated from Honduran territory and conducted raids during 1983 which reportedly resulted in the "disappearance" and extrajudicial execution, in some cases on Honduran soil, of both Honduran and Nicaraguan non-combatant civilians, including Nicaraguan refugees in Honduras.
Such abuses have been reported since 1981 in the context of increasing armed conflict throughout Central America, but largely appeared to be directed at non-combatants who had no involvement with armed opposition groups either in Honduras or elsewhere.
Many of those arbitrarily detained in 1983 were held in incommunicado detention, for periods exceeding those permitted under Honduran law, in places not publicly recognized as detention centres where they were reportedly tortured. Some such people were eventually freed without charge, or were released under bail, but with charges pending against them. Victor Inocencio Peralta, a worker of the Unión Nacional de Campesinos (UNC), National Association of Peasants, was arrested in Choluteca by DIN agents on 17 October. DIN denied his arrest until he was brought to court on 31 October and accused of having collaborated with Salvadorian opposition groups and arms trafficking. He was allegedly tortured during this period in incommunicado detention. He was released on bail in December 1983.
In other cases "disappeared" people whose arrest was eventually acknowledged by DIN remained in detention without trial for periods exceeding those permissible under Honduran law. Between March and May 1983, Amnesty Intemational repeatedly appealed for information conceming the whereabouts of Inés Consuelo Murillo Schwaderer and José González Flores, who were reportedly detained on 13 March in
170
the city of San Pedro Sula by men believed to be plainclothes members oí Inteligencia Militar {G-1), Military Intelligence. Relatives and local human rights groups also presented habeas corpus petitions on their behalf.
The local DIN headquarters repeatedly denied holding the two until 31 May 1983, whenthey were remanded IjyDIN into the custody of the Juzgado Primero de Letras de T Criminal, Criminal Court of the First Instance, in Tegucigalpa, on charges of terrorism. Both had reportedly been tortured during their period in unacknowledged incommunicado detention, and both had still not been brought to trial by the end of the year.
The detention of a number of others reportedly arrested in the course of 1983 was.never acknowledged. They included members of a group which allegedly launched an armed action against the Honduran Govemment in the department of Olancho in September, several of whom reportedly died under torture while in military custody. Amnesty International continued inquiries on their behalf, as well as on behalf of those who "disappeared" before 1983, and whose cases remained unresolved. These included the trade union leader Fidel Martinez and the joumalist Tomás Nativí, who "disappeared" following their abduction in June 1981 by armed plainclothes agents believed to be members of the security forces. Tomás Nativí had been detained by the regular security forces and badly beaten on a number of occasions prior to his eventual unresolved "disappearance".
Amnesty Intemational also continued to appeal on behalf of Honduran and Salvadorian members of a Christian community group, who were arrested in Tegucigalpa on 22 April 1981. The forcible detention of several members of the group by agents of the DIN was witnessed by a foreign development assistance worker. Documentation, including stamped passports, was made available to Amnesty International and indicated that four children among the group, along with one of the children's grandmother, had been processed through a Honduran border post into El Salvador by Honduran officials. However, the Honduran authorities have never acknowledged that any of the detentions took place and the others remained "disappeared".
In May 1983, Amnesty Intemational called on the Honduran authorities to institute a public and independent inquiry into the killing on 28 March 1983 of four leaders of the Honduran trade union Sindicato de la Compañía Agrícola y Ganadera de Sula (SITRA-COAGS), Union of the Agricultural and Livestock Company of Sula, and the wounding of four other members of the same union. The incident occurred a few hours after union leaders had met a representative of the Honduran Ministry of Labour to discuss COAGS' refusal to negotiate a new collective agreement for its banana workers.
171
Initially, the armed forces denied that those who had shot the men were soldiers. Later, the authorities acknowledged that they were members of the army, but stated that they had acted independently, and not in their capacity as soldiers, in carrying out the shootings. Eventually, in response to repeated expressions of international concern regarding the killings, the Honduran armed forces gave public assurances that they intended to apply the "full force of the law" in determining responsibility for the incident. The Honduran press reported that the three soldiers implicated in the shootings had received a payment of US$ 2,000 to carry out the attack from executives of the company where the trade unionists worked. The soldiers in question were reportedly arrested but then escaped, reportedly with the help of the soldiers guarding them.
In response to an inquiry from the International Labour Organisation (ILO) regarding the case, the Honduran authorities stated in August 1983 that the judicial investigation was still in progress, and that its results would be made public when the secret iwmano (indictment) stage of the inquiry had been completed. As far as Amnesty International was aware there had been no further developments by the end of 1983.
Throughout the year Amnesty International raised its concerns in Honduras with regional organizations and other international bodies, including the United Nations (UN) Working Group on Disappearances. In June, an Amnesty International telex to the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) asked for information concerning the situation of 10 refugees who had been removed on 17 June from the refugee camp for Guatemalans at El Tesoro by Honduran military officers, reportedly accompanied by Guatemalan paramilitary agents in Honduran uniform. During the incident, a UNHCR employee who had attempted to defend the rel^gees was threatened by Honduran soldiers, leading to a protest to the Honduran President from the High Commissioner. Seventeen refugees had originally been detained; seven were released the same day. In July the other 10 were allowed to resettle in Bolivia. All were reportedly beaten and tortured while in the custody of the Honduran army.
In its 1982-1983 Annual Report, issued in September 1983, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (lACHR) of the Organization of American States noted that it was concerned by reports of "disappearances" in Honduras. The lACHR also stated that it was concerned that detentions in Honduras were customarily followed by long periods of incommunicado detention, during which the authorities, especially the police and security agencies, responded to writs of habeas corpus by denying that the persons being sought were actually in custody.
172
