Djibouti
Amnesty International was concerned about allegations of torture of detainees including former political refugees who had returned to Djibouti from exile.
Amnesty International received detailed allegations that two people were tortured in January at the Villa d'Ambouli, an interrogation centre, by officers of the Brigade spéciale de recherche de la gendarmerie, the Special Research Department of the gendarmerie. One of the alleged victims claimed after his release that he had been detained and tortured as a result of a personal dispute with an officer of the gendarmerie. He claimed to have been beaten while suspended from an iron bar and to have had his head repeatedly immersed in water to the point of suffocation. He also alleged that another detainee, Ahmed Abdallah, was transferred to Gabode prison after being tortured at the Villa d'Ambouli at the same time. However, Amnesty International was unable to confirm these detailed allegations.
In October the organization received reports that Ali Mohamed Houmed (known as "Moyale"), Hussein Houmed Ahmed, Ibrahim Mohamed (known as "Nahouda") and at least one other person suspected of belonging to the clandestine Mouvement populaire de libération (MPL), Popular Liberation Movement, were tortured at the Villa d'Ambouli by officers of the same security service. The four, who
39
were apparently suspected of having perpetrated acts of political violence in 1979, were detained after returning from four years' exile in Ethiopia. Amnesty International was not aware of the circumstances of their return from Ethiopia. On21 October Amnesty International urged President Hassan Gouled Aptidon to establish an official investigation into these reports of torture, recalling the undertaking to abolish torture which President Hassan Gouled Aptidon had made to an Amnesty International delegate in January 1980. Amnesty Intemational had not received any reply by the end of the year, although the four were reportedly still being held at Gabode prison. It was not known whether charges had been brought against them.
On 1 February, the governments of Djibouti and Ethiopia entered into a tripartite agreement with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees which provided for the voluntary repatriation from Djibouti of some 35,000 refugees from Ethiopia. Amnesty Intemational investigated allegations of the forcible repatriation of some of the refugees but was unable to confirm that any reftigees had been repatriated to Ethiopia against their will Over 7,000 reftigees had apparently returned voluntarily and safely to Ethiopia by the end of the year.
Equatorial Guinea
Amnesty Intemational was concerned that atrial of 26 people accused of plotting to overthrow the government may not have been conducted in accordance with internationally recognized standards for a fair trial, and was concerned about the use of the death penalty.
Between 30 and 80 people are believed to have been arrested in May, mostly in Malabo, in connection with an alleged plot to overthrow the government There was no official announcement of the arrests at first but after several weeks the authorities confirmed the arrest of some 20 to 30 soldiers and civilians allegedly implicated in the plot to kill the head of state and overthrow the government The authorities alleged that Pablo Esono Obama Eyang, a former member of the military government, had been responsible for promoting the conspiracy. He was apparently among those arrested.
In mid-May, Sergeant Venancio Miko, one of those arrested,
40
escaped from Blabich (Black Beach) Prison in Malabo and sought asylum in the Spanish embassy. He Sieged that he had been severely beaten while in custody. However, he was handed back to the Equatorial Guinean authorities at the end of May after the Spanish Government apparently obtained an assurance that he would neither be executed nor subjected to torture.
On 1 July 26 people were brought to trial before a military court in Malabo charged with plotting to kill the head of state and overthrow the government Others arrested in connection with the plot were apparently released uncharged. Three of the defendants, Venancio Miko and two former miUtary government ministers, Carmelo Owono Ndongo Andeme and Gregorio Micha Ela Obono, faced the most serious charges of directiy planning to assassinate President Obiang Nguema Mbasogo and overthrow his government The 23 others, who apparently included Pablo Esono Obama Ey ang, were accused of aiding and assisting them. The trial lasted three days and was open to the public. The three principal defendants were convicted and sentenced to death. However, Amnesty International was unable to obtain further information about the verciïcts or sentences of the other defendants.
Two of those sentenced to death, Carmelo Owono Ndongo Andeme and Gregorio Micha Ela Obono, were executed on 6 July, the day after their sentences were announced. Venancio Mikô was not executed apparently because of the assurance given to the Spanish authorities in May. However, his sentence was not commuted and at the end of the year he remained under sentence of death at Blabich Prison. Following the executions on 6 July, Amnesty International appealed to the government to extend clemency to Venancio Mikô and any other prisoners who might be sentenced to death.
The trial in July of Venancio Mikô and other prisoners appears to have failed to conform to internationally recognized standards in certain respects. Neither the three prisoners sentenced to death nor others who may have been convicted were able to appeal to a higher court against their conviction and sentence. It also appeared that the two prisoners who were executed had been given no opportunity to submit formal pleas for clemency to the head of state.
41
