Somalia
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the detention of prisoners of conscience; the detention of other political opponents of the government; the imprisonment of others after imfair trials; harsh prison conditions; and allegations of ill-treatment of prisoners. More than 30 people were sentenced to death and there were a number of executions during 1983.
The government of President Mohamed Siyad Barre continued to face armed opposition from the Democratic Front for the Salvation of Somalia and the Somali National Movement, both based in Ethiopia. Following an attack by the Somali National Movement on 2 January in the northem town of Mandera, near Hargeisa, a state of emergency was imposed in the area. However, the emergency was lifted on 13 Febmary, when an amnesty was declared for an unspecified number of prisoners, including some of those arrested during the emergency. There was further activity by opposition guerrilla organizations throu¿iout the year in border areas and in other parts of tiie country, including the capital, Mogadishu.
90
At the beginning of the year seven former members of parliament and of the central committee of the Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party (the only political party permitted in the country), who had been arrested in June 1982, were still being detained incommunicado in Labatan Jirow prison, near Baidowa. They were charged with treason soon after their arrest but by the end of 1983 no date had been set for their trial before the National Security Court. They were apparently arrested for opposing the re-election of President Siyad Barre for a further five-year term of office. They included Ismail Ali Abokor, a former Vice-President of Somalia, and Omar Arteh Ghalib, a former Foreign Minister. All seven were adopted by Amnesty Intemational as prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty Intemational learned of the death in detention of one of them, Warsame Ali Farah, on 20 July, after he had apparently been refused admission to hospital and continued to be denied access to his family. The organization expressed concem about his death and requested details from the authorities about the cause of death and about his medical treatment in detention. Amnesty Intemational also sought assurances that all prisoners would be given adequate medical treatment The Attorney General later sent the organization a copy of the postmortem report, which indicated kidney failure, but provided no further information or guarantees about the provision of medical attention to other prisoners.
Amnesty Intemational investigated the cases of 20 people who had been arrested in Hargeisa at the end of 1981 and were tried by the National Security Court in Febmary 1982. They were convicted of various offences under national security legislation, the main charges being organizing or participating in a subversive association. They were sentenced to prison terms ranging from three years' imprisonment to life imprisonment. They included Mohamed Bamd Ali, a businessperson; Aden Yusuf Abokor, medical director at Hargeisa hospital, and other doctors, businesspeople, teachers and engineers. All had belonged to an unofficial organization engaged in local voluntary community projects. The prosecution at their trials alleged that this organization was subversive and engaged in publishing anti-state propaganda. Amnesty Intemational was investigating the possibility that they had in fact been imprisoned for their non-violent opinions and activities. The oi^anization was also concerned that they did not appear to have received a fair trial. Although defendants were permitted legal representation and access to lawyers shortiy before the trial, they had no right of appeal to a higher court or to a civil court The verdict and sentence of the court are subject to review by the President but it had not been announced by the end of the year whether the President had reviewed these cases.
Prisoners of conscience for whose release Amnesty Intemational
91
continued to appeal during 1983 included Yusuf Osman Samantar ("Barda'ad"), a left-wing politician who had been detained without trial since 1978 for his opposition to the government, andSaidaBotanElmi, who had been detained without trial since 1978 in reprisal for her husband's political opposition activities in exile. They remained in detention at the end of 1983. Amnesty International continued its investigations into several other cases of political imprisonment They included Ahmed Abdi Hashi ("Hashari"), a lawyer and former ambassador, and Abukar Hassan Yare, a university lecturer, who were arrested with other alleged left-wing critics of the government in January 1981. By the end of the year, they were still detained and the government had given no indication whether they would be charged and brought to trial.
Amnesty International learned of a nimiber of arrests during the year apparently made on political grounds. A number of people in Mandera and Hargeisa were reportedly arrested for allegedly collaborar ting with the Somali National Movement's attack on 2 January, which resulted in the escape from Mandera prison of a number of political and non-political prisoners. The majority of those arrested were released in an amnesty on 13 February, but others were among 55 or more people who were reportedly tried by the National Security Court in Hargeisa in mid-November. Eleven of those tried were sentenced to death on charges alleging their involvement in criminal violence, while a fiirther 39 were sentenced to terms of imprisonment on other charges. Amnesty International appealed for the commutation of the 11 death sentences and sought further details about the trials.
In mid-January, Ubah Arteh Ghalib, the daughter of Omar Arteh Ghalib (see above), was arrested in Mogadishu allegedly in connection with her father's imprisonment Amnesty International requested details from the Attorney General about the grounds for her arrest and her legal status. In March the Attorney General informed the organization that she had been released.
The treatment of political detainees was reportedly harsh. Those held in the maximum security prisons of Lanta Bur (near Afgoi) or Labatan Jirow (near Baidowa) were held incommunicado. Some were said to be held in prolonged solitary confinement, either in cells that were in permanent semi-darkness, or in cells permanently lit by artificial light Medical attention in these prisons was reportedly poor, with only irregular visits by qualified medical doctors. Access to specialist treatment was difficult to obtain and often long delayed, with hospital admission usually being denied. Political detainees held in other prisons, such as Mogadishu central prison or regional prisons, were generally better treated, with family visits usually being allowed. Conditions, however, were poor, with a poor diet and little medical
92
attention being available. Those arrested on political grounds and held for interrogation by the National Security Service in Mogadishu and the larger towns were reportedly subject to beatings and were held incommunicado in poor conditions.
The use of the death penalty also gave cause for concern. During 1983, Amnesty Intemational leamed of the imposition of over 30 death sentences by the National Security Court, which has jurisdiction over both political and non-political offences carrying the death penalty, including treason and other national security offences, homicide and embezzlement of large amounts of public ftinds. Some of the death sentences were reportedly carried out, often within days of the sentence being imposed. On 9 June Amnesty Intemational protested to President Siyad Barre about the execution in public in Mogadishu of a former army officer convicted of homicide a few days earlier. On three separate occasions between September and November Amnesty Intemational appealed to the President for clemency for a total of 21 people condenmed to death for national security offences, homicide or embezzlement The organization received no replies to its appeals and did not know whether any of the sentences and executions were carried out. The total number of death sentences and executions during 1983 was not known to Amnesty Intemational.
	> • mt" w
	
	A f I ■
