Rwanda
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the contulued imprisonment of 24 people whom the organization had adopted as prisoners of conscience. Some prisoners of conscience, along with other political prisoners, were apparently subjected to deliberately harsh conditions of imprisonment which amounted to cmel, inhuman and degrading treatment Amnesty Intemational was also concemed that trials of political detainees fell short of intemationally recognized standards and that political detainees, some of whom were eventually acquitted by the courts and released, were being kept in pre-trial detention for long periods, sometimes exceeding two years.
In addition to the 24 people adopted by Amnesty Intemational as prisoners of conscience, the organization also received information during the year concerning some 25 prisoners who were accused of having committed offences against the seciuity of the state, although the total number of people imprisoned for political reasons was believed to be somewhat higher. Fourteen of these prisoners, some of whom had apparently been in custody since April 1980, were acquitted and freed in April 1983.
Nineteen of the prisoners of conscience on whose behalf Amnesty Intemational worked had been convicted by the State Security Court in November 1981 and were serving sentences of between two and 12 years' imprisonment They had mostly been convicted of distributing tracts which criticized senior government officials and were interpreted
85
by the authorities to be subversive, although they did not advocate the use of violence against the government Amnesty International considered that they and five other prisoners sentenced at the same time to long prison terms did not receive a fair trial. In April Amnesty International set out its concerns in this regard in a letter to the Minister of Justice, Charles Nkurunziza, The concerns included the tenuousness of some of the evidence presented by the prosecution, allegations that four defendants had been tortured in order to make them " confess" to certain offences, and the fact that none of the defendants had been assisted by legal counsel, although several had asked for defence lawyers. Amnesty International received no response to this letter.
Between 18 and 29 April, 27 people were tried by the State Security Court at Ruhengeri on charges connected with an alleged plot said to have been led by the former head of the security police, Theoneste Lizinde in 1980. However, only three of the defendants were convicted of offences against the security of the state. Three others were convicted of insulting President Juvenal Habyarimana. The other 21 defendants were alleged to have distributed subversive tracts but 14 of them were acquitted. Those acquitted included people who had apparently been in custody awaiting trial for abnost three years. Two of the seven who were convicted of distributing subversive documents, Froduald Gasamunyiga and Prosper Mubera, had been held in Ruhengeri prison for more than a year before the trial and had apparently been subjected to incommimicado detention in completely unlit cells, cachots noirs, for long periods. They both received four-year prison sentences and were subsequently adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience. Three of the other defendants convicted with them were not arrested before the trial but received summonses and were informed of the charges against them only a few days before the trial. One was sentenced to three years' imprisonment and the other two to four-year terms. They too were adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience.
The three defendants convicted of insulting President Habyarimana were not accused of having been involved in the alleged plot in 1980. Two were sentenced to three years' imprisonment and one to a two-year prison term.
Three of the trial defendants were convicted on more serious charges relating to an alleged conspiracy to overthrow the government One was sentenced to 20 months' imprisonment, one had 10 years added to a previous 25-year prison sentence and the third was sentenced to life imprisonment Stanislas Biseruka, a former army officer who was sentenced to 25 years' imprisonment at the trial in November 1981, had a further years added to his sentence. In 1980, he had sought asylimi in Uganda but was forcibly repatriated and allegedly tortured in 1981 after being kidnapped by Rwandese security agents. In November 1981
86
he was convicted of conspiring to overthrow the government and in April 1983 he was convicted of having contacted other opponents of the Rwandese Government while in Uganda. Donat Muvimanyambo, another defendant who had been forcibly repatriated from Uganda, was sentenced to life imprisonment for allegedly contacting opponents of the Rwandese Government while in Uganda, founding an opposition political group and writing insulting remarks in his personal diary about President Juvénal Habyarimana.
The State Security Court which heard political cases was composed of five judges, two of Ûiem members of the armed forces. Although rights of defence were in theory respected, in practice defendants were not given an opportunity to appoint defence lawyers. Although prisoners convicted by the court have no right of appeal, they can challenge the legal grounds of their conviction in a submission to the Cour de cassation. Cassation Court, if they do so within 10 days of being sentenced. In most cases reported to Amnesty Intemational prisoners had not received a copy of their judgment within this time and none of those convicted in April was known to have lodged an appeal.
In February and March large numbers of arrests took place in KigaU of men and women whose identity papers were not in order or who did not have proper jobs. In particular, more than 100 women were arrested and simimarily sent to Nsinda "re-education" camp near Rwamagana on the grounds that they had been engaged in prostitution. Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the case of four of these women and made inquiries with the authorities about the reasons for their detention. They appeared to have been arrested because they had been in close contact with European expatriate workers. They were reportedly questioned by members of the national intelligence service who apparently suggested that they were working as spies on behalf of their European friends. Following intemational publicity surrounding these cases, the four women concerned were released and confined to their home villages for several months.
Amnesty Intemational remained concemed about conditions in Ruhengeri prison's "Special Section", a high security wing in which political prisoners were held. It contained six "black cells" which have no no windows or artificial light and in which prisoners were held for long periods. In January Amnesty Intemational urged the authorities to move five prisoners then reportedly being held in these cells. They included Immaculée Mukamugema, who was adopted by the organization as a prisoner of conscience after being sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment in November 1981. She had apparently become ill after being held in a "black cell" in total darkness for most of the second half of 1982. At the end of February, she was reportedly transferred to Kigali prison, where she was placed in an ordinary cell in the women's section of the prison.
87
Many political prisoners in the "Special Section" at Ruhengeri prison were held incommunicado even after they had been sentenced, although some of those convicted in November 1981 were apparently permitted at least one family visit. Some prisoners' relatives who had received official permission to visit them in July were not allowed by the prison authorities to do so, despite an assurance by President Habyari-mana in July that convicted prisoners would be permitted to receive such family visits.
There were some improvements in prison conditions during the year although it appeared that poUtical prisoners were still generally subjected to harsher treatment than ordinary criminal prisoners. In Jime, President Habyarimana announced that the Minister of Justice and Vincent Nsengijomiva, the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Kigali, had been asked to investigate allegations of harsh conditions of imprisonment However, by the end of the year no results of this investigation had been made public. In July, the President also announced that the Intemational Committee of the Red Cross had been granted facilities to inspect conditions in Rwanda's prisons.
