Grenada
Amnesty Intemational's main concem during the first part of the year was the continued detention without charge or trial of suspected opponents of the People's Revolutionary Govemment (PRG) (formed when the New Jewel Movement (NJM) led by Maurice Bishop came to power in March 1979). Subsequendy, Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the reported extrajudicial execution of Prime Minister Maurice Bishop and five other leading members of the PRG by members of the armed forces on 19 October, in a coup allegedly organized by a left-wing faction in the NJM. The PRG was dissolved and a Revolutionary Military Council (RMC), led by Hudson Austin, Commander in Chief of the People's Revolutionary Army (PRA), briefly assumed control of the govemment The RMC was overthrown after troops from the United States assisted by forces from Barbados, Jamaica, Dominica, Antigua, St Lucia and St Vincent invaded Grenada on 25 October. All detainees held imder the PRG were released from prison shortly after the invasion. Amnesty International subsequently expressed concem regarding the grounds for the detention of former supporters of the NJM by US troops, and their treatment in custody. Amnesty Intemational also raised its concem about the detention without charge of former members of the RMC and others with the interim civilian govemment which was appointed in November.
In November and December 1982 some 60 political detainees had been released, including all but 35 of the cases then under investigation by Amnesty Intemational. On 18 March 1983 the organization wrote to Prime Minister Maurice Bishop, enclosing the names of more than 100 people allegedly detained as of November 1982, whose release it had been unable to confirm and asking whether any of them remained in preventive detention. No reply was received from the govemment, but during the year Amnesty Intemational investigated the cases of 97 people it believed to be detained without charge under People's Law No. 8. This provided for the preventive detention of people suspected of "intending to take action.., likely to endanger public safetj^'. Some detainees had been held for more than three years under the law and
154
Amnesty Intemational appealed for all such prisoners to be brought before a court or released, in accordance with Grenada's obligations under intemational law. Fourteen political detainees were released by the PRG in September. All remaining prisoners held in preventive detention by the PRG were released on 26-27 October following the US-led invasion.
In its March 1983 letter to the Prime Minister, Amnesty Intemational also expressed concem about death sentences passed on four people convicted in November 1982 of causing death by explosives. Although the crime of murder carries a mandatory death penalty under Grenada common law. Amnesty Intemational said that the retroactive application of the Terrorism (Prevention) Law in these cases, providing for trial by special procedures not in force at the time the crime was committed, appeared to be incompatible with Article 4(2) of the American Convention on Human Rights, to which Grenada is a party. This states that death sentences may be imposed only "... in accordance with a law establishing such punishment, enacted prior to the commission of the crime". Amnesty Intemational urged that no executions take place in Grenada and that the death sentences be commuted. On 28 December, following the US-led invasion, the four defendants were given an unconditional pardon and released from prison by the Governor-General.
On 13 October Maurice Bishop was removed from office and placed under house arrest by the army, reportedly after a power-sharing dispute within the central committee of the NJM. On 19 October he was freed by several thousand supporters, who accompanied him to Fort Rupert military headquarters. Accounts of what happened subsequently varied. However, later that evening the military authorities announced that Maurice Bishop, former government ministers Unison Whiteman, Jacqueline Creft and Norris Bain and trade union leaders Fitzroy Bain and Vincent Noel had been killed during an exchange of gunfire inside the fort. Later reports indicated that all six were summarily executed by members of the PRA shortiy after they had entered the fort.
The authorities also announced that 17 people had been killed outside Fort Rupert barracks on 19 October. Later reports stated that at least 100 people had been killed, either by the army firing into the crowd or by jumping in panic over a cliff outside the walls of Fort Rupert
On 20 October the military authorities announced that a 16-member RMC had assumed full legislative and executive powers and that the PRG had been dissolved. A 24-hour curfew was declared.
In a telex message dated 21 October to General Hudson Austin, Commanding Officer of the PRA and leader of the RMC, Amnesty Intemational expressed deep concem about the alleged summary execution of Prime Minister Maurice Bishop and the five people named
155
above and requested that an independent and impartial inquiry be held into the circumstances of the deaths and that the results be made public.
Amnesty International also appealed on behalf of others arrested by the PRA during the events leading to the killing of Maurice Bishop, urging that they be given full protection under international law regarding the right to life, humane treatment and due process of law. They included Kendrick Radix, former Minister of Justice and a supporter of Maurice Bishop; George Louison, former Minister of Agriculture, Cooperatives and Social Affairs, and Alister Hughes, a freelance journalist, all of whom were released from Richmond Hill Prison, a few days after the US-led military occupation of Grenada which began on 25 October.
More than 600 Cuban nationals and over 1,000 Grenadians were subsequently detained by US and Caribbean troops. Most of the Cubans were reportedly employed as civilian construction workers by the PRG and were captured during the first two days of the occupatioa They were evacuated to Cuba during November. The Grenadians, who were held for varying periods for screening and interrogation by US troops during the three weeks following the invasion, included civilians as well as former members of the PRA, People's Militia and RMC. They included Bernard Coard, deputy leader of the PRG; his wife, Phyllis Coard, a minister in the PRG; Selwyn Strachan, former Minister of Mobilization in the PRG, and General Hudson Austin. The latter four, who were alleged to have been involved in the October coup, were held aboard two US aircraft carriers for nine days before being transferred to Richmond Hill Prison on 6 November.
On 4 November Amnesty International sent a telex message to the US President, calling for full adherence by US forces to internationally accepted standards embodied in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Amnesty International asked in particular about the grounds and justification for the imprisonment of those in US forces' custody and their treatment
The appeal was sent after Amnesty International had received allegations that among those detained were former members or supporters of the NJM who had no apparent involvement in the killing of Maurice Bishop and others on 19 October. Amnesty International also received reports that some detainees had been threatened or otherwise ill-treated after arrest.
Unconfirmed reports later received by Amnesty Intemational indicated that Bernard and Phyllis Coard had been subjected to degrading treatment after their arrest by US troops and were made to roll through dung and ant-hills while bound. Bernard Coard was also allegedly held for a total of nine days in steel cages in the holds of two US aircraft carriers where the noise from the engine room was constant and
156
deafening. Photographs showed Bernard Coard, Hudson Austin and other Grenadians stripped to the waist, manacled and blindfold while in the occupying forces' custody.
On 17 November Amnesty International again wrote to the US President expressing concem about reports that members of the PRA and others held for questioning by US military forces had, until 15 November,been held for periods of up to three days in wooden crates near Point Salines airport. The organization referred in its telex to reports that the crates, known as "isolation facilities", had been fully exposed to the heat of the sun, with little ventilation and no facilities for water and personal hygiene. Amnesty International said it considered detention in such conditions to constitute "cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment" in violation of internationally accepted standards for the treatment of prisoners.
On 2 December the US authorities replied, stating that no one had been held under interrogation in the crates for more than 24 hours and that "those undergoing questioning had free access to mess [eating] and latrine [comfort] facilities".
On 15 November the Governor-General, Sir Paul Scoon, who assumed authority for the civil govemment of Grenada after 25 October, vested füll legal and political powers in an interim civilian administration, composed of a nine-member Advisory Council appointed by the Governor-General. The new administration was expected to run the govemment until elections were held the following year.
On the same date, a Preventive Detention Ordinance (PDO) came into effect giving the Advisory Council the power to detain without charge any person who appeared to it likely to act in a manner adverse to the interests of public s^ety, order or defence. An Advisory Tribunal was established under the ordinance to consider and make non-binding recommendations to the council with respect to any objections to a detention order, this was to review the cases of detainees within one month of their detention and thereafter every six months.
By 16 November the US forces had released or handed into Grenadian custody all remaining detainees held for interrogation at Point Salines camp. By mid-December all but 300 US military personnel had withdrawn from the island. A Caribbean Peacekeeping Force of some 450 police and military personnel from the six Caribbean countries who had also participated in the invasion remained on the island. The Preventive Detention Ordinance of 15 November gave the remaining US and Caribbean Peacekeeping Forces the power to arrest and search any persons " acting, or... likely to act in a manner adverse to public safety, order or defence" and to detain them for up to 72 hours.
On 18 November the Advisory Council informed Amnesty International that 47 "security detainees" were being held at Richmond Hill
157
Prison under the PDO of 15 November. Amnesty Intemational had written to the Council urging it to ensure that all those in custody be treated in accordance with Grenada's obligations under intemational law and that all those in detention were promptly charged and brought before a court or released
The Governor-General announced on 9 December that an investigation was being carried out into those responsible for the 19 October coup and related killings, and that charges would be brought against people being held in preventive detention, where appropriate. By the end of 1983 some 40 people were still being held without charge in Richmond Hill Prison. They included Bemard and Phyllis Coard, Hudson Austin, several former members of the PRG and most of the 16-member RMC. At the end of 1983 Amnesty Intemational was investigating an allegation that three former members of the RMC had been beaten during November by membere of the Barbados police force during interrogation at a fort near the prison. Amnesty Intemational was also investigating allegations that detainees had been denied access to legal counsel, despite provisions for this under the constitution.
