Saudi Arabia
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the reported detention of possible prisoners of conscience; the incommunicado detention of people apparently for political reasons and inadequate procedures which led to long delays before such detainees were charged and tried; and allegations of torture or ill-treatment of detainees. The organization was also concemed about the imposition of amputations, floggings and the death penalty as judicial punishments.
There was no response from the Saudi authorities to Amnesty Intemational's letter of 22 December 1982, which asked for confirmation of the arrest of 128 possible prisoners of conscience and details of the charges or pending trial procedures against them {sqq Amnesty International Report 1983). Reports of the arrests were denied by the Saudi authorities in the Saudi and intemational press. During 1983, however, Amnesty Intemational learned of further arrests and several releases and by tiie end of the year the organization had compiled a list of the names of over 170 people reportedly held tocommunicado and whose whereabouts were unknown, some of wWm the organization believed might be detained for the non-violent ^ercise of their human rights. They included Wadad al-Qumri '^bd al-Mun'im, a 42-year-old Palestinian school teacher and meni^er of the executive committee of the General Union of Palestinian Women who was arrested on 27 Febmary 1982 in Riyadh while visiting her husband. Her subsequent whereabouts were unlcnown and there was growing concem for her state of health as she was known to suffer from a kidney disorder and had aheady had one of her kidneys removed. Among those reportedly released was Fawzia al-Bakr, a lecturer at the sociology department of the University of Riyadh and a joumalist with the Saudi newspaper îj/-Jazeera.
359
At the end of 198 3 Amnesty Intemational was also investigating the reported detention in December 1983 of several Sri Lankan workers after they had tried to form trade unions on constmction sites and had threatened to take strike actioa Authorities in Saudi Arabia were known to have prohibited the formation of trade unions and other forms of labour organization on the grounds that official institutions existed to protect the rights of workers and to hear their grievances.
Amnesty Intemational received a number of allegations of torture or ill-treatment from present or former detainees during the year. Most of the allegations were made by people detained for criminal offences and they suggested that ill-treatment occurred most often during the period immediately after arrest, while detainees were held in police custody awaiting trial or release. Peter Savage, a 36-year-old Briton who was detained for three months on charges of embezzlement, alleged that during his interrogation at a Riyadh police station he was beaten with a stick, told that this treatment would continue until he had signed a written confession and threatened that his wife would be arrested if he did not cooperate. Lechner Walter, an Austrian who was detained in April 1983 and subsequently convicted of smuggling whisky into the country, alleged that he was beaten with a stick and threatened with being hung up by the feet, given electric shock treatment and being beaten until he was crippled Several former detainees complained that the risk of ill-treatment during detention increased because, in the absence of witnesses, the law requires a confession to convict for certain offences.
In at least one case the authorities reportedly carried out investigations into complaints of torture and disciplined those responsible. Keith Carmichael, a British subject, complained that he had been threatened with sexual assault and that his feet were padlocked to the back of a chair and that the soles of his feet were beaten with a cane while being held in incommunicado detention between November 1981 and 31 January 1982 {s&e Amnesty Intemational Report 1983). Although the authorities made no direct response to Amnesty International's request for an investigation into these allegations, the organization leamed that an inquiry was instituted in 1983 with Mr Carmichael being given the opportunity to identify some of those he believed were responsible for his ill-treatment At least one prison guard was reportedly imprisoned as a result The findings of the inquiry were not made public.
Islamic Law {al-Shari'a), as practised in Saudi Arabia, imposes amputations as the punishment for repeated theft where there are no mitigating circumstances. During 1983 Amnesty Intemational was aware of one such punishment In Mecca, on 30 December 1983, Jamil Muhammad Ahmad, a Yemeni national, had his right hand amputated from the wrist after being convicted of robbing a safe. Amnesty
360
Intemational holds amputations to be a fomi of cmel, inhuman and degrading punishment, and thus prohibited under intemational law.
Amnesty Intemational was also concemed that cmel, inhuman and degrading punishment was judicially imposed in the form of the flogging of prisoners. According to Saudi officials this form of punishment is designed to humiliate and rehabilitate rather than cause pain. The official administering the blows is meant to hold a copy of ¿le Quran under his cane arm, using only the lower arm to wield the cane, and the strokes to the clothed back and buttocks are reportedly not allowed to draw blood. However, Amnesty Intemational has leamed that there are wide discrepancies between public floggings, which appear to be carried out in accordance with the above stipulations, and floggings which take place in prisons. In the case of the latter, former detainees reported that it was often painful, causing weals andbmising, and that the intensity of the strokes was often dependent on such factors as the detainees' relationship with the guards or whether the person being flogged was first or last in a series.
During 1983 Amnesty Intemational leamed of several cases of foreigners being sentenced to be flogged, including six British subjects who were sentenced to terms of imprisonment and an overall total of 2,700 lashes for smuggling alcohol. The Saudi press also publicized the cases of three Saudi workers who were convicted in June 1983 of negligence which led indirectly to the death of a child, and who were sentenced to terms of imprisonment and 30 lashes each.
During 1983 Amnesty Intemational leamed of 21 executions in Saudi Arabia which were carried out in public and reported in the Saudi media. In all but two cases the victims had been convicted of murder. In some cases the executions were carried out many years after the criminal conviction and imposition of sentence. Hussein bin Hassan al-Maleki was executed in Taif, on 19 August 1983, for a murder he committed in 1966; and'Ali ibn Sa'udSalih al-Fakieh and Munira bint 'Abd al-Talib al-Sabi' were executed on 4 November in Riyadh for a murder they committed in 1968. Under Islamic law the relatives of a murder victim may either demand retribution {Qisas) in the form of the death of the murderer, or they may waive such a claim freely or by settlement. In both cases the courts found it necessary to wait until the heirs of the deceased had reached the age of maturity and had all agreed on execution as the form of retribution before the sentences could be carried out Executions are generally carried out by hanging, but stoning is the prescribed form of execution for some crimes. One case in 1983 involved Hind bint' AH' Abd al-Ghani Dighna who was found guilty of committing adultery with Farouk ibn 'Ali Saytafi and of helping him to kill her husband. He was executed for murder and she was stoned to death for committing adultery. During 1983 Amnesty Intemational
361
addressed several cables to Minister of Interior Prince Naif bin 'Abd al-' Aziz expressing deep concem over the executions that had been carried out and reiterating the organization's unconditional opposition to the death penalty.
