Zaire
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and the detention without trial of suspected opponents of the government Some political detainees were reported to have been tortured or severely beaten while in custody. There were also allegations of torture of criminal suspects, a number of whom were reportedly killed or deliberately starved to death at one ix)lice station in iCinshasa. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about reports of grossly inadequate prison conditions and by the use of the death penalty.
Some 60 political prisoners whose cases were known to Amnesty Intemational at the beginning of the year were released in May under the terms of an amnesty granted by President Mobutu Sese Seko. However, by the end of 1983 more than 100 people were known to have been imprisoned or restricted for political reasons, including many of those freed in May. The total nimiber of political prisoners being held was unclear.
In March Amnesty Intemational published a briefing ^^Qd Political Imprisonment in Zaire. This described in detail the detention without trial of suspected political opponents of the government and referred particularly to detentions which had occurred in Kivu region. It also reported the cases of prisoners of conscience who were sentenced to 15-year prison terms in May 1982 after an unfair trial at which they had
115
been accused of trying to form a new political party, known as the Union pour la démocratie et le progrès social ( UDPS), Union for Democracy and Social Progress. This attempt was considered by the authorities to be unconstitutional and illegal as imder the terms of the constitution Zaire is a one-party state ruled by the Mouvement populaire de la révolution (MPR), People's Movement for the Revolution,
Many suspected supporters of the UDPS were still being detained without charge or trial at the begirming of 1983 and had been adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International. Most of them had been arrested between July and November 1982 and were being held at the Kinshasa headquarters of the ICinshasa national security service, the Centre national de recherches et d'investigations (CNRI), National Research and Investigation Centre, which in November was merged with the service responsible for Zaire's external security to form a new agency, the Agence nationale de documentation (AND), National Documentation Agency. In May the government granted an amnesty to all those known by Ainnesty International to be detained as suspected UDPS supporters. The authorities informed Amnesty International that only some 17 prisoners who had been convicted of offences against the security of the state would benefit from the amnesty, but it later became clear that many other political prisoners had also l^en released. They included untried political detainees and Mbwaya Mupompa, a woman who had been sentenced to three years' imprisonment in April 1982 for entering the country with allegedly subversive documents. Four former soldiers, the only prisoners remaining of some 70 who were convicted in March 1978 in cormection with an alleged plot to kill President Mobutu, were also freed
Following the May releases, Amnesty International continued to appeal for the release of one person who was still imprisoned and was believed to be a prisoner of conscience.
A number of those released in May were regarded by the authorities as the leaders of the UDPS. They were known in Zaire as the " Group of 13" and included 11 former members of the national assembly, known as People's Commissioners; a former government minister, Kibassa Maliba; and a businessperson, Birindwa ci Birkashirwa People suspected of helping any of the 13 in their political activities were arrested on a number of occasions. At the beginning of August, for example, a printer who had supplied them with visiting cards was arrested and was apparently kept in custody for the rest of the year. In mid-August, several members of the group were themselves briefly detained and subjected to severe beatings. Their arrest occurred after they had met a visiting delegation from the United States House of Representatives at Kinshasa's Intercontinental Hotel, They delivered a memorandum to the visiting delegation which apparently contained criticisms of the
116
political situation in Zaire. After the meeting, they were cheered by a crowd of UDPS supporters outside the hotel. The security forces intervened and arrested Kibassa Maliba, four former People's Commissioners who belonged to the "Group of 13" and some 50 other UDPS supporters. They were held for a few hours, reportedly subjected to severe beatings and then released. However, one other UDPS supporter, Bossassi-Epole Bolya Kodya, who was arrested at the same time was not released, but was instead held at the CNRI headquarters in Kinshasa for several months and eventually sent into internal banishment to a town in Equateur regioa He was not charged with having corrunitted a specific offence. He had previously been detained on several occasions since July 1981 and was President of the Lïgue zaïroise pour la défense du Citoyen par la d^ense des droits de l'homme (LDDH), Zairian League for the Defence of the Citizen by the Defence of Human Rights. He was adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience.
During August arrests of suspected UDPS supporters also took place elsewhere, particularly in Mbuji-Mayi, the capital of Kasai' Oriental region, where more than 100 people were reportedly arrested Although most were believed to have been released uncharged after a few weeks in detention, some were allegedly tortured and eventually transferred to Kinshasa, where they remained in the custody of the AND at the end of the year. They included a former People's Commissioner, Mukoka Mwena Kaviilu, and Dinanga Mukunze, a businessperson who had headed South Kasai^s military forces when the area tried to secede in I960.
Between August and November, other suspected UDPS supporters were arrested and either detained without charge or trial, or sent into internal banishment In mid-November, Kibassa Maliba, Birindwa ci Birkashirwa and seven former People's Commissioners were sent into internal banishment under the terms of administrative banishment orders. The orders specified that they were to be restricted to isolated villages in their regions of origin, along with their wives and children, who were also named in the orders. Similar banishment orders were also served on others suspected of helping to organize the UDPS, including Professor Lihau Ebua, a former Supreme Court judge who had been consulted by the UDPS leaders early in 1982 about ways of forming a new political party in Zaire without breaking the law. Amnesty International considered them all to be prisoners of conscience.
Despite these events, President Mobutu was reported at the end of November to have told a foreign journalist that there were no prisoners of conscience in Zaire and that in Zaire people were not arrested for political reasons.
Further arrests occurred in December. Four sons of one of the
117
banished People's Commissioners, Ngalula Mpandanjila, were detained in Kinshasa on 4 December, apparently because they were suspected of contacting foreign journalists about their father's case. In the village in Kasai" Oriental region where Ngalula Mpandanjila himself was restricted, the village chief was reportedly arrested for failing to stop other villagers from talking with the former People's Commissioner. Elsewhere in the region, more than 20 people were known to hve been arrested and detained at the AND headquarters in Mbuji-Mayi because they were suspected of supporting the UDPS.
Other suspected government opponents were also arrested in November and December. In Uvira, Kivu region, a school teacher was arrested in November, reportedly accused of having been in contact with Zairian opposition leaders living outside the country. He was allegedly tortured and later transferred to the AND headquarters in Bukavu, where he was kept in custody uncharged. In December a number of school teachers were arrested in Kisangani, the capital of Haut Zaire region, and several "relegated" to remote villages after they were accused by the AND of instigating a strike by school teachers for higher salaries.
There were renewed allegations of torture. Many concerned suspected criminals, though it was also reported that suspected UDPS supporters detained in Kasai' Oriental region in August and December had been tortured. In February there were reports that a man named Mvuezolo, who had been arrested as a suspected thief, had died as a result of torture inflicted while he was held at Maluku, north of Kinshasa, in the custody of the gendarmerie. Two other prisoners suspected of theft were reportedly tortured at the same time. Mvuezolo was alleged to have been kicked by guards, cut with a machete and subjected to electric shocks.
Following Mvuezolo's death, some of his colleagues at the firm where he worked demonstrated in protest and 14 of them were arrested. On the night of 4 February soldiers carried out a search operation in Maluku, breaking into houses and arresting almost 90 people. Most such detainees were apparently released after paying bribes or unofficial "fines". No official action is known to have been taken against the gendarmes involved in the torture.
Allegations of the torture of suspected criminals, apparently as a means of obtaining "confessions", were also received from Kinshasa There was also strong reason to believe that certain criminal suspects held at a police station in Kinshasa's lingwala district, under the authority of the Brigade spéciale de recherches et de surveillance (BSRS), Special Research and Surveillance Brigade, a branch of the gendarmerie, were deliberately killed, many of them being starved to death. Deaths were reported at this poUce station in early 1983 and
118
again at the end of the year. In January 10 prisoners reportedly died there, including two who had been receiving hospital treatment but who were allegedly dragged from their beds and taken to the BSRS centre to be killed. By tiie end of the year more than 50 prisoners were reported to have been killed The names of some of the victims were known to Amnesty Intemational.
Despite repeated appeals to the authorities by Amnesty International and by other organizations, no effective measures are known to have been taken to prevent such kiUings, nor to prevent the death of other prisoners. Such deaths became frequent at Kinshasa's Makala and N'DoIo prisons in late 1983, with most of those who died reportedly having suffered from malnutritioa
Amnesty Intemational leamed that a number of death sentences were imposed by courts and confirmed upon appeal but did not know how many, if any, executions were carried out during the year.
