Tanzania
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the indefinite detention without trial of alleged political opponents of the government and the refoulement{mvo\\Mi-tary repatriation), of refugees.
Following numerous arrests in January 1983,30 people were remanded in custody and charged with treason. The government announced that a plot to kill President Julius Nyerere and overthrow the government had been uncovered AH but seven of those charged with treason in this connection were members of the armed forces. They were granted access to legal counsel and relatives. However, when the two principal defendants escaped from custody and fled to neighbouring Kenya in June, the authorities withdrew the treason charges against the other 28 defendants but served them with detention orders of unlimited duration issued in accordance with the Preventive Detention Act They were still being detained on this basis at the end of the year. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that they could be detained indefinitely without legal recourse.
The Preventive Detention Act, in addition to being applied to suspected political opponents of the government, had been used in previous years to imprison alleged "economic saboteurs" without charge or trial. Particularly in view of criticisms among judges and lawyers in Tanzania of the use of presidential detention powers for this purpose, the government introduced new temporary legislation in May 1983 for a period of one year - the Economic Sabotage (Special Provisions) Act- which was made retroactive to 4 March 1983. The act permits police officers to arrest alleged "economic saboteurs" and detain them for investigation for up to 60 days. At the end of the 60-day
104
period, detainees must be formally charged before the new National Anti-Economic Sabotage Tribunal and remanded for trial, or otherwise released. Each of the four tribunals is headed by a High Court judge, and includes two other members appointed by tiie President It can impose sentences of up to 15 years' imprisonment Defendants have no right to legal representation or appeal. Over 2,000 people were reportedly detained under this act between March and December for a wide range of alleged economic sabotage offences. By the end of the year, according to the authorities, almost 400 had been tried; over 600 others had been released without being tried As many as 1,000 people were still imprisoned while awaiting charge or trial. Amnesty International was monitoring the possible use of this act for political purposes and was concerned about certain aspects of the act - its retroactivity and the denial of the right to legal representation and appeal - which were incompatible with international standards for fair trial.
During 1983 Amnesty International learned of the imprisonment of 25 alleged political opponents of the government in Zanzibar, who were detained without charge or trial for an indefinite period under Zanzibar's separate Preventive Detention Act Six of the detainees, including Othman Mzee Muqadam "Bapa", had been arrested in early 1981, when they were publicly accused of plotting to overthrow the Zanzibar Government Another detainee, AH Sultan Issa, a former prisoner of conscience, was arrested in October 1982 for selling T-shirts bearing the slogan Maendeleo Zanzibar, "Forward Zanzibar", which was used by Zanzibar political opponents abroad Amnesty International received no reply to its inquiries to the authorities about the grounds for the arrest of Ali Sultan Issa or to its expression of concern that he might be imprisoned for his non-violent political opinions. He was, however, released on 5 October 1983 without being charged A further 18 people were reportedly detained in August for allegedly conspiring to overthrow the Zanzibar Government and establish an Islamic republic. Amnesty International was seeking further details about these detainees in order to determine whether they were prisoners of conscience.
In early November 1983, 20 or more Kenyan nationals, who had fled to Tanzania after the coup attempt in Kenya by elements of the Kenya Air Force on 1 August 1982, were arrested in Tanzania. At least 16 of those who were arrested, including the two self-confessed leaders of the coup attempt, other former air force personnel, two former members of pariiament and some university students, were reportedly secretly returned to Kenya against their and detained Tanzania had earlier granted asylum to at least 10 of those returned
Up to seven Tanzanian refugees in Kenya were arrested at about the same time and were reportedly secretly returned to Tanzania and detained. One of them, Hatty McGhee, an Air Tanzania pilot, had
105
earlier escaped from prison in Tanzania in June 1983; he had been charged with treason in connection with the January 1983 coup conspiracy. Three others had reportedly been formally recognized as refugees imder the United Nations Convention and Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees. Another, Said Lamke, a businessperson, was a natiu-alized Kenyan citizen.
These secret exchanges of aUeged political opponents took place shortly before the meeting on 16 November between the Presidents of Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda, when they reportedly reached agreement on a number of political matters affecting all three East African states. On 25 November Amnesty Intemational expressed its concem to the Tanzanian Govemment about reports of refogees being arrested and forcibly retumed to Kenya, where they were immediately detained Amnesty Intemational also inquired into the situation of a number of Tanzanian refugees who had at the same time been forcibly retumed to Tanzania by the Kenyan authorities and detained Amnesty Intemational urged the govemment to reaffirm its stated commitment to the protection of refugees in accordance with the United Nations Convention and Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees, which Tanzania has ratified No response was received. By the end of the year there had been no official comment on the incident, nor confirmation of the detention of those who had been retumed from Kenya and whose legal status was not knowa Amnesty International continued to investigate this serious violation of intemational law and to seek details about those who had been retumed from Kenya. The organization was concerned in particular that Said Lamke, and possibly others, could be prisoners of conscience.
