Kampuchea
231
Amnesty International's main concern was the reported detention without trial by the authorities of the People's Republic of Kampuchea (PRK) of people they suspected of opposing their policies or of supporting groups engaged in armed resistance against them. The civil war between the Government of the PRK and the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea (CGDK), which controlled some areas of the country, made it difficult for Amnesty International to substantiate reports of human rights violations or to obtain detailed information from areas controlled by either side.
In July 1983 refugees arriving at camps near the western border reported that widespread arrests had taken place in the army and administration of the Government of the PRK and among the peasants of people suspected of association with the Khmer People's National Liberation Front (KPNLF), one of the three groups constituting the CGDK. Starting in April 1983,300 people were reportedly arrested in the western provinces of Siem Reap, Oddar Meanchey and Battambang. Among them were said to be Chan Seng, the Governor of Siem Reap province; Keo Ha, his former deputy; as well as military officers, teachers and village cadres. In early August 1983 the PRK authorities officially denied the reports of the arrests. Villagers were reportedly arrested during the year for protesting against arrests, military conscription and forced relocation. Further arrests of government officials were reported in October and December 1983 in Kampor and Kompong Cham provinces. Amnesty International had no information on the reasons for these arrests.
Refugees from western provinces also reported the arrest, ill-treatment and torture in June 1983 of villagers by Vietnamese soldiers present in the country who suspected them of helping the armed operations of the KPNLF.
Amnesty International was unable to estimate the nimiber of people detained on political grounds or to obtain information on individual cases in order to establish whether those involved were prisoners of conscience. Among the individual cases it investigated was that of Mao Ayauth, a former television and radio producer who was working in the government's information service and was reportedly detained in 1981. Amnesty International learned of the release at the end of 1982 of Nam Bunnaraya, director of the orchestra of the Kampuchean radio, after 18 months' detention without charge or trial.
Most political detainees were believed to be detained without charge
232
or trial. One trial was reported to have taken place before the Phnom Penh People's Court on 6 and 7 December 1983. Ten people who had joined the PRK administration after apparendy being former officials of the Democratic Kampuchea (DK) administration of 1975 to 1979, were tried and convicted of actively helping the Khmers rouges armed forces in Prey Veng and Phnom Penh. Details regarding the trial and its procedures were not available.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about reports that some of the prisoners held in the Prison Centrale, Central Prison, in Phnom Penh were kept in fetters and in unlit cells, especially during their period of interrogatioa
Detention for "re-education" purposes without charge or trial appeared to be widespread. On several occasions, local authorities announced that, in accordance with the government's policy of clemency towards "misled people", detainees were being allowed to return to their families after attending political courses and pledging support to the govemment In the first half of 1983, over 600 "misled people" were reportedly released in Khompong Thom province. There were reports of the long-term detention for "re-education" purposes of "hardcore" former cadres of the DK administration. In June 1983, the authorities confirmed that more than 100 were being detained in a camp in Takeo, some having been held for up to three years.
