Argentina
Amnesty Intemational continued to work on behalf of thousands of individuals who "disappeared" following the military coup of March 1976. Despite increasing pressure in Argentina to resolve this problem, the outgoing military govemment of General Rey-naldo Bignone took steps to prevent those responsible being brought to justice, by passing the Law of National Pacification, an amnesty law, which would have had the effect of granting complete immunity from prosecution to all members of the police and security forces for past human rights violations. On 29 October 1983 the state of siege was suspended, elections took place and on 10 December 1983 the govemment of President Raúl Alfonsín was swom in. One of the new government's first measures, welcomed by Amnesty Intemational, was to present a draft law to Congress abrogating the Law of National Pacification, which was unanimously approved on 27 December 1983. The new govemment also established, before the end of the year, a National Commission on Disappeared People to conduct a full inquiry into cases of "disappearance".
Amnesty Intemational expressed concem to the govemment of General Reynaldo Bignone about the continuing use of the state of siege provisions to hold those detained at the disposal of the National Executive Power (PEN detainees) without charge or trial, either in prison or in restricted liberty. Amnesty Intemational investigated the cases of more than 100 such people who were convicted by military courts in proceedings which did not appear to conform to intemational standards for a fair trial
Throughout the year Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports of the harassment, beating and short-term abduction of journalists.
126
human rights workers and trade unionists by groups allegedly linked to the military police or security forces. Two men abducted in May 1983 were believed to have been the victims of extrajudicial executions.
On 28 April 1983 the government published '\\s Final Document of the Military Junta On the War Against Subversion and Terrorism which stated that all those who had "disappeared" during the previous eight years should be considered dead for judicial and administrative purposes. The government stressed that there would be no further disclosures about the consequences of the "war against subversion". Although the government admitted that there had been excesses, it stated that "the actions of the members of the Armed Forces in the conduct of the war were in the line of duty". In a letter to President Bignone on 11 May 1983 Amnesty International renewed its request for the government to give a "full public accounting of all those persons who'disappeared' after arrest" and called upon the authorities to refrain from adopting measures which could impede inquiries into these "disappearances".
On 23 September 1983 ûiQj'unta published an amnesty law, known as the Law of National Pacification. The law pardoned certain crimes committed with a political motive or purpose including kidnapping, torture and murder, it suspended criminal proceedings related to these offences and blocked all ftirther investigations into "disappearances".
In a letter to President Bignone Amnesty International criticized the amnesty law on the grounds that it made it practically impossible to determine what had happened to the "disappeared" detainees, that it could encourage further human rights violations by giving the perpetrators of past crimes a sense of immunity, and that it prevented the perpetrators of the "disappearances" from being brought to trial. The Law of National Pacification was abrogated by the government of President Raúl Alfonsín on 27 December 1983.
The continuing official silence on the problem of "disappeared" people was in marked contrast to the steady stream of evidence being published in the Argentine press. In March 1983 an exiled former officer of the Argentine Federal Police, Rodolfo Peregrino Fernández, made a number of serious public allegations against members of the Argentine police, military and security forces. He alleged that the High Command of the Armed Forces had received secret daily bulletins from the State Intelligence Agency, SIDE, listing all operations carried out by special anti-subversive units, including abductions. He claimed that he had witnessed the torture in a secret camp in Buenos Aires of Lucia Cullen de Nell, a young woman who "disappeared" in June 1976.
Under Argentina's legal system, private parties can initiate criminal prosecutions. This mechanism has been used by human rights groups over the past few years in attempts to discover what happened to
127
"disappeared" prisoners. Such actions have been hampered by the failure of the executive to provide judges with the information necessary to conduct investigations. The judiciary were also often unwilling to challenge the government's refusal to cooperate. The work of the courts was further obstructed by the fact that the Armed Forces High Command would not allow officers to testify before the courts, claiming that questions of national security were involved.
On 9 August 1983, lawyers filed a collective habeas corpus petition on behalf of the relatives of 23 individuals who were abducted between 1976 and 1978 and allegedly detained at Xhñ Escuela de Mecánica de la Armada (ESMA), Navy Mechanics School, a secret detention centre. The first judge handling the case took no action and the armed forces had still not responded to the habeas corpus petition a month later.
On 10 Febmary 1983 the Centro de Estudios Legales y Sociales (CELS), Centre for Legal and Social Studies, an Argentine human rights group, filed their second complaint alleging that illegal trials had taken place at the judicial morgue in Buenos Aires and that officials there had failed to conduct official investigations into violent deaths. One of the cases cited was that of Norberto Gómez, a 27-year-old doctor who was abducted fi^om his home in November 1976 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1983). His body was brought to the morgue in March 1977, a death certificate was issued and he was secretly buried in an unmarked grave. On 22 June 1983 the Supreme Court dismissed the complaint, absolving court officials of acting improperly despite the fact that in none of the cases had they notified the families of the deaths, nor had they investigated the causes of violent deaths as required by law.
Unmarked graves continued to be discovered in cemeteries throughout Argentina: in 1983, 1,186 bodies were exhumed. Many of the bodies, although in a late stage of decomposition, showed signs of having been shot at close range and mutilated, possibly as a means of preventing identification. In a number of cases in which formal identification was possible it was established that the bodies were those of people who had been listed as "disappeared". The remains of a 17-year-old Umguayan exile, Adriana Gatti Casal, who was seven months' pregnant when she "disappeared" in 1977, were located in La Chacarita cemetery, Buenos Aires, and formally identified in August 1983.
At the beginning of 1983 Amnesty Intemational estimated that there were approximately 200 PEN detainees, many of whom had been in detention for over seven years without trial. Approximately 50 whom Amnesty Intemational considered to be prisoners of conscience were released in April 1983, including Dr Jorge Mario Domingo Marca, on
128
whose behalf the organization had campaigned after the govemment had ignored a mling by the courts in December 1982 that his continued detention under the state of siege was unconstitutional. On 29 October 1983 all the remaining PEN detainees were unconditionally freed following the lifting of the state of siege.
Amnesty Intemational appealed on behalf of a number of PEN detainees whose state of heal^ gave the organization cause for concem One such prisoner, Martin Abdón Jaime González, who had completed a six-year sentence in 1981 but who had remained in detention under the provisions of the state of siege, was reported in June 1983 to be suffering from ulcerative colitis. He was released in October 1983.
By the end of 1983 Amnesty Intemational knew of about 130 political prisoners in Argentina, all of whom had been sentenced by civilian Federal courts or by military courts. The organization believed that a number of them might be prisoners of conscience. In a message to the President-elect Dr Raúl Alfonsín Amnesty Intemational called on the new goverrunent to consider releasing the remaining political prisoners.
On 19 May 1983 Amnesty Intemational called on the govemment to conduct an independent and public investigation into the killing of two people who were abducted in Rosario, Santa Fe Province, on 14 May 1983. One of the dead men, Osvaldo Cambiaso, was adopted by Amnesty Intemational as a prisoner of conscience in 1979. He had been released in 1982.
The two men had reportedly been abducted from a bar by heavily armed men who had forced the pair into an unmarked pick-up van and driven off. According to the police the men had been shot and killed in a car on 14 May 1983 while trying to escape a police patrol in Lima, outside Buenos Aires. However, a habeas corpus petition filed immediately after the abduction by the Cambiaso family was rejected on 17 May 1983 on the grounds of a lack of information - the day on which the police in Buenos Aires issued their statement. Investigations into the abduction and killing of the two men were conducted by judges in Rosario and Buenos Aires.
An autopsy performed on the body of Osvaldo Cambiaso established that he had been shot at close range and that he had been tortured Relatives of Eduardo Pereira Rossi were not allowed to examine his body, which was handed over in a sealed coffin for burial in the presence of armed officials. In Rosario the judge investigating the alleged abduction declared himself incompetent after he and witnesses had received death threats. In June 1983 the judge in San Nicolás, Buenos Aires, charged three police officers with homicide and ordered that they be held in preventive detention. In October 1983 the criminal proceedings
129
were dropped, the case was closed for lack of evidence and all three were released.
The search for children reported as missing following the abduction of their parents made some progress during the year. In June 1983, 9-year-oid Tamara Ana Maria Arze, the daughter of a former prisoner of conscience, Rosemary Riveros, was traced. She had been missing for seven years. Since 1979, 12 missing children have been found. In August 1983 Amnesty Intemational expressed concern about an attack on the staff and premises of El Porteño, a magazine which had published an article about missing children. The editor, his family and a joumahst working for the magazine reportedly received death threats. A number of other journalists covering human rights topics were also the victims of death threats and short-term abductions.
In March 1983 Amnesty International submitted material to the United Nations related to "disappearances", torture and prolonged detention without trial. In May 1983 Amnesty Intemational sent material on the "disappearance" of 347 European and non-Argentine Latin American citizens in Argentina to the Sixth Inter-Parliamentary Conference in Bmssels between the European Parliament and the Latin American ParUament
