Kuwait
On 12 December bombs exploded in two foreign embassies in Kuwait, in the airport and in other installations, killing six people and injuring over 60. According to official sources, 19 people had been arrested by the end of the year and charged with carrying out the bombings. They included Iraqi and Lebanese members of Al Da'wa Al Islamiya (The Islamic Call), an Iraqi movement with pro-Iranian sympathies which is composed predominantly of Shi'a Muslims. The government announced that it had set up a State Security Court to try them.
Amnesty International received reports from various sources that large numbers of Kuwaiti, Iranian and Iraqi Shi'as were also arrested and detained following the bombings. Unofficial sources claimed that 3/ 4,000 had been arrested, while the authorities put the number at 100. Amnesty International was concerned at reports that some of those detained were ill-treated and held incommunicado. Amnesty International was also concerned that large numbers of the Iraqis arrested
346
had been deported, or had been threatened with deportation, to Iraq, where it was feared that some may have been considered opponents of the govemment and that as such they may have faced imprisonment, ill-treatment or executioa
Lebanon
During 1983 Amnesty Intemational was concemed about reports of arbitrary arrests and detentions, often incommunicado, without legal process; torture and other forms of ill-treatment of prisoners; abduction and "disappearances"; extrajudicial killings and the death penalty. There were reports of these abuses in regions of the Lebanon effectively under the control of the Lebanese government, the Israeli Defence Forces (IDF), the Syrian army and a number of Lebanese militias.
At the end of 1983 the Lebanese authorities appeared to be in control of the greater part of Beimt, having moved into West Beimt and disarmed the Muslim militias. Their control, however, was tentative since the Lebanese Forces, a coalition of mainly Maronite Christian militias of which the Kata'ib, Phalange-militia, were an integral part, were not disarmed in East Beimt and effectively controlled an area which extended from East Beimt to the mountains of the Metn and Kesrouan. The Israeli forces had withdrawn to a line of defence on the Awali river and were in control of Lebanese territory to the south of the river. In the Shuf mountains the militia of the Progressive Socialist Party (PSP), comprising mainly Dmze fighters, had defeated an attempt by the Lebanese army to replace the withdrawing Israeli forces and appeared to be in control of most of the territory. The remainder of the Lebanon -the Beka' a valley to the east and Tripoli and the ' Akkar plain to the north - was within Syria's sphere of influence, if not effectively under Syrian control Owing to the complex military and political situation described above and to continued inter-factional fighting throughout 1983, Amnesty Intemational was unable fully to investigate many of its concems in the Lebanon.
During 1983 Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about reports of widescale arbitrary arrests by the Lebanese army and security forces of people in West Beimt and the Palestinian refugee
347
camps. By the end of 1982 Lebanese officials had acknowledged the detention of 1441 people, and the release of 469 over an unspecified period; the number of detainees reportedly increased during early 1983. The official justification for the arrests was that those arrested - mostly Palestinians but also Lebanese and other nationals - were criminals and illegal aliens without residence permits in the Lebanon. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that arrests were reportedly sometimes carried out by people in plain clothes, without proper identification or arrest warrants, and that those arrested were held incommunicado, not being allowed visits by lawyers or relatives and without outside observers such as the Intemational Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) having access to them. Amnesty Intemational had addressed these concerns to President Amin Gemayel on 22 December 1982 but did not receive a response from the Lebanese authorities in 1983.
Reports indicated that many of those arrested were being held incommunicado by the Lebanese authorities at the seven-storey General Security building in Badaro, at the Ministry of Defence building at Yarzeh, and at Rumieh prison outside Beimt. In March 1983 the ICRC were allowed to make initial visits to 86 detainees at Badaro. Subsequently they were only allowed to visit Rumieh prison where they registered some 700 detainees. As of the end of the year, neither families, lawyers nor humanitarian organizations had been allowed to visit Yarzeh; unconfirmed reports estimated that more than 2,000 detainees were being held there.
Amnesty Intemational also remained concemed about reports that the Lebanese Forces continued to hold a large number of detainees, incommunicado and outside any normal legal process, in secret detention centres. Such detainees were reportedly being held at the headquarters of the Lebanese Forces at Karantina, the Adonis barracks prison near Jounieh (where over 200 women were reportedly held) and a number of camps in the Kesrouan region. On 26 April 1983 six detainees who had been held without charge or other legal process were handedover by theXiaia'/Z) to the Lebanese authorities. They included Habib Shartouni, detained by ^QKata'ib since September 1982 on suspicion of placing the bomb which killed President-elect Bachir Gemayel on 14 September 1982; Joseph Kazazian and Nazih Shaya, suspected of an attempt on the life of Bachir Gemayel which led to the death of his daughter in 1980; and three others held since 1981 on suspicion of causing explosions in East Beimt A week later a further 11 detainees were transferred by the Kata'ib into the custody of the Lebanese authorities. Joseph Kazazian and Nazih Shaya were subsequently tried, sentenced to death and executed in November 1983. Amnesty Intemational was unaware of the fate or whereabouts of the other detainees.
348
In southern Lebanon Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed that thousands of detainees held by the Israeli forces were being denied the legal rights accorded by intemationally accepted standards. (For further details see entry on Israel and Occupied Territories (page 342)). On 24 November 1983, 4,491 detainees from Al-Ansar prison were released by the Israeli authorities in exchange for six Israeli prisoners held by Al-Fatah (a faction of the Palestinian Liberation Organization).
During 1983 Amnesty Intemational received a number of disturbing reports conceming conditions of detention and the ill-treatment of detainees held incommunicado by various parties in the Lebanon. Several reports, some of them from former detainees, alleged that detainees held by the Lebanese authorities at the Lebanese General Security Headquarters in Yarzeh had been routinely beaten and otherwise ill-treated during interrogation. Former detainees expressed particular concem about the brutal treatment in prison of Thuraya Rajeh, a 26-year-old Palestinian. In another case, Paola Crociani, an Italian photo-joumalist, was taken from her home at 10.30 p.m. on Wednesday April 20 by four armed Lebanese security officers and detained for 36 hours before being deported from the Lebanon. While she herself did not claim to have been seriously ill-treated, she reported having heard prisoners screaming and loud music throughout the two nights she spent in detention. She also reported having seen, during the daytime, prison guards "equipped with steel whips covered with leather straps tied and hanging from both sides"; prisoners being beaten and trampled on by guards; others who had been deprived of food or water for several days; and a room with 400-500 detainees "heaped over one another for lack of space". In July 1983 five British and American joumalists were detained and taken to the military security headquarters in Beimt where they were reportedly blindfolded, punched and kicked. One journalist, Ken Jobson of United Press Intemational Television News (UPITN), reported that he was knocked to the ground and kicked in the stomach by a Lebanese soldier, "raising a large weal".
Reports also reached Amnesty Intemational of the torture or ill-treatment of detainees held by the Lebanese Forces. In one incident a woman released by the Kata'ib in July 1983 reported being taken blindfold from a roadblock to a detention centre in the Kesrouan region andheldwith 127 other women detainees. She alleged that she had been tortured, that she had received cigarette bums on her eyelids and chest and that she had been assaulted with a stick which had been twisted inside her. She also reported that some of the detainees were pregnant after having been raped by the guards.
In another case, Ali Bajuq was detained by the Kata'ib for a few hours but reportedly needed 20 days hospitalization to recover from the
349
effects of serious ill-treatment. According to the hospital's medical report he had been cut a number of times with a sharp instrument and had been injected with several drugs including heroin and a compound similar to strychnine.
There were increasing fears during 198 3 about the fate of hundreds of people who had "disappeared". In July 1983 the Lebanese Prime Minister Shafiq al-Wazzan set up a special committee to investigate the situation of people "detained, abducted or disappeared" since September 1982 in West Beirut, the Shuf and Mount Lebanon. The committee, chaired by Judge Sami Yunis, was reported in the Lebanese press to be looking into a list of over 900 names supplied to it by the Committee of the Relatives of Detained or Disappeared Pereons in Lebanon. Although a number of those named on the list may have been among those killed during the massacre which took place at the Sabra and Chatila refugee camps in September 1982, Amnesty Intemational received reports that many "disappeared" individuals were being detained incommunicado by the Lebanese army and security forces or had been abducted and were being similarly held by the Lebanese Forces. There was growing concem throughout 1983 that many of the "disappeared" might no longer be alive. Relatives continued to press for information on, and access to, the many detainees being held incommunicado.
During 1983 Amnesty Intemational was aware of reports of a number of extrajudicial executions carried out by non-govemmental forces in control of territory. These included allegations that the Lebanese Forces had executed and buried detainees in a mass graveyard at their headquarters in Karantina; that "murder squads" belonging to the National Guard and to the Lebanese Forces in southem Lebanon were abducting and executing selected Palestinians living in Sidon in order to intimidate others into leaving Lebanon; and that villagers taken prisoner had been massacred by both sides during the fighting between the Lebanese Forces and Druze militias for control of the Shuf mountains.
On 8 Febmary 1983, the Kahan Commission, the Israeli commission of inquiry into the massacre which took place at the Sabra and Chatila refugee camps in September 1982 published its final report The commission's main finding was that "the atrocities in the refogee camps were perpetrated by members of the Phalangists, and that absolutely no direct responsibility devolves upon Israel or upon those who acted on its behalf. The commission also concluded that Israeli officials should have foreseen the danger of a massacre if the Phalange militia entered the camps, and that they did not take "energetic and immediate" actions to restrain the Lebanese militiamen or to put a stop to their actions. (See also entry on Israel and Occupied Territories
350
(page 345)). The inquiry into the same events which was initiated by the Lebanese authorities had not been completed by the end of 1983. This inquiry, led by Prosecutor General Assad Germanos, was being carried out in the strictest secrecy, without even the procedures followed being made public.
On 7 April 1983 Amnesty Intemational sent a cable to President Amin Gemayel expressing deep concem about the execution by hanging of Ibrahim Tarraf, convicted of murder on 3 March 1983. This was the first judicial execution to have been carried out in the Lebanon since 1972. Between April and December Amnesty Intemational was aware of 25 death sentences having been passed by Lebanese courts, many of them in absentia, and of over 100 cases where the Military Prosecutor had asked for the death penalty. On 6 December 1983 Amnesty Intemational again wrote to President Gemayel expressing concem about the death sentences passed on 26 November 1983 on Joseph Kazazian and Nazih Shaya (see above). In its letter Amnesty Intemational stated that the organization did not condone acts of violence but opposed capital punishment unreservedly. It urged the govemment to commute the death sentences, should legal appeals be exhausted and the cases come before the President for review.
