Peru
Extrajudicial executions and "disappearances", which had been alleged only rarely in Peru prior to January 1983, became Amnesty International's primary concern during the year. Amnesty International con^ tinued to be concerned about torture; the prolonged detention of prisoners of conscience, most of them leaders of peasant organizations or communities; extensive delays in trials of political prisoners; and poor prison conditions. The organization was also concerned about execution-style killings and torture carried out by guerrillas of the Sendero Luminoso (Shining Path) movement in some mountain areas.
Emergency measures to counter the Shining Path organization included the declaration of a state of emergency in March 1982, suspending the right to habeas corpus and other constitutional
188
guarantees initially in nine and later in 11 highland provinces of the departments of Ayacucho, Huancavelica and Apurimac. On 26 December 1982 a Political-Military Command based in the city of Ayacucho was established to administer political affairs in the zone and to carry out a counter-insurgency offensive. Amnesty Intemational subsequently received reports of extrajudicial executions in the region, sometimes after torture, and of "disappearances". Such abuses were attributed to military and police forces, as well as to civilian patrols under their supervision.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed in particular about the reported detention and killing of 16-year-old Nivardo Urbay by members of the Guardia Civil, Civil Guard, on 3 March in Simariba, Huanta, Department of Ayacucho, and the reported killing of two teachers of the mral school in Paras, Cangallo, Department of Ayacucho, and shopkeeper Estilo Ayala by the Civil Guard on 10 April. Although initial reports based on official sources attributed the killings to Shining Path guerrillas, intemational publicity surrounding the cases in September was followed by a press statement by the Interior Minister, Luis Percovich, declaring that the three had been killed on 3 April " in an armed clash with the police". However, reports received by Amnesty Intemational indicated that the teachers. Patrocinio Quiccha and Virgilio Huarancca, Ayala and a fourth man - initially wrongly identified as the teacher Milón Gutiérrez - had been detained on 10 April when their names were read out from a list at a police road-block, and had then been summarily executed by members of the Civil Guard.
Amnesty Intemational launched an appeal in July for an inquiry into the apparent extrajudicial execution of four members of the Pacheco family in the Andean community of Manzanayocc, Department of Huancavelica. Félix Pacheco, a local leader of tiie legal left-wing party Unión Democràtica del Pueblo, Democratic Popular Union, and the Anco District Peasant Federation, was reportedly shot in cold blood by members of the Civil Guard on 5 Febmary. His parents, Cirillo Pacheco, 73, and Hermenegilda, 68, were subsequently detained on 11 March, by men in civilian clothes and were executed at the Manzanayocc cemetery. His brother, Teodosio Pacheco, was also detained and Idlled on 12 March. In September Minister Percovich stated publicly that the police intelligence service had reported that Félix Pacheco had been shot in an armed clash, and that his parents and brother had been "brought to justice" and killed by the spontaneous action of the community of Manzanayocc after they had demanded that it support Shining Path. Amnesty Intemational subsequently received a copy of the 8 June court testimony of one of the alleged civilian participants in the killings of 11 and 12 March, Marcial Erazo Estroza. He was appointed Vice-President of the community of Manzanayocc by the
189
regional political-military commander 10 days after the killings and testified that he and others had been instructed by army and police personnel to detain local people named as suspected supporters of Shining Path, and that after taking one prisoner to the army garrison at Pampas, he had been told "that if they capture member of Shining Path, if possible they should just kill them, because these were negative elements and enemies of the Constitutional Government".
In August Amnesty Intemational sent a letter to President Femando Belaunde expressing the organization's concem about evidence of torture, "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions in the emergency zone. Calling for the President to take immediate steps to investigate reported grave abuses of human rights, the organization urged that particular attention be paid to over 100 reported " disappearances" and extrajudicial executions, outlined in an accompanying memorandum. The letter condemned the reported "execution" on 3 April of 67 people in the Lucanamarca district by Shining Path, but expressed concem about evidence that a joint army, police and marine operation had carried out mass extrajudicial executions in retaliation, including a military communique which reported the killing of 69 "terrorists" in the district between 4 and 10 April. The communique did not, however, identify any of the dead and Amnesty Intemational was unaware that any prisoners had been taken. Military communiques from the same area reported the killing on 21 May in Saccsamarca of 70 "terrorists", and 47 in neighbouring Huancasanccos on 22 May.
Although most such killings were attributed to units of the regular military and police services, information on others indicated the involvement of civilians organized into community patrols. These included the execution-style killing of eight Pemvian joumalists and their guide on 26 January in the remote community of Uchuraccay, Huanta
Amnesty Intemational's letter also expressed concem about detention procedures in force since January that involved the temporary or prolonged "disappearance" of suspects in the emergency zone after been detained in night raids by security men in plain clothes and often hooded. Such detentions were systematically denied to have occurred. Ten cases were outlined in Amnesty Intemational's letter.
No response was received to the letter and the document was made public on 22 September. The government then attacked the document as biased, maintaining that there was no basis to the reports of torture, "disappearance" and extrajudicial executioa National concem over reported human rights violations in the emergency zone grew, however, in late September when the Ayacucho district attomey, Dr Ricardo Pequeño, said in a televised interview that his office had acted on the cases of 160 reported "disappearances" and that the head of the
190
Political-Military Command had refused to respond to or assist in his inquiries. The presentation to the authorities of detailed dossiers on 78 cases of "disappeared" prisoners by the Roman Catholic Comisión Episcopal de Acción Social (CEAS), Episcopal Commission of Social Action, prompted a press statement by Prime Minister Fernando Schwalb declaring that the cases would be investigated. Similarly, the reported execution of 34 men, women and children in the Ayacucho hamlet of Soccos on 13 November, by members of the Civil Guard who had been insulted at an engagement party, was followed by a public commitment by the govemment to institute an inquiry into the incident
Although Pemvian public opinion became aware of the gravity of the human rights situation in the emergency zone in late 1983, and some measures to investigate reported violations were promised by national officials, extrajudicial executions and "disappearances" continued to occur in the zone which remained under military administration. A Committee for the Relatives of the Disappeared was organized in Ayacucho in late 1983, comprising the families of 192 people believed to have been detained and "disappeared". By the end of the year Amnesty Intemational held individual dossiers on 350 prisoners reported to have "disappeared" but believed the actual number of "disappearances" to be higher.
Amnesty Intemational received detailed reports that a stadium in the city of Huanta was being used as a secret detention centre, and unconfirmed reports that "disappeared" prisoners had been held at Civil Guard, army and marine posts at the private farm Fundo Luisiana (La Mar, Ayacucho), at Canaria (Victor Fajardo, Ayacucho), at Cangallo (Cangallo, Ayacucho), at Pampas (Tayacaja, Huancavelica) and in " safe-houses" in the city of Ayacucho.
Most of Pern's political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, were held without formal charge for investigation, or were among approximately 900 prisoners formally charged with the crime of terrorism, under Decree 046 of March 1981. The conclusions of the trials of much prisoners were subject to long delays sometimes lasting years.
Although prisoners apparently considered dangerous were immediately sent by armed forces aircraft to Lima to await trial, many community leaders, trade unionists and members of legal opposition parties charged with "terrorism" vemomQádepositado, "deposited", in provincial jails, their cases being frozen.
Among prisoners of conscience charged with "terrorism" were leaders of peasant organizations who described their situation as being "between two fires", in that they were under threat from both the Civil Guard and Shining Path guerrillas. The latter have attacked those who do not fully support them, summarily executing or publicly beating and
191
threatening uncooperative leaders of peasant communities and cooperatives and of the major national peasant organizations.
At a town meeting on 13 February members of the peasant community of Colcabamba, Huancavelica, voted to protest against arbitrary arrests and harassment by the Civil Guard, but also to reject demands by Shining Path guerrillas that the community destroy bridges and otherwise collaborate with them. On 14 February seven dead dogs hung from the bandstand in the Colcabamba plaza by Shining Path were found, together with the names of the seven principal leaders of the community written in blood with a warning that they would be executed for collaborating with the Civil Guard. Later the same day, however, two of the leaders threatened by guerrillas - Milton Taype Campos and José Palomino Garcia- were detained by the Civil Guard and accused of'terrorism". On 18 February the Colcabamba community president Juan Alonso Tunqui and the former president, Clemente Quispe, were detained on the same charge. Amnesty Intemational appealed for the release of all four as prisoners of conscience; all but Clemente Quispe were released in March and April 1983; Quispe remained in detention in Huancayo, his case being frozen while awaiting consideration by a court in Lima.
Alberto Altamirano, the principal leader of the peasant community of Cocairo in Apurimac Department, was also adopted by Amnesty Intemational as a prisoner of conscience. In Febmary the community had protested in an open letter to President Belaunde that guerrillas had slaughtered the community's 25 milk cows, beaten some members publicly with whips, and shaved the heads of two women whom they accused of collaborating with the authorities. The Civil Guard was in its tum said to have forced residents to assemble on 31 January and to have stripped two comuneros (peasants working communal land) naked They were then kicked, beaten and slashed with razor blades while being questioned about the guerrillas. Civil Guards were reported to have smeared the blood of the two prisoners (who were later released) on their own faces, apparently to terrify the assembled villagers.
About 180 prisoners charged under Decree 046, including 65 prisoners associated with the legal political parties oUzquierda Unida, United Left, and with traditional peasant and labour organizations, were held in two wings of Lurigancho prison in Lima Most Decree 046 prisoners known to Amnesty Intemational to be prisoners of conscience were transferred from El Frontón island prison, six miles from Lima's port of Callao, to Lurigancho prison in late 1982 and early 1983, except for 14 prisoners of the Cajamarca peasant community of Huayllabamba. About 100 women charged with terrorism were being held in the small women's prison of Callao.
192
Amnesty Intemational worked on behalf of 48 prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty Intemational continued to express concern about conditions in Pern's prisons. Severe overcrowding was the norm, with endemic hepatitis and tuberculosis. There were virtually no medical facilities, food supplies were contaminated and water supplies were extremely limited. About 400 prisoners charged with "terrorism" were being held at El Frontón, housed in a single block, the "Blue Pavilion", which was designed in 1981 for about 150 prisoners. On 10 May two prisoners. Angel Botonero Alvarado, aged 26, and Américo Solorzano Rojas, aged 23, were shot dead there by members of the Republican Guard's special counter-insurgency unit. Yapan Atik - a Quechua name meaning" all powerful" - during protests at the scarcity and poor quality of food, and lack of water. In Lurigancho prison, housing almost 6,000 prisoners, a severe lack of water was also reported as well as systematic beatings and the shooting of prisoners by Republican Guard warders. Political prisoners in all the detention centres in Lima have protested against severe restrictions imposed on visits by relatives, the arbitrary suspension of such visits, and the brutal treatment of visitors.
