Romania
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, most of them would-be emigrants. In several cases where Amnesty Intemational had details of trial proceedings relating to political charges, defendants were not accorded fair trials. The organization received allegations of the ill-treatment, following arrest, of people held on political charges. Prison conditions were described as harsh. Amnesty International was also concemed about the imposition of 12 death sentences.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports of people who had been harassed by the authorities or imprisoned for having applied to emigrate or for having attempted to leave the country without official authorization after this had been reftised or delayed. Hie Savu, aged 32, a mechanic from Bucharest, and Paul Barolescu were adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty Intemational after being sentenced to two and one-and-a-half years' imprisonment respectively by the municipal court of Bucharest Sector II in September on charges of "fraudulent crossing of the frontier". This is an offence punishable under Article 245 of tiie criminal code with up to three years' imprisonment They were reportedly arrested by Yugoslav border guards after they had dived into the Danube from a Romanian excursion boat and had swum to the Yugoslav bank. After serving a 25-day prison sentence in Yugoslavia they were reportedly retumed to Romania. Hie Savu was reportedly not allowed to see his lawyer or his parents during investigation proceedings; his lawyer was permitted to see his court dossier only two days before the trial. In a similar case, Alex Pop, a 26-year-old Pentecostalist from Timisoara, was sentenced to three years' imprisonment. He had been arrested and retumed to Romania by the Yugoslav authorities after crossing the Yugoslav border.
Amnesty Intemational appealed to the authorities for the release of Constantin Buica, an artist aged 27, and Vicentiu Boambes, a technician aged 26, who were arrested in Bucharest between 15 and 19 August after they had gone on hunger-strike in protest against the refusal of the authorities to grant them permission to leave Romania. They were allegedly beaten by police ^er being taken into custody.
Individuals continued to be imprisoned for the non-violent exercise of their human rights on charges of "parasitical" or"anarchic conduct" under decree 153/1970, which provides for summary trial without the right to legal defence and prescribes sentences of up to six months'
299
imprisonment or "corrective labour without deprivation of liberty". Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports of the harassment and arrest of religious believers, in most cases members of Protestant evangelical sects, and adopted four Baptists from Caransebes and Timisoara as prisoners of conscience. The four, Dinu Virgil Gadea, Comeliu Refec, Ovidiu Podborschi and Petru Marianec, were members of an unofficial "Organization Committee of the Young Baptists Union" who had sent a petition to Church representatives in March, asking them to press for the re-establishment of the Young Baptists Union which had been dissolved by the authorities in 1950. This petition reportedly stated that such an organization would enable young Baptists to take a united stand against various forms of state repression against religious believers, such as discrimination in education and employment, house-searches and interrogation by police, and in the case of believers found distributing religious literature, arrest, ill-treatment and imprisonment Shortly afterwards they and three other signatories of the petition were reportedly detained by the police for questioning and threatened with imprisonment if they persisted in their demands. On 10 August they were among a group of Baptists who were arrested after they had held a public demonstration in which they carried posters calling on the govemment to cease the harassment of believers and enter into a dialogue with them. They were released but rearrested on 15 August and tried and sentenced the same day under decree 153/1970 in Caransebes. They were sentenced to four months' imprisonment, increased on appeal to six months.
Amnesty Intemational continued to appeal to the Romanian authorities for the release of the prisoner of conscience Father Calciu-Dumitreasa, aged 57, a Romanian Orthodox priest, serving a 10-year sentence imposed in 1979 {seeAmnesty Intemational Report 1980). It also appealed for the release of two men from Radauti imprisoned under Article 166 of the criminal code, which makes " propaganda against the socialist state" an offence punishable by between five and 15 years' imprisonment. The two men were Petm Cazacu and Dragos Oloiem (seeAmnesty Intemational Report 1983). Petm Cazacu was sentenced to six years' imprisonment in Febmary 1982 (later reduced to three and a half yeare on appeal) for writing letters complaining about alleged cormption among local officials.
Amnesty Intemational sought details of charges brought against two ethnic Hungarians from Miercurea-Ciuc, Laszlo Buzas, an economist, and Emo Borbely, a high-school teacher, who were reportedly arrested in November 1982. Their arrest appeared to be connected with the arrest of at least 10 other ethnic Hungarians at that time, which followed the publication of a memorandum in an unofficial Hungarian-language joumal produced in Romania. The memorandum was addressed to
300
participants of the Madrid meeting of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe and claimed that the Hungarian minority was the object of an official policy of assimilatioa Although most of those arrested were released after a few days, Laszlo Buzas and Emo Borbely were said to have been sentenced to prison sentences of up to eight years by a military court in 1983.
Amnesty Intemational received allegations in 1983 that several ethnic Hungarians who had been arrested in November 1982 had been beaten while being held in police custody. Among these was Karoly Toth. Police allegedly beat his head against a wall and beat him over the back with tmncheons.
Prison conditions were reported to be harsh, with poor food, hygiene and medical care. Prisoners were allegedly sometimes denied the right to visits by relatives.
Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about the use of the death penalty. At least 12 death sentences were reported in the Romanian press, whereas Amnesty Intemational did not leam of any such reports the previous year. Although there were grounds for believing that death sentences had been imposed in 1982 which were not reported in the press, the available information suggested that in 1983 there was an increase both in the number of death sentences handed down and in the number of offences for which this penalty was imposed Six of the 12 reported death sentences were for murder, the remainder were for economic offences which did not involve loss of life; in April Ion Zangorescu was sentenced to death for stealing pork fi-om a meat factory; in November death sentences imposed on Aurelian Pircalabescu and Viorel Boceanu for " robbery to the detriment of public property with particularly serious consequences" were confirmed by the Supreme Court; and in December a military court in Tirgoviste sentenced Vasile Boiangiu, Teodor Manciulea and Ilea Flore a to death for undermining the national economy by stealing and selling meat "to the serious detriment of public property". Amnesty Intemational did not know if any death sentences were carried out but was concemed that the imposition of the death penalty for economic offences appeared to reflect a change in sentencing policy. In April 1979 a Romanian representative informed the Human Rights Committee that in the past 15 years the death penalty had not been applied in a single case involving an offence against state property, and that under new legislation being drafted at that time the death penalty would be applied exclusively as an exceptional measure and as an altemative in cases of homicide, treason, espionage and aerial piracy having particularly serious consequences.
