Comoros
The principal concerns of Amnesty International were the short-term detention or imprisonment of suspected political opponents of the government and the beating or ill-treatment of political detainees, some of whom may have been prisoners of conscience.
Between 8 and 12 January, 10 or more people including members of the Front démocratique. Democratic Front party, were detained on suspicion of having written or distributed a newspaper article accusing President Ahmed Abdallah of corruption. Amnesty International received reports that some or all of those detained may in fact have had no cormection with the article in question and that they may have been detained on account of their membership of an opposition political party. On 5 February, four of those arrested were acquitted by the Tribunal correctionnel de Moroni, Moroni Criminal Court, while the six remaining defendants were convicted of libel and insulting the Head of State and sentenced to up to four months' imprisonment. In response to an inquiry from Amnesty International, the Minister of Justice, Said Tourqui, wrote to the organization on 11 March confirming the names of the six people convicted. He stated that their trial had been public and that the defendants had been able to choose their own counsel. At an appeal hearing on 23 March the sentences passed on the six were increased to eight months' imprisonment of which five months were suspended. Amnesty Intemational was unable to ascertain the nature of the evidence presented either at the original trial or the appeal hearing. On 30 May, a new Minister of Justice, Mohammed Momnini, confirmed in a letter to the organization that the six were released between 11 and 13 April after serving three months in prison.
Between 20 and 50 people suspected of membership of the Front démocratique were reportedly arrested in mid-July apparentiy because some of them had applied to contest local elections on 24 July. They included at least two people who had previously been held in January: Abdou Mhoumadi - who was one of those convicted on 5 February -and Aboubacar Boïna, Some of the detainees were reportedly beaten by officers of the federal police prior to their release on 4 August. One woman was reportedly raped by police officers while in their custody. A former minister, Hadji Hassanali, was released on 10 August after being held for some three weeks at the headquarters of the gendarmerie in Moroni. It was not known whether his arrest was connected with the arrest of the suspected members of the Front démocratique in July.
37
President Abdallah reportedly announced a partial amnesty of both political and common law prisoners on 13 May, the fifth anniversary of his accession to the presidency. Amnesty International wrote to the authorities to seek further information about the precise terms of the amnesty but received no reply. However, unofficial reports indicated that no prisoners of conscience were being held immediately after the amnesty.
