Federal Republic of Germany
Amnesty Intemational's main concems were tlie imprisonment of conscientious objectors to military service and the prosecution of people in violation of their right to freedom of expression. The organization also called for an investigation into the procedures followed with respect to the case of a Turkish refugee who committed suicide during proceedings following an extradition request by the Turkish govemment
Amnesty Intemational appealed on behalf of six people convicted for their refusal on conscientious grounds to perform military service. Among them was Thomas Hansen ( see Amnesty Intemational Reports
1982,	1983), whose rejected application for conscientious objector status was based on moral and political considerations. He was sentenced to six months' imprisonment on 7 October 1981 for his refusal to obey, which was increased to 10 months without probation on appeal. He ¿d not begin serving his sentence until 21 April 1983, following the rejection of several appeals.
Amnesty Intemational also intervened cm behalf of Hubert Kappelhof, who was sentenced to eight months' imprisonment on 24 March 1982 on charges of "desertion" and "insubordination" after the rejection of his application for conscientious objector status on moral and political grounds. This sentence was reduced to six months at his appeal hearing on 20 December 1982 by the Landgericht {vQ^onaX court) of Münster. A further appeal was rejected by the Oberlandesgericht (regional supreme court) of Hamm on 30 March 1983 and he began serving his sentence on 17 Jime. Meanwhile, the Public Prosecutor drew up an indictment against Hubert KappeUiof on the same charges, because of his absence from the army between 18 March and 6 October 1982 (he was officially released from the army on 17 January 1983). His second trial took place on 28 June and he was sentenced to nine months' imprisonment, increased to one year without probation by the Landgericht of Münster on 12 and 20 October. Hubert Kappelhof appealed against this decision but the appeal had not been heard by the end of
1983.
Amnesty Intemational remained concemed about what it regards as an excessively wide interpretation of the offence of "making propaganda for a terrorist association" (Article 129a of the criminal code), which makes punishable the expression of certain views considered to be beneficial to such organizations, including views considered to "gain
280
sympathy" for them. According to a line of reasoning adopted by many prosecuting and judicial authorities, criminal culpability for this offence depends not so much on what is said, printed or otherwise disseminated, as on what those who (allegedly) expressed themselves supposedly sought to achieve. These authorities seek to establish their "real aims" by investigating the persons' political beliefs, their personal connections, and books, leaflets and letters in their possession.
Amnesty Intemational sent an observer to the trial, in September/ October 1983, of three people who with seven others had been charged under Article 129a with having sprayed slogans on motorway signs in support of the demand by prisoners of the avowedly violent Red Army Fraction (RAF) to be detained together in groups. The spraying had taken place in April 1981 at a time when a large number of prisoners from the RAF (including the husband of one of the accused) had been on hunger-strike in supi>ort of this demand ( see A mnesty Intemational Report 1982). The period of pre-trial detention lasted some 10 weeks and was served under the same maximum security conditions that the accused had expressed concem about Both the judge responsible for ordering pre-trial detention and the prosecutor in his indictment argued that although the slogans tried to create the impression that the accused were only motivated by humanitarian concem about prison conditions, their "real" aim had been to support a terrorist association, the RAF.
The trial court in Stuttgart rejected this reasoning on the basis that imder the rule of law the determining factor for criminal culpability under Article 129a could never be found solely in the aim of the perpetrator. Since the texts of the slogans did not indicate any aims other than an improvement in prison conditions, any such aims could not be attributed to the accused, who were therefore acquitted of having made "propaganda for a terrorist association" and only fined for damaging property. The prosecutor subsequently appealed to the highest Federal Court At the end of 198 3 this appeal was still pending.
On 31 August in a telex message to Minister of Justice Hans Engelhard, Amnesty Intemational called on the govemment to investigate the procedures followed in the case of Kemal Altun, a Turkish citizen who had sought asylum in the FRG and who had jumped to his death from a sixth-floor window in a West Berlin court building on 30 August On6 Jime 1983 Kemal Altun had been recognized as a refugee by the Bundesamt, Recognition Board, of Zimdorf which stated that he should be afforded asylum, a decision which was subsequentiy challenged by the Bundesbeanftragter, the Representative of the Minister of the Interior within the asylum proceedings.
Following Kemal Altun's application to the FRG Govemment for asylum, the Turkish authorities had asked for him to be extradited, alleging that he had hidden weapons used in the murder in 1980 of a
281
right-wing politician. Gun Sazak. They had dropped earlier charges that he had been directly involved in the murder.
Amnesty Intemational had previously appealed to the Govemment of the FRG not to authorize the extradition because Amnesty Intemational believed that Kemal Altun faced the serious possibility of being tortured were he to be retumed to Turkey.
