Switzerland
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the imprisonment of conscientious objectors and the lack of any altemative civilian service.
Altemative service was the subject of increasing public discussion pending a new referendum, scheduled for Febmary 1984. The referendum proposal, put forward by an independent group of citizens, advocates the establishment of an alternative period of civilian service one and a half times longer than the period of military service.
An affirmative referendum result would require a change to the Swiss Constitutioa Article 81 of the military penal code would continue to apply in the interim. Under Article 81 all conscientious objectors are sentenced to terms of imprisormient, even in cases where the military tribunal recognizes a "severe conflict of conscience" on religious or ethical grounds. If the objection to military service is considered to be primarily political, a longer term of imprisonment is imposed.
305
In 1983 Amnesty International worlced for the release of 10 conscientious objectors, who had been sentenced to terms of imprisonment of between five and 15 months. Some sentences were reduced on appeal. Under Article 36 of the military penal code all defendants were subsequently excluded from service in the army.
On 15 December 1982 Josef Egloff, an architect, was sentenced to 15 months' imprisonment by a military tribunal at Lucerne for refiising to perform military service. The court's decision was based primarily on what it considered to be serious inconsistencies in the defendant's attitude to non-violence and it statedthat Josef Egloff s refusal showed an attitude of "clear rebellion against the state". The sentence was reduced on appeal to eight months by a military court at Aarau on 8 March 1983. Josef Egloff maintained that the first court had misconstrued his arguments concerning non-violence; the appeal court found the length of the original sentence "inappropriate".
Olivier Maulini, a pacifist, was sentenced to eight months' imprisonment on 16 December 1982 for refusing to perform military service, and began his prison sentence at Bellechasse on 21 June 1983. He stated that he would have been willing to carry out an alternative civilian service had it existed, but objected on ethical grounds to military service.
Although the tribunal at Aigle accepted the moral basis of his beliefs it concluded that Olivier Maulini had not been able to prove that he was the victim of a serious conflict of conscience and his sentence was therefore not reduced.
Martin Karlen was given a relatively short sentence of five months' imprisonment by a military court at Berne, which found that"his way of life accords with his high ethical and religious convictions". Martin Karlen began his sentence on 28 February at the prison of Realta in Cazis.
In December 1983 Amnesty International was investigating the case of Simeon Jakob, a former primary school teacher who was sentenced to 10 months' imprisonment by a military court at Lucerne on 9 November 1983. At his trial he stated that he had become increasingly uneasy about the nature of the military training he had originally agreed to and that he had become a member of an agricultural collective, influenced by ideas of non-violence. At the end of the year Simeon Jakob was appealing to have his sentence reduced.
