India
Amnesty Intemational remained concemed about the use of preventive detention legislation to detain political opponents of the government, and widespread reports that people arrested had been tortured and ill-treated by the police. It continued to receive occasional reports of deaths in custody and of extrajudicial killings in staged "encounters" with the police. Judicial executions, which had been temporarily suspended, were resimied in October;
During Febmary 198 3, widespread communal violence occurred in the state of Assam where an estimated 3,500 people, mainly Bengali-speaking immigrants, were killed by Assamese (many of whom had
221
been campaigning for the repatriation of Bengali Muslims who had entered the state). Demands for political autonomy throughout the year in the Punjab were increasingly marked by violence attributed to Sikh extremist groups. Amnesty Intemational sought to ensure the observance of specific human rights by governments by addressing itself to official measures taken in these and other Indian states which had resulted in the detention of political opponents who had participated in apparently non-violent political activities under preventive detention legislation -especially the provisions of the 1980 National Security Act (NSA) and the 1981 Essential Services Maintenance Act and, in Jammu and Kashmir the Public Security Act (PSA).
The practice of preventive detention was reportedly widespread although no statistics for the number of detainees held were published during the year. Those detained included student leaders in Assam; trade union leaders in Bombay; tribal leaders in Bihar, reportedly for trying to organize meetings; political leaders in the Punjab for peacefully expressing their views in favour of greater autonomy in the province; and political workers in Bihar who were campaigning for minimum wages but were allegedly "Naxalite extremists". In Jammu and Kashmir several members of the Congress (I) Party and of Islamic fundamentalist parties were detained The NSA allows detention without trial for a maximum period of 12 months for the broadly defined purposes of "the security of ¿le state... the maintenance of public order ... or the maintenance of supplies essential to the community". On 11 March, the Union Home Minister is reported to have directed senior police "to fully utilize the National Security Act whUe dealing with activities which . .. threaten the security of the state".
On 28 December 1983 Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Prime Minister expressing concem that since its promulgation in 1980 the NSA had been used to detain hundreds of non-violent opponents of the government, despite earlier public assurances that ¿lere was no question of using it to "curb political dissent or trade union action". Amnesty Intemational cited tiie examples of two leaders of the Sikh autonomist party Akali Dal, Jagdev Singh Talwandi and Sukhjinder Singh, and of the newspaper editor, Bharpur Singh Balbir, who were detained imder the NSA's provisions after being arrested on 3 October 1983 "for their inflammatory speeches and writings", despite the fact that they had apparently only engaged in peaceful political activities. (Jagdev Singh Talwandi remained in detention at the end of 1983 whereas the latter two were released within two weeks of their arrest after their detention orders had been quashed by an advisory board set up under the act's provisions.)
Amnesty Intemational said that it recognized that most cases of preventive detention were short-term but that it also knew of a few cases
222
where the maximum period of 12 months' detention had been ordered The Supreme Court as well as High Courts of the various states occasionally ordered the release of detainees on the grounds that existing legal safeguards had not been observed. Kamlahar Prasad Chaturvedi from Madhya Pradesh was released by the Supreme Court on the grounds that the "detaining authority had taken into account stale and old incidents while issuing the order". Such court decisions confirmed that detention practices under the NSA did not always conform to the safeguards provided in Indian law and that cases of arbitrary arrest and detention continued to occur. They also underline the importance of independent judicial review of detention.
Amnesty Intemational also expressed concem about reports in the Indian press that the release of>lA:a//i>a/leaders by the State Advisory Board in November had caused the Home Ministry to consider removing the supervisory powers of the courts over the use of the Act The organization reiterated its appeal to the govemment to repeal all preventive detention laws in India and to introduce further safeguards against arbitrary arrest and detention by, for example, considering bringing into force Section 3 of the 44th Consitutional Amendment, already enacted by Parliament in 1978 but so far not implemented. Among other provisions, it would have restricted the maximum period of detention without obtaining the opinion of an advisory board from three to two months.
Amnesty Intemational also wrote to the Chief Minister of Jammu and Kashmir on 26 October to inquire about an estimated 50 people arrested in late August and early September following several violent incidents. Reports suggested that members of the Jamat-e-TuIba, (People's League) and the Muhaz-i-Azadi{Li\xTa.tion Front), had been indiscriminately arrested, without necessarily being connected with the violence. The reply from the Chief Minister on 20 December 1983 was not specific and failed to give details about individuals named by Amnesty Intemational, all of whom remained in detention without trial at the end of the year.
On 1 August the Supreme Court ordered the Bihar Govemment to release and pay a large sum of money in compensation to Rudal Sah, who had been illegally detained for 14 years after his acquittal by a sessions court in 1968. It also ordered ¿lat compensation be paid to Ramachandra of Baluji village, who was released on 3 December 1981 after being held for 30 years without trial. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that delays in being brought to trial were also experienced by political prisoners.
Amnesty Intemational remained concemed about widespread reports that criminal suspects and some political detainees had been torttired or ill-treated while being held in police stations. People held m
223
army custody or in prisons were also reportedly tortured and ill-treated. Members of the tribal or of the "Untouchable" communities were reportedly most at risk. Police in Bihar arrested five members of the Adivasi (tribal) community on 1 June who had reportedly complained about unemployment in the Singhbhum district They were reportedly tied to a police car, dragged along for 200 metres and subsequentiy himg upside down by the police in the village market square and flogged. The leader of the five, Vedar Nag Munga, is said to have died on the spot. Amnesty Intemational received reports of torture from many Indian states. The alleged methods included: beatings while hanging prisoners upside down; denying prisoners food and sleep; rolling heavy iron rods over prisoners' upper legs and knees; and the occasional use of electric shock torture in the states of Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan. On 20 November the Supreme Court ordered a judicial inquiry into reports that prisoners in a New Delhi jail were subjected to sexual assaults. However, such judicial inquiries are rarely held.
In its letter of 28 December 1983 Amnesty Intemational expressed concem that existing laws and machinery to deal with complaints about torture and ill-treatment by the police had been ineffective. The organization described in detail 10 cases of deaths in police custody reported during 1983, including the case of Krishna Kumar Rajan, who died in a Bombay hospital on 9 August 1983 within 24 hours of his release from police custody where he had been seriously beaten.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports that alleged members of the Communist Party of India (Marxist-Leninist) ("Naxal-ites") and criminal suspects were taken into custody and subsequentiy tortured and killed by the police. Official reports stated they were killed in "encoimters" witii law-enforcement officials. The Supreme Court heard writ petitions during 1983 concerning a number of political activists alleged to have been deliberately killed by the poUce in "encounters" in Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, and Uttar Pradesh. Amnesty Intemational raised with the govemment five such "encounters" which reportedly occurred between November 1980 and January 1982 in Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Maharashtra. The oi^anization received a reply in October summarizing the findings of an inquiry held into the death of one of the five, Peddi Shankar. According to the govemment he was killed during an exchange of fire between the police and a "Naxalite" group. However, Amnesty Intemational received a detailed report from a civil liberties group which found that no "encounter" had taken place and that Peddi Shankar had been shot in the back by a police guard In its 28 December letter to the Prime Minister, Ainnesty International welcomed the fact that an investigation had been held, but stated that only the publication of a full report detailing the nature of the inquiry held, its methods of investigation and
224
the evidence relied on in support of its conclusions, would allay the suspicion that Peddi Shankar had been shot dead in cold blood by the police. Amnesty International also reiterated its appeal for a full independent inquiry by a judicial authority into all cases of "encounter" killings where there was reason to believe the poUce had killed people after taking them into custody, and urged the government to consider establishing an independent judicial mechanism before which complaints of such extrajudicial killings could be considered fix)m the entire coimtry. Amnesty International also expressed concern that laws which conferred broadly defined powers to shoot to kill appeared to facilitate the illegal and arbitrary killing of political opponents in a number of Indian states. The organization referred to: the Disturbed Areas Act of Andhra Pradesh; the Armed Forces (Assam and Manipur) Special Powers Act; the Punjab Disturbed Areas Act; the Chandigarh Disturbed Areas Act; and the Armed Forces (Punjab and Chandigarh) Special Powers Act which were enacted following the imprasition of presidential rule in Punjab on 6 October 1983 and a declaration on 7 October 1983 that Punjab and Chandigarh were "disturbed areas".
Amnesty International continued to be concemed about the reported execution of people sentenced to death, although some steps towards abolition of the death penalty were taken. On 7 April the Supreme Court declared unconstitutional Section 303 of the Indian penal code which prescribed a mandatory death sentence for people serving sentences of life imprisonment for murder. The Supreme Court commuted several death penalties in 1983, in one case on the grounds that a very lengthy delay in execution was an important reason for commuting tiie death sentence. Some individuals sentenced to death have been awaiting execution for periods of nine to 11 years. As of 22 April 1983, 21 petitions for mercy were pending with the President, which the Home Ministry stated would be dealt with shortiy.
During May and June the Supreme Court stayed the execution of a number of prisoners who had challenged hanging as a cruel and unconstitutional punishment However, on 23 September the Supreme Court upheld hanging as constitutional and on 9 October executions were resumed, with at least two executions subsequenUy taking place. Amnesty International asked the government to take steps towards the abolition of the death penalty and to commute the sentences of all prisoners under sentence of death to hfe imprisonment.
225
