China
Amnesty Intemational's main concerns were the large number of executions carried out during a campaign against crime; the adoption of legislation which removed vital safeguards in some capital cases; the continued imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and new arrests of people for peacefully exercising their human rights; and trials of political prisoners that fell short of internationally-accepted standards.
216
On 28 February 1983, Amnesty Intemational sent a memorandum to the Govemment of the People's Republic of China describing its concerns in the coimtry. It invited comments from the govemment but received no response. Drawing attention to some aspects of Chinese law and practice which permit the imprisorunent of prisoners of conscience and other violations of fundamental human rights, Amnesty Intemational recommended:
•	the release of all prisoners of conscience;
•	the revision of the provisions of the criminal law which permit the imprisorunent of people solely for the peaceful exercise of fundamental
ri^its;
•	repeal of the provisions of the 1957 Decision of the State Council on the Question of Rehabilitation Through Labour under which people having dissenting views can be detained without charge or trial and subjected to compulsory labour for the purposes of "re-education-through-labour";
•	that consideration be given to modifying the provisions of Article 92(2) of the Law of Criminal Procedure, to establish safeguards against unlimited detention without trial, and specific safeguards against arbitrary detention;
•	that the govemment consider adopting measures so that any trial procedures relating to political prisoners conform to intemationally established norms, including the right to public hearings and the right to be presumed innocent imtil proved guilty according to law; and that detailed records of the trial of any political prisoner be published;
•	the introduction of procedures to ensure the effective protection of prisoners against cmel, inhuman or degrading treatment, such as the right of relatives and legal counsel to visit and communicate freely with a detainee shortly after arrest and regularly thereafter;
•	that steps towards the abolition of the death penalty be taken, such as reducing the number of offences punishable by the death penalty.
A major concem in 1983 was the increased use of the death penalty. Mass executions were carried out during a nationwide campaign against crime launched in August Arrmesty Intemational recorded over 600 executions in some 20 cities and counties between August and October, when the rate of executions was the highest since the early 1970s.
However, the organization believed that the total number of executions carried out throughout the country was far higher. Foreign correspondents in Beijing estimated the total number at over 5,000. Although the rate of executions appeared to be lower in November and
217
December, many continued to be carried out Among the cases reported were those of a 27-year-old woman executed in Shaanxi province after being convicted of stealing large quantities of petrol and selling it on the black market, and a 20-year-old man executed in Guangzhou after being convicted of kicking several women in the streets.
Many were executed in groups of 15 to 40, being shot together in the same place aiter being paraded in public in the streets or during mass rallies. Most were reportedly imemployed people of between 18 and 40. While the majority appeared to have been convicted of murder, rape or robbery, people were also executed for a wide range of other offences, including the^ spying, organizing a secret society, corruption, embezzlement, molesting women or gang fighting.
On 28 October 1983, Amnesty Intemational wrote to President Li Xiannian, calling for a halt to the wave of executions and expressing concem about the continuous increase in the use of the death penalty in the previous few years. The organization noted with particular concem various measures adopted on 2 September 1983 by the National People's Congress (NPC) Standing Committee to increase the number of offences pimishable by the death penalty and to accelerate the procedures for trial, appeal and execution in some capital cases. One such measure introduced the death penalty for seven new categories of offence, bringing to 29 the total number of crimes for which Chinese citizens can be executed under the criminal law. Another measure removed vital safeguards in order to speed up the procedures for trial and appeal in capital cases involving homicide, rape, robbery, explosions and"other activities that seriously threaten public security". Defendants could now be brought to trial without being given a copy of the indictment in advance, and the time limit for appeals after sentencing was reduced from 10 to three days. In order to speed up the procedure for execution, it also became possible for provincial high courts to approve dealii sentences without referring them to the Supreme People's Court (SPC). Following the adoption of these measures, a man named Chen Guangsen was reportedly executed in Guangzhou on 12 September 1983 only eight days after the alleged offence.
Amnesty Intemational said that the speed with which trials and executions were being carried out under this legislation did not allow for the procedural safeguards against the death penalty to which the United Nations General Assembly had drawn attention several times and pointed out that the increased use of the death penalty contradicted the aim of rehabilitation acknowledged in Chinese law.
Amnesty International's information conceming prisoners of conscience often remained incomplete since no official information on prisoners was published and the authorities usually did not reply to Amnesty International's inquiries. The organization believed that the
218
prisoners of conscience of whom it was aware represented only a fraction of the total number of those detained.
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the release of Wei Jingsheng, an electrician and former editor of an unofficial journal who was reported to have been held in solitary confinement at Beijing Prison No. 1 since 1979. In 1983 it was reported that he was being allowed out of his cell for exercise only once a month and was still being prevented from meeting other prisoners, working or receiving visits from his family. Amnesty International was particularly concerned about the length of time he had spent in solitary confinement and its effect on his health.
Other prisoners of conscience of concern to Amnesty International included the 83-year-old former Bishop of Shanghai, Gong Pinmei, who had been imprisoned in Shanghai for nearly 30 years, and at least 10 other elderly Roman Catholic priests from Shanghai who were arrested for the second time in 1981. Most were in their 60s or 70s and had previously served lengthy terms of imprisonment Four of them were reportedly tried in early 1983. Father Vincent Zhu Hongsheng, aged 68, and Father Joseph Chen Yuntang, aged 75, were tried in mid-March and sentenced to 15 years' and 11 years' imprisonment respectively for "counter-revolutionary" offences. No official information about the trial was released but information received by Amnesty International indicated that the trial was not held openly. About 100 people were officially invited to attend, but not relatives of the defendants. According to sources in Shanghai, the charges against the priests referred only to their contacts with foreigners, their continued allegiance to the Vatican and their independent religious activities.
Two other priests. Father Stanislaus Shen Baishun and Father Stephen Chen Caijun, were reportedly tried on similar charges in February or early March 1983. Father Shen Baishun, aged 79, was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment and Father Chen Caijun, aged 65, to two and a half years' imprisonment Again, no details of the trial were officially released. Father Shen Baishun was reportedly transferred to a prison hospital in Shanghai after the trial for treatment for a heart condition. Another Catholic priest. Father Francis Zhu Shude, aged 69, was tried in Chao Xian, Anhui province, sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment with a further three years' deprivation of civil rights on 10 June 1983 and subsequently died in detention in December of natural causes.
In December 1983 foreign press reports alleged that 90 religious leaders had been arrested throughout China in 1983, but they gave no details about the people concerned. However, the Bishop of Baoding, Monsignor Fan Xueyan, aged 76, and his Vicar-General, Monsignor Huo Binzhang, aged 70, were later reported to have been tried on
219
charges of "maintaining links with the Vatican" and each sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment Both had reportedly been under house arrest for over a year before being taken into custody and tried; and both had been imprisoned previously.
Numerous arrests were carried out during the campaign against crime launched in August 1983 and a simultaneous movement of "rectification" within the Chinese Communist Party aimed at"weeding out" people officially considered to be extremists from either the left or right Whereas most of those arrested were believed to have been charged with ordinary criminal offences, others appeared to have been detained for purely political reasons. Yan Heitou, a former official from Hebei province, was reportedly rearrested in November 1983 after his release from prison for making contact with his former "leftist comrades". According to the Hebei Daily, cited by Agence France-Presse in Beijing on 18 December 198 3, he was sent to prison for seven years in 1976 for taking part in the "Gang of Four's" attempt to seize power. His release sparked off celebrations, the Hebei Daily said, and within a month dozens of his former comrades came to see him and expressed disenchantment with the current situation. In another case, Xu Guangcheng, a former official in a Shanghai corporation, was reportedly arrested in autumn 1983 for organizing sit-in protests against his expulsion in 1982 from the Chinese Communist Party, following the discovery of a diary in which he had written "reactionary words and sentences to vent his dissatisfaction with the party organization and to attempt to reverse the verdict and stage a comeback".
Anmesty Intemational was also concemed about the arrest of Tibetans reportedly detained since August 1983 for meeting foreign journalists or Tibetan exiles visiting their homeland. One of them, Kalsang Tsering, a monk aged 20, had been interviewed by joumalists at Drepung Monastery at the beginning of August 1983 and was reportedly arrested on 26 August 1983. Amnesty Intemational continued to investigate the cases of other Tibetans reported to have been arrested in the previous three years for political or religious reasons in the Autonomous Region of Tibet
The series of political trials which had started in 1982 continued during 1983. Most of the trials reported by the Chinese news media concemed people described as "followers" of the "Gang of Four" or of Lin Biao - the former Defence Minister who disappeared in 1971 after an alleged attempted coup. In June 1983, the SPC stated in its report to the NPC that "the historical task of trying the Jiang Qing and Lin Biao cliques had been fulfilled". With respect to many of the cases reported in 1983, articles published in the official Chinese press after the arrest of the defendants several years previously clearly indicated that they were presumed guilty before their trials. Although the official press did not
220
usually publish details of trial procedures it often detailed the accusations brought against the defendants. Some were accused of having used violence, but others appeared to have been charged with political offences not involving the use of violence.
Some of those tried during the year had been adopted by Amnesty Intemational as prisoners of conscience. In one case, Liu Shanqing, a resident of Hong Kong, was tried m Guangzhou on 7 Febmary 1983, and sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment plus three years' deprivation of political rights for "counter-revolutionary" offences. Amnesty Intemational believed that Liu Shanqing was detained for exercising his right to freedom of opinion and associatioa He was arrested in December 1981 in Guangzhou, a few days after leaving Hong Kong for the PRC in order to see the families of two imprisoned dissidents. Despite numerous inquiries, his family and friends in Hong Kong were not informed in advance of his trial. However, in a letter dated 10 August 1983 to the Students' Union of the Chinese University of Hong Kong, which had campaigned for Liu's release, the Guangzhou Intermediate People's Court claimed that Liu Shanqing had been brought to a public trial, and gave details of the verdict
Amnesty Intemational learned of the release of several prisoners of conscience dming the year. They included Ren Wanding, one of the founders of a group called the "Chinese Himian Rights Alliance", who had been detained without trial in Beijing since April 1979, and Chen Lu, a 37-year-old technician and member of the same group, who was also arrested in 1979.
