Malaysia
Amnesty International's main concerns remained the continued detention without trial oí over200 political detainees under the Internal Security Act (ISA) 1960, and the imposition and carrying out of the death penalty. According to official figures, the releases of political detainees which started in 1981 appear to have continued in early 1983. However, little information reached Amnesty Intemational about individual releases during 1983 and most of the releases it heard of concemed detainees who had been freed in 1982.
Amnesty Intemational continued corresponding with the govemment regarding a proposed visit of an Amnesty Intemational delegation to Malaysia to discuss the organization's concerns with the authorities. However, the visit was cancelled after Amnesty Intemational had been asked on several occasions by the govemment to postpone it and had then been informed that the govemment officials it had requested to see would not be available to meet the delegation.
In mid-March 1983, the Deputy Minister of Home Affairs stated in the Malaysian Parliament that tiiere were still 266 ISA detainees. The ISA allows for the detention without charge or trial for renewable two-year periods of people whom the govemment considers a threat to national security. He also said that the cases of all the remaining detainees "would be reviewed by the Advisory Board from time to time". The Advisory Board, which is responsible to the Prime Minister's office, makes periodic reviews of detainees' cases and presents recommendations to the Minister of Home Affairs for decision on release or continued detention. The reviews, however, are based mainly on the results of interrogations carried out by Special Branch officers to assess the detainees' behaviour and in particular whether they admit to the accusations against them. In several cases known to Amnesty Intemational, detainees were transferred from detention camps to undisclosed police lock-ups or "rehabilitation" centres to be subjected to such interrogations. Detainees in "rehabilitation" centres were reportedly held in solitary confinement and were usually denied exercise or books. Those held for long periods were occasionally taken blindfold to police stations for visits by relatives. The length of time spent in the centres appeared to vary from several days to several weeks or months. Some were subsequently released—often without ejqilanation —while others were sent back to their detention camps. Among detainees reported to have been transferred to "rehabilitation" centres was Ng Teo Huan, a former shopkeeper aged 36 who had been detained
242
without trial since 1972. He was reported in early 1983 to have been transferred from Batu Gajah detention camp to an unknown "rehabilitation" centre. Another detainee, Wong Yong Huat, was reported to have been sent to police interrogation centres three times in 1982 and early 1983 before being transferred to the Taiping detention camp in Perak.
Amnesty International continued to work on behalf of over 20 adopted prisoners of conscience or people whose cases were being investigated. During the year, it learned of the release of several of these detainees. Among those reported to be stiU detained in 1983 was Lim Mai Kim, a factory worker from Malacca who was arrested in Singapore in 1974 and reportedly sent to Malaysia in 1975 where she was held without trial under the ISA in Taiping detention camp. Another ISA detainee, Chin Ah Kau, was officially reported to be still detained because of "his insistence to pursue" his past "communist activities". Such official acknowledgement and justification of the continued detention of a detainee was rare. The authorities did not usually answer Amnesty International's inquiries about individual cases and the organization's information about prisoners remained incomplete. Amnesty International was particularly concerned about the cases of several detainees whose fate remained unknown despite numerous inquiries to the authorities. They included two women: Chan Wai Sin, who was reported to have been continuously held in police stations since her arrest in 1979 and was last heard of in 1982 when she was transferred to a "rehabilitation" centre; and Liew Yet Hua, a widow aged over 60 who was arrested in 1977, detained in the Taiping detention camp and was last reported to be in poor health, suffering from rheumatism and anaemia. Amnesty International's continued inquiries about her detention had been unanswered since 1979.
All political detainees held in the Batu Gajah detention camp, one of the two such camps used since the 1960s for political detainees, were reportedly transferred elsewhere in February or March 1983. The camp remained open for other categories of prisoner. Those transferred were sent either to the Taiping detention camp or to police lock-ups and "rehabilitation" centres throughout the country. As of April 1983, some 160 political detainees were reported to be held in the Taiping camp and over 100 were believed to be detained in unspecified locations, in police lock-ups or "rehabilitation" centres. Amnesty International was concerned about the large numbers detained in such undisclosed places of detention, apparently for interrogation purposes. Conditions in theTaiping camp were reported to be poor, with detainees being confined to extremely hot and poorly ventilated cells for about 20 hours a day.
243
Amnesty Intemational leamed in 1983 of the release of several prisoners of conscience, most of whom had been freed during the second half of 1982. They included Ng Wei Siong, a former secretary of the Labour Party and town councillor who had been detained since 1967. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that most released detainees were served with restriction orders prohibiting them from political or trade union activities, from travelling without permission and sometimes from choosing their area of residence. The restrictions usually also included a curfew and an obligation to report regularly to the local police station. In some cases the restrictions were increased several months after release.
The use of the death penalty remained a major concem in 1983. Fourteen people were executed in 1983 and 19 were sentenced to death on various charges. Most of those executed had been convicted of the illegal possession of firearms under the ISA, Section 59 of which provides a mandatory death penalty for this offence. According to infomiation available to Ainnesty Intemational, 39 people were executed for offences imder the ISA between 1980 and December 1983,10 of them in 1983. In late 1983 the cases of 3 2 people sentenced to death under the ISA were still pending. People charged under the ISA were usually tried under special trial procedures known as the Essential (Security Cases) (Amendment) Regulations, which restrict the rights of defendants. One of those executed for illegal possession of firearms, Lim Kwang Yeow, had been arrested in 1977 and was detained for two years before being charged under the ISA reportedly for possessing one bullet and two bullet cases.
Twenty-four of the people executed in Malaysia between 1975 and December 1983 had been convicted of dmg offences. One of them was executed in 1983 and six others were sentenced to death on such charges during the year. In mid-April 1983, the Malaysian Parliament adopted amendments to the Dangerous Dmgs Act, 1952, making the death penalty mandatory for possession of a certain quantity of dmgs and lowering the amount for which the death penalty can be imposed
Three of those executed in 1983 were convicted of murder and 11 others were sentenced to death on such charges. They included a former government minister and member of the Malaysian Parliament, Datuk Mokhtar Hashim, who was convicted of murdering a "political rival" and sentenced to death in March 1983. His appeal to the Federal Court was rejected on 23 July 1983 but he later appealed for clemency to the King. His case was still pending in December 1983.
244
