Libya
Amnesty Intemational remained concerned about the continued imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, many of whom were serving life sentences and about the retrial of prisoners of conscience on the same charges on which they had originally been tried. The cases of those retried were heard before a revolutionary court which lacked basic legal safeguards and which handed down death sentences in some of the cases. Other concems were the continued detention of political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, who continued to be held after having been acquitted of charges against them or having completed their sentences; and the prolonged detention without charge of political suspects. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about repeated allegations of torture. A number of judicial executions for allegedly political crimes were
351
carried out during the year, and calls for the "physical liquidation of enemies of the revolution" were renewed by the General People's Congress at its annual meeting on 17 February 1983.
It was difficult for Amnesty Intemational to determine the exact number of prisoners of conscience being held but information reaching the organization indicated that among the hundreds of people arrested arbitrarily since 1980 were many who had been imprisoned because of their non-violent political or religious beliefs or ethnic origin, or simply because of their relationship with people who were active political opponents oi\hego\QVT)mQn\.{%QQAmnesty International Report 1980, 1981, 1982, 1983). In most cases it was impossible to establish the specific basis for detention: either the person was still held without charge, or the charges were phrased in such general terms that Amnesty International was unable to ascertain whether they included a specific offence; or the lack of fair trial by the revolutionary court made the validity and basis of convictions questionable.
Amnesty Intemational continued to appeal for the release of 85 prisoners of conscience, nine of whom were retried by a revolutionary court during 1983 for the same offence as at their original trial and given fresh sentences, in some cases including the death penalty.
Four of those retried belong to a group of prisoners of conscience who have been in prison since they were originally arrested in April 1973 for alleged membership of illegal political parties (the Islamic Liberation Party, the Marxist Party, and the Muslim Brotherhood). They were brought to trial in June 1974 and in Febmary 1977 and were given sentences in the latter trial ranging from four to 15 years' imprisonment. However the Revolutionary Command Council decreed that the sentences should be amended to life imprisonment or death. Amnesty Intemational received reports that the four, Hassan Ahmad A1 Kurdi, Abdullah Bilgasim A1 Mislati, Salih Ali A1 Zarouq Nawal and Muhammad Muhadhab Haffaf, each serving a term of life imprisonment, were retried in April 1983 before the revolutionary court and sentenced to death. Muhammad Muhadhab Haffaf was reportedly hanged in public in April 1983 (see below).
Another retrial of concem to Amnesty Intemational involved 25 prisoners of conscience, all alleged former members of the pro-Iraqi wing of the Ba'ath Party who were originally arrested in Febmary-March 1980 and were tried and acquitted in early 1982 {sqq Amnesty Intemational Report1983). However, they remained in prison foUowing an administrative decree ordering their continued detention. During the first two weeks in July 1983 all 25 defendants were retried by the revolutionary court headed by Abdul Salam A1 Zadma, a captain in the special security branch and a member of the revolutionary committees. Three of the defendants were sentenced to death: Farid Ashraf, a lawyer
352
aged 50, Muhammad Hillal, a shopkeeper in his fifties, and Mustapha Al Nawari, a lawyer in his thirties. Two others were sentenced to eight years' imprisonment Dr Abdulhamid Albabour, a veterinary surgeon, and Mahmoud Omar Abu Obeid, a govemment employee in his mid-forties. The other 20 defendants were acquitted and released. On I August 1983 Amnesty Intemational appealed to the authorities not to carry out the death sentences and to release all five prisoners.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed that normal trial procedures as laid down in the Penal Code do not apply in the revolutionary courts established according to principles of "revolutionary legitimacy" at the revolutionary committees' meeting in Febmary 1980 {sqq Amnesty Intemational Report 1983). Trials in these courts are summary and held in camera. The tribunals consist of members of the revolutionary commitees, there is no right of defence and no right of appeal to a higher court.
In December 1983 Amnesty Intemational expressed its concems to the authorities about the continued detention of nine prisoners of conscience, seven of whom were acquitted in 1980 when they were retried for the same offence for which they had previously been tried by a criminal court in 1976. They were: al-Mehdi Muhammad al-'Adl, Muhammad Muhammad al-'Adl, Oreibi 'Amr Youssef, Ibrahim Mahmoud al-Sida'iy, Abdullah AH al-Khouja, Mansour Abdul Salam al-Majdoub, Muhammad al Makki al-Imam, Salih Inna's Youssef and Muhammad Ali al-Shridi. All nine had originally been arrested with 12 others in 1975 on charges of forming a secret political organization "with principles opposed to those of the 1969 Fateh revolution".
Sixteen other political prisoners were still being detained after they had been acquitted at their trial before the criminal court in Tripoli in Febmary 1983, reportedly on charges of forming a political organization which called for Berber mle in Libya, The 16 belonged to a group of 40 people who were originally arrested in May 1980 and tried in Febmary 1981: these 16 were reportedly acquitted, three others received death sentences and the rest were given sentences ranging ft-om 10 years' to life imprisonment No details of the exact charges against them or their places of detention were known to Amnesty Intemational.
During the year Amnesty Intemational leamed that at least 23 poUtical prisoners were still in prison after having completed sentences of seven to 13 years' imprisonment which had been handed down in 1969 and 1970 on charges of plotting against the govemment They included Muftah Al Sharif, Muhammad Al Shairi, Abdel Matloub Azouz, Khalil Ja'afar, Attiah Al Tarwahi and Abdul Azim Kabbassa. Amnesty Intemational was not aware of any judicial procedure which allowed the continued detention of prisoners whose sentences had expired
353
Frequent and consistent allegations of torture continued to be received by Amnesty Intemational. Torture was reportedly used most frequently to obtain confessions and information about "the enemies of the revolution" and their activities. Former prisoners interviewed by the organization said that they had been whipped while chained to the wall, burnt with cigarettes and threatened with execution. Other techniques described included whipping and sustained beatings on the soles of the feet, heavy blows to the ears and electric shocks, particularly to the head and genitals. Prisoners who had not themselves been tortured said they had frequently heard the screams of people being tortured and said that they were sometimes forced to watch fellow prisoners being tortured. The main torture centre under the jurisdiction of the revolutionary committees was allegedly in A1 Hadba A1 Khadra' in Tripoli.
During the year Amnesty Intemational had access to the findings of the medical examination of one of the two people tortured on 13 November 1982 by members of the revolutionary committees at the residence of the Secretary General of the Libyan People's Bureau in Bonn, Federal Republic of Germany (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1983). The findings showed that the clinical evidence was consistent with the torture allegations. Two Libyans residing in Bonn, Dr Mustapha Zaidi and Abdullah Yahia were prosecuted and brought to trial on charges of torturing fellow Libyans. However, the trial was stopped afler the West German authorities decided to exchange the accused for eight West German nationals who had been detained in Libya in April. On 15 May the two accused Libyans were released and retumed to Libya.
Amnesty Intemational received reports that five political prisoners were executed in Libya in April 1983 and that 10 others were under sentence of death, all for alleged membership of illegal political organizations. Muhammad Muhadhab Haffaf(see above), was hanged in public at A1 Fateh University in Tripoh on 7 April 1983. Four Palestinian teachers were also publicly executed on the same day at Ajdabia secondary school on charges of belonging to the Islamic Liberation Party. On 19 April Amnesty Intemational sent a cable to Colonel Mu'ammar Gaddafi and to Muhammad A1 Zarouq Rajab, Secretary of the General Secretariat of the General People's Congress, expressing concem about these reported executions and seeking confirmation that they had taken place but received no reply.
On 11 March 1983 Amnesty Intemational wamed that the lives of Libyans Uving abroad were again under threat following a decision on 17 Febmary 1983 by the General People's Congress to hunt down and liquidate all Libyans considered hostile to the revolution:" Every citizen is responsible for the liquidation of the enemies of the revolutioa" This decision came after repeated urgings by Colonel Mu' ammar Gadaffi in
354
previous months that the General People's Congress should approve the elimination of "enemies abroad".
On 23 March Amnesty Intemational launched a worldwide campaign to expose political killings by governments. In its 131 page report. Political Killings by Governments, Amnesty Intemational said that since the Febmary 1980 call for the "liquidation of enemies of the revolution abroad" at least 14 Libyan citizens had been killed or wounded in assassination attempts outside Libya
In December 1983 the Libyan People's Bureau in Bmssels described the official policy relating to the killings of Libyans abroad as lawful action. In a written reply to Amnesty Intemational the People's Bureau said that "many countries liquidate their political enemies secretly, only the Jamahiriya publicly announces this policy, because we are entitled to do so and all the laws support us."
