Canada
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about allegations that prisoners convicted of common crimes had been subjected to torture or ill-treatment after a prison riot
An Amnesty Intemational mission visited Canada in April 1983 to investigate allegations that prisoners in Archambault Prison, Quebec, had been ill-treated following a riot in the prison in July 1982. The riot, in which three prison guards and two prisoners died, was reportedly triggered off by an abortive escape attempt by two prisoners who had taken several guards hostage.
The Canadian authorities granted Amnesty Intemational access to prison employees, prisoners and records. The mission received swom statements about torture and ill-treatment from 17 prisoners and interviewed six of them. They also interviewed prisoners' families, lawyers and prison officials.
The most serious allegations concemed the treatment of prisoners placed in the prison's segregation imit and included reports of beatings, the spraying of tear-gas directly into prisoners' mouths, keeping prisoners naked in their cells for periods varying from a few days to three weeks; depriving inmates of sleep and adulterating their food. Three prisoners were said to have been "choked" by having wet towels wrapped tightly around their heads.
134
In June Amnesty Intemational submitted a memorandum to the Canadian Government calling for a ftill, impartial and independent inquiry into the allegations and urging that the results of such an inquiry be made public. The mission found that there existed at least "reasonable ground to believe" that torture or other cmel, inhuman or degrading treatment had occurred in the prison during the relevant period, and that the government had an intemational obligation under the terms of the United Nations Declaration on Torture to undertake such an inquiry.
In August the government announced that it had asked the Correctional Investigator of Canada to conduct an inquiry into the allegations contained in Amnesty Intemational's memorandum. In November the government informed Amnesty Intemational that the Correctional Investigator was still working on his report. The results of the inquiry were not known by the end of the year.
During the mission one of Amnesty International's delegates also attended a court hearing, on 12 April, in the case of Jean Claude Bemheim, Director of the Office des droits des detenii(e)s (ODD), Office of Prisoners' Rights, on a charge of contempt of court The charge, which carried a sentence of up to 5 years' imprisonment on conviction, arose from a press conference given by the ODD in January to publicize a report on tiie allegations of ill-treatment at Archambault. At the time of the press conference 10 prisoners at Archambault were about to stand trial on charges of murdering the prison guards killed during the riot. The indictment against Jean Claude Bemheim alleged that comments he had made at the press conference about the police investigation into the killings and the treatment of the accused inmates could be capable of illegally influencing the jury at this trial. Canadian Television, Radio Canada and four newspapers who reported the press conference were also charged with contempt of court A hearing on the merits of the case was adjourned. An Amnesty Intemational observer attended a further hearing in May but this was also adjoumed. The proceedings were dropped before Amnesty Intemation^ was able to assess whether the charges constituted a violation of the right to freedom of expression under intemational law and whether, if imprisoned, the defendant could therefore be considered to be a prisoner of conscience.
135
