Malawi
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the detention without trial of suspected political opponents of the government, including some prisoners of conscience, and about alleged extrajudicial executions. The organization was also concemed about the trial of Orton Chirwa, a leading political opponent of the government, and his wife. Vera Chirwa, before tiie Traditional Court They were sentenced to death and were under threat of execution at the end of the year.
Three cabinet ministers and a member of parliament were reported by the authorities in May to have died in a car accident Unofficial sources, however, claimed that the four men were victims of political killings carried out by agents of the government
Two months earlier, the Malawi authorities had publicly denied responsibility for the death of Dr Attati Mpakati, the leader of the Socialist League of Malawi (LESOMA), who was murdered in Harare, Zimbabwe. The LESOMA leader had earlier been severely injured by a letter-bomb in February 1979 when he was resident in Mozambique, and on that occasion had accused the Malawi authorities of sending the bomb.
In Febmary, six students at Chancellor College, one of the constituent colleges of the University of Malawi, were arrested at the campus apparently because they were suspected of wanting to form a new political party in opposition to the Malawi Congress Party (MCP), the only political party permitted by the constitutioa Two were released after about two weeks and apparently sent to their home villages but four others - Zangaphe Chizeze, Edge Kanyongolo, Mack Willie Killion, and Tubby Chibwana - remained in detention without trial and were
65
still being held at the end of the year. All four were adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International, and the oi^anization appealed for their release in April and again in December if they were not to face criminal charges. There was no official response to ¿lese appeals. At first, the students were held at Lilongwe Prison but Amnesty International later learned that they had been moved to Mikuyu detention centre, northeast of Zomba, where in the past many uncharged political detainees had been held incommunicado for several years.
The authorities also refused to disclose any information about the legal status or whereabouts of another adopted prisoner of conscience, Fumbani Chirwa. He was arrested together with his parents, Orton and Vera Chirwa, in December 1981, but unlike them was not charged or brought to trial. He was rumoured to be detained incommunicado at Zomba Prison but repeated inquiries about him by Amnesty International and others elicited no response from the authorities. In November, Amnesty International made concerted new appeals to the government to clarify his situation after receiving unconfirmed reports that he had died in custody, but again without response.
At the end of the year. Amnesty International was investigating several other reported political detentions. Those held reportedly included a journalist and a former cabinet minister but the organization was unable to estimate the total number of detainees.
Amnesty Intemational also continued to press for the release of Sofiliano Faindi Phiri, a former nominated member of parliament He was adopted as a prisoner of conscience after being imprisoned for five years in March 1981 for expressing views about development in the Chikwawa area which were interpreted to be insulting to Life-President Kamuzu Banda,
The trial of Orton and Vera Chirwa on charges of treason, which began in July 1982, continued in the Southern Region Traditional Court at Soche until February. Judgement was then reserved until 5 May, when the panel of five chiefs who presided as judges brought in guilty verdicts against both defendants and sentenced them to death. Amnesty Intemational, which had earlier sought unsuccessfully to send an observer to the trial, considered that it had not been conducted in accordance with internationally accepted standards for fairness. Like all defendants in the Traditional Courts, but unlike those appearing before the High Court, Orton and Vera Chirwa were denied legal representation. They were also refused permission to call certain witnesses from abroad or to arrange for their evidence to be taken on commission. In addition, the normal rules of evidence observed in the High Court do not apply in Traditional Courts. The latter have as their judges chiefs who are not required to have formal legal training and have no security of tenure, thus calling into question their judicial independence.
66
The executive, not the judiciary, has the discretion to decide whether a particular case should be heard in the High Court or the Traditional Court
The circumstances in which the Chirwas were detained by the authorities in December 1981 remained unclear. Both Orton and Vera Chirwa alleged at their trial that they and their son had been forcibly abducted from Zambia but the Malawi authorities continued to assert that they had entered Malawi clandestinely immediately prior to their arrest
In late May, there were unconfirmed reports suggesting that Orton and Vera Chirwa were to be executed on 9 June. Amnesty Intemational issued an intemational appeal to Life-President Kamuzu Banda urging him to prevent their execution. Public appeals for clemency were also made by President Daniel arap Moi of Kenya and President Shehu Shagari of Nigeria. The Church of Scotland, of which both Orton Chirwa and Life-President Kamuzu Banda are members, sent a representative to Malawi to seek clemency. In response, the authorities announced that Orton and Vera Chirwa were not in danger of imminent execution and said that they had lodged an appeal before the National Traditional Court of Appeal.
In June, unofficial sources reported that Paramount Chief Mumbelwa, the chairperson of die National Traditional Court of Appeal, had refused to preside over the Chirwas' appeal out of respect for Orton Chirwa, with whom he had been long acquainted. The same sources claimed that Chief Mumbelwa had gone into hiding or had been detained but Amnesty Intemational was not able to confirm this. However, he was not among the judges when the National Traditional Court of Appeal began hearing Orton and Vera Chirwa's appeals in September. Li late October, it was reported that Chief Mumbelwa had died in hospital at Lilongwe though the cause of death was not known to Amnesty Intemational.
In late September, an Amnesty Intemational delegate visited Malawi in an attempt to observe the appeal proceedings in the National Traditional Court of Appeal The delegate was admitted to the coimtry but was specifically denied permission to enter die court and was therefore imable to observe its proceedings. However, the court did not sit in camera and members of the public were allowed to attend The appeal proceedings concluded on 25 November, when the prosecutor called for both death sentences to be confirmed. The court reserved judgment and had not delivered its verdict by the end of the year.
In December, Amnesty Intemational made renewed appeals for clemency on behalf of Orton and Vera Chirwa in view of fears that they might be executed with minimum delay if their sentences were to be upheld by the National Traditional Court of Appeal.
79
