Mozambique
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the long-terai detention without trial of suspected opponents of the government, imfair trial procedures, and allegations of beatings and ill-treatment of prisoners. The organization was also con-cemed about the infliction of floggings on more than 100 people, by the use of the death penalty and by the carrying out of a number of extrajudicial executions.
The country experienced serious political and economic problems. The southem half of the country was affected by a severe drought and famine and guerrilla fighters in the same area belonging to the Resistència Nadonal Mozambicana (RNM), Mozambique National Resistance, were particularly active in opposition to the govemment Govemment forces mounted a series of offensives in various parts of the country against the RNM and by the end of the year had apparently freed many people detained by the RNM, althou^i at least 15 foreign nationals were still being held by the RNM. In December the authorities offered an amnesty to all RNM guerrillas who surrendered with their weapons and announced the remission or reduction of prison sentences of many convicted prisoners, excluding those convicted of political offences.
In March, smuggling and black marketeering were made capital offences and flogging was introduced as a pimishment in addition to imprisonment for offences against the security of the state, for "economic" offences such as smuggling and for various other offences, such as armed assault In June, a campaign known as "Operation Production" was launched to clear the main towns of imemployed people and others who did not have official permission to reside in them. The authorities subsequently admitted that the operation had resulted in many arbitrary arrests and other excesses by die security forces.
Amnesty Intemational leamed of several cases in which people were arrested for criticizing govemment officials or policies. For example, a priest in Tete province was detained without trial and held in incommunicado detention for six months after writing to the Provincial Govemor about problems of food shortages. He was released uncharged in October.
Long-term detention without trial continued to be used on an extensive scale against real and suspected critics or opponents of the goverrunent The detainees included a number of alleged opponents of the Frente de Libertaqào de Mozambique (FRELIMO), the Mozambique Liberation Front which in 1977 became the ruling Frelimo Party. They
73
were arrested before independence in 1975 and were reportedly held at isolated "re-education" camps in northern Mozambique although no information about them appeared to have been made available to their relatives by the authorities in recent years. None were known to have been released during 1983.
Suspected members and supporters of the RNM constituted by far the majority of imcharged political detainees. They included captured guerrilla filters, people alleged to have provided them with information or supplies, and others found in possession of tracts expressing sympathy with the RNM's aims. In December President Samora Machel stated that there were some 3,500 detainees in custody who were suspected of supporting the RNM in some way.
Relatively few such detainees were charged and brought to trial. Most were apparently held by the security police, the Serviqo Nacional de Seguranqa Popular (SNASP), National Service for Ae People's Security. No independent body existed to review detainees' cases. Detainees were frequently held incommunicado for many months in harsh conditions, some reportedly being severely beaten or tortured during interrogation.
Amnesty Intemational received information about a considerable number of detainees arrested during the year against whom no specific charges were known to have been brought. They included a number of expatriate workers, mainly of Portuguese nationality, who were arrested in Beira in April and May, apparently because they were believed to be associates of a British citizen, Dion Hamilton, who was convicted in Febmary by the Revolutionary Military Tribunal on charges including involvement in the RNM.
The trial in Febmary was one of two political trials reported during the year, involving a total of 49 defendants accused of offences against the security of the state. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that the trials did not conform with intemationally recognized standards. The first trial was held in camera in Beira and involved 40 defendants. They included Dion Hamilton, his wife and eight Portuguese nationals, all of whom were arrested in December 1982 and January 1983 after an explosion had wrecked petroleum storage tanks in Beira on 9 December 1982, and 30 other people who were accused offighting with the RNM or of supporting the RNM in other ways. Hearings lasted three days and involved several groups of prisoners who appeared before the court separately and whose cases do not appear to have been related. All 40 defendants were defended by the same legal counsel, a SNASP officer, who appeared to have had no time to consult many of his clients before the trial.
At the end of the trial 23 of the defendants were convicted and 17 were acquitted. This was the first time that defendants tried by the
74
Revolutionary Military Tribunal, which was set up in March 1979, were known to have been acquitted Five people were sentenced to death after being convicted on charges relating to attacks and killings which the RNM had carried out Of the remaining 18 defendants who received prison sentences, 15 Mozambicans were convicted of involvement with the RNM and were sentenced to terms of between six and 12 years' imprisonment Dion Hamilton was sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment after conviction on charges including complicity with the RNM, having prior knowledge of the attack on Beira's petroleimi storage tanks and possession of weapons. Two of the nine Portuguese nationals on trial were also convicted for failing to reveal prior knowledge of the attack to the authorities and were sentenced to terms of four and eight years' imprisonment
In mid-March Law No. 2/79 concerning Crimes against the Security of the People and the People's State was amended to extend the nimiber of offences punishable by death to include non-political offences, notably murder, smuggling and black marketeering. On 31 March a further law, No. 5/83, introduced flogging as a punishment for a wide number of offences, both political and non-political. These new penalties could be applied to prisoners who were already in custody and sentences of flogging were subsequently imposed on one group of prisoners whose trial before the Revolutionary Military Tribunal in Maputo had begim at the end of March, before the law introducing flogging was enacted.
This trial ended on 3 April and according to official sources involved 17 defendants, eight of whom were accused of non-political offences. All the defendants were convicted and six were sentenced to death. Two of these, Gulam Nabi and José Manderero, were convicted of economic offences. Two others were sentenced to death on murder charges and two more were convicted on charges relating to involvement with the RNM.
The 11 other defendants received prison terms ranging from two to 12 years and were sentenced to be flogged. Six of them were students from the Faculty of Education at Maputo's Eduardo Mondlane University who were convicted on charges of agitation and were each sentenced to eight years' imprisonment and 45 lashes. They were accused of having written two letters which allegedly urged students to disrupt their classes in the Faculties of Education and Law. Amnesty International subsequently took up the students' cases for investigation to establish whether they were prisoners of conscience. The organization also took up for investigation the case of a school teacher, Leonardo Mabunda, who was sentenced at the same time to eight years' imprisormient and 45 lashes for insulting the Frelimo Party and the State.
75
At the trials before the Revolutionary Military Tribunal in both February and March, Amnesty International was concerned that defendants had inadequate opportunities to defend themselves and were not properly defended by the state-appointed legal counsel, that tenuous evidence was accepted by the court and that those convicted had no right of appeal. The oi^anization was also concerned that many of the sentences annoimced on 3 April were imposed under the terms of laws which had been enacted after the defendants had committed their alleged offences.
Sentences of death were reportedly carried out by firing-squad within several weeks of their annoimcement at both the trials. Although prisoners sentenced to death by the Revolutionary Military Tribunal may in theory appeal to the head of state for clemency, no death sentences are ever reported to have been commuted. On both occasions. Amnesty International appealed for all the death sentences to be commuted. The six death sentences imposed on 3 April were carried out on 8 April in front of a crowd consisting of several himdred Frelimo Party supporters.
In January official sources reported seven executions in towns near Maputo of suspected RNM guerrillas who were shot by firing-squad without any form of trial or other legal procedure. No provision for such executions exists under Mozambican law. Four people were executed at Macia on 13 January and three more at Magude on 18 January. In both cases the executions took place after the prisoners had appeared in public at political ralUes which were attended by senior government officials. Amnesty International appealed to the government to prevent any further such killings.
The introduction of flogging at the end of March was justified in the preamble of Law No. 5/83 on the grounds that existing penalties, particularly imprisonment, had proved inadequate to stem a serious crime wave. The new law made flogging mandatory for all political offences, for economic offences such as black marketeering, for armed assaults, robbery, rape and child molesting. It also permitted the imposition of flogging on a non-mandatory basis for offences such as murder and drug smuggling. Sentences of up to 90 lashes may be imposed in addition to prison sentences and fines. The law stipulates that floggings are to be carried out in public and that up to 30 lashes may be administered in each session, following which a period of eight days must elapse before a subsequent session.
In many cases, floggings appeared to have been carried out at well-publicized meetings some days or weeks after sentences were imposed
Immediately after the new law was announced, a considerable nimiber of sentences of flogging were imposed by the courts: 11 sentences of between 10 and 45 lashes were imposed by the
76
Revolutionary Military Tribunal on 3 April. The first public floggings reportedly took place in Quelimane on 9 April, when the victims were two dock workers convicted of theft by the Provincial People's Tribunal. By 26 April, less than a month after the new law was introduced, 20 people were reported to have been flogged in Maputo alone, mostly for black market offences and theft
Although fewer flogging sentences were apparently imposed in May, they continued to be imi>osed and carried out later in the year. Although no official statistics were available, it appeared that more than 100 people had been publicly flogged by the end of the year.
