Italy
The excessive length of judicial proceedings involving political prisoners remained a principal concern of Amnesty International. Allegations of torture and ill-treatment of detainees reported in 1982 were the subject of judicial investigations and in one case police officers were seiv tenced to suspended prison terms following legal proceedings. Amnesty International continued to work for the release of imprisoned conscientious objectors.
The trial known as "7 April" was of special concern to Amnesty International, {^ee Amnesty International Reports 1980, 1981, 1982 and 1983). The majority of the defendants had been in custody since 1979. Amnesty International had sent observers to the trial on three occasions since it opened on 7 June 1982 and the trial continued at the endofl983. InFebruary 1983DrKurtMeierofthe Zurich Bar visited Rome as an Amnesty International delegate to discuss the progress of the trial with interested parties.
291
In a review of its concerns in Italy, published in April 1983, Amnesty Intemational criticized judicial provisions regarding the length of preventive detention {carcerazionepreventiva). Cases which carry prison sentences of 20 years or more on conviction may lead to defendants spending a total of 10 years and eight months in prison before a final verdict is reached on the case.
The situation regarding preventive detention came under mounting criticism in Italian legal circles in 1983. The Minister of Justice, Mino Martinazzoli, acknowledged that the length of time defendants spent awaiting trial was "excessive". The practice of filing multiple charges in political cases in order to ensure "the maximum permissible period of preventive detention" was criticized by Giuliano Vassalli, the President of the Justice Commission of the Senate.
Amnesty Intemational was aware that the govemment was attempting to reduce the maximimi length of preventive detention. A draft bill proposed by the govemment and approved by the Council of Ministers on 4 October 1983 would cut the maximum length of preventive detention by one third (to eight years). However, Amnesty Intemational believed that even if the current govemment bill were to become law preventive detention in Italy would still be extremely long, and its concem about the situation of those prisoners being held in long-term detention would be unchanged, since the draft bill referred only to cases which may arise in the future.
Amnesty Intemational noted with concem that some courts used their powers under emergency legislation to increase the already excessive length of preventive detention. One detainee, Giustino Cortiana, had his request for provisional liberty rejected by the Court of Assizes in Rome, even though the judicial limit of two years and eight months pending sentencing in the trial of first instance had expired, Giustino Cortiana had originally been charged with being a member of the Red Brigades, a left-wing armed group. He was acquitted of this charge by an appeal court in Milan in March 1983, but was charged in the meantime with membership of an armed band in connection with the "7 April" case. He was due to be granted provisional liberty once the judicial time limit for this charge had expired. However, in November 1983 the Court of Assizes in Rome rejected Giustino Cortiana's request, on the basis of Article 112 of the penal code. This allows for an extension of the normal time limit if the number of persons alleged to have been involved in a crime is five or more. This in turn implies he could be held for five years and four months, pending sentencing in the trial of the first instance.
Amnesty Intemational became increasingly concemed that long-term detention was being further lengthened in some cases by the alteration of charges, or by the bringing of new ones by judges in other
292
parts of the country, while judicial proceedings were already underway.
On 21 June 1983 several defendants in the "7 April" trial in Rome, including Luciano Ferrari-Bravo and Emilio Vesce, were issued with fresh warrants by the Deputy State Prosecutor for Padua, Dr Pietro Calogero, in connection with possession of arms between 1971 and 1979 (Article 21 of Law No. 110 of 18 April 1975). An Amnesty Intemational Newsletter article published in August 1983 said that "The bringing of a new charge at this stage — apparently unsupported by new evidence against defendants who are already on trial in connection with charges relating to an armed band — will permit a further extension of up to four years' preventive detention on this separate charge. Some of the arms in question were the subject of a separate trial of different defendants in July 1980."
In this case, the investigating judge, Dr Palombarini, ordered that the defendants be released in October 1983, on the grounds that the new charge should be subsumed under the original armed band charge, for which the judicial time limit had already expired.
In 1982 there had been a sharp increase in the number of allegations of torture and other forms of ill-treatment of detainees in relation to arrests made at the time of the kidnapping of NATO Chief-of-Staff, Brigadier-General James Lee Dozier (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1983). Judicial inquiries were set up into these allegations in Rome, Padua, Venice, Viterbo and Verona shortly after the General's release in January 1982.
In July 1983, four police officers on trial in Padua as a result of these investigations were found guilty of abusing their authority while interrogating a member of the Red Brigades, Cesare Di Lenardo, by beating him, tying him to a table and forcing him to drink large quantities of water. The officers were sentenced to suspended prison terms of one year to 14 months. A fifth officer was not put on trial because he was elected a parliamentary deputy in the June 1983 elections and thus benefitted from immunity.
In November 1983 the Venice tribunal investigating similar torture allegations — including some made by other police officers — decided to end its inquiry on the grounds of a lack of sufficient evidence. As regards the inquiries in other cities, Amnesty Intemational was unaware of any fmdings being made public by the end of the year.
Amnesty Intemational received no new allegations of ill-treatment of detainees during 1983.
There was a decline in the number of conscientious objectors to military service adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty Intemational. As a result of the 1981 reform of the Military Code, which introduced an appeal stmcture, conscientious objectors were generally released from prison pending appeal. They may also be
293
released prior to being sentenced in order to make new requests to perform ¿temative, civilian, service. In the case of Franco Fomasari, a pacifist song-writer, his application for alternative civilian service was turned down by the Ministry of Defence, reportedly because his general behaviour was "manifestly in contrast with the moral principles" required of conscientious objectors. The local carabinieri had opposed Franco Fomasari's request for alternative service stating, among other things, that although of "normal moral conduct" he had a "poor public reputation", had taken part in unauthorized demonstrations, and had been involved in the left-wing Italian Workers' Autonomy movement, an allegation he strenuously denied. He was arrested on 11 December 1982 but released nine days later from the military prison of Forte Boccea to allow him to make a second request for alternative service.
