Jamaica
Work for the abolition of the death penalty and against impending executions was the main focus of concem for Amnesty Intemational during the year. Eight prisoners were hanged in 1983, bringing to 22 the number of people executed since 1980.
An Amnesty Intemational mission visited Jamaica in November to discuss its concerns regarding the death penalty with the government. The mission met the Prime Minister, the Minister of Justice and the Governor-General.
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about a resumption of executions in 1980, after more than four years (1976/1980) in which none had been carried out. During this period parliament had set up a committee to consider whether or not the death penalty should be abolished. In January 1979 the House of Representatives voted by a narrow majority to retain capital punishment, but recommended unanimously that the cases of all those awaiting execution - many of whom had been sentenced during the period of de facto suspension of executions - be reviewed. In February 1979 the Senate passed a resolution recommending that capital punishment be suspended for a further 18 months while another committee sat to examine the question in greater depth. However, executions resumed on 27 August 1980.
All of the 18 individuals executed in 1982/83 by hanging had been sentenced to death either before or during the period in which executions were held in abeyance while parliament considered the issue. In June 1982 the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in England (which serves as the final appeal court for Jamaica) had considered final appeals in the cases of five of the prisoners executed later that year. Ahhough the prisoners' appeals were denied on technical grounds (by a narrow majority of 3-2), the majority opinion stated that a long delay in the carrying out of the sentence for which the condemned man was in no way responsible, must be an important factor in deciding whether to exercise the prerogative of rnQvcy {sqq Amnesty Intemational Report 1983).
The executions were carried out despite a recommendation by the Committee on Capital Punishment and Penal Reform in December 1981 that all death sentences passed before 31 March 1981 be statutorily commuted.
During the mission Amnesty Intemational urged the govemment to take immediate and positive steps towards the early abolition of the death penalty, and to commute the sentences of those awaiting executioa Amnesty Intemational further urged that, as a minimum first
173
step toward abolition of the death penalty, parliament or the govemment should consider limiting its application.
Earlier in the year. Amnesty Intemational had appealed for clemency in the cases of Anthony Hewett and Lloyd Aitkens, who were executed on 31 May; Stafford Pine and Junior Whyte, who were executed on 28 June; and Ransford Thomas and Clive Hayles, who were executed on 19 July. Ransford Thomas had been sentenced to death in 1974, with the others having been sentenced between 1976 and 1978. In the case of Stafford Pine, a psychiatric report in June 1983 had found the prisoner to be schizophrenic and apparently insane at the time of the examination.
At the end of 1983 more than 130 prisoners were under sentence of death, some 60 of whom had been sentenced before 31 March 1981.
