Poland
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the imprisonment of large numbers of prisoners of conscience, allegations of ill-treatment of political prisoners and the use of the death penalty.
According to official figures, on 4 January 1983 about 1,000 people, most of whom Amnesty Intemational believed to be prisoners of conscience were still in prison and an additional 500 people were held awaiting trial for politically motivated offences.
On 21 July, the day before martial law was officially lifted, the Sejm (pariiament) passed an amnesty law affecting 21,571 people, including 3,666 political offenders, of whom 2,123 had been imprisoned. Under the terms of the amnesty law, men over 21 who had received sentences of over three years' imprisonment had their sentences reduced by a half, and all men under 21 at the time of the offence were released, as were all women regardless of age, and all men over 21 sentenced to up to three years' imprisonment In most cases those benefiting from it were liable to serve the remainder of their sentence in addition to a new penalty if they committed another similar offence before 31 December 1985.
By 22 July 1983,687 individuals had already been imconditionally pardoned under a special "speeded up" procedure introduced after martial law was suspended in December 1982. Another 122 applications
294
had been turned down by the State Council's Clemency Commission, because these concemed detainees "who had performed leading roles in organizing activities banned under martial law, had used terror, intimidation, or had criminal records" or who were said to have shown a hostile attitude in prison. Among those released from prison by 20 August were prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty Intemational such as Zofia Romaszewska, who was sentenced to five years' imprisonment in Febmary 1983 for activities in connection with the underground radio Solidamosc (Solidarity), and Ewa Kubasiewicz, who was sentenced in 1982 to 10 years' imprisonment for violating martial law regulations, later reduced in a retrial to three years suspended.
Among those also released were individuals who had been arrested but not yet tried and sentenced, including the press spokesperson of the banned independent trade union Solidarity, Janusz Onyszkiewicz, and Solidarity adviser, Bronislaw Geremek, and Zbigniew Belz and Andrzej Sobieraj, local Solidarity leaders.
At least 20 people were not eligible for amnesty since they had been sentenced for attempted illegal border crossings or were convicted or accused of political offences of the most serious category, ie deemed to be against the "Fundamental Political and Economic Interests of the Polish People's Republic". They included the prisoners of conscience Edmund Baluka, a former leader of the December 1970 strikes in Szczecin who was sentenced to five years' imprisonment on 30 June 1983 on charges relating to his alleged anti-state activities during his stay outside Poland in the period 1973/1981; and Robert Leszek Moczulski, Tadeusz Stanski and Romuald Szeremietiew, leaders of an unofficial opposition group called the Confederation of an Independent Poland (KPN), who were sentenced to five years' imprisonment in October 1982.
Eleven people awaiting trial were also excluded from the general provisions of the amnesty law: four members of the Komitet Obrony Robotnikow{K.OK), the Committee for the Defence of Workers, Jacek Kuron, Adam Michnik, Henryk Wujec and Zbigniew Romaszewski (the latter already sentenced at an earlier trial), and seven leading Solidarity officials, Jan Rulewski, Seweryn Jaworski, Karol Modzelew-ski, Grzegorz Palka, Andrzej Rozplochowski, Andrzej Gwiazda and Marian Jurczyk. At the end of 1983 both groups were facing charges of "preparing, in agreement with others, activities aiming to overthrow the Polish socio-political system by force". Their trials were announced several times as imminent, but had not taken place by the end of 1983.
The security forces continued to arrest large nimibers of people during demonstrations in cities throughout the country. According to officiai statements, about 1000 people were arrested in 15 Polish
295
provinces during demonstrations in May, most of whom were reportedly released after several hours and were fined. Numerous arrests were also reported during the Pope's visit to Nowa Huta on 22 June and during demonstrations on 31 August, the third anniversary of the birth of Solidarity
At least 60 individuals were detained in December during demonstrations commemorating the workers killed during street protests along the Baltic Coast in December 1970.
Arrests were also reported of people involved in the imderground stmctures of Solidarity. The number of such arrests increased greatiy during December. According to official reports in the Polish media, more than 250 arrests took place in Wroclaw (55), Szczecin (44), Gdansk (36) and other parts of the country. In Warsaw, Kielce and Bydgoszcz, 13 members of the All-Polish Committee for Farmers' Resistance (OKOR) were detained, including two of its leaders, Jozef Teliga and Wienczyslaw Nowacki.
In nearly all these cases the accused were charged with continuing trade union activities, anti-state activities, disseminating and printing of illegal publications, activities connected with the underground radio Solidamosc or calling for illegal gatherings (mostiy under Articles 271 and 278 of the criminal code).
Hundreds of others, including trade union activists and defence lawyers of human rights and trade union activists were detained for periods of up to 48 hours. On 27 December Wladyslaw Sidorowicz, a doctor, was detained for 48 hours because he refused to hand over to the police the file of Krystyna Frasyniuk, the wife of the prisoner of conscience Wladyslaw Frasyniuk. some cases, people were repeatedly detained for short periods and subsequentiy released without having been charged. Lech Walesa, the chairperson of Solidarity, was detained in this way on several occasions.
Political trials continued to take place throughout 1983 but the number reported in the media declmed and the list of crimes subject to summary proceedings was reduced when martial law was suspended in December 1982.
A number of lawyers encoimtered increasing difficulties while trying to represent the interests of charged Solidarity activists, including Stanislaw Afenda who was reportedly suspended from carrying out his legal functions in July, and Piotr Ajidrzejewski,who was suspended from his professional duties by the Supreme Court on 14 December for "contempt of court" at a triid in 1982.
On 22 July, when martial law was formally lifted, a number of features of martial law were permanentiy or provisionally incorporated into the constitution and other legislation. A new law on the Ministry of Intemal affairs was passed by the Sejm on 14 July, whereby people who
296
are considered a risk for state security and public order could be taken into preventive detention without the orders or agreement of a prosecutor or judge.
Some of the amendments to the criminal code that became law on 29 July were further reaching than the corresponding martial law decree regulations of 1981. A paragraph was added to Article 282 a allowing t>eople to be sentenced to up to three years' imprisonment for organizing or leading a protest meeting. In a clear reference to organizations like Solidarity, membership of organizations that had been banned or refused legal status also became punishable by up to three years' imprisonment (amendment of Article 278, paragraph 1).
The jurisdiction of the Military Courts was reduced but one extension promulgated imder martial law remained in force permanently - that conceming offences against the fundamental interests of the Polish People's Republic (Article 565, paragraph 2 of the Criminal Procedures Code).
Amnesty Intemational received a number of reports that prisoners had been subjected to cmel, inhuman and degrading treatment Wladyslaw Frasyniuk was reportedly beaten while held in Leczyca Prison in August Nine political prisoners in Barczewo Prison reportedly wrote to the Polish Coimcil of State in December stating that they would go on hunger-strike to protest against their ill-treatment They were subsequently reported to have been subjected to beatings, sprayed with cold water and forced to undress in cold cells. The prisoners involved were the three KPN leaders mentioned above and six Solidarity and trade union leaders, P. Bednarz, A. Slowik, J. Kropiwnicki, P. Kosmowski, E. Baluka and W. Frasyniuk, agaia Complaints and protests about prison conditions and ill-treatment allegedly often resulted in disciplinary punishments such as the "hard bed", the "tiger cell" (cage) or the kabryna (punishment cell). Such allegations were frequently made with respect to Braniewo, Strzelin and Hmbieszow prisons, where a number of hunger-strikes reportedly took place to protest against bad prison conditions. At the end of the year about 20 Solidarity activists were on a hunger-strike in Strzelin Prison to protest against rotten food, lack of basic medical care, insufficient contact with families, unhygienic conditions and to demand political prisoner status. Some of them had reportedly been forcibly fed.
Amnesty Intemational received frequent reports that members or supporters of Solidarity had been beaten about the head, body and legs with mbber tmncheons, kicked, punched or forced to run the gauntlet of tmncheon blows between a double row of police.
Most of these allegations concemed ill-treatment at the time of arrest, during transport in militia vehicles and above all while in custody at militia headquarters.
297
Seweryn Jaworski, a Solidarity leader awaiting trial in Rakowiecka Remand Prison in Warsaw, was reportedly beaten by guards several times in May and kept in isolation for wearing a badge with the national colours of Poland. He was reportedly punched in the abdomen and in the neck and threatened "he would not leave here alive". At least five of a group of 11 miners from Lubin who had been charged with "terrorist activities" in 1982 reportedly complained at their trial in November that plastic bags had been put over their heads until they nearly suffocated and that they were beaten on the soles of their feet
Eleven people reportedly died in unexplained circumstances during or shortly after periods in police custody. Most of them had been Solidarity activists. In at least one case, that of the 19-year-old high school student, Grzegorz Przemyk, allegations that the death was caused by police ill-treatment were supported by affidavits of the findings of tiie prosecutor's office. He was reportedly arrested on 12 May in Warsaw and taken to a police station in Jezuicka Street He died in Solec Hospital two days later from severe injiuies to the spleen and liver. On 16 May the prosecutor of Warsaw Srodmiescie (inner town) opened an investigation into his case. On 23 December formal indictments were issued against two civic militia members, two members of the ambulance service and two doctors. No date for the trial had been set by the end of the year.
During 1983 nine death sentences were passed, seven for murder. A diplomat who defected and an academic were bolii sentenced to death in absentia on charges of high treason and espionage respectively. In addition, one death sentence passed in 1982 was upheld by Lodz Provincial Court. The Polish press reported that Waldemar Krakos was executed on 10 October. He had originally been sentenced to 25 years' imprisonment for a murder committed in January. The Procurator General and the Minister of Justice appealed against the sentence. The Supreme Court subsequently sentenced him to death and his appeal for clemency was turned down by the State Council. The executions of Tadeusz Wencel and Julian Koltan took place on 8 July and 12 December respectively, the latter having been sentenced to death in 1982 for murder and attempted murder.
298
