Korea (Republic of)
Amnesty Intemational remained concemed about the detention of prisoners of conscience, reports of torture and unfair trials and the use of the death penalty. Amnesty International was also concemed about widespread arrests of students and the use of short-term detention without charge and house arrest against students and other critics of the government Several long-term prisoners of conscience, some detained since 1971, remained in detention. Some 306 political prisoners, including73 adoptedby Amnesty Intemational as prisoners of conscience, were released in presidential amnesties in August and December. Torture reportedly continued to take place and confessions said to have been obtained under torture were allegedly used as prosecution evidence. Death sentences were imposed for criminal offences and legislation was passed to provide the death penalty for some economic crimes. The President commuted three death sentences in political cases.
Students arrested for holding anti-govenmient demonstrations or distributing anti-govemment leaflets continued to constitute the majority of prisoners of conscience. Most demonstrations were peaceful, although the police often used tear-gas to break them up and scuffles took place while participants were being arrested. More than 300 students were arrested during the year and prosecuted under the Law on Assemblies and Demonstrations (LAD) which prohibits gatherings "feared to trigger social unrest". Those who were tried before the end of 1983 were sentenced to between one and three years' imprisonment More than 200 students were released under presidential amnesties on 12 August 1983 and 23 December 1983. Many had nearly completed their sentences. In annoimcing the 23 December amnesty, the authorities said that students still detained would be released if they "repented".
InFebmary 1983,19 students were detained for up to three weeks
234
in Seoul and questioned about documents analyzing South Korean society which they had allegedly prepared. One student, Chung Chin-tae, was subsequently charged with anti-state activities under the National Security Law (NSL) and sentenced to three years' imprisonment Amnesty Intemational considered him to be a prisoner of conscience.
Several well-known political or religious personalities were put under house arrest or detained, some without warrant for short periods for expressing their non-violent political views. The Reverend Koh Young-keun was detained on 25 Febmary 1983 for delivering a sermon entitled "Let us Establish Justice", in which he questioned tiie legitimacy of the govemment and criticized the death sentences imposed on Moon Pu-shik and Kim Hyong-jang in the Pusan arson case (see below). Charges brought against him on 1 March were later dropped and he was released on 7 April 1983. Several people were reportedly taken into custody and threatened with arrest on charges relating to distribution of copies of his sermon.
On 16 May 1983, Kim Young-sam, a former leader of the banned opposition New Democratic Party (NDP) who had been held under house arrest since June 1982, gave a press interview in which he called for the release of people imprisoned for criticizing the govemment. Two days later, he went on hunger-strike to demand the restoration of democracy in the Republic ofKorea (South Korea). On 25 May 1983, the police forcibly removed him from his home to hospital where he was placed in solitary confinement Ten former meml^rs of the NDP, several members of the Human Rights Committee of the Korea National Coimcil of Churches and other leading dissidents, including the Reverend Moon Ik-kwan, Quaker leader Ham Sok-hon, Dr Lee Moon-young, lawyer Hong Nam-soon and former National Assembly member Yeh Choon-ho, all previously adopted by Amnesty Intemational as prisoners of conscience, were placed under house arrest for expressing support for Kim's demands. All were released from house arrest by mid-June 1983.
At the end of August 1983, up to 500 teachers and university students were reportedly detained without warrant for periods ranging from several days to several weeks and interrogated by the police about their involvement with workers' night schools sponsored by local churches. They were reportedly forced to state, allegedly under torture, that their activities were aimed at building a socialist society. Kim Han-jo was held for three weeks in September 1983 at the National Police Headquarters in Seoul. She was interrogated about her previous work with night schools and her involvement in a research project directed by the Christian Institute for the Study of Justice and Development which examined the presentation of the issue of Korean unification in
235
government textbooks. Eight other school-teachers involved in the project were detained from mid-December to 30 December 1983. On 30 and 31 December, four others connected with the project were detained: Kang Man-kil, a former Professor at Korea University in Seoul; Lee Yoang-hee, a former Professor at Hanyang University m Seoul; and the Director and a member of staff of the institute - the Reverend Cho Seung-hyuk and Lee Mi-kyung. They were said to face charges under the NSL of supporting the Etemocratic People's Republic of Korea (North Korea). Both Professor Lee and the Reverend Cho had previously been adopted by Amnesty Intemational as prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty Intemational also continued to investigate the detention of Kim Hyong-jang in connection with an arson attack on the United States Culturé Centre in Pusan in March 1982. The organization believed that he may have been imprisoned for his political views and that the charge that he had incited people to commit arson was false. He reportedly claimed that his confession admitting the charges, which was used as evidence at his trial, had been obtained imder torture. Kim Hyong-jang and another defendant, Moon Pu-shik, were sentenced to death in August 1982. Amnesty International appealed for the commutation of the sentences. On 15 March 1983 President Chun Doo-hwan commuted the sentences to life imprisonment
Amnesty Intemational continued to appeal for the immediate and unconditional release of the prisoners of conscience Soh Sung and his brother Soh Joon-shik, who were arrested in 1971 reportedly because of their involvement in student demonstrations during the presidential elections. Soh Simg was sentenced to life imprisonment Soh Joon-shik's seven-year term of imprisonment expired in May 1978. His appeal against his continued detention under the Public Security Law was rejected by the Seoul High Court on 30 May 1983. Among the other long-term prisoners of concem to Amnesty International was Dr Lee Sung-hee, one of 17 members of the National Council for the Defence of Democracy, an informal opposition group, arrested in March 1974 and sentenced to life imprisonment for espionage. Amnesty Intemational continued to investigate his case as it was concemed that Dr Lee may have been wrongly convicted and imprisoned for his nonviolent political opinions.
Amnesty Intemational continued to appeal for the release of prisoners convicted under the NSL of being members of an anti-state organization, Aram-hoe, and of plotting rebellion. They were arrested in August 1981 and claimed at their trial that they had been tortured into signing false confessions. They were later acquitted by an appellate court on the grounds of insufficient prosecution evidence, but in October 1982 the Supreme Court overruled the appellate court's decision and
236
returned the case for retrial. On 21 June 1983 the Seoul High Court sentenced them to between 18 months' and 10 years' imprisonment Amnesty Intemational believed that the charges brought against them were false and that they had been imprisoned for their non-violent political beliefs.
Another case of continuing concem to Amnesty Intemational was that of eight teachers at Kunsan Number One High School and a former teacher working for a broadcasting company in Kunsan who were detained in November 1982 on charges under the NSL of forming an "anti-state" organization, the "Five Pines Society", in April 1982. At their trial they admitted that they held views critical of the government, but denied that they had supported communist ideology or praised North Korea. They also claimed in court that they had been tortured and threatened wiUi death during interrogation to force them to sign false coirfessions. Chongju District Court sentenced them to terms of between one and four years' imprisonment, suspended for six of the defendants. In July 1983, the Kwangju High Court reversed the decision and imposed sentences of between one and seven years' imprisonment on all of the defendants.
Nine officials of the Wuongpoong Textile Company union were sentenced by the Seoul District Court in April and May 1983 to terms of imprisonment ranging from 10 to 18 months. They had been arrested in November 1982 under the LAD for protesting against the violent harassment of union members by other company employees. Amnesty International considered them to be prisoners of conscience. All were released in the August 1983 anmesty.
Other prisoners of conscience released in the 12 August presidential amnesty were two trade unionists at Korea Control Data; Father Choi Ki-sik, arrested in the Pusan arson case; 10 students and workers arrested in the Kwangminsa case; seven defendants from the Pusan Good Books Association {Purim) case; three defendants in the Hanu) Bible Study Group case; and Lee Jae-oh, arrested in the South Korean National Liberation Front (SKNLF) case. Among those released in the 23 December amnesty were students arrested for participating in campus demonstrations and others convicted of violations of the NSL, including defendants from the SKNLF, Purim (see Amnesty Intemational Report1983) oadAramrhoe cases. In the August 1983 amnesty, Lee Tae-bok had his life sentence commuted to 20 years', and Paric Ki-rae's death sentence, imposed in 1974, was commuted to life imprisoimient
Torture reportedly continued to be used against people suspected of both political and ordinary criminal offences. After the death in March 1983 of Kim Kun-jo from brain injuries caused by beatings during interrogation by police, the National Police Headquarters in Seoul issued a statement in which it said it regretted the incident and would
237
take measures to prevent further police brutality. The Director of the National Police resigned, taking responsibility for not having prevented the incident The Minister of Home AflFairs, Roh Tae-woo, ordered the police to conduct a full investigation and a police officer was subsequently sentenced to seven years' imprisonment for fatally injuring Kim Kun-jo. In mid-April, the Minister of Home Affairs told the National Assembly that the govemment would "mete out stem pimishment against police officers who resort to violence during investigations". In December 1983 the National Assembly passed an amendment to the Law on Weighted Penalty for Special Crimes which would provide for a maximum term of life imprisonment for law enforcement officials convicted of torturing and killing criminal suspects. The authorities did not reply to requests by Amnesty Intemational for claims of torture made in several p>olitical cases to be independently investigated
In spite of measures taken to remedy the shortage of medical staff in prisons and the discretionary power of prison directors to transfer prisoners to hospital when necessary, several prisoners of conscience reportedly received inadequate medical care. Many of them were said to be suffering from the effects of torture or were ill as a result of their conditions of detention. Choi Sok-jin, sentenced to life imprisonment in the SKNLF case of 1979, was admitted to a hospital in early Febmary 1983 with a kidney infection. He was retumed to prison four days later. Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports that he was sick and not receiving adequate medical care (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1983).
Amnesty Intemational leamed of several death sentences imposed or upheld for criminal charges and appealed to the authorities to commute all death sentences.
The organization was concemed that the National Assembly passed bills in mid-December 1983 to provide the death penalty for economic crimes such as fi"aud and embezzlement, thereby increasing the number of offences punishable by the death penalty.
238
