Yugoslavia
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the imprisonment of many prisoners of conscience and political trials in which the accused reportedly did not receive a fair trial. The organization leamed of allegations by several defendants that they had been ill-treated during investigation. Amnesty Intemational was also concerned about the treatment of prisoners held in isolation and conditions in some prisons. The organization had details of five cases in which people were allegedly held in psychiatric confinement as a result of their non-violent exercise of their right to freedom of expression. The organization leamed of the imposition of 10 death sentences but did not receive reports of any executions.
In October 1983 the Public Prosecutor's Office stated that there had been a "negligible increase" in political offences in the first six months of the year in comparison with the same period in 1982, and that most of these offences were "verbal" and "committed for nationalistic motives". (According to official figures, in the first six months of 1982,268 people
320
were charged with political offences; the total figure for 1982 was 516). In 1983 Amnesty Intemational leamed of over 70 political trials involving more than 230 people, the majority of them ethnic Albanians from Kosovo province. Charges involving the use of violence were rare and only a relatively small number of those accused were charged with advocating or planning violence.
Nationalist activity by ethnic Albanians persisted in Kosovo province consisting largely of the dissemination of pamphlets and slogans supporting the demand that the province, which is part of the republic of Serbia, be granted its own republic status within the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. There were, however, instances of sabotage and four bomb explosions were reported which caused material damage but no loss of life.
In June the authorities announced that 2,503 people had been sentenced forpolitical crimes and minor offences of a political character in Kosovo over the previous two years, and that in the first nine months of 1983 seven illegal groups of Albanian nationalists had been discovered and 130 of their members had been arrested.
Amnesty Intemational adopted as prisoners of conscience a number of ethnic Albanians, including Skender Krasniqi and nine other university or high-school students who were sentenced to between one and five years' imprisonment by the district court of Pec on 3 March. They were found guilty of having attempted to organize nationalist demonstrations in Pec and of being in possession of literature of a "hostile content". It also adopted Destan Aliu, aged 28, an ethnic Albanian from Macedonia who was sentenced to eight years' imprisonment in January for having engaged in "hostile activity". He was reported to have emigrated to the USA in 1974 and to have taken part there in anti-Yugoslav demonstrations prior to his retum to Yugoslavia Other ethnic Albanians adopted by Amnesty Intemational included the teachers Enver Haliti and Ahmet Tahiri, who were sentenced to five and five and a half years' imprisonment respectively by a court in Titova Mitrovica on 10 May on charges of "hostile propaganda". They were accused of having made tape-recordings of broadcasts by Radio Tirana (Albania) which the court considered hostile to Yugoslavia, and of having intended to disseminate them.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the use of Article 133 of the criminal code dealing with "hostile propaganda" to imprison people for the expression of views which are officially disapproved of. During the year the Yugoslav press published a number of articles which reported criticism, by legal experts and others, of the provisions and formulation of Article 133. Convictions under this article, often based on the private conversations of the accused, appeared to have increased in Bosnia-Hercegovina in particular.
321
Amnesty Intemational leamed of some 12 such cases in which sentences of up to six years' imprisonment were imposed. It adopted as a prisoner of conscience Professor Ivan Pletikosa, aged 57, who prior to his arrest in December 1982 taught in the English department of Zagreb University. At his trial by the district court of Banjaluka in April he was charged under Articles 133 and 157 with "hostile propaganda" and "damaging the reputation of the [state]" on the basis of private remarks he allegedly made criticizing Yugoslavia's political and economic system and certain of its leaders. Professor Pletikosa reportedly denied the charges against him. The court rejected proposals to hear six defence witnesses and sentenced him to six years' imprisonment Two observers delegated by Amnesty Intemational to attend the court proceedings were refused access to the courtroom. In a similar case, Milan Soklic, aged 28, a sociology teacher, was sentenced to five years' imprisonment by a court in Tuzla in May. He was reportedly found guilty of having compared capitalism favourably with Yugoslav socialism and of having criticized restrictions on freedom of expression in Yugoslavia in the presence of several people at his home and in a hotel. Amnesty Intemational also adopted Hanefija Avdagic, aged 71, who was sentenced to five years' imprisonment by a court in Zenica in May after allegedly expressing doubts about the democratic character of the Yugoslav political system, blaming the system for the country's economic problems and justifying the demands made by Albanian nationalists in Kosovo.
On 18 July the trial of 12 Muslims before the district court of Sarajevo begaa The accused, who included engineers, an economist, a schoolteacher and two Imams, were variously accused of "association for the purpose of hostile activity" and "hostile propaganda" conducted from "Muslim nationalist principles. The chief accused, Alija Izetbegovic, aged 58, was charged with the authorship of a number of texts on Islam, including one entitled "The Islamic Declaration" advocating an Islamic revival, and with propagating the views contained in this document among a group of intellectuals and Imams with the intention of" forming an association for the purpose of hostile activity". He was also accused of having initiated a visit by five co-defendants to Iran to participate in a Muslim congress there. On 12 August the court found all the accused guilty; Alija Izetbegovic was sentenced to 14 years' imprisonment, 10 other co-defendants received prison sentences of between five and 15 years' imprisonment and a 12th was sentenced to six months' imprisonment. Two observers delegated by Amnesty Intemational were denied access to the court on 19 and 20 July but were able to attend proceedings on 21 and 22 July. The organization concluded that the charges against the accused did not include the use or advocacy of violence.
322
During the year, the official press criticized on a number of occasions - both in connection with this trial and with other issues - the "abuse of religion for political purposes". Charges on such grounds were brought against a Roman Catholic priest. Father Luka Prcela, aged 42, who was sentenced to five years' imprisonment by the district court of Split in May after being accused of having made critical comments about the Yugoslav League of Communists and about political leaders during sermons. He reportedly denied having made some of the statements cited in the indictment and stated that others had been distorted by being taken out of context
In June Amnesty Intemational wrote to the authorities raising the cases of five people alleged to have been confined in psychiatric hospitals for the non-violent exercise of their right to freedom of expression. Among these was Radomir Veljkovic, aged 58, a retired army officer who had been detained since 1973 in Belgrade Prison Psychiatric Hospital. In early 1973 he was charged with "hostile propaganda" and "damaging the reputation of the state" on the basis of documents, largely written in 1970, in which he had criticized the late President Tito and referred to abuses allegedly committed in the past by members of the state security police. In March 197 3 the district court of Sarajevo reportedly found him guilty but ruled that he was not accountable for his actions at the time that he committed these offences, that he was dangerous to his surroundings, and that he should be forcibly confined to a psychiatric institution. In an appeal against this decision, Radomir Veljkovic argued that the court had not given the grounds for its mling nor had it explained in what way he was dangerous. He stated that both he and his chosen lawyers had been prevented from attending the trial and referred to five medical certificates dated 1967/1970 diagnosing him as sane. He claimed that the psychiatric diagnosis of insanity on which the court had based its decision was false. Later in the year Amnesty Intemational leamed of the release from Belgrade Prison Psychiatric Hospital of Vjekoslav Naglic and Dusan Cetkovic, two other cases it had been investigating. In all the cases raised by Amnesty Intemational there was no indication that any of the victims had used or advocated violence. They were all confined to psychiatric hospital after they had been charged with non-violent political offences.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about allegations made by some ethnic Albanians convicted of political offences that they had been ill-treated during investigation proceedings. For example, Lutvi Maqedonci, a 21-year-old student, who was tried together with 22 others by a Pristina court in Febmary on charges of belonging to an illegal nationalist group, reportedly stated at the trial that he had been physically and psychologically tortured during investigation proceedings. He was sentenced to six years' imprisonment. In another political
323
trial in Pristina in December, Adnan Gashi reportedly denied the charges against him and said that the statements he had made during investigation proceedings had been obtained under duress and by intimidation. He was sentenced to five years' imprisonment. There was no indication that such allegations of ill-treatment had been investigated by the courts.
Amnesty Intemational leamed of breaches of intemationally accepted standards of fair trial in a number of political trials. These included restricted public access to proceedings, and the refusal by the court to allow the submission of evidence and the calling of witnesses for the defence. In the case of Alija Izetbegovic and his co-defendants (see above), the accused were denied access to their lawyers throughout the investigation proceedings. In addition, a number of the witnesses at the trial reportedly gave testimony after they themselves had been detained and interrogated by police. At the trial many were said to have withdrawn their testimony.
Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about reports of poor conditions in certain prisons and in particular the treatment of prisoners punished with solitary confinement or isolation. One account received by Amnesty Intemational concemed Zabela prison, where general conditions were described as fair. Solitary confinement cells, however, were described as windowless and cramped with bunks made of bare boards. Certain prisoners were said to be punished by being chained to their bunks so that they could not move. Guards reportedly often beat prisoners held in these cells.
In Frankfurt in the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG) the trial continued of three people accused of the attempted assassination in May 1981 of Rasim Zenelaj, an ethnic Albanian political emigre from Kosovo. In November, Zorica Aleksic, one of the accused, reportedly informed the court that she had been recmited by one of her co-defendants to work for the Yugoslav state security police and to kill Rasim Zenelaj. In July Stjepan Djurekovic, a Croatian emigre, was shot, dead near Munich in the FRG. Amnesty Intemational received allegations that he had been killed by agents of the Yugoslav state security police.
Amnesty Intemational leamed of the imposition of 10 death sentences during the year, nine for murder and one for terrorist activity which caused injury to a number of people and material damage. Amnesty Intemational did not leam of any executions. In June it appealed to the Presidency of Kosovo to commute a death sentence, confirmed in final instance, imposed on Ferat Muja for murder.
