Uruguay
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the large number of prisoners of conscience; the continuing practice of unacknowledged detention of suspected members of illegal political parties; the lack of legal guarantees for political detainees; the administrative detention of prisones who had completed their sentences; torture; and inhumane prison regimes.
In April 1983 an Amnesty International delegation visited Montevideo comprising Professor Heleno Claudio Fragoso of Brazil, Vice-President of the Intemational Commission of Jurists, and a member of Amnesty Intemational's Intemational Secretariat A member of the delegation held a meeting with the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Dr Carios Maeso. The delegation also met representatives of non-
200
governmental organizations, including the Colegio de Abogados, Uruguayan Bar Association; the Servicio de Paz y Justicia, Peace and Justice Service, an ecumenical human rights organization; members of political parties and trade unions and private individuals. In July, Amnesty Intemational submitted a memorandum outlining its concems in Umguay to President Gregorio C. Alvarez. The memorandum called in its recommendations for the release of prisoners of conscience, the adoption of measures to prevent torture, a thorough investigation to publicly clarify the fate or whereabouts of people reported to have "disappeared" following their arrest and the repeal of the Law of State Security and Internal Order (1972) which brought civilians accused of political offences under the jurisdiction of military courts. Amnesty Intemational also urged the govenmient to review the regimes currently in force in military prisons, to bring these into line with the United Nations (UN) Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners and to ensure that prisoners received proper medical attention and treatment.
No reply was received from the govemment to the memorandum, and in November the text was published in full in an Amnesty Intemational report. Human Rights Violations in Uruguay. At the end of 198 3 Amnesty Intemational estimated that there were approximately 800 political prisoners in Umguay, 670 men and 130 women. The organization was working on behalf of 279 adopted prisoners of conscience, and the cases of a further 85 prisoners were being investigated.
The release of 55 prisoners for whom Amnesty Intemational had worked was confirmed in 1983. Rita Ibarbum de Suárez, a 68-year-old former joumalist, who had suffered from a serious heart condition since her imprisonment in October 1975 and for whose release Amnesty Intemational had consistently appealed, was released in October, having completed her eight-year sentence in fiill. A small number of prisoners were granted early release before their sentences had expired. These included Juan Manuel Rodriguez Bas, a university teacher of Spanish birth, who was released in January 1983, three years before the expiry of his eight-year prison sentence. In July Alberto Altesor González, a former leader of the Uruguayan railway workers' union and a member of the Umguayan parliament, was released three months early. Amnesty Intemational had appealed for his early release to allow him to receive post-operative care following the major heart operation he underwent in July 1982 while in prison. Rita Ibarbum de Suárez, Juan Manuel Rodriguez Bas and Alberto Altesor González had all been adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty Intemational adopted 61 prisoners of conscience during the year, of whom 28 were arrested in 1983.
201
At least 50 university students and other young people were detained in June. A police official stated that 25 had been charged with "subversive association" and "assistance to a subversive association", offences under the Military Penal Code which carried possible prison sentences of between three and 18 years and two and eight years respectively. The students and young people were accused of membership of the illegal Unión de Juventudes Comunistas (UJC), Union of Communist Youth, and were held responsible for the planning of anti-govemment demonstrations on 27 June 1983, the tentíi anniversary of the closure of parliament by the armed forces. The UJC was the youth branch of Xht Partido Comunista del Uruguay (PCU), the Uruguayan Communist Party, which was banned by the armed forces in December 1973, along with 13 other political parties and groups. The 25 young people, who were awaiting trial by military court, were adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty International continued to investigate the cases of 15 prisoners who had been kept in detention on new charges following the expiry of their prison sentences. They were accused of a political conspiracy in prison as alleged members of a political group known as the Seispuntistas, Six Point Group, Amnesty International believed that the new legal proceedings against them did not conform to internationally recognized standards for a fair and impartial trial. Trial proceedings were based on confessions obtained under duress while prisoners were held incommunicado for prolonged periods and trials were conducted in secret To Amnesty International's knowledge, no evidence had been produced that the prisoners had used or advocated violence since the date of their imprisonment Five of the prisoners were reported to have been convicted on the new charges and given fresh prison sentences ranging from seven to 10 years.
Américo Gastón Roballo, whom Amnesty International had previously listed as "disappeared", was located at the end of January 1983 in a military barracks in Montevideo (see Amnesty International Report 1983). The Uruguayan authorities had repeatedly denied that he had been detained. However, in notes sent to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, which had taken up the case, the authorities subsequently maintained that he was arrested on 20 January 1983, Amnesty International believed that he had in fact been held in unacknowledged detention for a period of more than four months, from 20 September 1982 until the end of Januaiy 1983.
No new cases of" disappearances" were reported in 1983. Amnesty International continued to work on behalf of Miguel Angel Mato Fagiani, Félix Ortiz PiazzoH and Omar Antonio Paita Cardozo, all of whom reportedly "disappeared" in 1981 and 1982. InFebruary 1983 Amnesty International asked the authorities for confirmation of their
202
detention and information on their whereabouts. No replies were received. However, in response to inquiries made through diplomatic channels, the authorities stated that they had not been detained and that no warrant for their arrest existed.
Amnesty Intemational remained concemed about the continued practice of holding in administrative custody prisoners who had completed their ftill prison terms. Detention orders were issued in such cases by higher military authorities, without recourse to military courts, supposedly under emergency powers provided for by Article 168.17 of the constitution.
In September and November 1983 two prisoners for whom Amnesty Intemational had worked, Jorge Selves Lawlor and Washington Guinovart Tonelli, were released and left the country. They had been detained for approximately two and a half years and one and a half years respectively, after the expiry of their prison sentences. Both men had been held for an extended period in a military barracks in the provincial town of Florida, the Batallón de Ingenieros de Combate No. 2 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1983.)
In an interview published after his release Jorge Selves Lawlor maintained that he had been confined to a punishment cell in Libertad prison for 125 days after the expiry of his sentence before being transferred to the military barracks, where, he said, he was held for several months in isolation in a basement cell.
Reports that suspected members of illegal political parties were tortured while being held incommunicado following their arrest continued In Jime Amnesty Intemational sent urgent appeals to the Uruguayan authorities asking for guarantees of the physical safety and integrity of the students and young people arrested that month on political charges. In July, Montevideo newspapers published a statement made by the Peace and Justice Service which alleged that many of the prisoners detained in June had been tortured while in police custody. The reported methods included electric shock torture and beatings and semi-asphyxiation by immersion in water, a technique known as the submarino. Several women were said to have been raped in the presence of other detainees. Amnesty International received a detailed account of the torture inflicted on one of the students, Lucia Arzuaga Gilboa, which occurred before her arrest had been officially recognized In August Amnesty Intemational urged an immediate and thorough investigation of these allegations. Two Catholic priests were questioned by police in connection with the public statement on torture issued by the Peace and Justice Service, but to Amnesty International's knowledge no official inquhy was undertaken into the allegations it contained On 31 August the Peace and Justice Service was banned by government decree.
203
Amnesty Intemational remained concemed about the harsh treatment of prisoners and the inadequate provision for medical attention in Umguay's two major military prisons for political prisoners: the Penal de Libertad, Libertad prison, for men, and the Penal de Punta de Rieles, Punta de Rieles prison, for women
During the year Amnesty Intemational medical groups wrote to prison authorities expressing concem about reports of the serious ill-health of 11 prisoners, and urging that prompt and appropriate medical care be provided. In a number of cases, a formal reply was received from the Oficina Central de Información sobre Personas (OCIP), Central Office for Information on Persons, a government office which was established in 1978 to deal with inquiries and appeals received from abroad conceming political prisoners. Such replies invariably provided basic information conceming the prisoners' legal situation and general state of health, without responding to the specific concerns raised by Amnesty Intemational, or making available any details conceming medical treatment However, Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports of delays in medical attention, delays in the transfer of sick prisoners to hospital for treatment or surgery, and of an irregular supply of medicines.
In September Amnesty Intemational organized appeals to end the inhumane treatment of nine prominent leaders of the Movimiento de Liberación Nacional - Tupamaros (MLN), National Liberation Movement-Tupamaros. The appeals coincided with the 10th anniversary of the transfer of the nine from Libertad prison to separate military barracks in the interior of the country, where they had been kept in solitary confinement in tiny cells without adequate nutrition, ventilation or sanitary facilities. The nine were reported to be fi'equently denied exercise, reading and writing materials, regular family visits, legal assistance and adequate medical attention. In June, Amnesty Intemational issued an urgent appeal for one of them, Raúl Sendic Antonaccio, having received reports that he had been tortured on being transferred to another military barracks. In its 1983 Report on Human Rights Violations in Uruguay, Amnesty Intemational urged the transfer of the nine to a regular prison in accordance with the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners.
In 1983 Amnesty Intemational submitted information under the UN procedure set up to examine a "Consistent pattem of gross and reliably attested violations of human rights". Amnesty Intemational also submitted information to the UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances. During the year the Human Rights Committee, established under the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, published its views on 12 Umguayan cases. In all of these cases the Uruguayan Govemment was found responsible for
204
violations of the Covenant, particularly of Article 7, referring to torture. Article 10, referring to the ill-treatment of prisoners, and Article 14, referring to trial procedures. Ismael Weinberger Weisz and Lilito Celiberti, two prisoners for whose immediate release the Committee had asked in decisions reached in previous years, were released in 1983. Ismael Weinberger was released in January, one year before the expiry of his eight-year prison sentence. Lilian Celiberti was released in November, a few days before completing her five-year sentence. Both had been adopted by Amnesty Intemational as prisoners of conscience.
