Taiwan
Amnesty Intemational continued to appeal during 1983 for the release of some 40 prisoners of conscience and was investigating the cases of some 70 other political prisoners who had been detained for several years. Thirteen other prisoners of conscience were released on parole during the year. Amnesty Intemational investigated nine reported arrests on political grounds and one report of torture. It was also concerned about the execution of convicted criminals and the handing down of death sentences.
262
Among the prisoners of conscience on whose behalf Amnesty Intemational appealed were 17 who had been sentenced to life imprisonment in 1950 on charges of pro-communist activities. After years of inquiry, the organization could find no evidence that they had used or advocated violence. Seven were released on humanitarian grounds in Febmary and March 1983. Ten others remained in detention although in mid-October 1983 press reports quoted Minister of Defence Soong Chang-chih as saying that a review of their cases initiated in October 1982 was progressing and that some of them would soon be released.
On 4 October 1983 another prisoner of conscience, Lin Wen-chen, the former Dean of the Women's Bible School in Taipei, who had been detained since January 1980, was granted parole on medical grounds. Amnesty Intemational had been concemed about her r^idly deteriorating health. Also in October, five other prisoners of conscience were released on parole between two and four months before their sentences had expired. They were Yang Chin-chu, a writer, Chang Fu-chung and Chen Chung-hsin, joumalists, and two former employees of the banned opposition magazine Formosa, Yu Ah-hsing and Chiù Chui-chen. They had been arrested after the Kaohsiung Incident in December 1979 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1981).
There were no indications that the govemment was reviewing the cases of other prisoners of conscience or of prisoners convicted of sedition after trials that Amnesty Intemational believed fell short of internationally accepted standards. One prisoner of conscience, Pai Ya-tsan, an opposition politician,was sentenced to life imprisonment in November 1975 for circulating an election leaflet with questions to the Prime Minister on politically sensitive topics. Amnesty International continued to appeal for the release of Yen Ming-sheng, an opposition candidate in the 1975 pariiamentary elections, and Yang Chin-hai, his campaign manager and a businessperson. It was believed that the immediate reason for their arrest in May 1976 was their role in the preparation of a conference of independent politicians which was intended to establish an opposition party. Afl«r tiieir arrest, both were held incommimicado for two months. At their trial in 1976 Yang Chin-hai testified that he had been tortured in order to force him to confess that he had been plaiming terrorist activities. Yang Chin-hai was sentenced to life imprisonment and Yen Ming-sheng to 12 years' imprisonment The principal evidence produced by the authorities to support the charges was confessions reportedly extracted imder torture. Amnesty Intemational adopted both men as prisoners of conscience.
Although the constitution guarantees the right to freedom of expression, several writers and joumalists remained in detention for their writings. Among them was Lin Cheng ting. Amnesty Intemational
263
believed that his arrest in 1957 was the result of an editorial he wrote criticizing the way the govemment and the United States Embassy handled a mob attack on the embassy which followed the killing of a Chinese by a US soldier, and the organization adopted him as a prisoner of conscience. Another prisoner of conscience, Huang Hua, was serving his third sentence for sedition and was in his mid-40s. In October 1976 he was sentenced to 10 yeare' imprisorunent for articles he contributed to the Taiwan Political Review.
Among the cases being investigated by Arrmesty International were those of some 10 people who were serving terms of three years' "reformatory education" (detention during which political "re-education" is administered) for allegedly producing pro-communist propaganda. One of them was Lee Ta-chuan, a retired soldier. He was reportedly charged with gambling, but Amnesty Intemational believed that he may have been arrested for circulating petitions to President Chiang Ching-kuo calling for negotiations with the People's Republic of China (PRC) and for complaining about police bmtality.
Although Anmesty Intemational received several reports of the detention of political prisoners under the Law for the Punishment of Police Offences, it had details in only one case. Article 28 of this law allows the police to send "a person who habitually commits police offences ... to a suitable place for correction . . .". Police offences include "disseminating mmours sufficient to affect public peace". Wang Ching-hsiung, a lecturer at the College of Chinese Culture, was convicted of producing pro-communist propaganda in the early 1970s. He completed his sentence in 1980 but remained in detention under Article 28 reportedly because he refused to change his political views. Amnesty Intemational adopted him as a prisoner of conscience.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed that many prisoners of conscience were reported to be in ill-health and to be receiving inadequate medical treatment, in spite of assurances from the authorities to the organization that adequate medical facilities were available within the prisons and that provision was made for medical examinations or treatment outside prison where necessary.
Amnesty Intemational investigated nine arrests which took place during the year. Yang Huan-hsi was arrested on 5 January 1983 and charged with having written to friends who held official posts in the PRC, suggesting initiatives for the reunification of China by the PRC. On 9 February 1983, the Taiwan Garrison Command (TGC) announced that he had been sentenced to three years' "reformatory education" but he was conditionally released in view of his age and poor health. In another case, Maeda Mitsue, a Japanese citizen. Professor Lu Hsiu-yi, Dean of the Political Science Department of tiie College of Chinese Culture, and Ko Szu-pin were arrested on 3 and 8 January 1983 and
264
accused of working for an organization based in Japan which, the prosecution said, advocated the formal independence of Taiwan, to be achieved through a violent revolution backed by the PRC. Amnesty Intemational urged the authorities to allow them immediate access to lawyers of their choice and asked that they be humanely treated They were held incommunicado until 25 Febmary 1983 when the prosecution recommended lenient sentence s on the grounds that they had cooperated and repented during their interrogation. Their trial before a military court was believed to have taken place in late Febmary but no details were available. They were sentenced to three years' "reformatory education", suspended, except in the case of Lu Hsiu-yi.
Amnesty International was concemed about the case of Chang Ming-chuan, who was arrested in March 1982 and sentenced to death for murder and robbery. He appealed against his conviction, claiming that he had been tortured into making a false confession as well as pointing out discrepancies in the prosecution evidence. In early 1983 the Supreme Court sent the case back for review to the Taiwan High Court on the grounds of unsatisfactory evidence. The High Comt reimposed the sentence and, following another appeal, the Supreme Court on 15 December 1983 again retumed the case to ¿le High Court for review. It was not known whether the authorities conducted an independent inquiry into the claim of torture.
Amnesty Intemational also continued to lu^ge the authorities to set up independent inquiries into all previous claims of torture made by prisoners still detained. In early 1983 the government said that all such complaints had been "careftilly investigated without any concrete finding of torture or other ill-treatment". The reply did not indicate the nature of the investigations, the participants involved or the methods used
On 5 August 1983 Amnesty Intemational wrote to President Chiang Ching-kuo to express concem about the execution in July 1983 of 10 people convicted of ordinary criminal offences. Two more executions of criminal convicts took place in September and December. Twenty-seven people were reportedly sentenced to death for criminal offences during the year. One prisoner under sentence of death was acquitted and released in Febmary 1983.
