Suriname
Amnesty Intemational continued to call for an independent and impartial inquiry into the extrajudicial execution by the army of 13 prominent civilians and two army officers in December 1982. The organization was also concemed about the incommunicado detention of alleged opponents of the government without charge or trial and reports of ill-treatment of detainees.
In December 1982 Amnesty Intemational had written to Lieutenant Colonel Desi Bouterse, leader of the military-controlled govemment, expressing its concem about the reported torture and summary execution of 15 people who were shot dead in the early hours of 9 December after being held incommunicado for 24 hours in Fort Zeelandia military headquarters, (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1983). The organization called for a full inquiry into the circumstances of the deaths.
In January the govemment replied, stating that the reports referred to by Amnesty Intemational did " not reflect the truth of the matter" and
193
that" a number of persons detained for their involvement in activities to overthrow the government by violent means were killed in an unfortunate accident as a result oftheir attempt to escape from custody". However, Amnesty International believed that all 15 had been tortured and were then executed without legal proceedings. Eye-witnesses who subsequently identified the bodies in a city mortuary testified that the victims had severe bruising and cuts on the face, smashed jaws, broken teeth, fractured limbs, and multiple bullet entry wounds in the face, chest and abdomen.
In July Amnesty International wrote to Prime Minister Errol Alibux reiterating its appeal for the government to institute an immediate inquiry into the circumstances of the deaths and the treatment received by the deceased during their detention. Amnesty International also called for the results of such an inquiry to be made public. The Prime Minister replied to Amnesty International in September expressing regret that the complete protection of civil and political rights had not always been possible due to repeated external threats (citing four attempts since 1980 to overthrow the government). He stated the government's determination "to take firm steps towards the protection and promotion of human rights in general and the social and economic rights in particular". No official inquiry into the deaths had taken place by the end of the year.
Fifteen to 20 people were arrested on 30 January, accused of involvement in an attempted coup against the government. They included two former government ministers and Major Roy Horb, former Commander-in-Chief of the Paramaribo army garrison and second-in-command to Lieutenant Colonel Bouterse. Major Horb had resigned from the army a month before, reportedly in protest at the executions in December 1982. In a telex message to Lieutenant Colonel Bouterse dated 1 February, Amnesty International urged that full protection regarding the internationally recognized rights to life, humane treatment and due process of law be granted to those detained.
Major Horb was subsequently reported to have been found hanged in his cell in Fort Zeelandia on 3 February. Shortly after his death the government announced that an autopsy had been performed and that the cause of death had been found to be suicide by hanging. At least 10 of the people arrested were later released Lieutenant Hardjoprajitno, one of those arrested, was tried in October on a charge of illegal possession of arms and sentenced to 16 months' imprisonment.
In December Amnesty International appealed for the humane treatment of people arrested during November and reportedly held incommunicado in military custody. On 29 November the military authorities announced that they had arrested 10 people during the previous week on suspicion of plotting a coup against the government
194
However, up to 90 people, mainly from the Hindustani population, were believed to have been arrested. Some of them were then reportedly beaten while in custody. Amnesty Intemational was further concemed about reports that, after the beginning of December, relatives and lawyers were denied access to those detained and that some detainees had been transferred from Fort Zeelandia to an unknown destination.
Amnesty Intemational sent Lieutenant Colonel Bouterse a telex on 8 December with a list of the names of 14 people it understood to be in detention. On 14 December, in response to reports that those detained had been transferred into civilian custody, Amnesty Intemational sent a telex to the Minister of Justice, Frank Leeflang, asking to be informed whether the people named on the list were still detained, how many people were in fact detained and where. Amnesty Intemational asked that those detained be granted full protection by the authorities, that they be promptly charged and brought before a court or released, and that they be granted access to lawyers and relatives. Amnesty Intemational sent a similar appeal to the Prime Minister on 20 December asking him to inform it of the names and place of detention of all persons still in custody in connection with the recent alleged coup attempt
Amnesty Intemational subsequently leamed that seven people had appeared before a magistrate on 21 December and that the judge had ordered the release of two of those detained; their release was reportedly refused by Lieutenant Colonel Bouterse. Another two detainees were released into house arrest in early December. At the end of the year. Amnesty Intemational was still investigating unconfirmed reports that up to 90 people arrested in connection with the alleged November coup attempt were still being detained.
195
