Mauritania
Amnesty International's main concerns were the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, trials of political prisoners which fell short of internationally accepted standards, the detention without trial of real or suspected o^wnents of the government, torture and the death penalty.
Throughout the year. Amnesty International sought to obtain the release of detainees who were arrested in August 1981 and March 1982, when as many as 150 people were taken into custody, including a number of women and children, on suspicion of being members of a pro-Iraqi Ba'athist party in Mauritania, Many were believed to have been tortured at the time of their arrest by being beaten severely and hung up by their feet Some of the detainees were released within a few days of their arrest, but approximately 90 remained in detention without trial until late July 1983 when further releases reportedly took place. However, in late September 26 of those released and 29 of those who had remained in detention were tried by the Cour Spéciale de Justice, Special Court of Justice, a court composed entirely of military officers, at the remote military barracks at Jereida. They all faced charges of "complicity with a foreign power" and "membership of a banned organization" on account of Ûieir alleged creation of an Arab Socialist Ba'ath Party in Mauritania (all political activity having been outlawed in July 1978 when the ruling military authorities took power). The defendants were represented by legal counsel but their trial suffered serious shortcomings. The defendants were not permitted access to lawyers prior to their trial and the latter were not given adequate time to
69
prepare their defence. The authorities do not authorize appeals to a higher court against convictions by the Special Court of Justice. The trial ended on 1 October. Five defendants were acquitted but the remainder were convicted. In all, 38 received suspended five-year prison sentences, and 11 were sentenced to either 10 or 12 years' imprisonment with hard labour. A 10-year sentence was also passed on another defendant who was tried in absentia. More than half of the 11 prisoners sentenced to terms of hard labour had been adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International in 1982. New appeals for their release, and for the release of the other prisoners sentenced to hard labour in October 1983 and who were also adopted as prisoners of conscience by the organization were sent to the authorities after the trial. Those sentenced included the former government minister Mohamed Yehdih Ould Breidelleyl, Memed Ould Ahmed, a history teacher, and Mohamed Ould Hamady, a journalist and prominent trade unionist The organization also expressed concern about the possible lack of independence of the Special Court of Justice from the executive and about the restrictions on the rights of the defence. In a reply to Amnesty International in November 1983, the Director of the Presidential Cabinet stated that the court's judges had no political responsibilities and that the rights of the defence had, in the opinion of the government, been fijlly respected at the trial. However, the reply provided no additional information on the workings of the court or on the trial, and Amnesty International informed the authorities that it remained concerned about the fairness of the trial.
Shortly after their trial, the 11 prisoners who had been sentenced to long prison terms were transferred from Jereida barracks to other places of detention apparently in remote towns or villages. The precise locations were not disclosed, even to prisoners' relatives. The authorities reportedly did not release Yemhelou Ould Sidy Khattary, who had received a suspended five-year prison sentence in October 1983. He had reportedly been absent from the trial having been crippled when he was tortured shortly after his arrest in March 1982. He was adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience.
Amnesty International remained concerned about the continued detention without trial of Mohamed Lamine Ould Hormatallah, a former National Assembly deputy, who had been held since October 1979, and three other prisoners of conscience who were being held either because of their links with ex-President Moktar Ould Daddah or because they were suspected of opposing the government's decision to withdraw from its alliance with Morocco in the conflict in Western Sahara. Mohamed Lamine Ould Hormatallah, who was in his 60s, was held at Boumdeid prison and was in poor health with a stomach ailment The other detainees, Abderrahmane Ould Mouloud Ould Daddah, a
70
businessperson who was also arrested in October 1979, and Naval Lieutenant Dahane Ould Ahmed Mahmoud, a former Foreign Affairs minister who was arrested in August 1981, were held at Nouakchott Central Prison and at Chinguetti respectively. In late 1983, Amnesty Intemational appealed for the release of the prisoner of conscience Zeini Ould Moulaye Ould Hassan, a magistrate who was arrested in March 1981 and sentenced to two years' imprisonment for his alleged involvement in an armed coup attempt He was rearrested shortly after he had completed his term of imprisonment in March 1983, apparentiy because the authorities suspected that he had criticized government policy concerning the Westem Sahara. The detention without trial of these four prisoners of conscience was not thought to have any legal basis, and appeared to have taken place simply on the order of the executive.
fcAmnesty Intemational appealed on several occasions to the authorities to institute a judicial review of the cases of five prisoners against whom heavy prison sentences had been imposed in March 1982 by the Special Court of Justice. Four of them had received sentences of 10 years' hard labour, a fifth being sentenced to five years' imprisonment for allegedly being involved in a coup plot which the authorities claimed to have uncovered. During the trial severe limitations were believed to have been placed on the right to adequate defence and the prosecution apparently failed to advance any evidence of involvement in the alleged plot on the part of the prisoners. Among those convicted were former Head of State, Lieutenant-Colonel Moustapha Mohamed Ould Saleck, the former Prime Minister, Sid'Ahmed Ould Bneijara, and the former government minister Baham Ould Mohamed Lagdaf. In a response in November 1983 to an Amnesty Intemational inquiry concerning the case of Sid'Ahmed Ould Bneijara, the Director of the Presidential Cabinet declared that the accused had confessed to charges of subverting state security and to violence. Amnesty International was continuing to investigate both this case, and the cases of the other four prisoners sentenced at the same trial at the end of the year. The prisoners were beUeved to have been tortured after their arrest
Following their conviction in March 1982, these five prisoners were reportedly held in extremely harsh conditions in an old fortress at Jereida which had been built during the colonial period. They were apparently held in underground cells so small that the prisoners were unable to lie down or to stand up fully; the cells were insanitary, without any light and extremely poorly ventilated; food was reportedly very poor and prisoners were denied exercise, visits or correspondence. According to reports received by Amnesty Intemational, most of the five prisoners became very ill during their imprisonment at Jereida. The organization had appealed to the authorities in August 1982 to improve
71
their conditions substantially and to bring them into conformity with intemational standards relating to the treatment of prisoners, but no answer was received from the authorities. In early 1983, two of the five prisoners were apparently transferred from Jereida to different locations in Mauritania, where their conditions were thought to be improved, and the other three were apparenüy given better quarters in Jereida barracks.
In September 1983 Amnesty Intemational requested information from the authorities regarding the legal basis for the detention of Ladji Traore, the Managing Director of Pharmarim, the state-owned pharmaceuticals distribution company. He was arrested in March 1983 and apparently accused of poor management of the company, but several reports were received by Amnesty Intemational which suggested that the real reason for his arrest lay in differences of views about the administration of Pharmarim which existed between Ladji Traore and higher governmental authorities. Amnesty Intemational received no reply from the authorities, but continued to make inquiries to establish whether Ladji Traore was a prisoner of conscience.
Five detainees whom Amnesty Intemational had adopted as prisoners of conscience were released in the course of the year. Two of these, Tijani Ould Kerim and Abdallah Ould Bah, had been arrested in April 1980 and April 1979 respectively, apparently because of their political activities during the Ould Daddah administratioa The other three released detainees were arrested in March 1981, in the wake of an abortive armed coup attempt, but were not among the nine prisoners brought to trial in the same month on charges of involvement in the plot, four of whom were sentenced to death and later executed. These three detainees were apparently held for their political views alone, and were neither charged nor tried.
In July, Amnesty International publicly appealed to the mling military authorities to grant an amnesty to all political prisoners on the fifth anniversary of their assumption of power on 10 July 1978 and take action to end the use of torture. The organization drew attention to the imprisorunent of several prisoners of conscience and said that unconfirmed reports suggested that there might be as many as 100 political prisoners. Amnesty Intemational also referred to allegations that suspected Ba'athists had been tortured in 1982 by being hung up by their feet and beaten with fists and sticks.
One death sentence was known to have been carried out during the year. In March, a police officer convicted of murder by a Shari'a, Islamic law, court was sentenced to death and executed in public by firing squad. Following his execution, Amnesty Intemational protested to the govemment and called for an end to the use of the death penalty.
