Paraguay
Amnesty International was concerned about the arbitrary arrest, detention, torture, "disappearance" and forcible expulsion from the country of political detainees. Many of these human rights violations resulted from an abuse of the powers provided for under the state of siege which has been in force almost continuously for nearly 30 years. People detained under the state of siege are denied the right to a fair trial and due process of law and have no recourse against being detained indefinitely. Amnesty International was also concerned about the effect of two anti-subversive laws which have increasingly been used to arrest and detain people who were peacefully exercising their human rights. Amnesty International believed that there were 35 political prisoners detained in Paraguay as of December 1983,24 of whom had been adopted by the organization as prisoners of conscience. The organization was investigating the cases of three other prisoners.
In May 1983 Amnesty International organized appeals following the arrest of more than 30 people in Asimción. Those detained included students, teachers and trade imionists and staff members of the Banco Paraguayo de Datos (BPD), Paraguayan Data Bank, and the owner and employees of the Estudio Gráfico (a printing company). The BPD is a research institution which produced regular bulletins on the political, social and economic situation in the country. By September only three of those who had originally been arrested in May remained in detention in Tacumbú Prison. They were Roberto Antonio Villalba, Enrique Goossen Martens and Desiderio Arzamendia López and were charged with violating Law 209 on Defence of Public Peace and Liberty of Persons. Law 209 prohibits a large number of activities - such as printing, storing or distributing pamphlets or publications - if the authorities deem these activities to be Marxist-inspired Amnesty International believed that Law 209 was applied to detain these
184
individuals for the non-violent exercise of tiieir human rights and it adopted all three as prisoners of conscience in September 1983.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about numerous irregularities in the legal proceedings against those arrested in connection with the BPD. The arrests took place without an official warrant Three of the detainees were reportedly tortured while in detention and others were allegedly threatened with violence and ill-treatment. Other detainees claimed that they had been coerced into signing statements drawn up by police lawyers. The detainees were held incommunicado until Üieir transfer to regular detention centres, some 10 days after their arrest
The abuse of state of siege powers to justify lengthy arbitrary detention was illustrated by the case of Guillermo Escolástico Ovando, a cavalry sergeant who had been imprisoned for 21 years. He acted as a driver for Captain Modesto Napoleón Ortigoza who is alleged to have been a political rival of President Alfredo Stroessner. The Captain and his driver were arrested in December 1962 and accused of being responsible for the death of a military cadet and involvement in a conspiracy to overthrow the President. C aptain Ortigoza and Sergeant Ovando eventually received sentences of 25 years' and 15 years' imprisonment respectively. Amnesty Intemational believed that neither received a fair trial and was concemed about reports that the evidence used against them was obtained under torture and that forensic evidence about the cause of the cadet's death conflicted with the official version of events. Sergeant Ovando remained in detention in the Guardia de Seguridad, a high security detention centre, under the state of siege after completing his sentence in December 1977. Habeas corpus petitions presented on his behalf were routinely rejected by the Supreme Court on the grounds that detentions under the state of siege are not subject to judicial scmtiny. On 17 October 1983 a new habeas corpus petition was filed on Sergeant Ovando's behalf alleging that the Supreme Court's attitude compounded " an absurd mle of law in which individual freedoms and guarantees are perpetually suspended". On 15 November 1983 the Supreme Court rejected the petition and in December 1983 the President of the Supreme Court, Dr Luis Maria Argaña, filed a law suit against Ovando's lawyers accusing them of slander.
At the end of 1983 Amnesty Intemational was investigating the case of Alejandro Mella Latorre, a 33-year-old Chilean, who had been detained incommunicado in the Guardia de Seguridad for three years under the state of siege. Although the authorities alleged that he had been involved in the assassination of the former Nicaraguan President, General Anastasio Somoza, in Asunción in 1980, he was never formally charged or tried.
Amnesty Intemational believed that legal proceedings against political detainees did not conform to intemationally accepted standards
185
for fair trials. The organization was also concemed that detainees were often denied their right to be brought promptly before a judge and to either be tried within a reasonable time or to be released. The organization expressed concem about the delay in bringing to trial a group of peasants who were arrested in March 1980 and accused of hijacking a bus in Caaguazú. Four of the detainees were adopted by Amnesty Intemational as prisoners of conscience. The organization believed that they were detained for their alleged connection to the nonviolent peasant organization, Ligas Agrarias. The four, Andrés Centurión, Luciano Centurión, Ramón Paiva Acosta and Eliodoro Giménez, were released in 1983. Although the case had still not come to trial, they had already been detained for longer than the maximum possible sentence. Six peasants remained in detention awaiting the judge's verdict. Under Article 154 of the Code of Criminal Procedures, the investigative stage of a trial should last only two months, but in the Caaguazú case it lasted 32 months before the judge proceeded to the final stage in November 1982. Even then the prosecution did not produce a single wimess or any evidence in court relating to the charges.
Political prisoners staged a series of hunger-strikes throughout the year to protest against judicial delays and ill-treatment. Amnesty International expressed concem about the state of health of over 30 political prisoners held in the two main prisons in Asunción, many of whom were adopted prisoners of conscience, when they went on hunger-strike on 6 August 1983. The prisoners' demands, which were published in the newspaper ABC Color, included the release of all political prisoners, the lifting of the state of siege and the repeal of the wide ranging anti-subversive laws 209 and 294, which are used to curb freedom of expression and association. Law 294 on the "Defence of Democracy" prohibits the activity of any Marxist-inspired political group. On 24 August 1983 five of the hunger-strikers were transferred to the Policlinico Rigoberto Caballero, the police clinic. The hunger-strike lasted approximately two weeks and was suspended after the authorities had guaranteed that legal proceedings against the detainees would be speeded up.
In April 1983 Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Paraguayan authorities expressing concem about the death of the political detainee Leónidas Bogado viuda de González, who was detained with her daughter and three sons in Febmary 1982 and accused of having links with the "Chinese wing" of the illegal Paraguayan Communist Party. She died in a cancer clinic on 10 Febmary 1983 only two days after being admitted to the clinic from the Casa del Buen Pastor prison where she had been held. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that she had not been given adequate medical care during her imprisonment and that she had been prevented from receiving specialist treatment until two
186
days before her death, in contravention of Article 22( 2) of the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. For the last four days of her life she was reportedly held incommunicado.
Nineteen individuals remained in prison charged in connection with alleged membership of the Paraguayan Communist Party. All of them were adopted by Amnesty Intemational as prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about reports of the torture of both political prisoners and common criminal suspects. Political arrests were often not acknowledged for several months, putting prisoners at particular risk ofill-treatment Allegations of torture were usually denied by the Paraguayan authorities and were rarely the subject of legal action.
Under Article 59 of the Paraguayan Constitution a suspect must be brought before a judge within 48 hours of arrest and must be granted access to a lawyer. These regulations appeared to be repeatedly disregarded, with prisoners being kept incommunicado in pohce stations for weeks. During this period they were allegedly tortured to force them into signing incriminating statements which could form the basis for subsequent prosecutions.
On 8 August 1983 Carlos Bogarin, aged 23, was taken by three plainclothes police officers to the local police station in Puerto Presidente Stroessner. One hour after his arrest his family was informed that he had died and that his body was in a hospital morgue in Hemandarias. No official cause of death was given and the Chief of Police stated that the death had occurred during an operation carried out by members of his police force. The death of Carlos Bogarin resulted in the arrest of 10 police officers, including the Chief of Investigations. In statements to the judge a number of the accused admitted to beating the prisoner with truncheons on the orders of the Chief of Investigations. At the time of writing the judge was continuing his investigation into the death of Carlos Bogarin.
Another of tiie arrested suspects, Eulalio Rojas, was transferred to the police hospital in Asunción, reportedly in a serious condition. His family reported that his body was covered with wounds and bmises and that he was unable to urinate or eat as a result of blows to his stomach and kidneys.
A number of short-term detentions were reported during 1983, with journalists and students particularly at risk. In July Amnesty International intervened on behalf of Aldo Zuccolillo, the editor of ABC Color, who was placed in preventive detention on 15 July 1983 after publishing documents critical of the judicial system. He was released on bail after 12 days. Cristóbal Alcibiades González Delvalle, ajoumalist from ABC Color who had been subjected to several periods of short-term detention since 1979, was again arrested on 23 September 1983.
187
He was kept in incommunicado detention under the state of siege provisions allegedly as a result of articles he had written about the ruling Colorado Party. Amnesty International appealed to the authorities for his immediate and unconditional release. Two petitions for habeas corpus were filed on his behalf but were rejected by the Supreme Court. He was released on 7 December.
In a number of cases people have been arrested and then summarily expelled from the country. In June 1983 Dr Jorge Alvarenga, a general practitioner, was arrested after attending a meeting at the National University about trade unions and repression. He was allegedly tortured while in detention and was deported to Argentina a few weeks after his arrest
In 1983 Amnesty International submitted information concerning the imprisonment and torture of members of the BPD to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States and to the United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization On 6 September 1983 theUnitedNations(UN) Sub-Commission on the Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities adopted a recommendation to the UN Commission on Human Rights inviting the Government of Paraguay to consider ending the state of siege, in order to encourage the promotion of, and respect for, human rights in the country.
