Burundi
Amnesty Intemational's concems centred on the situation of refugees and asyliun seekers from Zaire; two were forcibly repatriated to Zaire and several others were detained without trial for short periods. Amnesty Intemational also sought information about two school teachers who had been suspected of criticizing or opposing the government and were arrested in 1981 and 1982.
The arrests of Zairian asylum-seekers was initially reported in April, when three were arrested in Rumonge and taken to the border with Zaire to be repatriated One of them escaped from custody, but two others, Kalenga and Kitungano, were handed over into the custody of the Zairian national security service at Uvira. They were detained in Zaire and reportedly subjected to severe beatings, but were released uncharged after several weeks.
Two Zairian refugees remaining in Burundi, Mukadi Walengamina and Musafiri Ramadhani, both of whom had previously been detained in Zaire for political reasons, protested to the Burundi authorities about the April repatriations and were arrested on 1 June, Amnesty International made inquiries about the reasons for their arrest and the grounds for their detention, but received no reply from the government
24
In August Amnesty International appealed for their release and the organization subsequently learned that they had been released unchained in September.
In November 22 Zairian refugees were arrested after staging a demonstration outside the Bujumbura office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. They were apparently protesting because they had still not been resettied in a neighbouring coimtry of their own choice despite lodging requests several years earlier. Several of those arrested had previously been detained for similar reasons in 1981. All of them were released imcharged in December after spending six weeks in custody.
Amnesty International continued to inquire about two school teachers who were reportedly still being detained without trial at the beginning of the year. One, Juvenal Kubegusa, was arrested in October 1981 apparently because the authorities learned that he was writing a political critique of Burundi. He had previously been held without trial from June 1980 until early 1981, when a number of students who had criticized government policies were detained. Daniel Bacinoni, the other detained teacher, was arrested in March 1982 apparently because he was suspected of having links with an opposition political party based outside the country. By the end of the year, neither of the two was known to have been brought to trial; however, it was unclear if they were still being detained or if they had been released.
Amnesty International was also concerned about a number of short-term detentions which appeared to be politically motivated. The wife of a former political prisoner was arrested and held for several months when she returned to Burundi after living abroad and a former political detainee who had been out of the country for several months was reportedly arrested when he returned in January. However, he escaped from custody shortly after his arrest
25
