Thailand
265
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the use of legislation outlawing criticism of the Thai Royal Family to prosecute opponents of the government, the trial of civilians for political offences in military courts employing judicial procedures which did not meet intemationally accepted standards, and the imposition of the death penalty. In 1983, for the first time in several years, i^ônnesty Intemational adopted two prisoners of conscience in Thailand.
In recent years Amnesty Intemational has known of very few people being imprisoned m Thailand on account of the non-violent expression of their political or other beliefs. The organization was therefore concemed about the arrest on 27 April 1983 and subsequent trial of political activist Anant Senakhan for lese majesté, the crime of defaming, insulting or threatening the Thai Royal Family set out in Article 112 of the Thai penal code. He was found guilty of contravening Article 112 at a trial on 17 August 1983 before a military tribunal and was sentenced to three years' imprisonment He was a reportedly outspoken opponent of a senior rnilitary figure, and was apparentiy arrested for openly criticizing alleged political involvement by the Queen. In December he was sentenced to a further three years' imprisonment after being tried on a second count of lése majesté, again before a military tribunal.
Following legislation enacted after the October 1976 coup by the ruling National Administrative Reform Coimcil (NARC) and still in force for charges of lèse majesté, defendants are tried by martial law courts composed of civilian judges. According to information received by Amnesty Intemational, Anant Senakhan was denied the right to call witnesses on his own behalf and his trial was held in camera. There is no right of appeal from the ruling of a martial law court in Thailand. Amnesty Intemational adopted Anant Senakhan as a prisoner of conscience.
Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about the arrest on 3 July of Saman Kongsuphol, a campaigner for civilian democracy, also on a charge of lese majesté. Saman Kongsuphol, the alleged publisher of a reportedly critical history of the Thai monarchy, was held incommunicado for six days and refused bail following his arrest On 30 December he was sentenced to eight years' imprisonment by a martial law court He was subsequentiy adopted by Amnesty Intemational as a prisoner of conscience.
Other crimes tried by martial law courts are offences against the
266
internal and external security of the state and offences against public order. Offences under the Anti-Communist Activities Act, whereby a suspected "communist" may be held for up to 480 days without a warrant, are tried by "special military tribunals" composed entirely of military officers. Anmesty International was concerned that the rights of defence of civilians tried before martial law courts and "special military tribunals" on political charges appeared to be seriously impaired and to fall far short of the relevant international standards.
In a letter addressed in December 1983 to Prime Minister Prem Tinsulanond, Amnesty International expressed concern that people tried by military courts appeared to be restricted m their rights of defence and denied the right of appeal guaranteed by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. It urged Prime Minister Prem to recommend that Anant Senakhan be pardoned by King Bhumibhol and asked for charges against Saman Kongsuphol to be dropped.
Amnesty International welcomed reports that the Thai Goverrmient had sponsored a parliamentary draft bill that would extend legal safeguards for suspects held in police custody. In particular, the organization noted that the new legislation would, if enacted, guarantee the right to private consultation with a lawyer at the time of arrest, the right to receive visits and medical treatment and the right to appeal against refusal of temporary release on bail. Amnesty International believes that such guarantees can greatly increase a detainee's protection from possible ill-treatment in custody.
Amnesty International also continued to be concerned about the imposition of the death penalty in Thailand and appealed on behalf of a number of sentenced criminals during 1983. The organization learned of at least 25 death sentences being passed (including three on police officers), 16 death sentences being commuted to life imprisonment, 12 death sentences being upheld by the Appeal Court (including 11 on police officers) and one death sentence being upheld by the Supreme Court (A person condemned to death by the Thai Criminal Court may appeal to the Appeal Court, the Supreme Court and then to the King for clemency.) In August 1983 Amnesty International launched an urgent appeal for clemency on behalf of Chirawat Khienpanya, a former student leader accused of complicity in the murder of a policeman in 1978 and sentenced to death in July. As the murder occiured while Thailand was under martial law, Chirawat Khienpanya was tried by a military tribunal and therefore was unable to have his case reviewed by a higher court He appealed for clemency to King Bhumibhol, and at the time of writing Amnesty International was awaiting the outcome of the appeal.
Official figures on executions have rarely been released in Thailand,
267
but Amnesty Intemational noted one report claiming that five people had been executed in 1982. No figure was available for 1983. Executions take place in Bangkok's Bang Khwang Prison, and a press report in March 1983 discussing the prison's recent acquisition of two West German-made machine-guns to be used for carrying out death sentences noted that 16 people were awaiting execution, having exhausted all appeal procedures. In May 1983 it was reported that 121 people were under sentence of death in the country.
Finally, Amnesty Intemational was concemed to leam in 1983 of the reported "disappearance" of a Vietnamese refugee from Sikhiu refiigee camp. Four witnesses claimed to have seen the refugee, Le van Hai, taken out of the camp by armed Thai guards after being interviewed by tiie deputy commander of the centre on 12 September 1982.
In its December 1983 letter to the Prime Minister, Amnesty Intemational caUed on the Thai Goverrunent to investigate the "disappearance" fully and to make the results of the inquiry public.
