Colombia (Republic of)
Four prisoners whose cases were taken up by Amnesty International in 1976 in Colombia were released in October 1976. A civil court
134
overturned their conviction by a military court for comphcity in the murder of General Ramon Arturo Quinones in September 1975.
At the time of the murder, General Quinones had been carrying out an investigation into corruption in the armed forces. As Colombia was then under State of Siege, the investigation into the General's murder was carried out by a military court. It led to the conviction of the four prisoners; three were sentenced to 24 years' imprisonment and the fourth to 28 years. In June 1976 the State of Siege was lifted, and the appeals lodged by the four went to the civil Superior Court of the Bogota judicial district. (The State of Siege which is in force at the time of writing was reimposed on 8 October 1976.)
Amnesty International groups are at present investigating 13 cases of campesinos (peasant farmers) from rural areas in Colombia who have reportedly been imprisoned on the orders of local large landowners with whom they are in dispute over land tenure. Amnesty International has no opinion on the merits of the arguments involved in these civil disputes; however, the cases being investigated are said to involve arbitrary detention, and detention for participation in non-violent meetings of the peasant union Asociación Nacional de Usuarios Campesinos (National Peasant Farmers Association) or for putting up posters announcing ANUC activities. There is further concern because the small farmers (especially those of Cauca Department in southwestern Colombia) who speak native languages and consider themselves Indians [indigenas), do not have the protection of the law, and can consequently be persecuted by local wealthy groups; at least six Indian leaders of the Regional Council of Indians of the Cauca {Consejo Regional Indigena del Cauca) have been murdered since October 1976.
Problems connected with human rights in the country areas of Colombia are considered to be largely the result of excesses by local authorities—national authorities have shown considerable willingness in the past to intervene to remedy abuses when they were reported.
Amnesty International's Secretary General wrote to President Alfonso Lopez Michelsen in February 1977 to express appreciation for Colombia's support of a resolution on torture by the UN General Assembly on 13 December 1976.
