Yugoslavia (Socialist Federal Republic of)
In June 1976, an Amnesty International mission was received by Yugoslav judicial authorities. They discussed questions pertinent to Prisoners of Conscience and other concerns raised by Amnesty International. The delegates were Amnesty International's Secretary General, Clayton Yeo from the International Secretariat and Professor Frits Ruter and Professor Marius Broekmeyer of Amsterdam University. During the visit, which lasted a week, the delegation was able to talk to Dr Ivan Franko, Federal Secretary of Justice; DrDusan Cotie, deputy Federal Secretary of Justice; Dr Yuko Gocetic, Federal Public Prosecutor; Dr Vidak Popovic, Prison Adviser to the Federal Secretariat of Justice and other high officials and lawyers. The delegation also visited several Yugoslav prison institutions. Discussion was mostly about the legislation under which prisoners adopted by Amnesty International in recent years were convicted. The delegates stressed that Penal Code Articles 118 (hostile propaganda), 117 (association against the state), 101/1 (endangering the territorial integrity and independence of the state) and 100 (counter-revolutionary attack against the state and social organization) are vaguely defined and that applying them to individuals who exercise their rights of expression in a non-violent manner
286
contravenes the human rights guarantees incorporated in the Yugoslav Constitution and intemational human rights instmments. The delegates referred in particular to Prisoners of Conscience, Dr Djura Djurovic, Dr Sime Djodan, Mihajlo Mihajlov and Mirko Vidovic. Of these so far Mirko Vidovic and Dr Djodan were released before the expiry of their sentences (3 September 1976 and 25 December 1976 respectively). Yugoslav officials told the delegates that the draft penal code, then believed nearly to have become law, would retain all the articles about which Amnesty Intemational was concerned. As of June 1977, the new penal code had still not been enacted.
During the past year. Amnesty Intemational heard of prosecutions for "hostile propaganda". Franc Miklavcic, a judge from Ljubljana, was sentenced to five years eight months' imprisonment in autumn 1976 for exercising freedom of expression. The sentence was reduced on the second appeal in 1977 to two years six months' by the Slovenian Supreme Court. The conviction was for "hostile propganda", "endangering the territorial unity of Yugoslavia" and "disclosure of official secrets". The charge of "hostile propaganda" arose from an article of his published in the monthly journal Zaliv, printed in Trieste, Italy. In it (citing historical sources) he defended his wartime colleague, the Roman Catholic poet, Edward Kocbek, who had been criticized for an earlier interview in the same monthly journal, in which he had claimed that members of the Yugoslav People's Liberation Front had executed many prisoners of war handed over to Yugoslav partisans by British and US forces in 1945.
Paradoxically, Franc Miklavcic was sentenced to a term of imprisonment whereas Edward Kocbek, who in fact committed the "offence" described in the charges against Franc Miklavcic, was not prosecuted, possibly because of the many international appeals on his behalf. The charge of "endangering the territorial unity of Yugoslavia" arose from Franc Miklavcic's views on socio-economic and human rights issues in Slovenia as expressed in his personal diary found by police in his flat. Four witnesses testified at the trial that these ideas were not exclusive to Franc Miklavcic but were shared by them all. The court evidently did not take into consideration the fact that it was a personal diary and that its contents had not been used publicly. The charge of "disclosure of public secrets" related to the fact that Franc Miklavcic had given Edward Kocbek a copy of a speech by a high-ranking official criticizing the Roman Catholic Church in Slovenia. In September 19 76, Viktor Blazic, another Slovenian Catholic intellectual and a follower of Edward Kocbek, was also convicted of "hostile propaganda" and sentenced to four-and-a-half
287
years' imprisonment, although on the second appeal the Ljubljana Supreme Court reduced the sentence to one year and four months' imprisonment. Viktor Blazic's conviction related to an article by him in Zaliv alleging restriction of religious and political freedom in Slovenia.
During the past year, Roman Catholic clergy in Slovenia have also been the subjects of official reprisals because of their outspoken criticism of the official treatment of believers in religion, but as far as Amnesty International is aware these reprisals have been restricted to police harassment, questioning and confiscation of passports. In March 1977, 16 Franciscan priests from Croatia, Bosnia and Herce-govina were reportedly subjected to prolonged interrogations and harassment by the UDBA (the Yugoslav secret police) after having signed a letter to President Husak of Czechoslovakia protesting about the reprisals against Charter 77 signatories. They included Father Sito Coric, Father Bonifacije Barbaric and Father Tihomir Miuc. None were believed to have been detained for long after the interrogation.
On 6 May 1977, after lengthy pre-trial detention without being formally charged, Vitomir Djilas, a 41-year-oId lawyer and cousin of the former Vice-President of Yugoslavia, was sentenced to 30 months' imprisonment for a 45-line letter to the official newspaper Politika about human rights violations in Yugoslavia. He said that although he had written the letter he had not sent it. Nevertheless he was convicted by the District Court in Titograd of spreading hostile propaganda.
Another example of the application of this Article is that of Mileta Bulat, a 78-year-old pensioner from Kljajicevo. He was sentenced in 1976 by the District Court in Sombor to six years six months' imprisonment (under strict conditions) for writing numerous letters to various authorities criticizing the lack of civil liberties in Yugoslavia.
Evaluating legal documents, such as trial transcripts, was often difficult, as in many instances they were cursory and had been altered after having been approved by the court. As far as Amnesty International is aware, political trials were not recorded verbatim, and often the evidence of witnesses called by legal counsel were to a large extent omitted.
Fresh information was received about the 1974 Zadar trial in which 16 Croatians were sentenced to long terms of imprisonment for allegedly founding a Croatian Liberation Army (HORA) and committing acts of violence. This information supports earlier claims that the charges were not backed by substantial evidence. Many of the defendants were Croatian intellectuals who publicly criticized the Yugoslav Government for what they regarded as its repressive socio-political and cultural policy in Croatia.
288
Marko Dizdar, a 26-year-old student who was sentenced to 11 years' imprisonment in the Zadar trial, has, according to recently received information, been kept for over a year in solitary confinement. This appears to contradict the Yugoslav Ministry of Justice Office's statement to the Amnesty International mission, to the effect that convicted prisoners may not be kept in solitary confinement for more than 25 days.
During the past year Amnesty International received numerous allegations of harassment, interrogation and imprisonment of Yugoslav migrant workers returning to the country after several years' work in European Economic Community countries. The Yugoslav secret police are said to have intensified their search for workers subscribing to the Yugoslav emigre press or associating with Yugoslav emigre groups. Those in possession of emigre newspapers have frequently been sanctioned by the government. The migrant worker Mr Govan and Father Cvitkovic, for example, were sentenced in 1976 to three and six years' imprisonment respectively for importing publications "hostile" to Yugoslavia. Magdalena Paric, a. trained nurse who had worked for several years in Vienna, was arrested on 3 July 1976 while visiting her sick mother in Breko/Bosnia. On 17 September 1976, she was sentenced to six years' imprisonment under Article 109 of the Yugoslav Penal Code, which forbids contact with hostile emigre groups. It is believed that this heavy sentence was partly because her brother works for an emigre newspaper. Amnesty International has adopted her and Marija Faler, who was originally sentenced to five years' imprisonment (under strict conditions) in 1974 for possessing emigré newsletters. The sentence was reduced on appeal in 1976 to two-and-a-half years' imprisonment. Marija Faler was not sent to Slavonska Pozega Prison until early in 1977 as the court gave her permission to stay out to take care of her baby who was bom in 1974.
In 1977, the Yugoslav authorities publicly announced that they intended to free several hundred political prisoners by mid-1977. In April 1977, Amnesty International inquired about this impending amnesty and asked for it to include individual Prisoners of Conscience.
During the past year, five Croatian nationalists in Zagreb were sentenced to death for politically motivated acts of violence. In each case the sentence was commuted to 20 years' imprisonment. In July 1976, Vlado Dapcevic, former Secretary General of the Yugoslav Communist Party, considered to be the most influential "Cominfor-mist" (see The Amnesty International Report 1975-1976) opponent of the present Yugoslav Government, was sentenced "to death and 65 years' imprisonment" for his "opposition" activities. The death
289
sentence was immediately commuted to 20 years' imprisonment. Colonel Dapcevic had been resident in Belgium and was supposedly kidnapped by Yugoslav agents while on a trip to Romania in 1975.
Amnesty International continues to use its investigation and adoption technique in Yugoslavia. This program includes more than 100 prisoners.
