Korea (The Republic of) [South Korea]
There are several hundred political prisoners in South Korea. The 70 Prisoners of Conscience adopted by Amnesty International come from varied backgrounds, but they have all been increasingly critical of the administration of President Park Chung-hee. In recent years, their criticism has been focussed on human rights and civil liberties issues. The men and women who have been subjected to arbitrary arrest and harassment by the Government include leaders and members of the South Korean Christian Churches, leaders and supporters of opposition political parties (including elected members of the National Assembly), students and university teachers, journalists, lawyers and trade unionists. Many of Amnesty International's adoptees were arbitrarily imprisoned under the provisions of Emergency Regulation Number 9, the latest in a series of special presidential decrees designed to ban all criticism of the President, his admins-tration and the Constitution (the so-called "Yushin" or "Revitalizing" Constitution) by which he rules.
On 4 May 1976, the mass trial of the 18 men and women arrested in March 1976 in connection with the so-called "Myong-Dong Incident" began. Most of the defendants were arrested because they endorsed a public statement entitled the "Declaration for Democratic National Salvation" calling for the release of political prisoners and the restoration of basic liberties in South Korea. But they were indicted under Emergency Regulation Number 9 on charges of agitating to overthrow the Government.
The mass trial was adjourned several times after defence complaints that defence counsel were unable to interview their clients. On 25 May, relatives of the defendants complained to Amnesty International that the trial was being held in "an atmosphere of terrorism". They said that the authorities had illegally detained close friends of the defendants, restricted the number of seats in the courtroom by issuing admission tickets and prevented lawyers and relatives from
193
freely seeing the accused. At one point in the trial, defence lawyers walked out of the courtoom after the panel of three judges had refused to hear evidence from any of the 16 defence witnesses.
On 28 August, all 18 defendants were found guilty of violating Emergency Regulation Number 9 and were given heavy prison sentences. Former President Yun Po Sun, aged 79, Quaker leader Hahm Suk Hon, aged 75 and known as "the Gandhi of South Korea" and opposition presidential contender Kim Dae-jung, aged 51 and seriously ill with sciatica, were each sentenced to eight years' imprisonment to be followed by eight years' suspension of civil rights (including the right to vote or hold public office). National Assemblyman and former Foreign Minister Chung II Hyung, aged 72, and his wife Dr Lee Tai Young, aged 61 and South Korea's first woman lawyer, were each sentenced to five years' imprisonment with suspension of civil rights. Under South Korean law, Chung II Hyung also lost his seat in the National Assembly as a result of his conviction and his wife, Lee Tai Young, was disbarred from legal practice. The remaining 13 defendants, including Professor Lee Oo Chung, President of Korea Church Women United, and a number of Roman Catholic priests, Protestant ministers and university teachers, were given prison sentences ranging from two to eight years, with corresponding suspension of civil rights thereafter.
On 29 December 1976, the Seoul Appellate Court confirmed the convictions of all 18 defendants, but changed their prison sentences without explanation. Yun Po Sun and Kim Dae-jung each had their sentences reduced from eight to five years' imprisonment and Hahm Suk Hon similarly had his sentence reduced to five years. Besides other changes, sentences were suspended in four cases.
On 22 March 1977, the Supreme Court confirmed the Appellate Court rulings, and nine of the defendants, including Kim Dae-jung, cire now serving their sentences. Although Yun Po Sun, Hahm Suk Hon and a number of others, who are elderly, have not been imprisoned following the Supreme Court verdicts, they could be removed to prison at any time. However, the nine defendants referred to, including Kim Dae-jung, have remained in prison continuously since their arrest in March 1976. It is reliably reported that they are held in solitary confinement and that they have recently been moved from Seoul to different provincial prisons, which means that it is even more difficult for their families and lawyers to visit them. Kim Dae-jung needs urgent medical treatment, which he is not receiving in prison.
When the Supreme Court verdict was handed down on 22 March, the demands made in the March 1976 "Declaration for Democratic
194
National Salvation" were reiterated by a number of prominent Koreans, including some who had been prosecuted for endorsing the original Declaration. The Govemment reacted with a wave of arrests in March and April. More than 100 people were arrested, including the wives and relatives of some of those imprisoned for endorsing the 1976 Declaration, Roman Catholic priests, Protestant ministers, journalists and students. Those arrested included Chong Kum Song, mother of the imprisoned poet and writer Kim Chi Ha; Kim Sang Hyon, former National Assemblyman of the opposition New Democratic Party; Lee Jik Hyong, Secretary of the Human Rights Committee of the Korean National Council of Churches, and his assistant Kim Kyong In; Park Chong Ryol, son of the Reverend Park Hyung Kyu (the Reverend Park is well known as an outspoken critic of the Govemment, who endorsed the reiterated demands of 22 March 1977) and Cho Chung Ha, wife of Park Hyung Kyu; Park Yong Gil, wife of the Reverend Moon Ik Hwan (the Reverend Moon is serving a five year prison sentence in connection with so-called "Myong-Dong Incident") and Moon Song Kun, son of the Reverend Moon; Kim Ok Shil, wife of the Reverend Kim Kwan Suk (Reverend Kim is Secretary General of the Korean National Council of Churches). The journalists arrested were former staff members of the prestigious daily newspaper, \heDong-A Ilbo, who had been dismissed from their jobs because of their outspoken reporting and as a result of the heavy pressure applied to the newspaper management by the Govemment.
In Amnesty Intemational's opinion, all those arrested and imprisoned in 1976 and 1977 in connection with the demands made in the "Myong-Dong Declaration" and reiterated in subsequent declarations are undoubtedly Prisoners of Conscience. They have been subjected to arbitrary arrest and imprisonment for the peaceful expression of their political and other beliefs. In addition to activities undertaken by individual adoption groups, in November 1976 Amnesty Intemational mounted an international campaign to try to secure the immediate and unconditional release of all those arrested and charged in March 1976. Following the arrest of the more than 100 people in March and April 1977, Amnesty Intemational also made urgent appeals to the South Korean Govemment urging their immediate release. In response to reports that the imprisoned opposition presidential contender Kim Dae-jung had begun a hunger strike on 7 May 1977, demanding better conditions for himself and other political prisoners, the organization launched immediate appeals urging that, at least, Kim Dae-jung be given the medical treatment which he required, and further appealing for the prompt and unconditional release of all Prisoners of Conscience in South Korea.
195
In November 1976, Amnesty International mounted an international campaign for the release of the imprisoned poet and writer Kim Chi Ha. The trial of Kim Chi Ha, who had already been in solitary confinement for 14 months from the time of his re-arrest in March 1975 for allegedly violating the Anti-Communist Law, finally resumed on 18 May 1976. The prosecution sought to prove that his literary works were meant to instigate a revolution in South Korea, but Kim protested that the Government was trying to label him as a communist on the basis of notes on fictional characters for a book which he intended to write in the future. Kim told the panel of three judges that members of the Korean Central Intelligence Agency had forced him to sign a statement which was later distributed publicly by the Government in order to prove that he was a self-confessed communist. He has consistently maintained that he signed the statement under duress.
On 31 December 1976, the Seoul District Criminal Court found Kim guilty of breaking the Anti-Communist Law by supporting North Korean propaganda. He was sentenced to seven years' imprisonment. He has appealed against this sentence, but remains in solitary confinement in Seoul's West Gate Prison, where he is concurrently serving the 15-year prison sentence arbitrarily re-imposed by a military court in 1975. On 15 January 1977, he was permitted to see his wife, two-year-old son and mother for five minutes. This was their first meeting since March 1975. Amnesty International has continued to make strong appeals for his immediate release—he suffers from tuberculosis.
During the year. Amnesty International adopted 26 students who are typical of the numerous students (many from Seoul National University) arrested and imprisoned in South Korea because of their outspoken criticism of the Government. They had been arrested in 1975 in connection with peaceful demonstrations against Government policies. These demonstrations, which called for the repeal of the "Yushin" Constitution which invests President Park with unlimited powers, were organized by the students after a fellow student committed suicide in protest against the Government's policies. Student' demonstrations of this sort are expressly forbidden by Emergency Regulation Number 9; and those arrested and convicted of breaking the decree were later given heavy prison sentences by the Seoul District Criminal Court—some were sentenced to up to 10 years' imprisonment. Amnesty International is still appealing for the immediate and unconditional release of these Prisoners of Conscience.
Adoption groups have gone on working for those prisoners convicted in 1975 because of their connection with the so-called "People's
196
Revolutionary Party" (eight of them were summarily executed in April 1975). Amnesty International is still working for the release of these prisoners, who were unjustly convicted and are serving long prison sentences. Some are in solitary confinement and need urgent medical attention, which they are not allowed to receive. The organization has urged the South Korean Government to release all these prisoners because of their unjust conviction in an unfair trial, in which torture was used to extract evidence and which involved other grave legal abuses.
During the year. Amnesty International made urgent appeals on behalf of Koreans sentenced to death by civilian courts in South Korea for alleged espionage. Many are Koreans normally resident in Japan who were arrested on charges of spying on behalf of North Korea while visiting relatives in South Korea. Amnesty International has requested a presidential act of clemency to reprieve the defendants sentenced to death. In addition, the organization has urged the South Korean authorities to grant retrials, which have been requested by many of the defendants' lawyers and families, who have asked the South Korean courts to consider evidence that the accused were in Japan at the time when the South Korean Government alleges they were in North Korea receiving espionage training.
