France (Republic of)
Amnesty International has continued during 1976-1977 to adopt
245
people imprisoned for conscienrious objection to military service. There is public pressure on the Government to modify the legislation relating to conscientious objection and to permit applications for Conscientious Objector status after induction as well as before. The French authorities consider only those applications for Conscientious Objector status which are based on religious or philosophical grounds, not those based on broader political beliefs. Complaints continue about the restrictive nature of the alternative civil service. However, the provisions for conscientious objection have not been modified in France, which is one of the few European countries not to have altered this type of legislation in recent years.
Recently, several Jehovah's Witnesses were sentenced to between 15 months' and two years' imprisonment by the special military courts, Tribunaux permanents des forces armées (TPFA), which were set up in 1961 to try draft resisters. This despite the fact that Jehovah's Witnesses, who refuse to apply for Conscientious Objector status for reasons of conscience, would be obvious candidates for this status if they applied. Quite heavy sentences are also somtimes passed on draft resisters who have publicly stated their firm opposition to any military organization. The sentences passed on other draft resisters in recent months would appear, on the whole, to be lighter than in the past. In some cases defendants have gone on hunger-strike and subsequently been declared unfit for military service and never brought to trial.
In 1976-1977 there appeared to be a move towards imposing heavier sentences on those charged with returning their military papers to the authorities. Until recently, this action was punishable by fines ranging from 400 to 1,000 francs, but, on 2 February 1977, Pierre Dantec was sentenced to three months' imprisonment and five years' deprivation of civic rights for turning in his military papers. This sentence was reduced to a fine of 400 francs on appeal in June 19 7 7 by the Cour d'Appel in Rouen.
Amnesty International worked on 43 cases of imprisoned Conscientious Objectors in the period 1976-1977. These cases are still active at the time of writing.
Amnesty International has also taken action over the use of the death penalty which is still imposed for a wide variety of crimes within both the French civil and military jurisdiction. However, in the period 1976-1977 it has been used only for civil crimes, principally murder committed in conjunction with such felonies as theft, rape, kidnapping and torture.
Under Article 17 of the French Constitution the President of the Republic has the right to pardon convicted people ["le Président de
246
la République a le droit de faire grâce'^). In April 1976 President Valéry Giscard d'Estaing defined the application of this right as "right of commutation of sentences for humanitarian motives". Amnesty International has always appealed to the President to exercise this possibility to commute death sentences.
During the past year, Moussa Benzhara, found guilty of murdering and robbing an English tourist couple and also of raping the girl, and Joseph Keller and Marcellin Homeich, found guilty of murdering and robbing an English tourist couple and also of raping the girl, had their death sentences commuted in January 1977. However, Christian Ranucci, a 22-year-old convicted of kidnapping and murdering an 8-year-oId girl, had his appeal rejected by the President and was executed on 28 July 1976.
Jerome Carrein, initially sentenced to death in July 1976 after being convicted of attempted rape and murder of an 8-year-old girl, had his sentence set aside by the Cour de Cassation in October 1976. He was found guilty in the new trial in the Cour d'Assises du Nord on 1 February 1977. Carrein's second appeal to the Cour de Cassation was rejected in March 1977 and the President of the Republic refused to exercise his right to pardon despite appeals from many individuals and organizations including Amnesty International. He was executed by guillotine on 23 June 1977. There is also one case, that of Hamida Djandoubi, sentenced to death for murder, rape and torture, where the appeal to the higher court {Cour de Cassation) was rejected in June 1977. The case will certainly be referred to the President. There is a third case still being considered by the Cour de Cassation.
In 1976 Amnesty International was much concerned by certain actions taken by the French authorities in connection with the visit to France of King Juan Carlos of Spain. A large colony of Basque refugees is resident in the departments of the South West, bordering on Spain. As a security measure, before the King's visit, 31 Basque activists were detained by the police in October and held in restricted conditions {assignations de residence) on the Atlantic islands of Ré, Yeu and Belle lie en Mer. Most were released at the conclusion of the King's visit but 11 were held on the île d'Yeu for nearly five months after the visit.
