Tunisia (Republic of)
In May and June 1976, Amnesty International adoption groups and National Sections conducted a major campaign to appeal for a general amnesty for political prisoners in Tunisia. In the following months two amnesties were announced by President Habib Bourguiba. In October 1976, 20 students, sentenced during the trials of left-wing dissidents in 1974 and 1975, had their sentences commuted. Nearly all of these were Amnesty International cases, and two of them, Nejib Elleuch and Sallouha Farroukh, had been the subject of Urgent Actions on account of their deteriorating health. In January 1977, on the 25th anniversary of the Revolution, a further amnesty was granted to nine students, eight of whom were Amnesty International cases. As a result of these releases, the number of cases dealt with by groups was reduced to 37. The remaining prisoners are left-wing students and intellectuals serving sentences of up to 16 years on the following charges: plotting against the security of the state; membership of illegal organizations and spreading false information. Most were sentenced at mass trials in 1974 and 1975. There is also a group of five leading socialist dissidents, originally arrested in 1968, who were granted a conditional amnesty in 1970 and rearrested in 1972, then given fresh prison sentences.
These prisoners are now all held in the Prison de Nader, Bizerte.
109
Their conditions of detention and state of health give cause for concern. Political prisoners in Bizerte receive very little medical attention, and medicine is not provided. If prisoners become seriously ill it is necessary for them to be transferred to the prison in Tunis, where they can receive specialist attention and hospital treatment. For instance during 1976, Nourredine ben Khader, an Amnesty International case, became dangerously ill as a result of a collapsed lung. An Amnesty International Urgent Action was initiated and he was transferred to Tunis for treatment. This may have saved his life. In May 1977, Amnesty International groups appealed on behalf of 15 prisoners in Bizerte who were known to be in urgent need of specialist medical attention for illnesses contracted while in custody.
To mark the anniversary of Tunisia's Victory Day—1 June-Amnesty International groups launched a postcard campaign calling for a general amnesty for all political prisoners. Amnesty International has also taken up 23 new cases of members of the Mouvement d'Unité Populaire (MUP) arrested in March 1977. The MUP is a socialist opposition party, founded in 1973 by Ahmed ben Salah, former Finance Minister in President Bourguiba's Government who was sentenced to 10 years for treason in 1970 and escaped into exile in 1973. Since its foundation, the MUP has distributed leaflets criticizing the Tunisian Government; and in March 1977, their five point program demanded presidential and parliamentary elections, a national charter and a new constitution in order to restore democracy in Tunisia. After the publication of the five point program in Tunisia, leading members of the MUP were arrested. Reports reaching Amnesty International suggest that several of the MUP members were tortured after their arrest, and that two had to go to hospital as a result. Similar allegations of police torture have been made by many political prisoners since 1968.
The trial of MUP members opened before the State Security Court in Tunis on 13 June. Altogether, a total of 33 people, six of them in absentia, were accused of plotting against state security, forming a clandestine organization and distributing illegal tracts. An Amnesty International observer, Professor Hassemer of Frankfurt University, attended the early stages of the trial, which was adjourned on 23 June.
