Iraq (Republic of)
Most of the arrests reported to Amnesty International over the past year have been of Kurds. Many of the Kurds who had fled Iraq returned to resume political activities after the March 1975 Iran/ Iraq agreement and the declaration of various amnesties. Those who were, or were suspected of being, engaged in such political activities as distributing pamphlets, holding politiccil meetings or forming political organizations have been liable to arrest. By mid-1976 the Kurds were reported to have recommenced guerrilla activities against the Iraqi armed forces. This led to further reports of more arrests of those involved, or suspected of involvement, in acts of sabotage.
Amnesty International is at present working on the cases of 23 Kurds who were allegedly members of a secret political organization belonging to Jalal Talabani's Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, mostly teachers or students arrested in Iraq in late 1975. Seven of the group, however, fled the country to escape arrest, took refuge in Iran and
299
were arrested by the Iranian secret pohce (SAVAK) in January 1976 and handed over to the Iraqi authorities. (The Iran/Iraq agreement provides for the extradition from either country of "subversive elements"). In July 1976, these detainees were tried by a revolutionary court and the majority sentenced to six years' imprisonment. Three were sentenced to death (see below). The exact charges against them are not known; the reason given by Iraqi officials is that they had committed "acts detrimental to the state".
From available information it is difficult for Amnesty International to give an accurate estimate of the number of Kurdish prisoners at present detained in Iraq. Reports received concern certain areas only: in Suleimaniya 80 Kurds were reported to have been arrested in May 1977 for supporting the Kurdish revolution, and in Dohuk province more than 130 are reported to have been arrested for the same reason since August 1976. In addition large numbers of Kurds are said to be detained in the south of the country (although many of the Kurdish families who were deported earlier as part of the alleged Arabization plan for certain areas of Kurdistan have now been allowed to return to the north). Kurdish sources claim that up to 60,000 men arrested, following the Iraq/Iran agreement of 6 March 1975, on suspicion of being members of the Kurdish Democratic Party, or the Kurdish armed forces are still being held in detention camps in the south; they also claim that since November 1976 families of those suspected of participating in the renewed fighting in Kurdistan are being separated, with wives and children (but not always all the children) mothers, or sisters being taken to prisons in the southern towns of Nasiriya and Diwaniya. Amnesty International has received the names of 35 families separated in this way.
Amnesty International has also been active on behalf of Talib A1 Baghdadi, a lecturer in economics at Baghdad University who disappeared at the end of 1976 after criticizing, to his students, a statement on the economy made by Saddam Hussein, Vice Chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council. For some time there was no news of his whereabouts. Later it was learnt that he had been sentenced to three years' imprisonment. In September 1976 new^ of the release of a Government "critic" was received: Abdul Sattar Nasir, a young Iraqi writer, adopted by Amnesty International after his arrest in January 1975 for indirectly criticizing the Government in a novel. He was reported released a year later.
Inquiries have continued through Amnesty International's groups, about the former freemasons reportedly arrested in 1973 or 1974 and tried in December 1974 on charges of either being foreign intelligence agents or of belonging to an organization with the aim of
300
overthrowing the Government. More than 100 were originally arrested, all elderly professional men. The Director of Prisons informed Amnesty International's Secretary General, during the latter's visit to Baghdad in March 1977, that only five were still in prison. According to Amnesty International's information, however, there are at least 13.
During the year. Amnesty International received the names of more than 200 other Iraqis reported to be in prison for political reasons. They are members of the Central Command of the Iraqi Communist Party, the left-wing of the Arab Socialist Baath Party and other left-wing political groups. Further information about them is being sought before taking up their cases with the authorities.
Amnesty International continues to receive reports of the systematic use of torture, but is unable, as yet, to substantiate or disprove them. Some of the Shiis arrested in February 1977 were said to have been tortured, as were several of the Kurds arrested in early 1976 and adopted by Amnesty International. In addition, four 14 to 15-year-old Kurdish schoolboys from Zakho province, arrested for possessing political leaflets, were said to have died as a result of torture during July-August 1976. In January 1977 Amnesty International learnt that, the previous April, Reber Mulla Husain, a 19-year-old Kurd who had been head of the Kurdish Students' Union in Zakho, had died because of ill-treatment in prison. His body when returned to his family was said to have shown signs of torture. Amnesty International groups were asked to write to the Iraqi authorities expressing concern at these reports, and requesting that an independent commission of inquiry investigate both this case and police and security interrogation methods in general.
Amnesty International's greatest cause for concern in Iraq is still the consistently high number of reported executions for political offences. In almost all cases, the trials and executions are conducted in secrecy, which raises doubts as to the legality of the detention and trial procedures, also of the charges brought against the accused.
More Kurds have been reported executed than anyone else. Kurdish exiles claim that several hundred were executed having surrendered to the Iraqi authorities after the declaration, then extension, of amnesties, following the March 1975 agreement. After carefully checking these reports with Kurdish sources. Amnesty International compiled a list of executions of Kurds—giving names when possible—which took place during April and May 1975, after the cessation of hostilities. The list included the names of 12 Kurds who had been executed after surrendering to the Iraqi army, and various groups of Kurds in prison at the time of the March 1975 agreement, who were then executed, many after retrial.
301
In a letter to President Ahmad Hassan Al Bakr on 28 October 1976, Amnesty International expressed disquiet about these reports, particularly since the Government had, in August, declared a fresh amnesty for Kurds in Iraq and abroad who had not taken advantage of previous amnesties. Amnesty International urged that assurances of safe conduct be given to all those who surrendered under this amnesty. This letter and list were also the subject of a press release.
In early December 1976 Amnesty International was informed that on 23 November four Iraqis, including three Kurds adopted by Amnesty International had been hanged in Abu Ghreib Prison. On 8 December, Amnesty International wrote to President Ahmad Hassan Al Bakr expressing profound concern about these reported executions, and at the lack of basic legal rights accorded to the victims and others in their group: their alleged maltreatment during detention; their trial in camera by a revolutionary court; the absence of any appeals machinery. These reports were later taken up by the International Secretariat and by Amnesty International groups with the Iraqi Embassies in their respective countries. All denied that the executions had taken place. On 24 January, however, a Kurdish delegation visiting London on behalf of the Iraqi Government confirmed that the executions had in fact been carried out, and that all four had been found guilty of "acts detrimental to the state".
In January, Amnesty International groups were asked to make inquiries about reports just received that four Iraqis, allegedly members of the Syrian wing of the Arab Socialist Baath Party, had been executed in August 1976. This occurred at a time when the propaganda war between Syria and Iraq was particularly intense, with both countries accusing one another of subversion and acts of sabotage.
Political trials and death sentences are seldom publicized in Iraq, but in February 1977 eight Shii Muslims were officially reported to have been sentenced to death following disturbances on 5 and 6 February in the holy Shii towns of Najaf and Kerbala. An Amnesty International Urgent Action campaign was organized on behalf of those condemned to death. There has, however, been no official confirmation that these executions were carried out.
Baghdad radio and the Iraqi press gave much detailed publicity to the "disturbances", the arrests and ensuing trial. Official sources claimed that Syrian-inspired agitators had caused disturbances during the annual pilgrimage from Najaf to Kerbala; that they had attacked a police station killing one person and wounding several, and that a 16-year-old Syrian boy had been caught attempting to plant a bomb in one of the Shii mosques in Kerbala. On 13 February the Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) issued a decree to set up a special
302
investigating body, and on 23 February a second decree ordered the establishment of a special tribunal of three Revolutionary Command Council members to try 110 detainees. The tribunal would not be required to follow normal criminal trial procedures, and procedures about the carrying out of executions. According to the Iraqi paper Ath Thawra dated 25 February, the court unanimously decided on 23 February to sentence eight to death, 15 to life imprisonment and to acquit 87.
Unofficial sources, however, do not agree with this account, claiming that the government tried to stop the religious procession leaving Najaf (fearing the anti-government, as well as the religious fervour that tends to erupt during the pilgrimage), and that when they failed, they sent tanks, aircraft and army units to fire on the procession 20 kilometers outside Kerbala, causing heavy casualties. In Kerbala itself over 15,000 were said to have been arrested.
These sources also claim that the special tribunal sat for only three to four hours, that the eight later condemned to death were not present at the trial because they had died during interrogation and that two members of the tribunal refused to sentence people to death who were not present in court. (According to official sources, these two were later dismissed from all party and official posts "for negligence in the performance of their party duties ..." (Baghdad radio 23 March 1977). In addition, the bodies of the eight have not been returned to their families for burial, as is the normal custom. This would seem to indicate that either they died under torture or that they are still awaiting execution. The 1 5 sentenced to life imprisonment have been taken up by Amnesty International as investigation cases.
Further efforts have been made during the year to send a high level delegation to Iraq to meet members of the Iraqi government and to discuss detention and trial procedures as applied to political prisoners with the appropriate ministries.
In a letter to President A1 Bakr of 28 October 1976 Amnesty International pointed out that "one of the problems which faces Amnesty International in regard to Iraq is the apparent refusal of your government to allow access to international and/or humanitarian organizations to visit . . . prisons or to attend trials. This policy makes it difficult for us to evaluate the accuracy and validity of allegations and complaints".
Although a high level mission has not yet been formally agreed to by the Iraqi Government, Amnesty International's Secretary General visited Baghdad for two days in March 1977 to discuss the possibility of the organization sending such a mission in the near
303
future. The Secretary General received considerable cooperation, and arrangements were made for him to meet the Minister of Justice, the Minister of Labour and Social Affairs, the Director General of Prisons and the President of the Iraqi Bar Association, with whom he discussed detention, interrogation and trial procedures as set out in the penal code. Amnesty International's Secretary General later attended a session of the Criminal Court. He was also invited to discuss individual prisoners by name and to inspect their files. It is hoped that a future high level, fully briefed mission will be able to visit Iraq and discuss at greater length detention and trial procedures as they apply to political prisoners.
Over the past year there has been increasing contact between the International Secretariat and the Amnesty International sections with Iraqi Embassies or visiting Iraqi official delegations. The organization welcomes these opportunities for exchanging views and for discussing matters of mutual concern.
At the end of June 1977 Amnesty International was investigating 36 cases.
