Iran (Empire of)
In November 1976, Amnesty Intemational published a Briefing Paper on Iran, in which it stated that the issues the organization was particularly concerned about in Iran were arbitrary arrest of suspected political opponents, the use of torture, lack of legal safeguards, unsatisfactory trial procedures, executions and unofficial deaths. This publication and the accompanying campaign designed to publicize it provoked an official reaction from the Iranian authorities for the first time in many years. On 29 November 1976 the Iranian Embassy in London put out a statement, in response to the Briefing Paper, which commented generally on its contents but not on specific allegations. In January 1977 Amnesty International was notified that two Iranian newspapers had reported that it was launching an anti-Iranian campaign. In a statement made on 17 January 1977, Amnesty Intemational pointed out that the Briefing Paper on Iran was one of a series of such documents it published and that it "never campaigns against a country or against a government, but only on humanitarian grounds against violations of human rights".
In a letter dated 28 January 1977, which was widely distributed to
297
Members of Parliament, student unions and commercial firms concerned with Iran in the United Kingdom, the Iranian Embassy in London stated that: . . Iran has been made the target of a concerted worldwide campaign of denigration launched by Amnesty Intemational". The letter concluded with an allegation that Amnesty Intemational had a . . proven record of political bias against Iran". Amnesty Intemational responded on 2 Febmary 1977 stating that its National Sections were conducting an international campaign against human rights violations in Iran, but pointing out that similar campaigns, which it regarded as an integral and valid part of its work, had publicized human rights violations in many other countries, including the Soviet Union. The statement also referred to a reported Iranian threat to boycott Dutch products, services and organizations, because of an Amnesty Intemational Netherlands Section conference on Iran, held in Amsterdam in Febmary 1977. Amnesty Intemational stressed that this conference was only one event in the intemational campaign, and the boycott in fact did not take place. Amnesty International also welcomed a Teheran newspaper report that the Shah had ordered the abolition of torture.
In March 1977 Amnesty International's Secretary General was invited to Iran for talks with the Shah and the Prime Minister, Amir Abbas Hoveyda. Although the Iranian authorities only agreed to talk to the Secretary General in his private capacity, issues which concerned Amnesty International were discussed and the Shah said he would be willing to receive suggestions about ways in which judicial procedures in Iran might be improved. The Secretary General appealed to the Shah to release several of Amnesty International's adopted prisoners, including a Kurd, Aziz Yousefi, who was sentenced to life imprisonment in 1959. Mr Yousefi was released in the amnesty to mark the Iranian New Year shortly after the Secretary General's departure from Iran.
In April 1977 Brian Wrobel, a British barrister, attended the trial of 11 political prisoners in Teheran. These prisoners, who were charged with having been concerned with communist groups, received sentences of between three years' and life imprisonment which were later reduced on appeal to between two and 10 years' imprisonment. The trial was significant as it was the first since February 1972 at which foreign observers and journalists were allowed to be present. Mr Wrobel attended the trial in his private capacity, but submitted a report on it to Amnesty International's International Executive Committee.
Four official executions of political prisoners were reported during the year, but in addition the number of political activists reportedly
298
killed during battles with the police noticeably increased. Six people were sentenced to death on 31 March 1977 for the murder of three religious leaders. Appeals for the commutation of these sentences were made in a letter to Mr Hoveyda and subsequently in a cable addressed to the Shah.
Amnesties of prisoners, including political prisoners, were reported in June, August, October, November and December 1976, and in January, February and March 1977. Most of these amnesties were to mark the 50th anniversary of the Pahlavi dynasty; others were in honour of the Shah's birthday and the Iranian New Year. Reports of the numbers released in each amnesty varied, but according to an announcement published by the official Pars news agency on 27 February 1977, a total of nearly 5,000 prisoners had been freed since the jubilee year began in March 1976. In addition to Mr Yousefi (referred to previously), Amnesty International knows of only three other releases of its adopted prisoners in amnesties during the past year.
The number of political prisoners in Iran is not known to Amnesty International, but Mr Parviz Sabeti, Deputy Director of the National Intelligence and Security Organization (SAVAK), stated in an interview reported by the Washington Post on 3 September 1976 that: "In all Iran there are only 3,200 political prisoners". Non-official sources give a much higher figure.
Amnesty International groups are working for 106 prisoners in Iran.
