Mexico (United Mexican States)
In March 1977, the new President of Mexico, Senor José López Portillo, released 128 people, many of them held on charges connected with the student demonstrations of 1968. A further 424 were freed on 11 April 1977. The Attorney General, Oscar Flores Sanchez, used the occasion to announce that there were no longer any political prisoners in Mexico. Amnesty International believes, however, that there may still be as many as 100 to 200 political prisoners.
Amnesty International is concerned at the degree of violence used by the police and military when making arrests; it frequently results in fatal injury. There is anxiety, too, about the number of disappearances. This is particularly acute in the State of Guerrero: over the past four years 257 people have disappeared there during anti-guerrilla operations by the army.
In the past year. Amnesty International has heard of several abductions; in a few cases, the people reappeared after protests had
148
been made. Most claimed that they had been tortured during their captivity. In September 1976, for example. Amnesty Intemational learnt of the arrest of Ysaias Rojas Delgado, who was taken to a secret prison, Colonia Roma, in Mexico City, said to be a torture center. He was sympathetic to opposition groups in neighbouring Guatemala, and while he was detained he saw seven other prisoners, some of whom were Guatemalan refugees. His arrest was not at first acknowledged by the authorities. Senor Delgado claimed that he and the other prisoners were tortured by electric shock treatment and severely beaten. After public appeals, the prisoners were finally expelled from Mexico.
In November 1976, Amnesty Intemational submitted to the outgoing Mexican Govemment of Senor Luis Echevarría, the report of its mission to Mexico of July 1975. Some of the report's recommendations have been implemented by the Mexican Govemment, such as the release of prisoners detained for long periods without trial and the demolition of the notorious Lecumberri Prison in Mexico City. However, other problems discussed in the report continue to cause concern. Among these is the use of torture by federal and state authorities to extract confessions, the apparently excessive violence employed by military and police in arrests and the unacknowledged detention of political prisoners in secret prisons, such as the Campo MiUtar No 1 in Mexico City.
On 13 January 1977, the daily paper ¿'xcWi^or published a report, claiming that 200 political activists were illegally detained in Campo Militar No 1. Many of those detained are said to be members of various guerrilla groups—for example. Liga 23 de Septiembre, Frente Urbano Zapatista and the Movimiento Armado Revolucionario. The military have not allowed lawyers or magistrates to enter the barracks to find out whether it is used as an unofficial detention center. According to reports, prisoners in the Campo Militar No 1 are maltreated, deprived of food and tortured.
Amnesty Intemational has heard of numerous cases of people disappearing after being arrested. For example, in August 1976, a young couple, Francisco Gorostiola Taria and Elia Cabrera Arenas, disappeared after being arrested by members of the anti-guerrilla brigade of the police force in Mexico City. The couple were said to belong to the Liga 23 de Septiembre, which had been responsible for several politically motivated kidnappings and robberies. The police said they were taking the couple to the military hospital, as both were wounded, after which they completely disappeared.
In July 1976, Amnesty Intemational took up as investigation cases nine prisoners detained in Cuernavaca, all of them charged in connec-
149
tion with a kidnapping and murder. The prisoners maintain that they are innocent and claim they were forced to confess to the crime under torture. Some of those now held were involved in the invasion of government land in March 1973. This, they feel, is the real reason for their arrests. Some have obtained medical certificates testifying that they bore marks of torture when they signed their confession. These certificates are now in the hands of the court. In Aprü 1977, Amnesty International received a copy of a letter written by the prisoners in Cuernavaca, asserting that they had been arbitrarily punished, threatened and tortured. As a result. Amnesty International wrote to the Attorney General on 11 May 1977, expressing concern at these reported irregularities and asking for an official inquiry.
A perennial Mexican problem has been disputes over land tenure. Particularly violent clashes between peasants and state officials erupted in the State of Oaxaca on 27 February 1977; some 30 peasants of the municipality of San Juan La Lana were killed. Further violence occurred in Oaxaca City on 2 March 1977, when 2,000 students held a protest rally, calhng for the dismissal of the State Governor; one person was killed and another 25 injured. Although the army claimed that troops were unarmed, journalists stated that the soldiers had automatic rifles which they fired into the crowd. Amnesty International sent a cable to President López Portillo, urging him to intervene in the State to restore order and to instigate an inquiry into the killings.
On 26 April 1977, Amnesty International made an urgent intervention on behalf of three people (all allegedly members of Liga 23 de Septiembre) who had been arrested on 11 April and held incommunicado since then. Their lawyers protested that none of the prisoners had been brought before a judge, which, according to the Mexican Constitution, must happen within 24 hours of arrest (Article 107, Section xviii). They consequently fear for the lives of their clients.
Amnesty International is also investigating the case of Mónico Rentería Medina and four others who claim that they confessed under torture to the murder of an industrialist, Eugenio Garson Sada, during a kidnap attempt in September 1973. Senor Renteria was nowhere near the scene of the crime, and claims that he has never joined in acts of violence. In 1969 he formed a rural guerrilla group, called the Movimiento Espartaquista Revolucionario, but it disbanded after only two months without undertaking any violent action. Senor Rentería is detained in the severely overcrowded prison of Topo Chico, Monterrey, buüt for 600 inmates and now holding 1,500 prisoners.
150
The situation of 590 North American citizens serving sentences for drug offences in Mexico is expected to improve, following an agreement between the Mexican and US Governments to exchange prisoners.
In June 1977 Amnesty International groups were working on two adoptions and nine investigation cases in Mexico.
