Bolivia (Republic of)
Political imprisonment resulting from Bolivian Government efforts to suppress trade union activity was Amnesty International's principal concern in the past year. About 1,000 trade unionists were detained in the course of the year, although most were held for relatively short periods (from one to si^ months). Seventy trade unionist prisoners were adopted. Many had suffered previous arrests or exile and had been adopted by Amnesty International groups before. At the time of writing, there are approximately 140 political and trade union prisoners in the Chonchocorro, Viacha and Achocalla jails and in the Cárcel San Pedro {ElPanóptico) jail in La Paz, and an unknown number in the Ministry of the Interior and in the cells of the Department of Political Order (DOP). A total of 79 prisoners are currently under adoption or investigation by Amnesty International groups, 65 of them trade unionists or leaders of student unions.
The Decree Laws of November 1974 formally banned all trade unions and trade union activity. Nonetheless, the single most powerful trade union, that of the mineworkers—/^^¿¿eracíón Sindical de los Trabajadores Mineros de Bolivia (FSTMB)—continued to function relatively freely until June 1976, although most of the leaders of its parent body, the single, nationwide Bolivian trade union federation. Central Obrera Boliviana (COB), had been detained and forced into exile in 1975. The FSTMB continued to operate openly from a La Paz office, and in May 1976 held its annual congress in the mining town of Corocoro. Shortly before the congress, which voted in favour of a 110% wage increase, COMIBOL, the government mining corporation which dominates the mining industry, had agreed to hold talks with leaders of the (illegal) FSTMB on 10 June. On 9 June, however, there were mass arrests of leaders of the FSTMB throughout the country^ As many as 600 miners were detained, as well as leaders of other secret unions.
Simultaneously troops occupied all the main mining areas. The miners countered by declaring an indefinite general strike which continued until late August 1976. In some areas authorities closed stores and cut water and electricity supplies in order to force leaders hiding in the mine shafts to surrender themselves. There were many reports of maltreatment of miners and their families during the strike. Two miners were shot dead by troops and many others were injured when troops entered the shafts of the Siete Suyos mine in order to capture leaders hiding there.
Most of the detained mineworkers were released or summarily exiled some months after the arrests in June and July; but many of
125
those released lost theirjobs and their rights to social security benefits. At the time of writing, over a year after the strike began, troops are still occupying the mining centers, and journalists are reportedly prevented from approaching the mines.
Two groups of 25 trade unionists, most of them mineworkers, were forcibly exiled to Chile in June and July 1976. Although Chilean authorities affirmed the 50 had voluntarily sought exile there. Amnesty Intemational learnt from interviews with some of the exiles, released from Chile in December 1976, that the 50 prisoners (all of them adopted by Amnesty International groups) were forced to board Bolivian air force planes, and were flowoi to Santiago, Chile, without knowing where they were being taken. Most were severely beaten before expulsion to Chile. On arrival in Santiago they were in fact given the choice between imprisonment there or being sent in groups of four to six to small villages in the extreme south of Chile, where they lived under virtual house arrest. They were held in police custody in Santiago and not allowed contact with foreign embassies or with the Santiago office of the UN High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR). At the time of writing, however, all but 13 have been permitted to leave Chile; most of them have gone into exile in Europe. Adopted prisoners who were victims of forcible exile included elderly mineworkers, little prepared for exile in European capitals, and labourers, some of whom had held no office in the trade unions. Most of the exiles leave large families without support still in Bolivia.
Non-trade unionists who were adopted as Prisoners of Conscience included students accused of "extremism" (but not officially charged) who were said to be members of illegal but non-violent left-wing political organizations. In Febmary 1977, Bolivian newspapers published photographs of a number of student political activists, including prisoners adopted by Amnesty Intemational, accompanied by signed recantations of their left-wing views and resignations from banned left-wing organizations such as the Bolivian Communist Party. (All political parties and organizations, whatever their ideology, were indefinitely suspended by a decree of November 1974, as were political meetings.) The similarity between the signed statements supports claims by exiles that political or trade union prisoners are detained indefinitely unless they sign "confessions", and deny their beliefs, but as far as is known, this is the first time that such statements have been released to the press. No political or trade union prisoners have been tried by any court for over two years.
In the past year a number of allegations of severe torture have been corroborated by statements from political prisoners and outside observers and, in the one case which appears not to have been political, by police sources.
126
Amnesty International intervened repeatedly on behalf of Antonio Peredo, the alleged leader of the Partido Revolucionario de los Trabajador es-Bolivia (PRT-B)—a revolutionary Marxist-Leninist group advocating armed conflict—after his detention in January 1976. He was said to be undergoing severe torture, yet the authorities refused to acknowledge that he was in custody. Seven months later, in July 1976, members of the Bolivian Red Cross, accompanied by journalists visited El Panóptico Prison in La Paz (Cárcel San Pedro) and found that Sr Peredo was in custody, and that he had been handcuffed to a pillar throughout his seven months' imprisonment. He is almost incommunicado and at the time of writing has not been tried. He claims that he was tortured after arrest—severely beaten, injected with painful drugs, and hooded.
Amnesty International has made inquiries about other prisoners accused of association with left-wing groups advocating violence but not formally charged, when the authorities did not acknowledge that they were in detention, when they were believed to be victims of torture, or when it was known that they lacked adequate medical treatment.
Jaime Lora Araoz, about whom Amnesty International also inquired, was detained in July 1976, accused of collaborating with a left-wing guerrilla group, and disappeared until his arrest was confirmed in January 1977. He said that he had been severely tortured after arrest, that he had been held in almost total darkness for nearly six months, and that he was in chains throughout the period. A further appeal was made in February 1977, following reports that Sr Lora was seriously ill and being denied medical attention. At that time he was the only prisoner in Chonchocorro Jail in solitary confinement and not allowed visitors.
In April 1977 Amnesty International wrote to the Bolivian Attorney General, asking about the progress of an investigation into the death in police custody of a La Paz taxi-driver, Sr Cruz Limachi. According to police sources, Sr Cruz Limachi died from "an excess of physical punishment", following his detention in the course of a routine—not a political—criminal investigation. The Attorney General was informed of Amnesty International's interest in the legal measures taken to establish the responsibility for the death of Sr Limachi. The organization also expressed the hope that reforms, such as an end to detention without a warrant, and to detention incommunicado, would help to prevent further deaths from ill-treatment by security forces abusing their authority.
127
