Paraguay (Republic of)
In July 1976, Amnesty International issued a 16-page Briefing Paper on Paraguay. This described the practice of arbitrary arrest, long-term detention without trial, torture and political killings. It also described the political context in which these violations of human rights occur in Paraguay, a country which is ruled autocratically by General Alfredo Stroessner, in spite of the fact that it has a formal peirliamentary framework. In March 1977 the Constitution was changed to allow the president to serve an unlimited number of terms.
The news release that accompanied the publication of the report stated that General Stroessner's rule "has been characterized by a steady persecution of political opponents and of peasants and active members of the Roman Catholic Church". It further said that Amnesty International estimated that "the number of political prisoners held at any one time in Paraguay fluctuates between 200 and 1,000".
Detention without trial for indefinite periods remains the most characteristic feature of the human rights situation in Paraguay.
Antonio Maidana, Julio Rojas and Alfredo Alcorta, the three
153
long-term prisoners whose detention had lasted for over 18 years, were released in January 1977. The failure of the authorities to issue them with identity papers and the general insecurity of their situation caused them to seek political asylum in the Peruvian Embassy in Asuncion in March 1977. Because the Paraguayan Government has refused to grant them safe-conduct passes, they are still in the Embassy at the time of writing.
Amnesty International sent cables to President Stroessner and to the Presidents of the Senate and the Chamber of Deputies welcoming the release of the three prisoners and appealing for Ananias Maidana Palacios and Ignacio Chamorro, both detained since 1959, and for eight other people detained without trial for over 10 years, to be set free.
A similar cable was sent after General Stroessner's statement to the press in Brazil in April 1977 that "all persons who have committed offences should be tried according to the law".
Long-term detainees, and more particularly campesinos (peasant farmers), were also the subject of discussion at a meeting which the British Member of Pariiament, Dafydd Elis Thomas, and Amnesty International researcher Inger Fahlander had with the Paraguayan Minister of Agriculture, Ing. Hernando Bertoni, in London in March 1977.
Approximately 50 political detainees have been formally charged during the past year under the Law of Public Peace and Liberty of Persons. These lawsuits—the first since 1958—only involve people arrested after December 1974. Despite certain reported irregularities, prisoners have been allowed to be represented by defence counsel. Several defendants have been released pending trial, and at least two—both Amnesty International adoptees—have been given an unconditional discharge after the hearings.
Despite nearly 100 releases of untried detainees over the past year, the vast majority of those detained in the widespread arrests following the discovery in April 1976 of a group alleged by the authorities to belong to an armed opposition movement, still remain in detention. They are included in information which Amnesty International has submitted to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (Organization of American States): it consists of lists of prisoners and reports of torture, disappearances and deaths following arrest.
During the past year there has been an alarming increase in reports of torture, deaths under torture, disappearances and killings at the time of arrest. In December 1976, Amnesty International wrote to General Stroessner requesting explanation of the reported death in
154
custody of, among others, the campesino Sixto Melgarejo, the war veteran Mario Arzamendia Flores and the peasant and Cantas (Latin American church-sponsored development organization) worker Arturo Bcmal. The press release about the letter (5 December 1976) also referred to the continued disappearance after arrest of the Communist Party leader Miguel Angel Soler and to the prison camp of Emboscada, where lack of water made survival especially precarious for about 20 women with small children bom to them in detention. Eleven of these women were reported to have been released in Febmary 1977.
Amnesty Intemational has carried out six Urgent Actions during the past year on behalf of 20 Paraguayan prisoners in bad health or in danger of ill-treatment. Among them were Gilberta Verdún de Talavera, aged 70, released at the end of January 1977 (Urgent Action 12 January 1977); Ananias Maidana Palacios, first transferred from the 3rd police station to Emboscada and later reported to have been transferred to Investigaciones, an interrogation center for political detainees and notorious for ill-treatment and torture; José Gil Ojeda and other members of Misión de la Amistad, a Christian development agency.
In July 1976, when invited to testify at the US Congress hearings on human rights under Section 502B of the Foreign Assistance Act conceming military aid, Edy Kaufman, a member of Amnesty International's Research Department, gave a report on recurring violations of human rights in Paraguay to a subcommittee of the Committee on International Relations of the House of Representatives.
Seventy-eight cases are currently allocated to Amnesty International groups for adoption or investigation.
