Romania (Socialist Republic of)
During 1976-1977 Amnesty International has concentrated on the treatment of members of neo-Protestant sects and participants in Romania's limited human rights movement. There have been allegations that members of the Hungarian minority were imprisoned for expressing dissatisfaction over the way in which their national rights in Romania were treated. Amnesty International heard of no new individual cases similar to Zoltan Kaltos', described in The Amnesty International Report 1975-1976. The organization received numerous reports of the imprisonment of ethnic Germans who were arrested for trying to cross the border illegally. Prisoners of Conscience are said often to be falsely charged on pretexts of embezzlement, hooliganism, homosexuality or systematic refusal to work.
Article 3 of the 1948 Law on Religious Confession states: "Nobody shall be persecuted for reasons of faith or lack of faith". However, much of Amnesty International's information about human rights violations in Romania concern restrictions on the freedom of conscience for religious believers.
In 1970, a new decree (No.153/1970) intended to cope vwth hooliganism and juvenile delinquency became law. According to Article 1 of this decree, members of groups expressing "parasitic, anarchist" attitudes contrary to the socialist system shall be punished. Local authorities used this law to persecute and prosecute those belonging to Baptist, Seventh Day Adventist or Pentecostal sects. In most reported cases persons persecuted in this way were detained only briefly and punished by measures other than imprisonment. In known cases in 1976-1977 several members of these sects were summoned by the police while holding meetings with other believers in their homes. It was alleged that police officials often made them hold Bibles while photographs were taken for use as supporting evidence against them under Decree No.153. They were fined, dismissed from their jobs and further harassed. In 1977 Alexandra Monacu from
266
Gropeni and several of his friends were fined up to 1,000 lei for illegally singing religious songs. S. Dobrescu from Vulca Bai was fined 3,000 lei in 1976 for holding religious meetings and L. Olah, a Baptist pastor from Buchin, was fined 1,000 lei for unauthorized preaching of the Gospel in 1976. All these believers as well as an undisclosed number of others were charged under Decree No.153.
On 3 and 4 April 1977 Josif Ton, Pavel Niculescu, Radu Dumit-rescu, Aurel Popescu (Baptists), Constantin Caraman (Pentecostal) and Dr Silviu Cioata (Seventh Day Adventist) were arrested after they had compiled an extensive report on official treatment of members of neo-Protestant sects in Romania. For more than a week, they were all subjected to daily interrogation including severe beatings and intimidation. Pavel Niculescu reportedly suffered broken ribs as a result of beatings by the Romanian police. The authorities informed them that they would be charged and tried for treason for allegedly sending the report to "hostile foreign agents". However, to Amnesty Intemational's knowledge, they were not formally charged and were released after a few weeks of interrogation. According to some estimates, there are between 50 and 200 neo-Protestant sectarians in prison in Romania. The neo-Protestant community in Romania is estimated at 400,000.
Military service is obligatory in Romania and the law allows no exemptions on grounds of conscience. Amnesty Intemational is at present investigating the case of Ghejan Titu, an Adventist mathematician, sentenced to four years' imprisonment for allegedly refusing to do combatant army service on feast days.
Ian Mocuta, a 35-year-old Seventh Day Adventist, who has been engaged in human rights activities in Romania since the 1960s, was sentenced in 1976 to six years' imprisonment on account of "hostile" activities. He reportedly publicly denounced the treatment of dissidents in Romania. Previously, during 1967-1968, Mr Mocuta was said to have continuously submitted comments on civil and human rights violations in Romania to foreign joumalists. In 1968 he was sentenced to six years' imprisonment for his activities. He was amnestied in 1972. In the absence of official legal documents Amnesty International has assigned his case for further investigation.
A Decree on the Press Law of 30 May 1975 further restricts the constitutional rights of believers as well as those of the Hungarian and German minorities in Romania. The Decree states that the Govemment and Party have exclusive control over the import and export of printed material and makes any Romanian citizen who privately imports religious or other literature liable to prosecution. According to various sources, hundreds of Bibles were confiscated by the
267
Romanian authorities in 1974. As the printing of Bibles in Romania is very restricted, some believers import them from foreign countries— an offence punishable by law with up to seven years' imprisonment. Amnesty International has received various reports that intimidation of, and administrative measures against, members of the German and Hungarian minorities who have imported a small number of books from Hungary or the Federal Republic of Germany, have increased since 1975.
The Romanian Penal Code makes it an offence punishable by up to three years' imprisonment to cross the border without official permission. Private citizens usually find such permission difficult to obtain. During the past year, Amnesty International learned of several cases of members of the German ethnic minority who were arrested in 1976-1977 while attempting to cross the border without official permission. They were sentenced to imprisonment under Article 245. Rudolf and Aneta Jorgovan decided to cross the frontier to Yugoslavia in August 1976 after applying unsuccessfully for permission to leave the country during the year 1975-1976. They were tried by the district court of Timisoara in November and sentenced to three years' and 18 months' imprisonment respectively. Amnesty International has adopted them as Prisoners of Conscience. A similar case is that of the Götz family, also of German ethnic origin. Johan and Regina Götz with their two children are said also to have attempted to cross the frontier illegally in September 1976 after several unsuccessful applications for permission to leave the country. Having received no legal documents about the case. Amnesty International hcis assigned it for further investigation.
Amnesty International is greatly concerned about reports describing the treatment of Romanian citizens who apply for permission to leave the country. According to various unofficial sources about 100 individuals of German ethnic origin resident in Transylvania were dismissed from their jobs in the summer and autumn of 1976 after submitting their applications to the authorities. In other cases, the Romanian authorities reportedly formally granted permission to leave the country but have withheld passports for months, during which time the applicants were harassed, intimidated and dismissed from their jobs. It is disturbing to note that many Romanian citizens, who were detained after making unsuccessful attempts to cross the frontier, alleged that they were beaten by the police and kept in cells without proper clothing or sanitary facilities for up to six months before their trials began. Amnesty International has been particularly concerned about grave allegations on conditions of imprisonment in the prisons of Aiud and Gherla.
268
Article 20 of the Romanian Constitution guarantees all citizens freedom of speech, press and demonstration. Article 29, however, prohibits these rights for acts "hostile to the socialist system" and "hostile to the interests of the working people". Members of the human rights movement which evolved in January 1977 were accused of committing hostile acts against the socialist system and subjected to official repression and harassment. One of the movement's founders, the well-known dissident writer Paul Goma, wrote a signed letter commenting on human rights violations in Romania to the 35 signatory states of the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe. This letter, together with another expressing sympathy with the human rights movement Charter 77 in Czechoslovakia, was signed by more than 170 Romanian citizens and published in the foreign press. Shortly after announcing his intention of compiling an extensive report on alleged psychiatric abuses against dissidents in Romania, Paul Goma disappeared from his flat on 5 April 1977, reappearing in May 1977. The authorities have not confirmed his assertion that he was detained, interrogated and maltreated for a month.
On 28 April 1977 Amnesty International's Secretary General appealed to President N. Ceauscescu to initiate a public inquiry into the cases of Paul Goma and other members of the human rights movement who had disappeared under mysterious circumstances. Amnesty International subsequently launched an Urgent Action on behalf of Paul Goma. Many of the 170 people who signed the appeal were reportedly detained, interrogated and sentenced to hard labour after April 1977. It is alleged that some were beaten and/or intimidated in order to make them sign incriminating statements. Among them were prominent Romanian intellectuals including the literary critic Ion Negoitescu and Professor Vlad Georgescu. Stefan Toia, another signatory, was reportedly interned in a psychiatric hospital. Nicolae Dascalu, a teacher of English in Bucharest, was reportedly subjected to daily interrogations lasting up to 18 hours and severe beatings. At the end of April 1977, he reportedly approached the US Embassy in Bucharest to ask for political asylum. This was refused by the US authorities and Mr Dascalu was reported to have been rearrested shortly after leaving the Embassy. Amnesty International has no further information on this case at the time of writing. Private sources allege that although most of the signatories to the human rights appeals were released after weeks of interrogation, some are still detained at the forced labour camps on the Black Sea-Danube canal. It is reported that Vlad Dragoescu, an architect and former political prisoner, has still not reappeared. Prior
269
to his disappearance the Romanian authorities confiscated his passport which had been issued so that he might marry a Norwegian citizen. At the time of writing, Amnesty International still has no confirmation as to his whereabouts. A few other signatories to the appeals were given passports and put under pressure to leave the country immediately.
On the centenary of Romanian independence in spring 1977 an amnesty for 28,500 prisoners, including political offenders and people imprisoned for attempts to leave the country illegally, was reportedly announced by the Romanian State Council.
In August 1976 the Metropolitan Military Court in Bucharest sentenced two industrial managers, Mr B. lorgolescu and Mr I. Hies, to death on charges of economic espionage. Amnesty International appealed in early autumn 1976 to President Ceaucescu to commute the death sentences. In November 1976 President Ceaucescu commuted the death sentences to life imprisonment.
The exact number of political prisoners in Romania cannot be established in the absence of officially disclosed statistics.
In June 1977 Amnesty International was investigating five individual cases in Romania and had adopted three Prisoners of Conscience.
