Zaire (Republic of)
In the past Amnesty International has been unable to undertake intensive research work on Zaire, but in the latter part of 1976 the country was given priority. Research was initiated in February 1977 with a view to taking up the cases of those who were condemned in September 1975 for alleged complicity in what was described as an abortive attempt to overthrow President Mobutu Sese Seko in June of that year. Seven army officers who were sentenced to death following the incident had not been executed at the time of writing.
113
While assembling relevant information preparatory to taking up these cases (including those of about 20 people who were still serving their prison terms), a crisis occurred in Zaire which made Amnesty International decide to postpone its initiatives on the country. On 8 March 1977, the Shaba region (formerly called Katanga) of Zaire was invaded by armed men alleged to be elements of the former Y^dXsLngtSQ gendarmes who crossed into Zaire from Angola.
During the fighting between the Zairean army and the invading forces, two men reportedly captured from the "rebels" in April 1977 were displayed before the public and presented at a press conference in Kinshasa on 20 April 1977. Amnesty International has no further information on the fate of these men.
On an unspecified date in April 1977, seven foreign journalists—a four-man Spanish television crew, two journalists of the German magazine Stern and Mr CoUn Smith of the London newspaper The Observer—were separately arrested in the Shaba region and accused of illegal entry into Zaire and of espionage. On 6 May 1977, however, after a 45-minute televized "presentation" of the correspondents, they were ordered to be released on President Mobutu's personal intervention.
It was reported, however, that several people were arrested and detained in Kinshasa in February 1977 in connection with the activities of the Front de Liberation de l'Enclave du Cabinda (FLEC). While Amnesty International was seeking confirmation of the reports, it was learnt that those detained were released in March 1977.
In May 1977, Amnesty International was informed of the detention of a Haitian national, Alix Balin. Mr Balin was reportedly arrested in October 1976 and, after being held for three months in Kinshasa, was transferred to Kafela in Equator Province. The report was being investigated at the time of writing.
Amnesty International hopes to resume its research after the repercussions of the Shaba crisis have died down.
