Turkey (Republic of)
During the past year arrests and imprisonments have continued of people charged under Articles 141 and 142 of the Turkish Penal Code, which prohibit forming organizations "aimed at establishing the domination of a social class over other social classes" and "making communist propaganda". However, some people awaiting trial were released after the abolition of the State Security Courts on 11 October 1976. All trials of political prisoners were then transferred to civil courts.
275
Amnesty International still received allegations of torture, and, on 9 February 1977, the Secretary General v^Tote to the Istanbul Chief Prosecutor welcoming the news that his office was conducting an inquiry into an alleged assault on Pasa Giiven, an Istanbul student, while he was in police custody. Pasa Giiven was reported to have been taken to hospital as a result of a beating he received. No information has been received to date about the findings of the inquiry, but according to the Turkish authorities Pasa Giiven has been released on bail.
In November 1976, the Amnesty International researcher responsible for work on Turkey visited Istanbul, Ankara and Izmir to talk to lawyers and to make inquiries about political prisoners.
In April 1977, a Briefing Paper on Turkey was published. In addition to Amnesty International's usual concerns reference was made to the large number of political murders which have taken place in Turkey over the past two years, for the most part carried out by right-wing commando groups.
It is not known how many political prisoners there are in Turkey. One estimate given in November 1976 was between 600-700, but the number may have decreased since then because of the above-mentioned releases, following the abolition of the State Security Courts. All the political prisoners known to Amnesty International are young left-wing activists. Some reports have been received of Kurds imprisoned at Diyarbakir Prison under Article 141, but Amnesty International has not been able to obtain detailed information about these prisoners.
Amnesty International groups are working on behalf of 48 prisoners in Turkey, all of whom have been imprisoned under Articles 141 and 142 for spreading communist propaganda or belonging to illegal organizations.
