Italy (Republic of)
Liborio Filippi, a Conscientious Objector and Amnesty International's only adopted prisoner in Italy during 1976, was released in October that year. Amnesty International has since taken up two more cases of Conscientious Objectors, those of Giuseppe Frusca and Luciano Peroni. Luciano Peroni was arrested towards the end of 1976 and Giuseppe Frusca in January 1977. Amnesty International does not know what sentences they received. Both are known as "total" objectors: that is, they object on political grounds to both military and alternative service. Most Conscientious Objectors in prison in Italy are still Jehovah's Witnesses who refuse on religious grounds both to perform military service and to apply for recognition as Conscientious Objectors and do alternative civil service. A representative of the Jehovah's Witness organization in Italy told Amnesty International in February 1977 that there were probably as many as 337 Jehovah's Witnesses in prison in Italy at that time. The average sentence served appears to be from 12 to 15 months—less than the two year minimum provided by the law. The Ministry of Defence is currently considering proposals which would reduce the period Jehovah's Witnesses must spend in prison. One such proposal under consideration is for Jehovah's Witnesses to receive sentences of three months in prison plus nine months of compulsory civil service, this being part of the sentence. In the past Amnesty International has found it difficult to obtain information about Jehovah's Witnesses in prison in Italy (partly because of their own reluctance for the organization to intervene on their behalf). Now, however. Amnesty International is trying to obtain details about some of those at present detained, with a view to possible adoption. Reports of bad conditions in the military prisons in Italy continue to reach Amnesty International, particularly with regard to the prison of Gaeta, where
259
some 200 Jehovah's Witness Conscientious Objectors are said to be held.
A Decree Law was passed in April 1977 repealing a law introduced in 1972 which provided for the automatic provisional release of people still in custody awaiting trial after four years' detention. Under the new emergency law pre-trial detention may continue after four years have elapsed if it is thought that the defence has dehberately obstructed the course of justice (choosing of lawyers and juries). This Decree Law will apply particularly to those charged with politically motivated "terrorist" offences. At present Amnesty International has no adopted pohtical prisoners in Italy; but it is concerned by the frequent failure to bring accused people to trial within a reasonable time and is afraid that the new law may exacerbate a situation that is already a cause for concern.
