Madagascar (Democratic Republic of)
In September 1976, about 120 people were arrested and detained in Madagascar. Most were students on strike or members of the banned MFM-MTM Party, including its leader Manandafy Rako-tonorina, who had been detained several times before. The majority were released shortly afterwards but some were still being held in December 1976 when Amnesty International wrote to Minister of
79
the Interior M. Ampy Portos requesting further information and assurances that detainees were being well treated. Amnesty International also asked the Minister to ensure that the detainees were either charged and brought to trial or released without delay. By early 1977, Amnesty International leamt from other sources that the detainees had all been freed, and wrote to the Minister of the Interior welcoming this.
As far as Amnesty International knows, these were the only people in Madagascar imprisoned for political reasons since December 1975, when an amnesty was granted to all political prisoners on the occasion of the inauguration of the Malagasy Democratic Republic. Under President Didier Ratsiraka, the "national democratic revolution" has proceeded smoothly, with elections for a People's National Assembly being contested peacefully in June 1977 by various left-wing political organizations functioning within the overall "national front for the defence of the revolution". Little overt political activity is permitted and the press is government-controlled. A civilian Prime Minister, Justin Rakotoniaina {appointed after the accidental death of former Prime Minister Colonel Joel Rakotonolala in July 1976) presides over a largely civilian cabinet.
Human rights were severely infringed for a time in December 1976 when an unprecedented massacre took place in Majunga province. A minor family dispute provoked a massacre of Comorian migrants by Malagasys between 21 and 23 December in which large numbers were killed and injured. The Madagascar Government's figure of 120 killed differs from the official Comorian figure of an estimated 1,400 deaths. Following this incident, the Comorian Government repatriated over 60,000 Comorians back to the Comoro Islands, since it feared for their future safety.
