Spain (Spanish State)
During the period covered by this report there have been the most momentous changes in the structure and customs of Spanish society since the Civil War. It is difficult to point to any area of Spanish society which has not been affected by legal or other reform. But while the general picture of the period 1976-1977 is on the whole very encouraging, political life in Spain remains marked by some peculiarly contradictory and depressing features. Nowhere is this more immediately apparent and experienced by the citizen than in the area of human rights.
Because of the immense legal, political and social changes of last year the nature of Amnesty International's concern about the country has been altered; and it has adapted its techniques to cope with the mixture of old and new problems which now exist. This is graphically illustrated by a comparison between the statistics for political prisoners in June 1976 and June 1977. There were approximately 200 political prisoners in Spain in June 1976. As a result of an amnesty in July 1976 and an amnesty and a pardon in March 1977, this figure was reduced by approximately 75%. However, the statistics of prisoner populations should not be considered the sole yardstick
270
of the human rights situation. This reduction of the numbers of political prisoners has been accompanied by the continued use by police of brutal and gratuitously violent methods when dealing with crowds, often without regard to the crowd's temper or behaviour. This was noticeable for example during the extremely violent clashes in the Basque provinces in May 1977 when there was much shooting, and during the May Day demonstrations in Madrid.
Amnesty International is concerned that in the majority of such incidents the police were not merely reacting to the "violence" of the crowds as had been claimed in defence of police behaviour. For example, in October 1976 in Barcelona, five police officers were brought to trial for mistreating and torturing the leaders of two neighbourhood associations, and a crowd of 200 police, members of the Brigada de Investigación Social (BIS), gathered in the passages leading to the court. Counsel for the plaintiffs and members of the press were assaulted, and the judge was obliged to clear the court. To date no action has been taken against the officers concerned. Amnesty International has continued to receive persistent well-attested reports of treatment of detained people which, compared with previous years', did not amount to systematic torture but could better be described as systematically brutal and degrading. The nature of treatment of detainees was in some measure dependent on both the region and the mood of the police force in a given case. Reports of maltreatment tended to increase sharply follov^ang acts such as the kidnapping of prominent politicians, the shooting of police officers, or even government-inspired measures, such as the legal recognition of the Communist Party in April 1977.
To sum up—the most disturbing and inconsistent aspect of the human rights situation in Spain during the past year has been the Government's failure to exercise control over the police force, as regards either its dealings with crowds and demonstrations or with individuals who have been arrested and are maltreated, then released without being charged. Police forces acted with all but impunity in such cases.
The present dramatic period of change could be said to have begun with the forced resignation of former Prime Minister Señor Carlos Arias Navarro in July 1976. Senor Arias had been appointed by Generalissimo Franco in January 1974 and his two-and-a-half year tenure produced certain initial reforms, notably the reform of the Law on Association and Reunion in June 1976. This law had previously been one of the major instruments of political repression in Spain. His successor, Señor Adolfo Suarez, embarked immediately on a program of rapid change which he asserted was designed to bring
271
Spain to a fully democratic state in as short a time as was, in his view, compatible with internal peace.
The Government introduced legislation in the Cortes (Spanish parliament) on political reform which was passed after three days of debate in November 1976. It required replacement of the old nominated Cortes with a new bicameral cortes, elected by direct universal and secret suffrage. A small number of seats in the upper house may be nominated by the King. A referendum was held in December 1976 to ascertain what support there was for political reform and this was won overwhelmingly by those in favour. Elections were held on 15 June 1977 which were won by the centrist party, the Union of the Democratic Center, led by the previous Prime Minister, Señor Adolfo Suarez. A law was introduced to legalize political parties to enable them to contest the elections. By June 1977 all parties, with the exception of certain groups to the left of the Spanish Communist Party [Partido comunista español—VCE,) had been legalized. The legalization of most political parties, especially of the Communist Party of Spain, removed what were traditionally the most frequent legal grounds for detention of Prisoners of Conscience in Spain. At the same time, the National Movement, which for 40 years had been the only permitted political party, was dismantled. In an attempt to meet the growing demands for autonomy of regional groups, commissions have been established to examine the problem with special reference to Catalonia and the Basque provinces. Within the Government itself Hmited but important reorganization of the police and armed forces has been ordered.
New press laws have been introduced and a complete reform of the monolithic official trade union structure is envisaged together with the accompanying legalization of the hitherto illegal independent trade unions. A limited right to strike was granted in March 1977.
There have been many changes in the field of criminal law which are of direct interest to Amnesty International. The specially created Tribunal of Public Order [Tribunal de Orden Publico—TOV) which dealt with political crimes was abolished in December 1976. The unification of jurisdiction was decreed, which meant in theory that political crimes, including terrorism, would no longer be tried by military courts. A new superior court, the Audencia Nacional would try them under civil law. However, it is too early to tell what the practical effect of this measure will be as, by June 1977, there had been no political trials of great significance which would previously have been conducted by a Council of War under military law.
In April 1977 Spain ratified the International Covenant on Econo-
272
mic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
During the past year there have been two amnesties which released numerous prisoners, including Prisoners of Conscience. In July 1976 Amnesty International appealed to the King to grant a general amnesty to commemorate Santiago Day. This was the culmination of a long campaign by many organizations including Amnesty International and individuals dissatisfied by the limited nature of the 1975 pardon granted in honour of King Juan Carlos' accession. Disappointingly, the 1976 amnesty was only partial. Theoretically it ordered the release of all those who had not been involved in "crimes of blood" [delitos de sangre) and that all other prisoners should have their sentences reduced by three years. This distinction created bitter discontent among families of political prisoners and references to the frequently arbitrary court judgements under which many of them had been sentenced for alleged acts of violence. A further campaign was launched to secure the unconditional amnesty of all political prisoners. In March 1977, two decrees granted a broader amnesty. The previous July decree was widened to include all those detained for terrorist activities but not directly responsible for causing death or injury. They were pardoned. The remaining prisoners had their sentences reduced by 12 years. It was also envisaged that those still in detention would apply for individual examination of their cases and a Royal Pardon. Nearly all political prisoners have either been amnestied, pardoned, had their sentences reduced or placed on provisional liberty.
This decline in the number of political prisoners has meant a change in emphasis in Amnesty International's work in Spain. There was an immediate drop in traditional adoption work. The focus shifted to the preparation of campaigns against torture, and Amnesty International prepared and distributed in July 1976 a leaflet entitled Torture in Spain 1976 together wdth a number of other documents. It also intervened on behalf of detained individuals and even groups, such as members of the Confederación Nacional del Trabajo/Federación Anarquista Ibérica (CNT/FAI) who were arrested and illegally detained in Barcelona in February 1977. Amnesty International exposed violations of the human rights of professional groups, such as joumahsts. A paper on violations of the human rights of lawyers is being prepared.
Despite repeated denunciations and allegations of torture, many of them supported by medical evidence, there is as yet no sign that the Government is able either to prosecute the people involved in past cases or to prevent torture from recurring. In the few trials
273
that have been held, the sentences have been derisory. For example, two police officers tried in March 1977 in Castellón for torturing three men, were sentenced to three days' arrest and ordered to pay compensation of 3,000 pesetas (£25) to the victims. The situation is further complicated by the fact that most of the police force, the para-military Guardia Civil and the Guardia Armada come under military jurisdiction. Only the BIS come under the jurisdiction of civil courts.
The extent to which the security forces can influence even a government which enjoys such a wide measure of support, was aptly illustrated in January 1977 by the Government's suspension of Articles 15 and 18 of the Constitution, which limit the period of detention and restrict the right to search without a warrant. This was done under pressure from the police following terrorist acts committed against a senior army officer, General Emilio Villaescusa and a banker and member of the Council of the Realm, Señor Antonio Maria de Oriol y Urquijo. It remains of concem to Amnesty International that so far the Government has failed to curb this power.
During the year Amnesty Intemational adopted several Conscientious Objectors, all of whom were released pending a reform of the law. This reform was finally published in January 1977. The decree recognizes only religious grounds for conscientious objection and requires three years' alternative service in the public interest: that is, twice as long as the military term of duty. Eleven fresh arrests of Conscientious Objectors were reported in May 1977. They have all been adopted by Amnesty Intemational.
