Vietnam (Sodalist Republic of)
North and South Vietnam were officially reunified on 2 July 1976, two months after the elections to the National Assembly in April 1976, and the Socialist Republic of Vietnam was proclaimed.
A number of arrests of groups or individuals were reported in 1976-1977; but the most important issue remained the large-scale detention in "re-education" camps of civilian and military personnel of the former Saigon administration.
In 1976-1977, Amnesty International made inquiries to the Vietnamese Government about procedures for releasing people being "re-educated", and about various individuals said to be in detention and what their conditions were like.
While most of the over a million people who had registered for "re-education" in 1975 spent only a short time in centers set up for this purpose, numerous former officers and civilians were still being held in camps towards the end of 1976—as many as 200,000 according to some observers. However, Vietnamese officials stated in February 1977 that about 50,000 people were still held, equivalent to 5% of the total of those who had registered. According to the statement, issued by Vietnam's observer at the United Nations, they would have to "remould themselves" before being released and they were being reasonably treated, although they could not expect a "better life than most of the ordinary working people in Vietnam".
In an earlier statement made in May 1976 the Provisional Revolutionary Government said that "those who have committed numerous crimes against the people and who show themselves to be obstinate at the political courses will be brought to trial at tribunals". And those in this category who "hide or conceal themselves in any way" and "clandestinely sabotage the revolution will be severely punished by law". According to the British newspaper the Guardian of 11 April 1977, quoting a broadcast by Hanoi Radio, those who would have to undergo prolonged "re-education" included "members of
228
the green berets, the rangers, the paratroops, marines, policemen, prison guards, district officials, village chiefs and secret agents who were trained by the United States".
For the remaining 5%, the average length of "re-education" would be three years, a period which can apparently be reduced depending on the "progress made in the re-education centers". No other factors determining releases have been specified.
Foreign journalists were allowed to visit some camps in 1976 and generally reported that "re-education" consisted of manual labour during the day followed by political courses and self-criticism sessions in the evening. One such account, reported in the American newspaper the Washington Post of 15 February 1977, concerned a camp in the former Tranglon base near Tayninh which held 4,000 former officers. The director of "re-education" services of the 7th military zone, which includes the Tranglon camp, stated that 21,000 junior and senior officers had been registered for "re-education" in the whole zone, half of them having already returned to their families. The food was reported to be sufficient and the officers were allowed a three-hour visit from their families once every three months.
Little is known, however, about most of these camps. From information available it seems that conditions vary significantly from one to another, depending either on the natural conditions of the area, on the managemement of the camp or on the gravity of the offences allegedly committed by the detainees. Some places are reported to be open centers, others to be closed camps where conditions are harsh and freedom of movement is restricted. In some cases, it is said, families have been allowed only one visit to their relatives since 1975, while in others short visits are allowed once a month.
Amnesty International has received reports indicating that in late 1976 transfers occurred from organized camps to development areas where food and sanitary conditions were said to be very poor. These transfers have increased problems of communication between the detainees and their families who apparently were not given official advance notice of the moves.
Amnesty Intemationd wrote to Prime Minister Pham Van Dong in April 1977, asking especially about transfers from camps in the south to the north, near or north of Hanoi, which were said to have been made in the autumn of 1976. Although it has since been reported that some of those transferred were later returned to the south, the total number and categories of those remaining in the north are not known.
Amnesty International also expressed concern about the prolonged detention of those who, as far as is known, have not been charged
229
with criminal offences. Inquiries were made about individuals believed to be Prisoners of Conscience: for example, Tran Van Tuyen, a lawyer who was Secretary General of the former Nationalist Party in South Vietnam. For a few months he had held the post of Deputy Premier in the short-lived Phan Huy Quat Government in 1965, and later stood for election to the House of Representatives of the Saigon National Assembly where he became the Chairman of the opposition bloc. He remained a member until April 1975. He was known to have defended political detainees held by the Thieu Government. He was sent to a "re-education" camp in LongKhanh province in June 1975 and, after several transfers, was last said to be held in Chi Hoa Prison in Ho-Chi-Minh City. He is 64-years-old and is reported to have refused to write confessions and to be in bad health due to his prolonged detention. His case and other similar ones are being followed by Amnesty International adoption groups.
Some releases were officially announced during the past year. In August 1976, the Vietnamese National Assembly declared an amnesty, to become effective on National Day, 2 September. Amnesty International welcomed the amnesty in a cable to the Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National Assembly, Mr Truong Chinh, and asked for details about the number and categories of those concerned but no further information was received. In February 1977, the Vietnam News Agency announced that more than 1,000 officers, police and administrative personnel had been released because they had "made substantial progress in reformation at military management camps". The 1,000 came mainly from the 7th military zone, including Ho-Chi-Minh City, and from the Mekong Delta. Other individual releases were also announced, some of former ministers and senior army officers.
Various arrests were reported in 1976-1977. On 10 September 1976, Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of the Interior Tran Quoc Hoan, enquiring about the arrest of the leader of one of the Hoa Hao Buddhist factions, Luong Trong Tuong, and three members of his family. They were said to have been arrested at the beginning of July 1975 and to be held in Chi Hoa Prison in Ho-Chi-Minh City. According to some reports, some Hoa Hao belonging to Luong Trong Tuong's faction and other associations had organized armed groups to oppose the new Government after April 1975. The Saigon newspaper Giai Phong announced in mid-July 1975 that ammunition depots were discovered in the office of the "Fourth Central Committee of the Hoa Hao Buddhists" in Long Chau Tien province. According to Tuong's relatives, however, when some Hoa Hao proposed forming a resistance front, Luong Trong Tuong had called upon his
230
followers to remain peaceful, asking them "not to allow Vietnamese blood to be shed again". No official information was available about Tuong's arrest.
Fresh inquiries were made about these cases at the end of October 1976, following reports that Tuong's wife had been arrested injuly 1976. In May 1977, Amnesty International received news that Tuong had been released but that two of his family were still detained.
The letter sent in September to the Minister of the Interior also mentioned reports that nine Buddhist nuns and two monks had immolated themselves by fire at the Thieu Vien Duoc Su Temple, Can Tho province, on 1 November 1975. According to these reports, the suicides were in protest against local authorities restricting religious practices. Amnesty International asked what had happened to three women reported to have been arrested three days later when they went to the temple upon learning about the suicides and whose whereabouts were unknown. A letter signed by the abbot of the temple, the Venerable Thich Hue Hien, appealing for respect for freedom of worship and giving the names of the 11 other nuns and monks involved, had been circulated together with a letter sent in November 1975 by the Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam to the Provisional Revolutionary Government of South Vietnam. The French review Le Point reported on 25 April 1977 that four members of the Buddhist Institute for the Propagation of the Faith went to the Duoc Su temple to investigate the affair a few days after it happened but were prevented from getting information by the local authorities. After hearing their report, the Church had sent an appeal to the Government.
In February 1977, the Vietnamese Government denied that these were suicides. They said that, according to witnesses' testimony, Pham Van Co (lay name of the Venerable Thich Hue Hien) had murdered two nuns in 1972 and 1974 after he had made them pregnant, and that he had "continued his immoral conduct after the liberation of South Vietnam". According to the Government statement, "in the face of being exposed, Co decided to end his life, burnt the temple and himself after killing 11 others, including two youngsters".
A letter from the Venerable Thich Thien Chau, published by the magazine WIN in January 1977, gave an account similar to the official one. The author of the letter, a representative of the Association of Vietnamese Buddhists in France, said that during an interview in June 1976, the President of the Buddhist Institute for the Propagation of the Faith, the Venerable Thich Tri Thu, confirmed that after an investigation the An Quang Pagoda had "filed the matter". However, according to another report, the Church had attempted unsuccessfully to discuss its own findings on the affair with the Government.
231
In 1977 tensions between leadingmembers of the Buddhist Church and the authorities seem to have developed. In April it was reported that a member of the People's Committee of Ho-Chi-Minh City had given warnings to some members of the An Quang Pagoda who were "more and more openly opposing the revolutionary power". The An Quang Pagoda had been famous during the war as a center of opposition to the Saigon Government. The available information suggests that the authorities have tried to restrict the activities of the Buddhist Church, particularly its social work in schools and orphanages, and have encountered strong opposition. Arrests were reported in April, five of them of leaders of the Unified Buddhist Church.
In May 1977, Amnesty International wrote to President Ton Due Thang expressing concern at these reports and urging that the arrests be investigated. The organization supplied the names of seven monks reported arrested and urged that those detained be released pending an enquiry. At the time of writing, no further information was available.
Amnesty International also looked into the case of a Roman CathoHc bishop, Monseigneur Nguyen Van Thuan, said to have been placed under surveillance inAugust 1975 and imprisoned in NhaTrang in March 1976. Monseigneur Thuan was Bishop of Nha Trang until his nomination as Coadjutor Archbishop of Saigon shortly before the change of government in April 1975. His nomination was opposed by a small group of radical priests who wanted to prevent hasty changes in the church hierarchy and another bishop was nominated €!oadjutor several months later. The charges against him do not appear to have been disclosed officially. According to some sources. Monseigneur Thuan may be accused of having had connections with the CIA and spreading anti-communist propaganda during the war. Rumours that he had died in prison were denied by the Vatican in April 1977, but his imprisonment was confirmed. Amnesty International inquired about his health, which was said to be bad because of his imprisonment, and urged that he be released or that the charges brought against him be made public.
Reports circulated in 1976 that many Roman Catholic priests had been arrested, but there is little information about individual cases and many reports remain unconfirmed. However, one particular case involving Roman Catholic priests, known as the "Vinh Son Church affair", was given wide publicity in the Vietnamese press. On 13 September 1976, 14 laymen and priests, some of the former being ex-officers of the Saigon army, were brought to trial in Ho-Chi-Minh City. They had been arrested the previous February for involvement in
232
the Vinh Son Church incident, in which a group of men engaged in a gun battle with the police after seeking refuge in the church. The Tribunal charged them with having formed a resistance movement called "The People's Army for National Recovery" and with engaging in armed resistance and economic sabotage by printing false money. They reportedly admitted the charges during the trial, which lasted four days. Among them, two ex-army men, Nguyen Due Hung and Nguyen Xuan Hung and one priest, Nguyen Huu Nghi, were sentenced to death. On 28 September, Amnesty International appealed to President Ton Due Thang to commute the sentences on humanitarian grounds. According to some reports the sentences still had to be confirmed by the President, but no further information was available on whether or not they had been carried out.
In June 1977, Amnesty International groups were working on behalf of 12 prisoners who had either been adopted or whose cases were being investigated. One adopted prisoner was reported released in March 1977 and his release was later confirmed. Other reported arrests were being followed up by the Research Department.
