Morocco (Kingdom of)
Eight major trials of political detainees took place in Morocco during July and August 1976. These trials were held at Meknes, Fez, Rabat, Settat and Casablanca. Approximately 350 people were brought to trial on various charges connected with their opposition to the Government of King Hassan. Some of the accused were charged with planning violent crimes against the Government, but the great majority were detained for their political convictions and membership of opposition parties, including the Union Socialiste des Forces Populaires (USFP) and the banned student groups. Union Nationale des Etudiants Marocains (UNEM) and Syndicat National des Lycéens (SNL). Many of the defendants had been in detention since 1973, and some since 1972.
The outcome of the trials was that more than 200 were either acquitted or sentenced to prison terms of less than three years, which had already been served by the time of their trial. All but two of the students and USFP members involved in these trials, whose cases were taken up by Amnesty International, have now been released. They include Abdelaziz Menebhi, a prominent student leader arrested in 1972 who was acquitted but who is now partially paralyzed as a result of ill-treatment received in detention.
Two French lawyers, Maître Francois Jemoli and Maître Laurent Hincker, attended the trials as Amnesty International observers. Both their reports contained very disturbing accounts of police behaviour in Morocco towards those detainees who are held under suspicion of being a threat to internal security. During the trials, prisoners and defence lawyers testified that periods of secret detention averaged six months and were sometimes more than a year. Ten people are alleged to have died as a result of maltreatment in detention centers since 1973, and several other detainees have disappeared. Following the disclosures in the trials of July and August 1976, Amnesty International groups organized a protest campaign, demanding an inquiry into police behaviour in Morocco.
During the election period, from November 1976 to June 1977, there was some measure of reconciliation between the King and the opposition parties. However, appeals for a general amnesty of all
83
political prisoners as a prelude to elections, made by the opposition parties and by Amnesty International groups and National Sections in a special campaign on 9 July, have not been heeded. In November 1976, 240 political detainees in Casablanca Prison staged an 18-day hunger strike in protest at the protracted delays in arranging their trial, and Amnesty International organized an Urgent Action to support their demand to be tried or released. These detainees were held for suspected membership of the radical socialist movement generally known as Frontiste. The majority were arrested in November 1974, and after periods of secret detention were brought for the first time before an examining magistrate, some in August 1975 and others in January 1976. There were further arrests during 1975 and 1976. As a result of the hunger strike of November 1976, 105 of the detainees in Casablanca Prison were released, uncharged, on 8 December, and 139 were brought to trial in Casablanca in January and February 1977. Thirty-nine others were tried in absentia.
Observers attending the trial on behalf of Amnesty International and several other international organizations were unanimous in condemning the conduct of the court. The rights of the prisoners to defend their cases and to be defended by their lawyers were restricted to an unprecedented degree. During the course of the trial the defendants were all expelled from the court room after staging a 48-hour hunger strike in protest at these restrictions. The evidence produced in court consisted only of marxist literature and duplicating materials, and the prosecution accepted that at the time of their arrest the defendants had only reached the stage of propagating their ideas. However, the Frontistes were found guilty of plotting the violent overthrow of the Government and received exceptionally heavy sentences. Forty-four were condemned to life imprisonment; 110 received sentences of between 10 and 30 years' imprisonment, and 22 received five year sentences, of which three were suspended.
Of those who stood trial in Casablanca in January/February 1977, 40 were already Amnesty International cases, including the Frontiste leader, Abraham Serfaty, who received a life sentence. Other cases were taken up after the trial. More than 180 Moroccan prisoners are now adopted by Amnesty International groups.
In June 1977, Amnesty International received information concerning a new wave of arrests directed against radical socialist groups and involving an estimated 300 persons, all of whom were reported detained incommunicado at secret security police detention centers. Persistent rumours suggest that a number of detainees may have died as a result of torture during interrogation by security police.
84
