Lao People's Democratic Republic
During the past year many civil-servants and officers of the former Vientiane administration have remained in "re-education" centers or camps in the Lao People's Democratic Republic. Only a few releases from such centers have been officially announced and no official figures are available of the total number of those still held. According to press reports, towards the end of 1976 about 6,000 members of the former administration were currently undergoing "re-education" in camps located in the north of the country, and tens of thousands of people were reportedly held in various centers throughout the country.
In February 1977, Amnesty International wrote to Prime Minister Kaysone Phonvihane, asking how many and what categories of former officials were being held for "re-education". It had been reported that some would have to stay in camps for 18 months and others as long as five years, depending on "their rank and their attitude". The letter mentioned earlier reports, according to which more than six hundred young people "rebellious to the new regime" had been arrested in April 1976 in Vientiane and sent to "re-education"
197
centers. Amnesty International expressed concern that civilians were held in these camps merely because of their position in the former administration or because of their beliefs, and asked what steps the Government was taking as regards their return to civilian life.
The organization also asked about the fate of a Thai student, Tirarat Sivaranon, and of two other Thai nationals said to have been arrested on 22 October 1975 by Laotian soldiers on charges of espionage. The three men were on a short authorized visit in the Suwannaket area and were reportedly arrested shortly after crossing the Thai-Lao border because Tirarat Sivaranon was taking photographs. His relatives, who are in Thailand, claim that they did not receive any official information about him for months, apart from the news of his transfer to an unnamed prison, and the fact that visits were not allowed. It was later alleged that he had died in prison in July 1976 because of emotional stress and the material conditions in which he was held. In June 1977, Amnesty International again urged the Government to conduct an inquiry into his case and into the conditions in the prison where he was held.
In March 1977, the arrest of the former King of Laos, Sri Savang Vatthana, and of members of his family was reported in connection with a pro-monarchist armed rebellion which took place in the city of Muong Nan. The ex-King and his relatives were accused of having inspired the rebellion and were sent to a "re-education" camp at Viengsay in the north of the country. However, no official evidence was given of their involvement. It was reported that after his abdication in December 1975, ex-King Vatthana was living in Luang Prabang, protected by an official guard day and night. Under the former coalition Government he had maintained a neutral position, saying he would agree to the coronation of his son only after the country was unified. Amnesty International wrote to Premier Phon-vihane in June 1977, expressing grave concern about the arrests and urging that Mr Vatthana and his relatives be released immediately, or that the precise charges against them be made public and that they be tried and allowed a proper defence.
The organization also inquired about reports alleging harsh conditions in some "re-education" camps, particularly in the north at Phongsali, Samneua and Attapu, where detainees were said to have to undertake hard labour on an insufficient diet. Foreign journalists have been able to visit "re-education" centers on islands near the capital, Vientiane, whose inmates are said to be mainly drug-addicts, hooligans and prostitutes; but no foreign journalists have been allowed to visit the camps in the north and no official information is available about them.
198
Little information h£is reached Amnesty International about individual cases of Prisoners of Conscience during the period covered by this report. Three cases were investigated by the International Secretariat; one of the people concerned was later reported dead and another released. Other cases are at present being followed up with a view to adoption or investigation by Amnesty International groups.
