Zambia (Republic of)
Fifteen University of Zambia students and a Times of Zambia journalist whose cases had been taken up by Amnesty International following their arrest in February 1976 were released from detention in August 1976. They had not been charged. However, two other students and university staff member Younus Lulat remained in detention until December before they too were released uncharged. Prior to his release, Mr Lulat went on hunger-strike on 24 October
114
in protest against his continued detention and on behalf of "all people held without trial in peacetime in Zambia". He announced his hunger-strike during a habeas corpus hearing in the Lusaka High Court on 29 October, but was persuaded to call it off some days later.
Following their release, nine of the students were expelled from the University of Zambia. Consequently, Amnesty International has been in touch with several educational organizations in an attempt to secure places for them at universities outside Zambia. Mr Lulat's appointment as a university staff member was also terminated. He has since left Zambia.
There were further releases during October 1976, when more than 35 members of the Zimbabwe African National Union (ZANU), the Rhodesian liberation movement, were freed following the acquittal of three ZANU members charged with murder. Josiah Tongogara, Joseph Chimurenga and Sadat Kufa Mazuba had been jointly accused of planning and carrying out the assassination of ZANU National Chairman Herbert Chitepo, who was killed in an explosion outside his Lusaka home on 18 March 1975. The three defendants, all of whom were arrested shortly after Mr Chitepo's death, denied the offence and alleged that they had been tortured while in detention. Their claim was accepted by trial judge. Justice Manival Moodley, who, when acquitting the three accused, ordered the Ministry of Justice to launch an investigation into security police methods and interrogation procedures. Attorney General Mainza Chona subsequently announced that the inquiry had exonerated all members of the security police.
Amnesty International assisted with defence arrangements for the Tongogara trial by engaging British barrister John Platts-Mills QC to act as special adviser to defence counsel and by channelling defence funds. Amnesty International similarly arranged legal representation on behalf of the ZANU members who remained in detention uncharged.
In March 1977, the one remaining ZANU member imprisoned in Zambia, Tyupo Shumba Chigowe, was released. Mr Chigowe, who was convicted and sentenced to death in April 1976 on charges of murdering another ZANU official and on the basis of a disputed "confession" statement, was acquitted and freed by the Zambian Appeal Court.
Members of another southern African liberation movement, the South West African People's Organization (SWAPO) of Namibia, also encountered difficulties with the Zambian Government in 1976-1977. In April 1976, the Zambian authorities detained more than 50 SWAPO members, including several members of the organization's
115
Executive Committee, when it became evident that divisions within the leadership might lead to open violence. Subsequently, during a habeas corpus action brought by the wife of Andreas Shipanga, the best known of the detainees, the Zambian authorities claimed that he had not been detained but rather taken into "protective custody". This view was refuted by Shipanga's wife and legal representative and, ultimately, by the Zambian Appeal Court which, at the same time, declared Shipanga's detention unlawful and issued a writ of habeas corpus in his favour. The writ was of no avail, however, as Shipanga and 10 other SWAPO detainees had been transferred in July 1976 to Tanzania, where they remain in detention uncharged. Zambian official explanations that Shipanga and his associates went to Tanzania voluntarily, and not as detainees, do not accord with authoritative information received by Amnesty Intemational. The organization believes that they were transferred forcibly and without their agreement so as to preclude the possibility of release by habeas corpus. There is no provision for habeas corpus in Tanzania. The Tanzanian Government has also refused requests made by the Zambian Government, on the instructions of the Zambian Appeal Court, to return Shipanga and his associates to Zambia where writs of habeas corpus can now be issued.
In May 1977, Amnesty Intemational was investigating reports that as many as 1,000 other rank and file SWAPO supporters, who had been associated with the Shipanga group, had been placed in a restriction camp at Mboroma near Kabwe.
Reports of several further detentions reached Amnesty International in 1976-1977 involving, among others, persons previously associated with the former opposition United Progressive Party (UPP) and African National Congress (ANC), which were disbanded when Zambia became a one-party state in 1972.
