Brunei (Sultanate of)
Amnesty Intemational has continued to work for the release of 19 adopted political detainees in Bmnei who are still being held without trial, although 30 of the original group of 49 adopted prisoners have been released.
The organization welcomed all the releases, including the release of groups of detainees on 17 December 1976 and 5 March 1977, but is still concemed that the 19 men, most of whom have already spent more than 13 years in detention without trial, remain prisoners.
The prisoners were members oi the Partai Rakyat (People's Party) and were originally detained following the suppression of a revolt in December 1962. They are held under emergency orders which have been in force since 1962.
Amnesty Intemational has written to the Sultan of Bmnei, Hassanal Bolkiah Muizzaddin Waddaulah, urging an immediate review of the cases of all the remaining prisoners with a view to their speedy release.
Burma (Socialist Republic of the Union of)
On 20 July 1976, the Burmese Govemment announced it had uncovered a plot to assassinate President Ne Win. Fourteen army officers were arrested in connection with the plot and eight of them were brought to trial. On 10 September, the trial began in a Rangoon Division Court, inside the closely guarded Insein Central Prison. The chief defendant was Captain Ohn Kyaw Myint, charged with high treason under Section 122(1) of the Penal Code. Ohn was accused of plotting to assassinate President Ne Win and destroy the Burmese Socialist Program Party (BSPP). Three other officers were accused of high treason, three were accused of harbouring persons engaged in high treason and the former General Tin Oo, dismissed as Defence Minister in March 1976, was charged with concealing knowledge of the plot.
In January 1977, Ohn was sentenced to death for masterminding the assassination plot. The other officers were given sentences ranging from five years' to life imprisonment. General Tin Oo was sentenced to seven years. On 21 January, Amnesty Intemational cabled President Ne Win urging that he commute the death sentence passed on Ohn Kyaw Myint.
In early 1976, the Council of People's Attorneys was instructed by the Burmese Govemment to determine whether military tribunals were constitutional. The Council is said to have advised the Govemment that tribunals were unconstitutional. In mid-1976, there were
174
reports that tribunals were transferred to the People's Courts. Although military tribunals were not constitutional, military courts were permissible under martial law.
In September 1976, the Government announced the lifting of martial law in Rangoon. It had been imposed in Rangoon in December 1974 during the student demonstrations in connection with the burial of former United Nations Secretary General, U Thant. An amnesty was announced for 1,600 people who had been convicted by the military courts, and the sentences of a further 3,300 were reduced. On 1 October 1976, the universities were opened after six months of closure. Students were required to sign pledges that they would not engage in political activities against the state.
An accurate estimate of the number of political detainees in Burma is not available; some observers have reckoned that several thousand students and workers had been arrested between December 1974 and March 1976. At least several thousand political prisoners are held in the prisons of Rangoon and the provinces.
