Cuba (Republic of)
Amnesty International continues to follow developments in the situation of political prisoners in Cuba; on various occasions it has expressed its concern to the Cuban authorities, especially about
135
the fate of prisoners held for expressing their political views, whose cases the organization has been following for the past few years.
In a televized interview broadcast by the British Broadcasting Corporation on 1 February 1977, Carlos Rafael Rodriguez, one of Cuba's Vice-Presidents, affirmed that the "counter-revolutionaries" held in prison could not be considered political prisoners, and that there were therefore no political prisoners in Cuba. {"We do not admit these as political prisoners because nobody in Cuba is in prison on account of his ideas.") This statement is not in line with others issued by prominent Cuban officials (including Fidel Castro, at present President of the Council of State), nor with Amnesty International's interpretation of information.
Because it is difficult to obtain and check such information (see Amnesty International Annual Report 1975-1976)y the estimated total of political prisoners in Cuba can only be an approximate one. The figure of 4,000-5,000 put forward in the Amnesty International Report 1975-1976 applies only to those prisoners whom the Cuban authorities (and in particular the courts who pass sentence) recognize as being detained on political charges. This category of prisoner appears to have become smaller in die last year, the total now lies between 2,000 and 3,000. (This estimate, based on information from various sources, was confirmed by Fidel Castro in a televized interview with the American journalist Barbara Walters in June 1977.)
Amnesty International's main preoccupation during the past year has been the situation of a minority of prisoners who have refused to comply on principle with the rehabilitation program, which has been in operation for about 10 years (see earlier Amnesty International» Annual Reports). These dissidents (known as plantados in Cuban prison jargon) are still reported to number several hundred. With a few exceptions, they are all long-term prisoners detained since before 1970. They include members of the armed forces and civil servants of the Batista regime, former members of the revolutionary movement who went into opposition after 1959, and individuals who took up arms against the present Government. Many had held high positions in politics, the army, the administration or the unions during the early years of the Cuban revolution.
Not all of them can be considered Prisoners of Conscience (even if almost all of them are undeniably political prisoners, sentenced for crimes "against the State" or "against the stability and integrity of the Nation"). Yet their particular situation stems from a stand on principle—their refusal to acccpt indoctrination or any form of detention or to engage in activities which they feel to be incompatible with their beliefs or opinions.
136
Until the end of 1976, La Cabana, a former colonial fort in Havana, was the main detention center for those who refused to be rehabilitated. It appears that most of the inmates of La Cabaña were then transferred to a new prison built several miles to the east of Havana, Combinado del Este. There are reports of political prisoners being held in maximum security conditions in other prisons, such as Boniato in Oriente province, and Nuevo Amanecer, a women's prison near the capital.
Among the better-known prisoners refusing rehabilitation are a number of former officers of the revolutionary army: Huber Matos, Eloy Gutierrez Menoyo, Antonio Lamas and César Paéz (the three last also took part in guerrilla activity against the present régime in the Escambray region during the sixties); the former workers' leader Lauro Blanco; the former student leader Jorge Vails; the ex-students Miguel Sales and Armando Valladares Perez. There are reports that several women have also refused to undergo rehabilitation. In November 1976 they included the following (most of them detained in Nuevo Amanecer prison): Miriam Ortega, Leonor Barbara Olivera, Leopoldina Grau Alsina, Nereyda Polo, Alejandrina (Aleja) Sánchez Piloto, Bertha Alemán, María Amalia Fernández del Cuesto, Felicia Guillermina García, Georgina Cid Campos, Nilda Díaz Batista, Ana Bustamante, Dolores Correoso, Albertina O'Farril, Esther Campos, Clara Alonso, Caridad Cabrera, Aracely Rodriguez, Zoila Aguila, Dora Delgado, América Quesada, María Magdalena Alvarez, María Teresa Bastanzuri, María Garcia Rangel, Mercedes Peña and Ana Lázara Rodriguez.
Although various observers agree that prisoners undergoing rehabilitation are, on the whole, in good conditions, information about a number of those refusing to be rehabilitated gives cause for concern, especially as these prisoners are kept apart from the rest, and (with a few notable exceptipns) the Cuban authorities have not as yet repHed to appeals and letters on their behalf. Moreover, none of the foreign visitors to Cuba who have made inquiries about the prison system have seen any prisoners in this particular category. Some of them have been held for over 15 years, and their state of health is said to be particularly poor.
Amnesty International has received no information to indicate that prisoners have been tortured during the period covered by this report. Accounts by former prisoners about previous years claim that prison conditions were then poor, that there was ill-treatment and, occasionally, fatal incidents; but on the whole they tend to corroborate official statements to the effect that torture is deliberately and systematically prevented under the present régime.
137
In June 1977, Amnesty International had 25 cases under adoption and four under investigation.
Amnesty International has continued discussions with Cuban officials, mainly through the UN. Their purpose is to explain the organization's concern—especially its concern over the situation of human rights in Cuba. Also, in May-June 1976, during the UN Apartheid Seminar held in Havana, the Amnesty International delegate to the Seminar had lengthy discussions with officials from the Ministry of External Affairs and the Ministry of Justice.
