Uganda (Republic of)
The human rights situation in Uganda seriously deteriorated in early 1977, when some of the worst instances of human rights violations in the whole continent occured. In May 1977, the International
110
Commission of Jurists published the texts of its submissions to the UN Commission on Human Rights from 1974 to 1976. These submissions did not result in any action from the United Nations, despite a recommendation in August 1976 by the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities "to make a thorough study of the human rights situation, based on objective and reliably attested information". The Commission finally decided merely to keep the Uganda situation under review. Amnesty International made a statement on human rights violations in Uganda to the Commission on Human Rights on 7 February 1977. While the Commission was in session from 7 February until 12 March, numerous further atrocities were committed in Uganda. In May 1977, Amnesty International made a formal submission under confidential procedures to the Commission on Human Rights concerning human rights violations in Uganda (especially since 1976-1977), with the hope that action might still be taken by the UN.
Amnesty International was again unable to adopt individual Prisoners of Conscience in Uganda, mainly for fear of reprisals, but also because very few detainees survived long after arrest by the security forces. Amnesty International's statement to the UN of February 1977 detailed the common procedures of arrest by the various branches of the security forces, which include, as a matter of routine, torture and arbitrary killing. Trials of detainees are rare—and even when they are held, the system of military tribunals is incompatible with internationally accepted standards of justice—for arbitrary killing is extremely widespread and is either condoned or ordered by the highest authority in Uganda. The Ugandan authorities are apparently insensitive to the world-wide revulsion which followed several recent atrocities, particularly the murder of Archbishop Janani Luwum,
Amnesty International estimates that during 1976-1977 several thousand Ugandans were killed by the security forces. Arrests and killings followed any event which was seen as a threat to the régime, such as the circulation of anti-government leaflets and student demonstrations, as well as attempts to assassinate President Amin and overthrow the regime. Killing by the security forces is almost continuous, affecting Ugandans of all walks of life, especially prominent citizens.
After the Israeli miUtary action at Entebbe in July 1976, Amnesty International protested to President Amin at the abduction and murder of Dora Bloch, the British-Israeli hostage. About 20 people witnessed her death, including a photographer Jimmy Parma who is said to have photographed her burnt corpse. A number of airport
Ill
staff and Kenyan nationals were also killed immediately after this incident. Most of the 245 Kenyans arrested were however released, though after considerable maltreatment and torture.
In August, Amnesty International cabled President Amin expressing "profound disquiet" at reports of student deaths and arrests at Makerere University and urging an inquiry into the army's behaviour, stressing the importance of this in view of Uganda's current membership of the UN Commission on Human Rights. Early press reports of several hundred student deaths later proved to be exaggerated, but according to Amnesty International information gathered from reliable eye-witnesses, on 2-3 August 1976 some hundreds of students were openly tortured on the campus by soldiers following orders from the President. Over 200 were then detained and ill-treated or tortured for some hours before being released. The actual death toll, however, was probably less than 10.
The worst series of events during 1976-1977 started on 25 January 1977 soon after the sixth anniversary of President Amin's coup d'état. The repression of the churches was increasing and on 16 February religious leaders were summoned by President Amin to the Nile Conference Center where the Anglican bishops were publicly accused of smuggling in Chinese weapons to overthrow the regime, with the assistance of President Nyerere and Acholi and Langi followers of former President Milton Obote. The head of the Anglican Church of Uganda, Archbishop Janani Luwum, was arrested together with two cabinet ministers, Charles Oboth-Ofumbi and Lieutenant Colonel Wilson Oryema. The next day the Government announced that all three had died in a car accident while trying to overpower the driver and escape. Amnesty International cabled certain African and and Arab heads of state on 16 February, as soon as the news of the arrests was received, requesting their personal intervention to secure the safety of those arrested. On 17 February, the organization learnt of their deaths, and cabled President Amin to express "profound shock" at these reports. Amnesty International called for an immediate and independent investigation, and publicly expressed "grave doubts" about the official version of the deaths in view of the total inadequacy of previous government inquiries into disappearances and deaths at the hands of the security forces.
Following these three deaths, a wave of government-sanctioned killings swept over Uganda, directed especially at Christian and educated members of the Acholi and Langi ethnic groups (the latter being former President Obote's tribe), including those in the security forces. Killings took place in the north (especially in Gulu and Lira), in Kampala—where soldiers with "death lists" arrested Acholi and
112
Langi in government offices, the university, hospitals, businesses, in their homes—and in military barracks and many other places. There are reliable reports from refugees of large-scale torture and killings following a similar pattern to previous mass arrests. Thousands of refugees fled to Kenya while the killings were at their height from February to May 1977. During this period, some of the worst atrocities were committed in Uganda since Amin came to power in 1971. A number of Kenyans were also arrested in March and Amnesty International cabled the UN and OAU Secretary Generals on 20 March 1977 urging their intervention to prevent torture and killing of up to 100 Kenyans arbitrarily detained in Uganda. Most were subsequently released.
In February 1977, Amnesty International renewed its offer to undertake a mission to Uganda to investigate human rights issues, as suggested by President Amin in 1975 at the United Nations in New York. No reply has yet been received from the Ugandan authorities.
In mid-June 1977, another assassination attempt on President Amin failed, and a new wave of arbitrary killings directed against the Baganda and Basoga ethnic groups was carried out by the security forces, notably the State Research Bureau.
The defections of senior Uganda government ministers continued in 1977 with the decision of the Minister of Health, Henry Kyemba, to seek refuge in Britain and publicize his knowledge of human rights violations in Uganda. The Minister of Justice, Godfrey Lule, who had represented Uganda before the United Nations Commission on Human Rights, timed his public statement of defection to coincide with the Organization of African Unity Conference in Gabon, which was attended by President Amin in his first pubhc appearance since his "disappearance" during the June coup attempt. Mr Lule gave further evidence on the use of torture, President Amin's responsibility for numerous killings, and the reign of terror by the security forces.
