Bangladesh (People's Republic of)
On 21 April 1977, Major General Ziaru Rahman, Chief Martial Law Administrator and effective ruler of Bangladesh, assumed the office of President and announced that general elections would be held in December 1978. By way of constitutional amendment, "secularism" was removed as one of the four principles of state policy and the Constitution was given an Islamic bias. The occasion was marked by the release of 737 political detainees and 11 political leaders, arrested in November 1976 for "activities prejudicial to the government". In fact, the political leaders had been arrested for reacting strongly against the Government announcement of 29 November 1976 that elections were indefinitely postponed. Amnesty International had cabled the Chief Martial Law Administrator on 1 December 1976 urging the early release of these prisoners if no charges were being brought.
Throughout the year, there was mounting concern about the continued application of martial law and the use of martial law tribunals to try both civilians and the military. Martial law courts have a very wide jurisdiction: they can try offences under martial law but also offences "punishable under any other law". Amnesty International is particularly concerned about the creation of Special Martial Law Tribunals, which may try offences punishable under chapters VI and VII of the Penal Code (offences against the State and against the Army, Navy and Air Force) and may hold proceedings in camera. Martial Law Regulation No 33, of 28 December 1976, removed the possibility of limited appeal against sentence passed by any of the martial law courts.
At least two such tribunals were set up during 1976. On 21 June 1976, Special Martial Law Tribunal No 1 opened to try Colonel Abu Taher (retired) and 32 other civilians and members of the armed forces on charges of attempting to overthrow the government of Bangladesh and of inciting the armed forces to mutiny. Most of the
170
accused were connected with the Jatiyo Samajtantrik Dal QSD— National Socialist Party) or its military wing, the Biplobi Gono Bahini (Revolutionary People's Army). On 29 June 1976, Amnesty International sent a cable to the President and the Chief Martial Law Administrator expressing concern about the fact that the trial was being held in camera inside Dacca Central Jail and that defence lawyers, who only met their clients on the day proceedings began, had to take an oath of secrecy. The organization requested an assurance that the trial would be open to the public and that the accused could choose their own defence counsel and would be able to appeal to an independent court.
On 18 July 1976, Colonel Taher was sentenced to death, two accused were sentenced to life imprisonment, 14 others to various terms of imprisonment, while 16 others were acquitted. Amnesty International cabled President Sayem the following day appealing for clemency for Colonel Taher, stating that the trial procedures fell short of internationally accepted standards and urging the Government to order a re-trial before an ordinary criminal court of all those sentenced. This request was released to the press the following day. On 21 July 1976, Colonel Taher was executed after an appeal for clemency had been refused by the President (there being no provision in law for appeal to any legal authority). The execution constituted an important precedent since, so far as Amnesty International is aware, no political prisoners had previously been executed in Bangladesh. On 11 August 1976, the organization cabled the Chief Martial Law Administrator expressing deep distress at the execution following a martial law trial held in camera.
From 4 to 12 April 1977, an Amnesty International delegation visited Bangladesh. Sean MacBride, SC, former Chairman of the organization's International Executive Committee, and Yvonne Terlingen, from the International Secretariat, received considerable cooperation from the Bangladesh Government and had detailed discussions with Major General Ziaur Rahman, the Chief Martial Law Administrator, the then President Mr Justice A.M. Sayem and the Secretaries of the Ministries of Foreign and Home Affairs. Sean MacBride also addressed members of the Supreme Court Bar Association and the delegates met lawyers, journalists, academics and some members of political parties. A report of their visit was presented to President Ziaur Rahman on 23 June 1977. The report reflects Amnesty International's concern about the continuation of martial law, the trial of political prisoners before martial law courts and the conditions in which political prisoners are being held.
Taking into account the delegation's findings. Amnesty Inter-
171
national estimates that there are at present between 10,000 and 15,000 political prisoners in Bangladesh. A few thousand are held under the provisions for preventive detention laid down in the Special Powers Act and the Emergency Power Regulations, but the majority are held on charges punishable under emergency regulations and martial law, mostly, however, without being tried. (A Bengali daily, Ittefaq, reported on 19 February 1977 that of the 36,685 prisoners held in Bangladesh as of that date, only about one-fifth had been convicted.) Political prisoners are usually tried by martial law courts or by special tribunals set up under the Special Powers Act. The Amnesty International report expresses concern about the restricted procedures which apply to martial law courts which try political prisoners.
The majority of political prisoners in Bangladesh belong to the Jatiyo Samajtantrik Dal (National Socialist Party) and associated organizations; but hundreds of members of the former Awami League, and the BAKSAL—the one-party system introduced during the latter part of Shaikh Mujibur Rahman's administration—are still in prison, mostly on charges of corruption, or are serving sentences passed by martial law courts. It is suspected that, at least in some cases, such charges have been brought for political reasons. Members of various left-wing groups are also in prison, the majority arrested when the Awami League was in power.
In view of the nature of most political opposition in Bangladesh and the serious criminal charges brought against many political prisoners, Amnesty International has adopted only a few as Prisoners of Conscience. However, during the Amnesty International mission, the delegates discussed the cases of 19 political prisoners belonging to various political parties, in order to find out why they were still in jail. Amnesty International discussed the cases of members of the Jatiyo Samajtantrik Dal, the Democratic League, the -East Bengal Communist Party (Marxist-Leninist), the Awami League, the National Awami Party (Muzaffar) and the various Maoist opposition groups. Some of these were released in the amnesty declared shortly afterwards.
On coming to power, the Government pledged to release all political prisoners and, as of December 1976, according to government statistics, 2,837 political detainees had been released under various amnesties declared by the present Govemmjent. Those released belong to various political groups, but members of the Jatiyo Samajtantrik Dal do not appear to have benefited from the amnesties. And there have been fresh arrests of members of this and other political parties, while in a few cases political prisoners whose release was ordered by
172
the High Court have been re-arrested at the jail gates on different charges. Moreover, the Amnesty International delegation noted that a number of prisoners arrested under previous administrations were still being held without trial. When discussing an official list of 383 political detainees arrested while the Awami League was in power in 1975, the Amnesty International delegates realized that at least 115 were still being held without charge or trial. Amnesty International has now taken up 40 of their cases for investigation, and urged the Government to review their position as a matter of the highest priority.
The Amnesty International report prepared by the mission delegates was forwarded to President Ziaur Rahman, and other government officials whom the delegates met, on 23 June 1977. The report noted the absence of constitutional and legal safeguards existing under the martial law provisions, under which political prisoners can be held and tried. It made a number of recommendations, which include the announcement of a date for the lifting of martial law. In the meantime, the report suggested the Government could immediately restore the supervisory jurisdictibn of the civil courts, could allow lawyers to appear before martid law courts in their legal capacity and could limit the use of martial law only to offences including armed insurrection and limit its use only to areas where there is a military threat of armed insurrection. The report further recommended that the Government fix a date for the early release of all political prisoners detained for more than six months without being tried or convicted, and urged the Government to speed up procedural administrative measures for the review of all political prisoners held in detention. The report also drew attention to serious overcrowding in jails and recommended that special attention be paid to the prevailing bad sanitary and medical conditions.
Some reports reached Amnesty International during the year of ill-treatment of political prisoners after arrest. These reports allege that severe beatings and burnings with cigarettes take place frequently during the period of interrogation, particularly in the Dacca Cantonment and the NSI (National Security Intelligence) interrogation centers. Amnesty International has not been able to verify these allegations; however, on 21 February 1977, the organization cabled the Chief Martial Law Administrator expressing concern about the deteriorating health of JSD leader Serajul Alam Khan. According to reliable reports, during his prolonged interrogation he had been deprived of food, drink and sleep. He is at present serving a seven year prison sentence, having been convicted by Special Martial Law Tribunal No 1 on charges of attempting to overthrow the Government. Reports that he was to be retried in camera were not verified by the mission delegates.
173
