Bulgaria (People's Republic of)
Bulgarian citizens who publicly express dissident views are liable to be charged under Article 108 of the Penal Code, which prescribes terms of imprisonment of up to five years for "anti-state propaganda" or Article 109, which prescribes terms of imprisonment of between three and 12 years for membership of any organization whose activities are "aimed at the destruction of the people's democracy". In March 1977 a spelaeologist, Alexander Alexandrov Strezov, was tried in Sofia under Article 108 after he had participated in the newly formed human rights movement in Bulgaria and publicly expressed sympathy with the Charter 77 movement in Czechoslovakia.
The availability of legal documents about this case is limited and Amnesty International continues to investigate it. In January the foreign media reported that 40 more Bulgarian intellectuals had been questioned by the police in connection with the circulation of texts of Charter 77.
According to reports reaching Amnesty International an undisclosed number of dissident members of the Pomak, Macedonian and Turkish ethnic groups are being detained in various prisons or places of assigned residence.
In recent years Amnesty International has been concerned about a number of cases in which Bulgarians with foreign business or professional connections have been convicted for "espionage" and sentenced to death. The cases of Solomon Ben Joseph, Heinrich Spetter and Nicholas Chamurlisky were noted in the Amnesty
239
International Reports for 1974-1975 and 1975-1976. A similar case was reported in 1976, that of Dr Peter Kondofersky. Dr Kondofersky is a graduate of Montpellier and Toulon Universities in France and is reportedly acquainted with some French government officials. After his return to Bulgaria, he worked as a gynaecologist near Sofia and maintained regular contact with his daughter and former colleagues living in France. Dr Kondofersky was arrested on 24 June 1971, charged with espionage and sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment and confiscation of property. Since then he has been held in Stara Zagora Prison where he is reported to have suffered several heart attacks. Amnesty International is investigating his case.
Article 279 of the Bulgarian Penal Code makes trying to leave the country without official permission an offence punishable by up to five years' imprisonment and a fine of up to 3,000 lewa or banishment. Amnesty International is investigating the case of Asen Andonov, a 32-year-old Bulgarian citizen who has been arrested and re-arrested several times after trying to leave the country without official permission. Amnesty International knows that his last trial took place in 1973-1974. In 1968, shortly after attempting to leave the country, Asen Andonov was treated at a psychiatric clinic in Sofia. In 1971 he was banished with his family to the village of Varbiza, where he worked as a stonemason.
A similar case being investigated by Amnesty International is that of Stefan Marinov, a physicist working at the Bulgarian Academy of Science in Sofia, who has applied for a passport several times since 1960. In 1965, after his application for a passport had been repeatedly refused, Mr Marinov distributed leaflets about his case to participants in the International Youth Conference being held in Bulgaria. He was subsequently arrested and given psychiatric treatment including pharmocotherapy. Amnesty International does not have consistent or detailed evidence that psychiatric methods are deliberately being used as an instrument of political repression in Bulgaria, but the Marinov case gives grounds for concern. Stefan Marinov was released after a year and continued to work at the Academy of Science. His fresh applications for a passport were refused and he applied for political asylum at the US Embassy in Sofia. On leaving the Embassy, which refused his application, he was reportedly severely beaten again by the police and confined in a psychiatric hospital. He was kept there for more than a year. After his release he was dismissed and pensioned off from his work. He was again arrested and taken to a mental institution in Sofia in mid-April 1977 after organizing an unofficial international symposium on physics. In May 1977 he was released in order to meet some
240
foreign scientists who tried to attend the symposium although the authorities had cancelled it, declaring it illegal.
Amnesty International has adopted Ljuben Hadji-Dimitrov, an architect from Vinica, who was arrested together with his wife in September 1976 after their children failed to return to Bulgaria. They were interrogated several times by the secret police. Both were charged with planning to cross the border illegally. They were also charged with possession of propaganda hostile to the régime. This apparently consisted of some letters from their three children who had been granted political asylum in Switzerland. Ljuben Hadji-Dimitrov has been sentenced to four years' imprisonment. His wife was released on grounds of her ill-health after a few months' imprisonment.
As with other aspects of human rights violations in Bulgaria, it is difficult to find out precisely in what sort of conditions Bulgarian political prisoners are kept. Amnesty International has been informed that some political prisoners are detained in prisons in Sofia, Stara Zagora, Burgas, Plovdiv, Vratsa, Pazardzik, Lovec and Pleven. There have been reports that some pohtical prisoners are assigned to forced labour in the mines of Bobov and Kremikovc. Some known Prisoners of Conscience are sentenced to terms of banishment to remote villages rather than confined in penal institutions.
Amnesty International has received detailed reports from former political prisoners about the island prison of Belena [Darzavno Zenedelsko Stopavstvo). According to these allegations the number of prisoners on Belena may be as many as 4,000-6,000, including political prisoners. Amnesty International has also received allegations that political prisoners in other prisons are held in overcrowded conditions and that they are allowed only very restricted visiting rights and exercise. Allegations of maltreatment were made by former inmates of Stara Zagora, Belena and Sofia Central Prison where political prisoners are held pending trial. Prisoners there are said to have been kept incommunicado for months, sometimes in cells without daylight.
Amnesty International has seven adoption and 11 investigation cases in Bulgaria. These figures are not so much a reflection of the actual number of political prisoners in the country as an indication of how difficult it is to get reliable information.
