Mozambique (People 's Republic of)
In 1976-1977 Amnesty International continued to monitor the situation in Mozambique and tried to investigate the circumstances of various detentions and reports about conditions at so-called "re-education" camps established throughout the country. However, reports issued as part of the propaganda war between the white minority régime in Rhodesia and the Mozambique Government made it more than usually difficult to obtain confirmation on specific issues.
Detailed information about the "re-education" camps was provided by refugees arriving in Portugal in March and April 1977. They claimed that more than 20 camps had been established and that the total number of people undergoing "re-education" might be as many as 100,000, among them 7,500 Jehovah's Witnesses held in a camp at Milanje. The refugees reported that camp inmates were kept under armed guard and made to engage in forced labour. Many cases of abuse by camp guards, including rape of women inmates and the summary killing of others, were also said to have taken place.
In March 1977, the Portuguese Ministry of Foreign Affairs announced that a total of 35 Portuguese nationals remained imprisoned in Mozambique. They were said to be held on a variety of charges ranging from petty offences to unspecified "political crimes". In May 1977, a number of prisoners were reportedly released as a result of an amnesty announced by the Council of Ministers. It is not known whether any of the Portuguese nationals were among those released.
In May, reports reaching Amnesty International indicated that more than 80 African nationalist guerrillas had been detained following a leadership dispute within the Zimbabwe African National Union (ZANU), the Rhodesian African nationalist organization based in Mozambique. However, it was not immediately clear whether this information was accurate as earlier reports concerning the alleged murder of one guerrilla leader and the arrest of another by the Mozambique authorities had proved unfounded.
An Amnesty International representative attended a UN-sponsored International Conference in support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia, held in Maputo from 16-21 May.
