Nepal (Kingdom of)
In March 1977, the Home and Panchayat (local administration) Ministry announced that 57 people were held under the Security Act on the general charge of "indulging in activities hostile to the Panchayat System". Ten of these had been arrested since January 1977. There is no reason to doubt the accuracy of the Government's figure, but in addition an increasing number of political prisoners have been arrested under the provisions of the Raj Kaj Act: State (Offences and Punishment) Act—more. Amnesty Intemational reckons, than under the Security Act.
Amnesty Intemational has not yet received an official list of all those released in a series of amnesties announced since December 1975, but believes that most political prisoners who were detained for several years under the provisions of the Security Act and the Raj Kaj Act were released during 1976. Towards the end of January 1977, two members of the Amnesty Intemational Nepal Section, Marshall Julum Sakya and Purusottam Basnet, were released from prolonged detention without trial under the Public Security Act. The former had been held since May 1973 and featured in Amnesty International's Prisoners of the Month Campaign in December 1976. Of the 34 prisoners for whom the organization was working in 1976, two are still in detention. One of them, Bhim Bahadur Tamang, was released after the maximum 18-month detention period had ended but was immediately re-arrested.
There were fresh arrests when former Nepali Prime Minister B.P. Koirala and former Minister Ganesh Man Singh returned to Nepal after eight years of self-imposed exile in India. Mr Koirala, a former leader of the banned Nepali Congress Party, was arrested with 3 others as soon as he retumed to Kathmandu on 31 December 1976. Mr Koirala had previously been adopted by Amnesty Intemational. Some 40 others, alleged sympathizers with the Nepali Congress Party, were arrested at about that time. Amnesty Intemational is at present preparing to take up 30 of these cases.
On 6 January 1977, the organization cabled King Birendra, urging the early trial of Mr Koirala and the three other detainees by an ordinary court where all legal safeguards applied. The Ministry of Justice announced on 23 January 1977 that a one-member Special Tribunal had been set up to try Mr Koirala and others under the Treason (Crime and Punishment) Act. When unconfirmed reports were received that a trial in camera had already ended. Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Home and Panchayat Affairs Minister on 27 April 1977 asking for clarification of the trial procedures. The organization also heard that Mr Koirala and Mr Singh, both in
202
Sundarijal Jail, had not been allowed visits from family or friends since their arrest. In his letter of 10 June 1977, Amnesty International's Secretary General expressed concern because, were these reports correct, then detention conditions would be contrary to the provisions for visits and correspondence set forth in the Nepal Jail Rules and the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners.
Before Mr Koirala returned from India on 5 December 1976, the Government declared an amnesty for 12 members of the Nepali Congress Party, among them a former minister who had been tried in absentia and sentenced to varying terms of imprisonment for anti-state activities.
A serious event during the year was when death sentences passed on two people convicted of treason under the State (Offence and Punishment) Act were confirmed by the Supreme Court (according to reports received in February 1977). They were passed on Yagya Bahadur Thapa, a former Nepalese Army Captain found guilty of promoting armed rebellion, and Bhim Narayan Shrestha, found guilty of an attempt to assassinate the King in 1974. On 9 December 1976 and 6 April 1977, Amnesty International wrote to King Birendra, stating its absolute rejection of the death penalty, and urging clemency for the two prisoners. As far as the organization knows, no death sentence has been carried out in Nepal for the past 14 years. To date, no news has reached Amnesty International that the men have been executed.
A former Foreign Minister, Rishikesh Shaha, was arrested on 1 May 1977 on charges of sedition. He was founding Chairman of the Nepal Section of Amnesty International. After spending a year on a fellowship in the United States, he returned home to Nepal in April. He had recently published a book and articles dealing with recent Nepali politics. Five other unnamed people were also reported to have been arrested on a charge of engaging in undesirable activities. Amnesty International cabled the Government on 5 May 1977, urging Mr Shaba's immediate release if no criminal charges had been brought against him. He was released on 7 August 1977.
