Ecuador (Republic of)
Two political group arrests, followed by short-term imprisormient, were of concern to Amnesty International in Ecuador in the past year. On 13 August 1976 a meeting in Riobamba of members of the Roman Catholic clergy from throughout the hemisphere was broken up by armed police. Those taking part, including foreign archbishops, bishops, clergy and lay preachers, as well as members of the Ecuadorian church, were taken under guard in buses to the capital, Quito, where they were briefly detained. Most of the foreign clergy, a total of 18, were immediately expelled. Although this meeting of representatives of the "progressive" clergy from Latin America and the United States had been planned more thanayearin advance, the then acting Minister of the Interior, Javier Manrique, took the view that the foreign clergy had entered Ecuador "secretly" and that they were "plotting against both national and international order". None of the detainees were held for more than a few days and there were no allegations of maltreatment.
On 26 November 1976, 31 people were detained when security forces raided the El Inca convent near Quito and broke up a meeting of members of a moderate political party, the Union Nacional Democratica (UNADE). Three of those detained, two of them journalists, were released a few days later. The Minister of the Interior, Colonel Bolivar Jarrin Cahuenas, accused the 28 who remained in custody of "subversion", and charged the UNADE with planning a guerrilla campaign, and with having a connection with the Riobamba bishops' conference of the previous August. The 28, who included two Roman Catholic priests and a former government finance minister, were released under an amnesty on 24 December 1976. Amnesty International expressed concern about both the Riobamba and the El Inca convent arrests, although no individual cases were taken up.
The Secretary General of Amnesty International wrote to the President of the Supreme Council of Government, Admiral Alfredo Poveda Burtano, in February 1977 to express appreciation for support from the Government of Ecuador for the resolution on torture, passed without opposition by the General Assembly of the UN, on 13 December 1976.
140
