Taiwan (Republic of China)
In October 1976, Amnesty Intemational published a Briefing Paper on Taiwan (Republic of China). It expressed the organization's concem about the human rights situation in Taiwan and said that several hundred people suspected of opposing the Govemment were currently detained after trials in camera by military courts. It also
220
said that there had been continuous intimidation of potential opposition to the Nationalist Government and arrests of political dissidents in Taiwan since a State of Siege was declared in 1949, in spite of a partial amnesty of prisoners announced after the death of President Chiang Kai-shek in April 1975, which became effective in July of the same year.
The Briefing Paper outlined the following issues as being of particular concern to Amnesty International: the arrest and detention of suspected political opponents on charges of sedition under laws drawn up after the State of Siege Wcis declared; the permanent suspension under these laws of the civil rights provisions of the 1946 Constitution; the conducting of trials and appeal reviews by military tribunals without adequate legal safeguards; the use of torture in some instances during interrogation; the use of the death penalty as punishment for certain criminal and political offences.
Amnesty International also criticized the holding of political detainees incommunicado for long periods before bringing them to trial. It said that some prisoners claimed during their trials that confessions had been extracted from them by force during interrogation and that frequently the confession was the sole evidence for conviction.
The Briefing Paper described typical prison conditions and listed prisons known to be used mainly for political prisoners. Long term prisoners are generally held in Green Island New Life Camp, an isolated prison on an island off the southeast coast of Taiwan.
In July 1975, there was a commutation of sentences by which they were generally reduced by one third [stc Amnesty International Report 1975-1976). In July 1976, on the anniversary of the commutation, Amnesty International wrote .to the Government welcoming releases of prisoners under the Commutation Act and the reductions of sentences. At the same time, it submitted a list of cases in which the effect of the commutation remained unclear: some of the prisoners appeared to have the same sentence as originally. One of them, Hsu Hsi-tu, was said to have had his trial suspended because of mental disability, but it was not stated whether he was receiving treatment for this or whether he was still in prison. In December 1976 it was reported that Mr Hsu was in hospital, although there was no indication whether it was a military or a civilian one.
In July 1976, Amnesty International inquired about the case of Kuo Yi-tung, a famous writer, with the pen-name of Po Yang, due for release in March 1976. He had been sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment in 1969 and his sentence had been reduced under the Commutation Act. It was reported, however, that he had been prevented
221
from leaving Green Island prison camp after March 1976 and was still working there.
Amnesty International received reports of the release of several prisoners towards the end of 1976. Among them was Lee Ao, a popular satirical writer and journalist, arrested in 1971 and sentenced by a secret military tribunal to 10 years' imprisonment because of his connections with the Taiwan Independence Movement. His sentence had been reduced in September 1975 after a retrial and he was reported released in December 1976. Wei T'ing-ch'ao, imprisoned twice for activities in the Independence Movement, and Su Tung-chi, a former Yunlin Councillor, were also released. Two journalists were said to have been released in May 1976 after their sentences had been reduced under the 1975 Commutation Act. They were Lu Shih-kun and Yao Yung-lai who had been arrested in 1967 on charges of sedition. These had all been Amnesty International adoption or investigation cases.
In December 1976, Prime Minister Chiang Ching-kuo announced the country's determination to "implement constitutional rule and safeguards for human rights" during an address to the National Assembly on Constitutional Day. He stated that Taiwan was "a democratic country governed by law in which the protection of human rights is a basic requirement" and that it "must proceed in accordance with legal processes involving fair trials and thorough-going investigation". According to the Prime Minister, 254 people convicted of sedition since 1949 are still serving prison sentences. Of these, 95 were convicted after 1974, including 33 convicted in 1976. While Amnesty International welcomes this announcement, it is concerned that arrests on charges of "sedition" and trials of political offenders by military tribunals have continued without full legal safeguards.
Several cases of prisoners arrested in 1976 were taken up by the organization for adoption or investigation. One was that of Huang Hua, a former Amnesty International adoptee, who was re-arrested on 26 July 1976, a year after his release. He was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment on 8 October 1976 on charges of involvement in "seditious activities". The tribunal ruled that he had used the Taiwan Political Review to "propagate rebellious thoughts" and that he had attempted to "instigate an armed rebellion" after the magazine was banned in December 1975. Huang was previously imprisoned in 1967 for alleged seditious activities in connection with the "Society for Promoting Unity of Taiwanese Youth". After his release in July 1975, he contributed articles to the Taiwan Political Review on the need for political reform. There is no evidence as far as Amnesty International knows that Huang had been engaged in violent activities
222
after his release. On 3 November 1976, the organization launched an appeal against his conviction.
There was a series of arrests in the summer of 1976; one was of a group of more than 14 people (arrested in July) accused of varying degrees of involvement in trying to "develop a clandestine organization and planning armed rebellion". Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Justice Wang Tao-yuan in October 1976, inquiring about these arrests and urging that those concerned receive an open, fair trial and be allowed a proper legal defence. In mid-November, the organization heard that one of the group's leading figures, Chen Ming-chong, had been sentenced to death. The Government denied this report, however, and on 27 November 1976 the Government Information Office announced in an official statement that Chen had been sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment by a military court on 27 November. Seven others had been sentenced to terms ranging from three years in a reformatory to 15 years' imprisonment. Five had been released earlier through lack of evidence against them and a few others who had been reported arrested were unaccounted for. Their fate is still unknown. From the official statement about the trial it appears that some of the defendants were sentenced merely for smuggling in, or circulating, books banned in the Republic of China, and for "contacts with communists" abroad. Six others were charged with attempting to develop "clandestine organizations in Taiwan, to recruit participants and plot armed revolt". However, the full prosecution evidence was not made public. Inquiries are still being made about these cases.
On 5 July 1976, Amnesty International wrote to Premier Chiang Ching-kuo expressing concern about the arrest on 31 May 1976 of eight people charged with "attempting to overthrow the government". Among those arrested were Yen Ming-sheng, a candidate in the 1975 elections to the legislature, and Yang Chin-hai, who had participated in Yen's autumn 1975 election campaign. It was reported that during the election campaign Yen Ming-sheng had received warnings by the Kaohsiung procuracy about some political statements he had made and was told that the arrests were meant to intimidate the Opposition, which was planning to hold a national political conference in November 19 76. According to a statement by the Taiwan Garrison Command, the eight persons were arrested for attempting "to overthrow the government, disturb security through violent means and create chaos by sabotaging oil and power facilities". It was reported in October that on 27 July 1976 a military court had sentenced Yang Ching-hai to life and Yen Ming-sheng to 12 years' imprisonment for "conspiracy to carry out sabotage and subversion".
223
Amnesty International cabled Premier Chiang Ching-kuo, urging that the prisoners be granted an open retrial; and later wrote to the Minister of Justice requesting further information about the cases. No reply was received. The cases have been taken up by Amnesty International for investigation.
On 7 January 1977, a Taiwanese national living in the USA, Wang Hsing-nan, was arrested in Taipei on charges of posting parcel-bombs to govemment officials, one of which had injured the Provincial Govemor of Taiwan. Following reports that Wang had been sent into hospital because of ill-treatment during interrogation, Amnesty International cabled the Govemment on 28 January expressing concem about these reports and urging that all the details of the case be made known. Wang was sentenced to life imprisonment by a military court on 28 January on the basis of a confession he had made earlier. He admitted his guilt during the trial. However, his relatives in the USA claim that the confession was extracted by force and that he was not allowed a proper legal defence. No further information was available about this case at the time of writing.
In May 1977, Amnesty Intemational made renewed appeals that Hsieh Ts'ung-min, an adopted prisoner, receive medical treatment. Hsieh, a Taiwanese editor imprisoned for the second time in 1971, was reportedly tortured during his pre-trial interrogation. After being sentenced, he spent several years in solitary confinement and is said to suffer from asthma, arthritis and an allergy. His health deteriorated as a result of several hunger-strikes he undertook in prison in 1975-1976. During the past two years, he has on several occasions been said to be in a critical state of health and was once taken to hospital for treatment. Amnesty Intemational heard in December 1976 that he had been treated in a Taipei hospital for a kidney stone and had fully recovered, but in May 1977 he was again reported to be in extremely poor health, unable to take anything but water. He is due for release in August 1977, and Amnesty Intemational again urged the authorities to release him from prison and send him to a civUian hospital for proper treatment.
In June 1977, Amnesty Intemational groups were working for 120 prisoners as adoption or investigation cases.
