Jordan (Hashemite Kingdom of)
Amnesty International has no adopted prisoners in Jordan. Reports have been received during the year of arrests, but insufficient information has made it impossible to adopt any of the cases, or to estimate the numbers involved. Amnesty International is, however, continuing to investigate these reports, which include the cases of Palestinians and Jordanians who were arrested for their opposition to the Government's support of the Syrian intervention in the Lebanese civil war.
On 9 July 1976, Amnesty International's Secretary General TOte to King Hussein of Jordan asking for an urgent inquiry into the reported detention of 23 people in A1 Jafr Prison. They were beheved to have signed a statement made in June 1976 in connection with the Arab League's decision about the dispatch of a peacekeeping force to Lebanon. Amnesty International was informed by the King's secretary on 20 July 1976 that the matter had been referred to the Prime Minister. Amnesty International has since learned that all were later released.
In March 1977 Amnesty International received reports of the arrests of trade unionists. Three men, Musa Kuweider, President of the Textile Trade Union of Jordan, Fathalla AI Omrani, Secretary General of the same union and Ahmad Kjradat, member of the preparatory committee for the Union of Teachers, were arrested in February 1976 for supposedly organizing peaceful strike action. On 25 May 1976 Amnesty International wrote to Minister of the Interior, Suleiman Arar asking about these cases. Amnesty International has since been informed that the trade unionists were released in April, it is believed after spending 14 months in solitary confinement without charge or trial.
On 10 December, Amnesty International wrote to King Hussein urging the commutation of death sentences passed on four people convicted of selling land in the occupied territories to the Israeli authorities. (A decision by the Jordanian Council of Ministers in April 1973 made this a capital offence, considering it high treason, and special courts for trying such offences were set up.) Amnesty International understands that eight death sentences for this offence were passed during the period covered by this report, all believed to be in absentia.
306
On 30 July 1976 and 16 May 1977 respectively, Amnesty International also urged the commutation of death sentences passed on two people for espionage. Amnesty International was informed by the Jordanian Ambassador to London, on 1 September, that the first case had been forwarded to the Foreign Office but no further reply has as yet been received. The organization was informed by the King's secretary, on 26 May, that the second case, that of a Jordanian subject, Mohammed Mahmud Hassan A1 Momany, "is being held on a charge of espionage for Israel and for the illegal possession of firearms and explosives". The letter goes on to say that the sentence has not yet been confirmed and "there is a chance Mr Momany's sentence will be commuted".
The only execution knowoi to have taken place during the year was carried out on 18 December on a Palestinian, Khairi Omeir, convicted of taking part in an armed attack on the Intercontinental Hotel in Amman on 17 November.
