Haiti (Republic of)
Early in January 1977, Amnesty International wrote to President Jean Claude Duvalier welcoming the amnesty for political and common law prisoners announced just before Christmas. As with previous amnesties, there was some doubt as to the authenticity of the people's names, their status as political prisoners and about whether they were actually released. These doubts were expressed in the letter to President Duvalier and in a news release of 9 January 1977.
Eight of the amnestied prisoners were forcibly exiled to France, among them Alix Pierre-Louis who had been arrested at the airport of Port au Prince on his return to Haiti in November 1975 (Amnesty International Urgent Action of December 1975).
Amnesty International also referred to at least 100 new arrests in the Port au Prince area and asked for information on the legal situation of, among others, the young Amnesty International adoptee Veneque Duclairon and the teacher and actor Jean Claude ExuUien.
The amnesty of December 1976 included only one Amnesty International adoptee, but the later review of cases undertaken by the Haitian authorities, resulting in 21 releases on 2 March 1977, included 11 prisoners on whose behalf the organization had taken some action (Jean Claude Exullien, among others).
Amnesty International cabled President Duvalier, congratulating him on this initiative, recommending that a similar review be undertaken with regard to all other prisoners detained without trial in Haiti, and giving the names of 10 prisoners who have been detained for periods ranging from one to 14 years.
Failure to bring prisoners to trial, and detention incommunicado remain the main human rights issues in Haiti; they are aggravated by the Government's failure to give any information about the fate of political prisoners, even to their families.
In 1976, anumber of Amnesty International groups each submitted their prisoner's case to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (Organization of American States). The Haitian Government's response to the Commission's requests for information tends to describe the prisoner as unknown and warn the Commission against heeding unfounded allegations. Amnesty International commented on the contradictory nature of the replies in a communication to
146
the Commission in April 1977, giving the examples of Dieudonne August, described as "unknown", whose release was announced by the Government in March 1977, and Marc Romulus, also described as "unknown" but later, after two years' detention incommunicado, granted permission to correspond with his wife, living in exile in Canada.
The case of the lawyer Hubert Legros, who was rearrested in January 1973, was taken up with the lACHR. Invited to comment on the Haitian Government's reply, which contained no factual information but claimed that Maitre Legros' name "was used as an attempt to accuse the Haitian Government of violations of human rights", Amnesty International renewed its demands for an answer to the basic questions of whether Maitre Legros had been charged and tried and, if this were not the case, under what legal or constitutional provisions he was being held without trial.
During the past year, there has been increased harassment of the Haitian exile community in the neighbouring Dominican Republic. On 13 May 1977 Amnesty International organized an Urgent Action on behalf of Max Bouijoly and Emmanuel Federic when they were reported as having been extradited to Haiti following nine months' detention incommunicado in a military unit in the Dominican Republic.
On various occasions Amnesty International has supplied supporting information to lawyers in the United States defending Haitian exiles against deportation to Haiti.
Amnesty International has carried out two further Urgent Actions on behalf of Haitian prisoners suffering from or in danger of ill-treatment, and 57 cases are currently adopted or under investigation by Amnesty International groups.
