Cameroun (United Republic of)
During late 1976, Cameroun was selected as one of Amnesty International's priority countries in French-speaking Africa. Following the release of 50 political detainees—including five adopted by the organization—in May 1975, Amnesty International continued to handle the cases of three political prisoners who were believed not to have benefitted from the amnesty.
In July 1976, more than 400 people were reported arrested during what appeared to be an official action against political dissidents. In January 1977, however, while Amnesty International was still investigating the alleged arrests, an unknown number of those arrested were released, according to reports reaching the International Secretariat. In March 1977, Amnesty International took up more than 50 cases for investigation, subsequently followed by another 70.
At the time of v^riting, there was no official indication of the reasons for the July arrests, though available reports indicated that those arrested were either associated with the distribution of anti-govemment leaflets or suspected of association with the banned
66
Union des Populations du Cameroun (UPC). According to reports, those who were released in January 1977 were neither charged nor tried, and those who were still in detention had not been tried at the time of writing.
It was also reported that a number of those arrested were later transferred to Tcholire detention camp in northern Cameroun where prison conditions are said to be harsh and detainees are subjected to ill-treatment. Others were reported to be held in the Yaounde Central Prison, in Yoko, and elsewhere in Cameroun.
The case of Albert Mukong, a prominent politician (from the anglophone Western Cameroun) who was arrested in Bamenda between May and June 1975 and detained in Danga-Matune Prison, near Nkambe in West Cameroun, was also taken up in March 1977 for investigation, since there was no indication of his having been tried.
Amnesty Intemational is continuing to investigate the reported arrests with a view to taking up more cases.
