Sri Lanka (Republic of)
A major development took place in Sri Lanka when the State of Emergency, in force since 1971, lapsed on 16 February 1977 and political prisoners, detained under emergency regulations and the Public Security Ordinance, were released.
Amnesty International had been concerned for a long time about the many political prisoners held under the Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulations, which permit wide powers of arrest and indefinite detention without trial. These powers were criticized in an Amnesty International mission report on Sri Lanka (see The Amnesty International Report 1975-1976). But during 1976-1977, the Government took a number of important steps towards implementing the report's main recommendations and Amnesty International has expressed its appreciation of this to the Government on a number of occasions.
In November 1976, several emergency regulations were allowed to lapse, including the power laid down in Articles 19(c) and 20(2) of Emergency Regulation Number 12 of 1974 to keep people in police custody for a period of 15 days without judicial control. Before this, with effect from 1 October 1976, the Government also decided to lift a number of restrictions on freedom of speech, movement and association. These restrictions had been imposed on most of the approximately 18,000 people—alleged to be members of, or sympathizers with, the Janatha Vimukhti Peramuna (JVP)—arrested after the insurrection. Amnesty International had asked in its report that these restrictions be removed. On 14 October 1976, the Ministry of Justice informed the organization that all of them (they had applied to 11,500 released people) had been revoked by the Prime Minister.
As regards the trial of alleged insurgents by the Criminal Justice Commission (see The Amnesty International Report 1975-1976), the Ministry of Justice wrote to inform Amnesty International that eight of the accused were still to appear before the Commission. (At the end of January 1975, when the Amnesty International mission visited Sri Lanka, the cases of 391 prisoners were still pending.) The total number of accused who had been charged by October 1976 was 3,872, of whom 2,919 had appeared before the Criminal Justice Commission (the difference being due to releases by the
218
Ministry of Justice and defendants not appearing because they had absconded). Of these, 2,536 had pleaded guilty and 374 of them were sentenced to terms of imprisonment ranging from two years' to life imprisonment (imposed in five cases). Ninety-two of the accused, according to the government statistics, were acquitted and 2,521 were released on suspended sentences.
In its December 1976 reprint of the Report of an Amnesty International Mission to Sri Lanka, the organization reviewed the positive steps taken so far by the Government. While noting that the Criminal Justice Commission had released numerous political prisoners appearing before it. Amnesty International reiterated its regret that the Criminal Justice Commission had been set up as a means of trying political prisoners and that the Criminal Justice Commission Act had not been repealed. This and the prevention of police brutality, particularly when prisoners are in police custody, were the subjects of special appeals to the Sri Lanka Government from Amnesty International members after the updated version of the report was published.
Amnesty International realizes that, despite the release of political prisoners since the ending of the Emergency, some of them, members of left-wing groups, may still be held under various other laws. Opposition sources claimed in May 1977 that some 2,000 political prisoners, members of different left-wing groups, including those sentenced by the Criminal Justice Commission, were still in prison. Amnesty International has so far not received any evidence confirming this, and estimates that between 200 and 300 political prisoners are held, the vast majority of them serving sentences handed down by the Criminal Justice Commission.
Members of the Tamil minority were also detained under the Emergency provisions when in 1972 their demands for greater autonomy grew stronger. The last of these, 19 Tamil prisoners whose cases had been taken up by Amnesty International, were released in February 1977 when the Emergency was ended; earlier, at the end of July 1976, 14 prisoners had been released; the cases of eight of them had been taken up by Amnesty International. However, in August 1976, the organization heard that seven Tamil detainees, who had given notice that they would go on hunger-strike until they were released or brought to trial, had been removed from Welikada Prison, Colombo, and were being held under unsatisfactory conditions. On 18 August 1976, Amnesty International asked the Government about reports that some prisoners had been ill-treated, and urged it to let them make contact with their families immediately and to provide full medical facilities to those on hunger-strike.
Four Tamil members of the Sri Lanka Parliament went on trial on
219
12 July 1976 for distributing a leaflet calling for a separate Tamil state. They were charged under the Emergency (Prevention of Subversion) Regulations for possessing and distributing a document issued by the Tamil United Front without police permission and were to be brought before a three-member court without a jury. On 5 July, Amnesty Intemational had appealed to the Prime Minister for their release; but, on 11 September, the High Court ruled Emer: gency Regulation 59, of May 1976 (under which the court had been set up) invalid; the trial, therefore, could not proceed. One of the accused was released and the cases against the three others left pending. In December, the Supreme Court overmled this decision, declaring that the State of Emergency and regulations made under it were legal. It ordered a re-trial. Shortly afterwards, however, the Govemment dropped the case against the four.
During the year, seven other Tamils were charged with complicity in the murder of the Mayor of Jaffna in 1975. On 17 Febmary 1977, Amnesty Intemational appealed to the Govemment to order that these prisoners be tried in an ordinary criminal court, especially since the Emergency (under the provisions of which the court had been set up) had ended. After a writ had been filed in the Supreme Court, challenging the jurisdiction of the court trying the seven Tamils, the Attorney General on 12 May withdrew the case. However, charges were immediately brought against the accused under the ordinary procedures. On 27 May, the High Court of Jaffna released all seven on bail, after ruling that their arrest had been illegal. The accused were told that six of them were charged with murder and the seventh with robbery. Their trial will now take place in the High Court, under ordinary procedures.
On 22 May 1977, to mark the fifth anniversary of the Republic, President Gopallawa granted an act of clemency to 144 men and six women, commuting their death sentences to life imprisonment. In its report, Amnesty Intemational had appealed for the abolition of the death penalty and the Secretary General cabled the President on 23 May 1977, congratulating the Govemment on its decision.
