Malaysia (Federation of)
The past year has seen a progressive erosion of many fundamental liberties and human rights in Malaysia. Several hundred men and women are still in detention, untried, for poHtical reasons (many already having spent periods of eight years or more in prison without charge or trial, and some up to 13 years); arrests of political suspects have also continued. In 1976, prominent political figures were arrested, including former govemment ministers and members of opposition political parties. There has been a disturbing tendency to use public "confession" by political detainees to justify further arrests. These "confessions" have contained assertions and "admissions" about alleged subversive and pro-communist activities by political detainees. The Communist Party is illegal in Malaysia. Although such assertions have been widely publicized in the press and on national television, none of the detainees has been brought to trial and there has been no opportunity for any evidence to be tested in a court of law.
These arrests have been made in the context of legislative restrictions on human rights which were formerly guaranteed by the 1957 Malaysian Constitution. Article 5 of the 1957 Constitution, intended to safeguard individual liberty by providing, inter alia, for the right to habeas corpus, legal counsel and a hearing before a magistrate within 24 hours of arrest, has been amended. Under the 1976 Constitutional (Amendment) Act, the safeguards guaranteed under Article 5 are now denied to anyone "arrested or detained or placed under restricted residence under any law relating to the security of the Federation (of Malaysia), preventive detention, restricted residence, immigration or banishment". Since all political suspects in Malaysia are detained under security legislation, this amendment means that limitations on the arbitrary exercise of executive and police powers have gone and any right of judicial recourse that political suspects once had has now been abolished. This amendment to the Constitution has been made retroactive, that is, taking effect as from 1957; thus it legalises any past abuses of constitutional rights and freedoms.
199
Amnesty International groups pursued their work on behalf of some 70 political prisoners in Malaysia, including a number imprisoned indefinitely "awaiting deportation", whose citizenship had been removed by the Government for political reasons. Groups continue to urge the Malaysian Government to bring formal charges against political prisoners in a court of law, so that evidence against individuals can be tested in accordance with generally recognized legal norms, or, failing this, to order the prompt, unconditional release of detainees.
Among other prisoners, Amnesty International groups have made appeals on behalf of Lee Jik Kim, who has been detained without trial since July 1964, and Kong Hoi, formerly a member of the opposition Labour Party of Malaya (LPM), who has been detained since November 1964. Groups have also continued their work on behalf of Mak Siang, a former tin worker and trade unionist reportedly in poor health, who has been imprisoned without trial since November 1966, and Yeo Moung Peng, formerly secretary of a local branch of the LPM, who has been held since August 1968. These detainees are typical of many of Malaysia's political prisoners.
On 2 June 1976, Amnesty International wrote to Prime Minister Datuk Hussein Onn, appealing for an urgent review of the cases of a number of political detainees reported to be in poor health because of their long imprisonment without trial. Many of these are men detained under the Internal Security Act in the Batu Gajah Special Detention Camp in Perak State. The Batu Gajah camp is one of two major political detention camps in West Malaysia, the other being the Kamunting Detention Camp, also in Perak State. Altogether, the two camps hold several hundred political detainees, including an estimated 60 women in the Kamunting camp.
On 22 June 1976, two leading Malay journalists, Abdul Samad bin Ismail, Managing Editor of the EngUsh language Neiu Straits Times, and Samani bin Mohamed Amin, News Editor of the Malay language Berita Harian, were arrested under the Internal Security Act for alleged communist subversion. Samad Ismail, Malaysia's leading political commentator in English and Malay language newspapers and a former close adviser to the Malaysian Government, also a well known literary figure, was arrested together with Samani Amin a few days after the arrest in neighbouring Singapore of the Editor and former Assistant Editor of Berita Harian, a separately published Singapore newspaper. Official statements appearing simultaneously in Singapore and Malaysia accused the arrested journalists of involvement in a plot to influence Malays in the area towards communism through manipulation of the Malay language press. The Singapore
200
editors made "confessions" on state-run television and in the Singapore press implicating Samad Ismail in the alleged plot.
After several months in detention, Samad Ismail appeared on national television in Malaysia on 1 September and "confessed" that he had furthered the cause of the illegal Communist Party of Malaya for much of his life. He is still in detention without trial.
Amnesty International does not accept the admissibility of "confessions" and believes that the obligation of proving an individual's guilt must rest with the Malaysian Government, in accordance with generally accepted legal norms. The organization has urged the Malaysian Government either to give Samad Ismail and Samani Amin a fair and open trial, or else to release them.
On 24 November 1976, Amnesty International wrote to the Prime Minister of Malaysia protesting against the arrest of six leading political figures. They included two deputy ministers arrested following their resignation on 2 November, Datuk Abdullah Ahmad, former Deputy Minister of Science, Technology and Environment, and Abdullah Majid, former Deputy Minister of Labour and Manpower. Also arrested were Chian Heng Kai, a Member of Parliament representing the opposition Democratic Action Party (DAP); Chan Kok Kai, Assistant Treasurer of the DAP; Tan Ken Sin, Executive Secretary of the Malaysia Chinese Association and Kassim Ahmad, Chairman of the opposition Partai Sosialis Rakyat Malaya (The People's Socialist Party of Malaya). A number of these political detainees subsequently made television "confessions" stating that they had promoted activities in support of the illegal Communist Party of Malaya. But no formal charges were brought and none of them was brought to trial. The six men are still in detention. Amnesty International has called for them to be given a fair trial or be released.
As abolition of the death penalty in all cases is one of Amnesty International's aims, the organization called on the Malaysian Government to reprieve everyone convicted and sentenced to death. On 23 December 1976, it cabled Minister of Law Tan Sri Kadir Yusof, urging him to consider exercising his power to recommend a reprieve in the case of Chai Yee Ken, sentenced to death by the High Court on 14 December after being found guilty of unlawful possession of firearms. A similar appeal was made on 15 January 1977 on behalf of Wong Swee Chin, who had been convicted of the same offence on 12 January. There has been a significant increase in the number of death sentences handed down by the Malaysian courts following amendments to the Dangerous Drugs Act and the Firearms Act in 1975. Trafficking in narcotics is now a capital offence. The death sentence is also applicable, and in some cases mandatory, for unlawful possession of firearms, as the above cases illustrate.
201
