Portugal (Republic of)
The first democratically elected government for over 50 years took office in July 1976 under the Presidency of General Antonio dos Santos Ramalho Eanes.
Major events of 1976-1977 were the joining of the Council of Europe in September 1976 and the signing of the European Convention of Human Rights in October 1976. In April 1977 the death penalty was abolished for military crimes when the code of military justice was brought into line with the April 1976 constitution.
Certain legislative measures which have not apparently yet led to people being imprisoned nonetheless concern Amnesty International; in particular, the revision in July 1976 of Article 411 of the Penal Code to permit sentences of up to eight years' imprisonment for those found guilty of insulting civil or military bodies or members of the Council of the Revolution and the National Assembly.
Amnesty International's Secretary General wrote to the Minister of Justice on 29 June 1976 requesting clarification of various apparent irregularities in judicial procedures including the suspension of habeas corpus in the Penal Code (Decree Law 398/74) for cases falling within military jurisdiction. The right to habeas corpus was restored for all cases when the military code of justice was revised in
264
April 1977. In July 1976, Amnesty International wrote to Prime Minister Dr Mario Soares on the occasion of his appointment thanking him for the assurances received in response to disturbing press reports that foreign refugees in Portugal might be deported to their Latin American countries of origin. A report prepared on the initiative of President Eanes was published in December 1976 and partially confirmed allegations of ill-treatment and torture of prisoners between 28 September 1974 and 25 November 1975. President Eanes ordered an inquiry into the torture allegations in December 1976 and since then at least 28 of the 32 officers accused by the inquiry have appeared before the armed forces' higher disciplinary board. In June 1977, 31 of the officers named were allowed to return to duty after a period of suspension. Only Major Otelo Saraiva de Carvalho, former head of COPCON, the special security force which was active from April 1974 to November 1975, remains under house arrest.
Amnesty International investigated several individual cases involving possible imprisonment of Conscientious Objectors and prolonged detention without trial. Partial recognition of the right to conscientious objection to military service (recognized in Article 41 of the
1976	Constitution) is to be codified into a law which (as of June 1977) has not been enacted.
Prolonged pre-trial detention may still occur even though steps are being taken to clear the backlog of cases. Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Justice on 23 May 1977 requesting an explanation of the case of a student held for 20 months without trial or formal charge. The trial has been announced for mid-July. Amnesty International has no adopted Prisoners of Conscience in Portugal.
The long-awaited trials of ex-PIDE/DGS (the secret police force under Salazar and Caetano) personnel began in October 1976, and between then and January 1977 at least 31 were sentenced to terms ranging from a few months to over seven years' imprisonment. In most cases, however, the sentences have not got to be served, since some pre-trial periods of detention have been deducted. So far only one high ranking ex-PIDE agent has been brought to trial: Senhor Henrique de Sa Seixas, former Commandant of Tarrafal prison camp in the Cape Verde islands, sentenced in January 1977 to seven years eight months' imprisonment. However the verdict was quashed in May
1977	by the Supreme Military Court and a new trial has been ordered on procedural grounds. In January 1977, a law was passed limiting the number and scope of extenuating circumstances which could be taken into account when sentencing ex-PIDE personnel. This was due to the public outcry against the light sentences. However, the
265
law was contested by a military tribunal and aJl further trials have been postponed. In April 1977, the Supreme Military Tribunal extended one former agent's sentence from three years nine months' to seven years' imprisonment. It is hoped that trials may soon proceed. Some former PIDE personnel, including at least four high ranking officers, appear to have been released unconditionally, but a handful are still in detention. As far as Amnesty International knows no date has been set for their trial.
