Yemen (People's Democratic Republic of)
Amnesty International groups are currently working on 32 adoption and nine investigation cases, 26 are untried and 15 others have been held for six years or more. News about these prisoners is rarely received, but Amnesty International leamt during the year that ex-members of the Federal Government who were tried in 1968 on charges of "High Treason and Feudalism" and sentenced to ten years' imprisonment, had been expecting to be released this year, since remission of a third of a sentence is normal. Those concerned would have been Nasir bin Abdullah A1 Wahidi, ex-Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries, Sultan Nasir bin Aidrus al Kazimi A1 Aulaqi, ex-Minister of State for Supreme Council Affairs, and Ali Atif Kalidi, ex-Minister of Health. Instead, their prison status has been altered from that of "convicted'' prisoner to that of "untried detainee". (They are held in Al Mansura Prison in Aden.)
Amnesty International also leamt that two of its adopted prisoners were released in August 1976. They were Muzafferali Azimuddin Bukhari and A.A. Chinoy, both Indians with British passports. Mr Bukhari, a chartered accountant, was arrested three times in five years for initially refusing to sign a statement that the bank accounts of certain of his clients were false. The third time he was arrested attempting to leave the country "illegally".
Mr Chinoy, who worked in a travel agency, was arrested in January 1972 as a hostage for his nephew who had fled the country, said to be in debt to a state company. He was charged with evading settlement of debts due to the state, but not tried. Such economic offences in the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen are regarded as offences against the state.
A number of other Amnesty International adopted prisoners featured in various campaigns during the year: Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Awadh Al Aulaqi, an ex-Minister of Finance who was sentenced in 1968 to 15 years' imprisonment, and Saiyid Abdul Hadi Shihab, ex-Commissioner of Internal Security arrested in 1967, were both the subjects of Amnesty International's Prisoner of the
316
Month campaign. Abdul Malik Ismail Muhammad, ex-Ambassador to Cairo, held without trial since 1975 for allegedly criticizing government policy, was featured in the Prisoner of Conscience Week campaign. And Tawfiq 'Az'azi, a lawyer who disappeared in Aden in March 1972, was included in the "Lawyers in Prison" brochure produced as part of the promotion of Prisoner of Conscience Year.
No response of any kind has been received from the Government of the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen to the numerous inquiries made by Amnesty International groups on behalf of these individually adopted prisoners.
New information has been received about untried detainees who are held in A1 Mansura Prison or A1 Fatah Camp in Aden. The information is both general and specific. Further details are being sought before taking up the individual cases with the Government. Almost all people detained for political reasons are held without trial, and a considerable proportion appear to be non-Yemeni nationals who are initially arrested and interrogated on suspicion of spying. They remain largely forgotten since their cases are not even brought to the attention of the relevant embassy or consulate in Aden. According to reports received, the nationalities involved include Lebanese, Egyptian, Palestinian, North Yemeni, Syrian, Omani, Eritrean, Somali, Djibouti, Indian, Pakistani, English, American, Danish and Greek.
Security directives for civil servants and students issued in March 1976 give some indication of the Government's very real preoccupation with the threat of espionage and its efforts to prevent the leak of information by severely curbing free expression and association. For example, students are exhorted to avoid discussing any matter other than their studies with expatriate teachers; they are forbidden to have contact with them outside school, or in" their houses, or to arrange private tuition with them. Similarly, civil servants are advised not to have contact with foreigners unless for specific business purposes, nor with foreign embassies, by visiting their offices or attending their parties, unless in accordance with Foreign Ministry procedures.
Over the past year Amnesty International has received detailed information about A1 Fatah Camp [Ma'askar Al Fatah), a detention camp in Aden where political detainees are first taken for questioning and where they may be held for a considerable length of time, without charge or trial. The unhygienic conditions, totally inadequate medical and recreational facilities and meagre food rations as well as the routine maltreatment of prisoners, probably make this one of the worst detention centers in the country. Conditions are certainly far worse than in AI Mansura Prison in Aden, which Amnesty International delegates visited in June 1975 (when permission to visit
317
other prisons in Aden was not granted). As far as is known, no representatives of any international and/or humanitarian organization, or of any foreign governments, have ever been allowed to visit the prison. A document about this prison is being prepared.
The only death sentences Amnesty International has learnt about —and which were reported on Aden radio—were passed on eight farmers who were tried by a people's court on 20 January on charges of demonstrating on 16 November against a government decision to restrict the consumption, sale and purchase of the narcotic shrub qat. Two others were sentenced to ten years' imprisonment. In a cable to President Salem Rubia Ali on 27 January, Amnesty International urged that these sentences be commuted, stressing that freedom of expression was guaranteed in the penal code. Article 65 of the penal code in fact states that: "The death penalty is prescribed for the most dangerous crimes and shall be pronounced only exceptionally when the security of the society requires it and when there is no hope of reforming the offenders". Demonstrating against the Government does not appear to be a capital offence.
It was later learnt that the death sentences were commuted to sentences of between 10 and 15 years' imprisonment, while the original two 10 year sentences were commuted to eight years.
Amnesty International wrote to President Salem Rubia Ali on 15 March welcoming the commutation of the death sentences, but at the same time requesting the release of the 10 farmers, since freedom of expression is a right guaranteed by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, as well as the constitution of the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen. Amnesty International groups are now working on behalf of these 10 prisoners.
318
