Dominican Republic
After agreeing to receive an Amnesty International delegation in May 1976, the Dominican authorities let it be known at the last minute that the mission would not be appropriate at that time. A further request was made in August 1976, but no official response was forthcoming. Since disturbing information about political imprisonment— particularly the conditions in which certain prisoners were held—continued to reach Amnesty International, the Secretary General wrote once again to President Balaguer, in April 1977.
In his reply, dated 21 April 1977, the President explained at length and in detail the official Dominican position wdth regard to the cases and conditions cited by Amnesty International, and stated that his Government was prepared for an Amnesty International representative to visit prisons and investigate alleged human rights violations in the Dominican Republic. Such a mission is now planned for the latter half of 1977.
The total number of political prisoners in the Dominican Republic was several hundred in the early 1970s. It is now estimated to be in the region of a few dozen. However, only a limited number of political
138
prisoners appear to have benefitted from the amnesty decreed by the authorities in December 1976. Moreover, precise, detailed and consistent information reaching Amnesty International indicates that practices amounting to serious violations of human rights are still going on: the arbitrary arrest, kidnapping and assassination of the regime's political opponents; the removal of certain political prisoners to isolation in provincial jails and military forts; deplorable prison conditions, ill-treatment and police brutality inflicted on many detainees; frequent irregularities in legal procedure, such as refusal of habeas corpus, arrests without legal warrant, repeated postponement of trial proceedings on unconvincing pretexts, and the continued detention of prisoners once their sentences have expired.
President Balaguer has himself on several occasions acknowledged the malfunctioning of the judicial process and the shortcomings of the penal system in his country. In his letter to Amnesty International's Secretary General cited above, he stated that:
"Dominican justice, like that of most of our countries, suffers from many faults and for a very long time has lacked in great part adequate facilities for the re-education of those who serve sentences for breaking penal laws. Also there are sometimes regrettable delays in the hearing of judicial trials, but none of these is due to reasons of a political nature, but to the work load of the tribunals and to the fact that the public authorities find it impossible to stop spurious interests often interfering in the healthy administration of justice."
During the period covered by this report. Amnesty International intervened mainly on behalf of prisoners whose state of health and conditions of detention were causing particular concern, among them Jorge Puello Soriano, Alcides Encamación Concepción, Plinio Matos Moquete and Aügusto Alvarez Perez. In 1976, all four of them had been transferred to the remote region bordering on Haiti, and then returned to La Victoria prison early in 1977. Representations were also made on behalf of Nelson Antonio Peral Cruz, whose case Amnesty International had followed closely since 1973; he was finally released in February 1977, after repeated postponements of his trial. Amnesty International also expressed concern about the fate of Emmanuel Federic and Max Bourjoly, both Haitians, who were arrested on 17 August 1976 and have not been heard of since. The Dominican authorities acknowledged their arrest and added that they had been deported to their home country, despite the fact that they had sought refuge in the Dominican Republic, apparently for political reasons. According to some sources, several hundred Haitian
139
citizens have been deported in comparable circumstances during the past few months.
