Botswana (Republic of)
The situation of poUtical refugees from surrounding countries remained Amnesty International's main preoccupation in Botswana in 1976-1977. Increased repression in South Africa, following the outbreak of widespread civil unrest in Soweto and other black townships in June 1976, led many hundreds of black South Africans to seek refuge in Botswana. They included several former political detainees and people restricted under banning orders, whose cases had been taken up by Amnesty International. The International Secretariat and individual groups gave relief to such refugees and contacted the UN High Commissioner for Refugees and other specialist refugee organizations in order to facilitate their future settlement.
Throughout the year, there was also a constant influx of refugees from Rhodesia, where the war between African nationalist guerrillas and the forces of the Rhodesian Front regime reached a new intensity during the year. The most widely publicized incident occurred in February 1977 when some 400 schoolchildren from the Manama mission in southwest Rhodesia crossed into Botswana. Claims by the Rhodesian régime that the students had been abducted by African nationalist guerrillas were denied by the Botswana Government. Delegates from the International Committee of the Red Cross were permitted to interview the students at a refugee camp near Francis-town.
The acrimony which this and other border incidents aroused between Botswana and Rhodesia was reflected by the arrest and prosecution of three Rhodesian journalists reporting the Manama mission incident. Sentenced to six months' imprisonment for entering Botswana illegally and while in possession of a weapon, the journalists were freed by the Botswana High Court at the end of March 1977 on the grounds that the sentences imposed were excessive.
The same month, the Rhodesian Appeal Court decided that four men abducted from Botswana by Rhodesian security forces in 1976 could not stand trial in Rhodesia and should be returned to Botswana. The Appeal Court ruled that the four, three of whom had been charged with guerrilla activities, had been illegally abducted from Botswana and could not, therefore, be considered to come vkdthin the jurisdiction of the Rhodesian courts. However, Rhodesian law was then amended to provide for the prosecution of such foreign nationals captured outside Rhodesia by the régime's security forces.
Amnesty International has no adopted prisoners in Botswana.
65