Ethiopia
The human rights situation in Ethiopia deteriorated drastically in 1976-1977. Amnesty International continued to make urgent appeals to the Ethiopian authorities to improve the position but without apparent success. The situation in Eritrea, where three secessionist movements are fighting for the self-determination of the province (a former Italian colony and United Nations mandated territory), continued to cause concern. Secessionist movements are also operating in other regions of Ethiopia, and unrest and political violence in the country as a whole reached a very high level in mid-1977.
Amnesty International's main action during 1976-1977 was the drawing up of a detailed statement on human rights violations in Ethiopia for the United States House of Representatives Foreign Relations Sub-committee on Africa, chaired by Congressman Charles Diggs. This was presented on 28 March 1977 by Swedish doctor and Amnesty International member Arnt Meyer-Lie, former Director of Ethiopia's medical services, who had visited political prisoners in Ethiopia in 1976. The statement began as follows:
"Amnesty International is very concerned about the deteriorating human rights situation in Ethiopia. During the government of Emperor Haile Selassie, Amnesty International campaigned actively against arbitrary and long-term detentions without trial, the use of torture and the conditions under which political prisoners were
70
held. However, since the Provisional Military Administration Council {Derg) came to power by coup d'etat in 1974, there has developed a consistent pattern of widespread gross human rights violations, especially in recent months, which Amnesty International regards as a matter for urgent international concern."
The statement documents the legal situation in which military tribunals (and, more recently, "neighbourhood" tribunals) may impose death penalties by summary trial for a wide range of political offences (including "sympathising with counter-revolutionary organizations"). Amnesty International noted with disquiet that the practice of extra-judicial execution had become widespread. The statement also described the conditions of some political detainees, including the women detainees visited by Dr Meyer-Lie in March 1976, and presented evidence on the use of torture. The organization estimates that at least 8,000 people are detained on political grounds in Ethiopia.
Amnesty International was later criticized by the Derg for its "venomous" and "counter-revolutionary" propaganda. Shortly before the submission was made, the US administration had stopped a small grant of military assistance to Ethiopia, but after US military advisers and the US consulate in Eritrea were expelled in April, the US Government decided to stop all future weapons' shipments to Ethiopia, because of the gross human rights violations. The US had hitherto been the main arms supplier of the Ethiopian military regime, but has now been replaced in this capacity by the Soviet Union and other Eastern bloc countries.
Amnesty International's concern was communicated earlier to the Ethiopian Government, in a letter addressed to Head of State Brigadier General Teferi Bante on 8 December 1976. The organization urged adherence to the various articles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, especially as regards the legal system, the use of the death penalty, the practice of extra-judicial execution and the conditions of detention. Amnesty International had previously cabled the Head of State concerning an amnesty for 209 prisoners on 26 August 1976, when it had urged a full amnesty of all political prisoners. In November, it protested against the execution of 50 people (on 2 and 15 November 1976). It urged clemency on humanitarian grounds for those sentenced to death, and expressed concern over the official explanation that these people were executed for being "counterrevolutionaries". Amnesty International heard that one of those executed was under 18.
The continued detention of about 100 women and young girls also caused concern, since they were apparently being held as "hostages"
71
for their relatives who were actively opposing the Derg. On 31 January 1977, Ijegayehu Asfa-Wossen, daughter of the former Emperor, died in hosptial. This was probably due to bad detention conditions and lack of proper medical treatment. Amnesty International cabled Brigadier Teferi Bante expressing deep shock at her death and urging that all women detainees be released. The following day (3 February 1977) Teferi Bante was shot dead with six other Derg members, and Lieutenant Colonel Mengistu Haile Mariam became the new chairman of the Derg and Head of State. He announced that Teferi Bante had been "executed" for "collaborating with counter-revolutionary organizations". Amnesty International again appealed for the release of women detainees on International Women's Day, 8 March, but without any positive result.
The organization has been active in protesting against the continued killings of students and others suspected of belonging to, or sympathizing with, the clandestine Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Party (EPRP). The atrocities committed by the security forces against these youths, teachers, academics, trade unionists, women and others, are the most serious human rights violations being committed in Ethiopia at present. At several anti-govemment demonstrations in 1976 {notably on May Day) large numbers of youths were shot in Addis Ababa and other towns. Towards the end of 1976 in particular, house-to-house searches by the army resulted in many summary killings and arrests. A disturbing feature of this pattern of events is the number of alleged secret killings of detainees in custody- Torture of political detainees is also widely practised.
These killings increased substantially after 3 February 1977 when the new Derg chairman announced that the revolution would "move to the offensive" and he urged the army and newly formed "people's militia" to "dispense revolutionary justice" and "liquidate counterrevolutionaries". "Revolutionary justice" in this context means summary killings without trial of all suspected enemies of the military regime. Since then there have been reports of frequent large-scale arrests of students, with a substantial number of them being killed. The worst incident was the massacre of 29 April 1977. That night, about 500 youths, some demonstrating against the Derg and distributing anti-Z>^r^ pamphlets, were shot dead by the people's militia and the army. The killings continued into the next week, when the death toll rose to around 1,000. The Derg totally denied reports of this massacre, dismissing them as "imperialist propaganda", but Amnesty International is convinced that the reports from journalists and diplomatic sources are substantially correct. The Secretary General of the Swedish Save the Children Fund stated on 16 May 1977 that
72
"about 1,000 children have been massacred in Addis Ababa and their bodies, lying in the streets, are ravaged by roving hyenas". Amnesty International protested against this massacre and cabled the UN Secretary General Kurt Waldheim and OAU Secretary General Eteki Mboumoua, requesting their urgent intervention to stop further killings.
Amnesty International also protested on 4 April 1977 about the resumption of public executions, in the case of six men sentenced to death by court martial on 2 April. They had been convicted of murder and torture, carried out especially by one man in his capacity as chairman of one of the urban dwellers' associations established by the Derg. The published details of torture and abuse of power carried out by these pro-government leaders corroborated other similar evidence received by Amnesty International. The organization is not convinced that sufficient steps have been taken by the Derg to bring about a major improvement in this situation.
In June 1977, Amnesty International made a lengthy submission to the UN Commission on Human Rights, under its confidential procedure, describing human rights violations in Ethiopia.
