Argentina (Republic of)
The military junta that has ruled Argentina since ousting the Government of Maria Estela Martinez de Perón on 24 March 1976 has pledged itself to a program of "national reorganization" and the elimination of subversion. As a result of left-wing-inspired violence from the Montoneros (Peronist in origin) and the People's Revolutionary Army (ERP), a State of Siege was introduced in November 1974, entitling the Executive to hold persons indefinitely in preventive detention irrespective of whether they were implicated in terrorist activities. Since coming to power, the military have maintained the State of Siege and there are now some 6,000 political prisoners in the country, the majority of whom have been neither charged nor tried.
Following the coup, all violence increased. For the first three months after 24 March 1976 twice as many political murders were reported as in the three months before. Arrests and abductions increased; so, too, did the allegations of torture and deaths in custody. In November 1976, because of this serious situation, a delegation was sent to Argentina by Amnesty International. It consisted of Lord Avebury, a member of the British House of Lords and of the Human Rights Parliamentary Commission, Father Robert Drinan, a member of the US House of Representatives, and a member of the Amnesty International Secretariat. The delegates were grateful for interviews with government officials and for permission to visit one prison.
119
Villa Devoto; however, the mission's freedom of inquiry was seriously limited by the presence of security police who intimidated, questioned and on at least two occasions detained people who approached the delegates.
On 23 March 1977, the Report of an Amnesty International Mission to Argentina: 6-15November 1976, was published—a detailed account of the human rights situation in Argentina during the nine-month period following the coup d'etat. It was based both on information gathered during the 10-day mission and on material received by Amnesty International throughout 1976. The report concluded that the state of martial law currently in force deprives all citizens in Argentina of the most basic civil and political rights. Fundamental constitutional guarantees have been suspended since the coup, including the important right for prisoners in preventive detention to opt for exile (Right of Option) which is now—unconsitutionally—at the discretion of the executive power. Military tribunals have been set up for all crimes pertaining to subversion and sweeping powers of arrest and detention have been conferred on the police. Furthermore, many of the decrees of the military junta free the police and the armed forces from any legal liability when people innocent of any subversion or subversive intent are detained, injured or killed.
The official suspension and unofficial neglect of fundamental legal rights has had alarming results. Since the coup, the number of political prisoners has increased, and although, according to the Constitution, prisoners held at the disposal of the executive power are not supposed to be punished, in fact they are held in punitive conditions. There is evidence that many have been maltreated during transfers and that the majority of them have been tortured as a matter of routine. Several personal testimonies of torture were presented in the report: one was that of Senor Máximo Pedro Victoria, a nuclear physicist who was savagely beaten during a prison transfer in September 1976.
Torture has frequently been inflicted on people who have not been officially arrested but merely unofficially abducted. One of the most conclusive testimonies concerning unofficial detention—revealing the involvement of the police and army in abductions and subsequent detention—was given by Father Patrick Rice, an Irish worker priest. He was arrested on 11 October 1976 in Buenos Aires, taken to a police station where he was beaten, then transferred in the back of a car to an unofficial detention center where he was subjected to electric shock and water torture. After a week, following pressure by the Irish Embassy, he was officially acknowledged to be a prisoner. Six weeks later he was deported.
120
The number of abductions has increased since the coup; the figure may be anything between 2,000 and 10,000. Friends and relatives find it all but impossible to discover the whereabouts of those who have disappeared, although in many cases they eventually learn that the victim is dead. The report concluded that despite the undoubted outrages committed by left-wing extremist groups, terrorist violence could not be held to justify the extreme and extensive government measures taken since the coup: "Amnesty International believes there is overwhelming evidence that many innocent citizens have been imprisoned without trial, have been tortured and have been killed. The actions taken against subversives have therefore been self-defeating: in order to restore security, an atmosphere of terror has been established; in order to counter illegal violence, legal safeguards have been removed and violent illegalities condoned."
In an official communiqué released on the day the report was published, the Government of Argentina rejected its findings as lacking "truth and objectivity" and stressed that the armed forces had a right and duty to defend civilization by any means. The Government did not, however, produce any evidence to disprove statements made in the report, nor has there been any attempt to implement its recommendations. Since it was published. Amnesty International has continued to receive an alarming amount of evidence that violations of human rights continue unabated in Argentina.
In January 1977, Amnesty International submitted to UNESCO A Survey of Repression in Cultural, Scientific and Related Fields Since the Military Coup of 24 March 1976. This showed that since the coup there has been intensive and systematic repression in all spheres of academic and cultural life. This has been demonstrated both by the series of increasingly restrictive decrees passed by the military Government, and by the sweeping dismissals, arrests and disappearances of journalists, writers, scientists and psychiatrists. In April 1976, for example, a number of scientists employed by the Argentine Atomic Energy Commission were all arrested. After protests from the international scientific community, most were released. However, two scientists from the Commission are still missing: Francisco Alvarez Rojas and the world-famous physicist Antonio Misetich.
In March 1977, Amnesty International intervened on behalf of poHtical prisoners in La Plata, who had claimed that they were threatened with death. In January, two prisoners had been killed while allegedly attempting to escape during a prison transfer. In February and March, three other prisoners died in mysterious circumstances. Amnesty International expressed serious doubt about
121
the official explanations for these deaths and undertook Urgent Actions on behalf of the remaining prisoners whose lives appeared to be in jeopardy.
Political imprisonment is not, however, the gravest problem in Argentina; it is the astounding increase already mentioned in the number of abductions of suspected left-wing sympathizers—or even of their friends and relatives—by groups of armed men who usually identify themselves as members of the security forces. Over the past year. Amnesty International has been informed of an average of two violent abductions a week, and has urgently intervened on behalf of 150 individuals; 23 of these have been released. In many cases those abducted by the security forces are taken to one of the many unofficial detention centers throughout the country—for example, the Campo de Mayo in Buenos Aires or La Perla in Córdoba, which adjoins a cemetery.
According to the Government, most of the people who disappear have, in fact, for recisons of their own, decided to live in hiding or to emigrate without telling their relatives. This explanation is contradicted by the fact that, in most of the cases reported to Amnesty International, there are reliable eye-witnesses of the abduction and that writs of habeas corpus have usually been filed—a revealing action, in view of the fact that lawyers have been systematically threatened for providing this help.
Occasionally, people disappear after being detained in a public place by the police or military. On 14 February 1977, Señora Nelida Sosa de Forti was prevented from flying from Ezeiza airport, Buenos Aires, to join her husband in Venezuela, on the grounds that her papers were not in order. She and her five children were held in a police station and blindfolded for one week, after which the children were released and told that their mother was to be taken to Tucumán for interrogation. Since then the authorities have denied that this woman is in custody.
Amnesty International has been very active on behalf of Latin American refugees living in Argentina who are regarded by the military as subversives and who have therefore been particular targets for repression. While all sectors of the large refugee community have been affected, those in the greatest danger appear to be the Uruguayans. In June and July 1976, about 30 Uruguayans living in Buenos Aires were abducted. Among them were: Margarita Michelini, daughter of the murdered Uruguayan Senator; two trade unionists, Gerardo Gatti and León Duarte; the well-known Uruguayan journalist Enrique Rodriguez Larreta and two other members of his family. There was no information about their fate until August 1976, when a Uruguayan
122
refugee, Washington Pérez, arrived in Sweden and explained how he had been forced by Uruguayan officials (some of whom he recognized) to negotiate a ransom for Gatti with a Uruguayan political group, the Resistencia Obrero Estudiantil (ROE)—Worker Student Resistance. On several occasions in mid-July, he was driven to a hideout near the capital where Gatti was being held. Gatti had been tortured and was in very poor health- The negotiations eventually broke down on 17 July 1976, when Pérez was asked to carry à similar demand for the release of León Duarte to the ROE group. Pérez suspected that the negotiations were a trap and that his own life and the lives of his family were in danger, so he left the country under the protection of the UN High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR).
In September and October 1976, more Uruguayan exiles were abducted in Buenos Aires. There was no further news about them until 28 October, when the Uruguayan joint armed forces issued an official communiqué announcing the detention in Uruguay of 62 people accused of subversive activities. Of 17 named by the Uruguayan authorities, 14 were among the group of 26 abducted on 13/14 July 1976 and included the journalist Enrique Rodriguez Larreta. The Uruguayan authorities claimed that these people had faked abductions in Argentina (auío-spcw^ííroí) in order to enter Uruguay secretly for subversive purposes.
This explanation of the arrests is not borne out by eye-witness accounts, confirming that the abductions took place in Argentina and that habeas corpus writs were filed immediately after they occurred, in seven cases by the UNHCR itself. Furthermore, Enrique Rodriguez Larreta was released by the Uruguayan authorities in December 1976 and has since testified to Amnesty International and to the US Congress that the was detained with other Uruguayans and tortured in a mechanics' workshop (which he was able to identify after his release) in Buenos Aires before being transported back to Uruguay in a plane belonging to the Uruguayan military. He was able to identify both Argentinian and Uruguayan security personnel among his captors. He also witnessed the death under torture of Carlos Santucho, brother of the left-wing guerrilla Mario Roberto Santucho who was killed in an armed confrontation on 19 July 1976.
Rodriguez Larreta is one of only three to have been released after the transfer of the group of refugees from Buenos Aires to Uruguay. The rest, acknowledged to be in detention, are now awaiting trial on charges for which they may be sentenced to as long as 18 years. More disturbing, however, is the fate of about 38 adults and eight children, who are still unaccounted for and whose detention re-
123
mains unacknowledged by both the Argentinian and the Uruguayan authorities.
In this group is the trade unionist Gerardo Gatti, whose wife and younger sons left Argentina after his abduction last year. His 18-year-old married daughter, Adriana Gatti de Rey, remained in Buenos Aires to continue her studies, believing that she herself was not in immediate danger. However, it is becoming increasingly common in Argentina for the families of suspected left-wing sympathizers to be illegally detained, tortured or even assassinated. On 9 April 1977, when Adriana Gatti de Rey was seven months' pregnant and just about to accept an offer of asylum in France, she was kidnapped in Buenos Aires and has since disappeared.
The political situation in Argentina has continued to demand persistent intervention on the part of Amnesty International. There are still many reports of abductions, torture and unofficial executions; left-wing violence, although checked, has not been entirely halted: in April 1977, for instance, the Foreign Minister, Admiral Cesar Guzzetti, was shot and critically wounded.
As well as adopting Prisoners of Conscience (the current number is 135), Amnesty International has been particularly active in trying to obtain asylum for refugees from Argentina and in helping those in immediate danger to leave the country.
In December 1976, the Argentinian Government issued a list of 1,546 people who, they claimed, were no longer being detained by the executive power. It transpires, however, that far fewer prisoners were actually released: since December no more than 200 have been released or deported. Because of the continuing very grave violations of human rights in Argentina, the recommendations made in the Amnesty International report need to be carried out as a matter of urgency.
In June 1977 Amnesty International groups were working on behalf of 135 adoptees and 15 investigation cases in Argentina.
