QATAR
STATE OF QATAR
Head of state: al-Shaikh Hamad Ibn Khalifa Al-Thani
Head of government: al-Shaikh Abdullah Ibn Khalifa
Al-Thani
Capital: Doha
Population: 0.6 million
Official language: Arabic
Death penalty: retentionist
'Abd al-Rahman bin 'Amir al-Na'imi
The government failed to respond to Al's request for clarification of the legal status of" Abd al-Rahman bin 'Amir al-Na'imi, who has been detained since June 1998, apparently on account of his political activities.
ROMANIA
More than 100 people continued to stand trial for their alleged involvement in the failed coup attempt of 1996, and at least four people who were being tried in absentia were arrested. A central municipal council was elected under universal suffrage for the first time in March.
Coup trial
The trial of more than 100 people accused of involvement in the failed coup attempt of 1996 continued. Some 30 defendants were being tried in absentia, but at least four were arrested to stand trial during the course of the year including Shaikh Hamad bin Jassim bin Hamad Al-Thani. The former cabinet minister and member of the Qatar ruling family, widely believed to be the main suspect in the coup attempt, was arrested in July when his private aircraft was reportedly diverted to Doha by Qatar undercover agents. He reportedly denied the prosecution's assertions that he had confessed before ajudge to the charges against him.
The government failed to investigate allegations raised in previous years that some of the accused had been tortured in police custody, and did not respond to Al's request for assurances that two of the defendants arrested in July were being humanely treated. Many of the defendants faced capital charges.
Elections
A central municipal council was elected by universal suffrage for the first time on 8 March. More than 200 candidates stood for the 29-seat council, and all Qatar citizens over 18 years old, excluding members of the police and armed forces, were entitled to vote. None of the six women candidates were successful.
In July al-Shaikh Hamad Ibn Khalifa Al-Thani, Amir of Qatar, reportedly established a committee to draft the country's first permanent Constitution, stipulating the establishment of a parliament elected by universal suffrage. The provisional Constitution, adopted in 1970, does not refer to an elected parliament.
Proposed human rights initiatives
There were reports that a group, including prominent lawyers and academics, had plans to establish two nongovernmental human rights groups: an international committee for the defence of intellectual liberties and freedom of expression, and a committee for the defence of human rights.
