AZERBAIJAN
AZERBAIJANI REPUBLIC
Head of state; HeydarAliyev
Head of government ArturRasizadeh
Capital: Baku
Population: 7.6 million
Official language: Azeri
Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes
1999 treaty ratifications/signatures: Second
Optional Protocol to the international Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition
of the death penalty
Several possible prisoners of conscience were detained or prosecuted, apparently in connection with their peaceful political or religious views. Reports of torture and ill-treatment in custody continued.
Background
The cease-fire continued to hold in the disputed Karabakh region, which remained, along with adjacent territories, outside the de facto control of the Azerbaijani authorities. Discussions on resolving this longstanding conflict moved into a new phase when the Presidents of Armenia and Azerbaijan began a series of one-to-one meetings, although no concrete proposals had been made public by the end of the year. Hundreds of thousands of people remained displaced by the conflict.
Possible prisoners of conscience
Several possible prisoners of conscience were held during 1999.
Q RasimAgayev,apoliticalscientistandjournalist, was released early under a presidential pardon in July. He had been sentenced to four years' imprisonment in june 1998 for concealing a crime against the state. Rasim Agayev had been detained by officials from the Ministry of National Security in November 1996. His lawyer was not permitted to see him until the fourth day of his detention.
Rasim Agayev reportedly confessed to one charge in the indictment after officials threatened to prosecute his daughter on a false charge of possessing drugs. He later retracted this statement, but was found guilty; his sentence reportedly could not be appealed as it had been passed by the Supreme Court sitting as the court of first instance.
There were allegations that the charges against him, which originally included the then capital offence of treason, had been fabricated to punish him for his known or imputed political views; he had been the press secretary to former President Ayaz Mutalibov, who remained in exile in Russia.
Representatives of some Christian groups were reportedly harassed; some were administratively detained for short periods.
Q In August Ibrahim Ikrameddin oglu Yuzbeyov, a Jehovah's Witness from the village of Alekseyevka, was summoned to the regional police headquarters in Khachmas to discuss a complaint regarding his proselytizing. Four police officers then accompanied him to his home and reportedly searched it, without obtaining a warrant, and confiscated a number of items. Ibrahim Yuzbeyov was then returned to the regional police headquarters where he was denied access to a defence lawyer. The following day he was sentenced to 15 days' administrative detention by Khachmas district court for petty hooliganism. Ibrahim Yuzbeyov denied the charge and alleged that he was being prosecuted for his actions as a Jehovah's Witness. He alleged that while in detention he was verbally abused and beaten by officers to force him to renounce his religion. Ibrahim Yuzbeyov was released at the end of his term but the items confiscated during the search were reportedly not returned to him. He also alleged that after his release he was summoned by the regional head of the Ministry of National Security in Khachmas and warned that he would be forcibly expelled from Azerbaijan within three days if he did not renounce his faith.
Torture and ill-treatment
In November the UN Committee against Torture reviewed Azerbaijan's initial report under the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. Al had submitted its own report to the Committee, expressing concerns about continued and widespread allegations of torture and ill-treatment. The Committee expressed concern about the absence of a definition of torture in the criminal code, as provided for by the Convention; the numerous and continuing allegations of torture; the apparent failure to initiate prompt, impartial and full investigations into the numerous allegations of torture reported to the Committee and to prosecute the alleged perpetrators, where appropriate; the absence of guarantees for the independence of the legal profession, particularly the judiciary; and the use of amnesty laws which might extend to the crime of torture.
Deaths in custody
in January, 11 prisoners and two guards died during disturbances at Gobustan prison, some 60 kilometres outside Baku. According to official reports, two prisoners attempting to escape managed to free other prisoners and seize arms and hostages before guards were alerted and sealed off the premises; two prisoners and one guard were killed. The following day the prisoners obtained a minibus, apparently intending to drive to the airport. However, armed units opened fire on the bus, killing nine prisoners and a guard who was being held hostage.
Reports of the incident varied and there were allegations that the victims may have been extrajudicially executed. An inquiry was initiated, but the conclusions had not been publicly reported by the end of the year.
40
Amnesty International Report 2000
BAH
Death penalty
In January Azerbaijan became a party to the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), aiming at the abolition of the death penalty. However, it entered a reservation by which the death penalty could be applied for grave crimes committed in wartime or under threat of war. The criminal code was amended accordingly in October.
Legislative update
Measures outlined in the 1998 State program for the defence of human rights — including the ratification of the (first) Optional Protocol to the ICCPR and establishment of the institution of ombudsperson — had still not been fulfilled by the end of the year. There was no civilian alternative to compulsory military service for conscientious objectors; consensual homosexual acts between adult men were still punishable by up to three years' imprisonment; and concerns persisted that legislation punishing insult or slander directed against the President could be abused to punish the legitimate exercise of the right to freedom of expression.
Karabakh
Death penalty
The death penalty was retained in the disputed region of Karabakh. Death sentences continued to be passed, but no executions were carried out. Q Azerbaijani citizen Agil Ahmedov, who had been sentenced to death for subversive activities, was pardoned on health grounds and released in a prisoner exchange on 9 March. Legislative issues
Military service remained compulsory, with no civilian alternative for those unable to perform this duty owing to religious, moral, ethical or other objections.
It was reported that the Karabakh Security Services were considering submitting a bill to parliament which would make "organizing illegal religious groups and sects" an offence punishable by 30 days' administrative detention or a fine. In the light of reported past harassment of some religious believers in Karabakh, there was concern that this could be used to imprison people solely for exercising their right to freedom of conscience and religion.
AI country report
• Azerbaijan: Comments on the Initial Report submitted to the United Nations Committee against Torture (AI Index: EUR 55/002/99)
