UZBEKISTAN
REPUBLIC OF UZBEKISTAN Head of state: Islam Karimov Head of government: OtkirSultanov Capital: Tashkent Population: 23,7 million Ofilcial language: Uzbek Death penalty: retentionist
A series of bomb attacks in Tashkent in February, in which at least 13 people died and more than 100 were injured, triggered a wave of arbitrary arrests of supposed conspirators. Hiese included members of independent Islamic congregations or followers of independent imams (Islamic leaders), supporters of banned political opposition parties and movements and their families. The authorities blamed the bombings on violent foreign-trained Islamic groups intent on establishing an Islamist state, which were operating in concert with the exiled, secular, democratic opposition. Heavy custodial sentences and death sentences were handed down after trials whose conduct gave serious cause for concern and during which the defendants made credible allegations oftorture. Arrests and harassment of human rights defenders continued throughout the year. Some unforeseen releases of Christian believers took place ahead of two major international reports on religious tolerance. The death penalty continued to be imposed despite official statements towards abolition.
Background
Although a large turn-out was reported in the parliamentary elections held in December, the first since 1991, there were concerns that their conduct was not free and fair. Five parties competed for the 250 seats in the 0//yMay//s (parliament), all of which supported the government. The two opposition parties, Erkand Birlik, were banned. The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) did not send an official monitoring team to the elections, saying that the campaign process did not meet democratic standards. Some OSCE representatives were present and reported a number of problems, including interference by local authorities and the process of nominating candidates which was said to be neither unbiased nor independent. The results of the elections were due in January 2000.
Al received a growing number of reports of ill-treatment and torture by law enforcement officials of members of independent Islamic congregations or followers of independent imams. Hundreds of these so-called "Wahhabists" were sentenced to long terms of imprisonment after trials that fell far short of international fair trial standards. Those reported to have been arrested, ill-treated and tortured included suspected supporters of the banned political
256
Amnesty International Report 2000
UZB
opposition parties Erkand Birlik, including family members and independent human rights monitors, as well as alleged supporters of banned Islamic opposition parties and movements, such as Hizb-ut-Tahrir. Concern was heightened in February when hundreds of men and women were detained following bomb explosions in Tashkent.
On 15 March President Karimov publicly named the exiled leader of the banned opposition frAparty, Muhammad Salih, as one of the organizers of the February bomb explosions and called for his arrest and extradition to Uzbekistan. On 18 March Muhammad Bekzhon, Yusif Ruzimuradov, Kobil Diyarov and Negmat Sharipovwere forcibly deported from Ukraine following a joint Uzbek/Ukrainian police raid on their apartments. All were associates of Erk; Muhammad Bekzhon is also a brother of Muhammad Salih, A third brother, Rashid Bekzhon, was sentenced in August to 12 years' imprisonment after being convicted of terrorism, Al received a written statement signed by Rashid Bekzhon and five co-defendants alleging that they were tortured and ill-treated in pre-trial detention in order to force them to incriminate Muhammad Salih. Their appeals against their sentences were turned down in October.
Torture
Uzbekistan acceded to the UN Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment in 1995. However, Al remained concerned that Uzbekistan failed to implement its treaty obligations. For example, it failed to ensure that all acts of torture were offences under its criminal law and that such offences were punishable by appropriate penalties. Al prepared a briefing for the November meeting of the UN Committee against Torture which was scheduled to review Uzbekistan's initial report on measures taken fo implement its obligations under the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
Al was disturbed by public statements by Uzbek officials, including the President, in the wake of the Tashkent bombings which could be perceived to condone the use of torture and ill-treatment by state agents against certain sections of the population. In April President Karimov stated publicly that he was "prepared to rip off the heads of 200 people, to sacrifice their lives, in order to save peace and calm in the republic".
Q On 18 August Tashkent Regional Court sentenced Batyr Khalilov, his brother Farikh Khalilov, Ashrafkhodzha Mashradkhodzhayev, Ubaydullo Rakhmatullayev and Shukhrat Sharafuddinov to prison terms ranging from 16 to 18 years on charges including forming an illegal religious organization, inciting religious hatred and attempting to overthrow the constitutional order. The five members of Hizb-ut-Tahrir were reportedly tortured in order to force them to "confess". The methods included near-suffocation with a plastic bag, being hung upside down, having needles stuck under finger- and toe-nails, having their hands and feet burned and having electric shocks administered via a device fitted to the head ("electric cap").
Unofficial prison camps
Al received reports that the authorities were running prison camps in remote areas of Uzbekistan where the overwhelming majority of prisoners were reported to be members of independent Islamic congregations accused of supporting the banned Islamic opposition. The existence of two camps in former Soviet army barracks in the Republic of Karakalpakstan was independently confirmed. Conditions were said to be cruel, inhuman and degrading with prisoners denied adequate rations of drinking water while doing forced labour. There was concern that the camps are situated in chemically or biologically contaminated areas.
Harassment of human rights defenders
Intimidation and harassment continued during 1999 of members of the unregistered Independent Human Rights Organization of Uzbekistan (NOPCHU). In June its Chairman, Mikhail Ardzinov, was seriously injured during a search of his home by officers from the Tashkent City Department of Internal Affairs (GUVD). His injuries included two broken ribs, concussion and bruised kidneys, as well as cuts and bruises. After the search Mikhail Ardzinov was taken to the GUVD where he was reportedly beaten again and questioned before being driven back to his home. Al was concerned that his detention and ill-treatment were related to his outspoken and public criticism of the sweeping arrests of individuals and groups following the Tashkent bombings.
In September Ismail Adylov, a member of NOPCHU and Birlik. was sentenced to six years' imprisonment on charges of attempting to overthrow the constitutional order, sabotage and possessing material constituting a threat to public security and order. The charges related to documents allegedly found during a search of his home, but which Ismail Adylov said were planted there. On 26 October Ismail Adylov's appeal against his sentence was turned down by the Syrdarinsky Regional Court.
AkhmadkhonTurakhanov, asi-year-old NOPCHU member, died in Tashkent prison in June. The cause of death may have been either diabetes, from which he suffered, or tuberculosis which he was believed to have contracted while in prison. He had been sentenced in March to six years' imprisonment for "hooliganism... committed at a mass gathering" and "attempting to overthrow the state". These charges were based on his having interrupted a meeting in a school hall by loudly criticizing the local authorities for failing to deal with such problems as the gas and water supply. The verdict states that he also expressed his discontent with the government, called for an Islamic state, and propagandized "Wahhabism" in local mosques. Akhmadkhon Turakhanov admitted speaking critically, but denied ever having called for the overthrow of the state or supporting "Wahhabism". Q NOPCHU member and prisoner of conscience Makhbuba Kasymova was sentenced in July to five years' imprisonment for "concealing a crime" and "misappropriation of funds" after a grossly unfair three-hour trial described by human rights monitors as a
257	Amnesty International Report 2000

UZB
"farce". Plainclothes officers had entered her flat when she was not there and questioned her family and Ravshan Khamidov, who was staying at her home. Ravshan Khamidov was detained after a hand grenade and a small quantity of drugs were allegedly planted on him by the officers. Makhbuba Kasymova, a mother of six and a former teacher, had no prior notice that her trial was taking place, and it was conducted without defence witnesses or a lawyer of her choosing. By the end of 1999 Ravshan Khamidov had not been tried for the crime which Makhbuba Kasymova was convicted of concealing.
Harassment of women
Reports of harassment of women by the authorities were received. On 21 February Munira Nasriddinova, the wife of Obidkhon Nazarov, an independent imam, and her mother-in-law were reportedly taken from their home in Tashkent to a local police station where they were allegedly beaten. The mother-in-law was reportedly released after eight hours, but Munira Nasriddinova was tried and sentenced to 10 days' administrative detention for "hooliganism". She was released on 3 March. While in detention she was reportedly questioned about her husband and imam Tulkin Ergashev. A warrant for the arrest of the two imams, for promoting "Wahhabism", preaching illegally and trying to set up an Islamist state, had been issued in March 1998.
Shahzoda Ergasheva, the wife of Tulkin Ergashev, was also detained on 21 February. She was reportedly held overnight in the cellar of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and questioned about the whereabouts of her husband. Over the next days she was moved to different locations before being transferred to a women's detention centre. She was reportedly beaten up by other prisoners. Her physical condition deteriorated and after her release on 8 March she was admitted to hospital where she remained for more than a month.
Arrests of Christians
Three members of the Full Gospel Church in Nukus, Republic of Karakalpakstan, were sentenced in June to terms of imprisonment on drugs-related charges. Pastor Rashid Turlbayev received a 15-year sentence, and church members Parhad Yangibayev and Issed Tanishiyeveach received a lo-year sentence. Pastor Tirubayev, who had been trying since 1995 to register the Full Gospel Church with the authorities in Nukus, was accused of holding illegal religious meetings and of converting Muslims, During a search of the homes of the three men, police allegedly discovered small quantities of drugs as well as items of Christian literature, video and audio tapes. All three men denied possession of narcotics and supporters claimed that the drugs had been planted.
Releases of religious followers
In August, five Christian prisoners and one Jehovah's Witness were unexpectedly released, all under presidential decrees. Among them were three members
of the Full Gospel Church in the city of Nukus, Karakalpakstan Autonomous Republic. Pastor Rashid Turibayev and church members Parhad Yangibayev and Issed Tanishiyev had been sentenced to long terms of imprisonment on drugs-related charges. Rashid Turibayev had also been charged with participating in illegal religious activity. Supporters claimed the drugs had been planted in order to fabricate a criminal case against the men to punish their religious activity. In addition it was announced that a fine on a Pentecostal leader had been revoked.
The releases took place before two important events: the planned hearing on Uzbekistan by the US Commission on Security and Co-operation in Europe, at which freedom of religion was to be a major concern, and the i September deadline for the US State Department to present its report to Congress on religious liberty worldwide. Between August and December 1999 the government registered at least eight religious communities.
Al welcomed the release in September of Abdurauf Gafurov, who had been detained in November 1993 and sentenced to three years' imprisonment in 1994. Al believed that he was a possible prisoner of conscience, detained solely as a consequence of his activity in unregistered Islamic congregations and for the nonviolent expression of his religious beliefs.
'Disappearance' in custody
Komil Bekzhon, younger brother of Muhammad Salih, "disappeared" in July while in state custody. Komil Bekzhon was serving a sentence of lo years' imprisonment for possession of drugs and weapons, a charge which human rights monitors believed was fabricated solely on account of his brother's political activities.
Death penalty
There were serious concerns that the death penalty continued to be carried out despite official statements moving towards abolition. This concern was heightened by the fact that a substantial number of men sentenced to death alleged that they were tortured in pre-trial detention. Al learned of 37 death sentences and at least six executions during the year.
On 28 June the Supreme Court sentenced six men to death for their part in the February bombings in Tashkent. Sixteen co-defendants received prison sentences ranging from 10 to 20 years. All were accused of being members of extremist religious organizations which advocated a Jihad (.bo\y war) to overthrow the constitutional order and the assassination of President Karimov, There were reports that the defendants had been beaten or otherwise ill-treated in pre-trial detention and forced under duress to give false evidence, and human rights monitors expressed concern that fair trial standards, although promised by the authorities, had not been respected. Conditions on death row have been described by former prisoners as particularly cruel.
Q Arsen Albertovich Arutyunyan and Danis Vladimirovich Sirazhev were sentenced to death in
258
Amnesty International Report 2000
VEN
November for murder. They were believed to be in danger of imminent execution. There were serious concerns that their confessions had been extracted under duress.
Al country reports
•	Uzbekistan: Makhbuba Kasymova, prisoner of conscience (Al Index: EUR 62/022/99)
•	Uzbekistan: Ismail Adylov, prisoner of conscience (Al Index: EUR 62/024/99)
•	Uzbekistan: Summary of concerns on torture and ill-treatment- Briefing for the United Nations Committee onTorture (Al Index: EUR 62/027/99)
•	Uzbekistan:Ar5en Albertovich Arutyunyanand Danis Vladimirovich Sirazhev (Al Index: EUR 62/029/99)
