DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
Head of state and government Leonel Fernández
Reyna
Capital: Santo Domingo Population: 7.5 million Official language: Spanish Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes
Despite progress with some judicial and penal reforms and several measures aimed at improving respect for human rights, serious violations continued. At least 200 people were reportedly killed by police in 1999, many in disputed circumstances; several police officers were charged in connection with killings. Dozens of people were reportedly shot, some fatally, during demonstrations against the deterioration of public services, electricity shortages or rising costs. There were some reports of ill-treatment of demonstrators, criminal suspects and detainees.
Police killings and excessive use of force
According to reports, at least 200 people were killed by the National Police in 1999. Police claimed that many of these deaths occurred during exchanges of gunfire, but this was disputed in many cases by witnesses. Several police officers were charged after evidence emerged indicating that they had carried out extrajudicial executions or used excessive or disproportionate force. The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights expressed concern about this issue in its October report on the Dominican Republic, Q Police claims that three suspects had been killed during an exchange of gunfire in Cayetano Germosén, Espaillat province, in July were publicly disproved when television stations broadcast footage of the three handcuffed men being loaded into a police vehicle. Later, officers reportedly admitted summarily executing the three in revenge for the death of a colleague believed to have been killed by the same men. In the subsequent public outcry. President Leonel Fernández Reyna declared that such violations would not be tolerated. A judicial enquiry was opened, but no result had been made public by the end of the year. Q After calls for prosecution from the Attorney General, the District Attorney for the capital province and the head of the Commission in Support of judicial Reform, a police officer accused of killing Gersón Elias Núñez Arias in September appeared before civilian judicial authorities for questioning. The victim had allegedly been shot in the back while trying to break up a fight.
The Attorney General and the Chief of Police signed an agreement on coordination between public
prosecutors and the police. An internal investigative unit reviewed alleged police misconduct, and some cases were brought before military or civilian tribunals. However, results of investigations and any subsequent sanctions against officers were not always announced publicly. In October police officials stated that the police force was conducting a purge of its members; it was not known how many of the 400 reported dismissals were connected with human rights violations. Discussions continued about the creation of the post of human rights ombudsman.
Justice and detention
At the end of December the authorities stated that 14,657 people were detained, of whom 73 per cent were in pre-trial detention. Overcrowding reportedly contributed to poor conditions and tension within prisons. Prosecutorial and prison authorities took steps to improve judicial review and to alleviate overcrowding.
During 1999 the General Prison Supervisor investigated several cases of ill-treatment of detainees. The Attorney General and prison authorities published a Manual on Inmate Discipline, aimed at clarifying acceptable procedures.
Q In December, the Chief of Police announced the arrest of a colonel accused of torturing and ill-treating detainees in his custody; the police investigative unit was said to be reviewing the case against him.
Haitians
There were reports of ill-treatment of Haitians. The Haitian National Migration Office reported that 6,000 people were expelled to Haiti in November in an operation which violated international standards. The Dominican authorities reportedly rounded up suspected Haitians and expelled them en masse, sometimes separating children from their parents. In December the two countries signed an agreement to improve treatment during deportation.
Updates
In November a former Dominican air force sergeant was extradited from the USA to face charges in the case of journalist Orlando Martinez Howley, who was allegedly extrajudicially executed in 1975 after printing criticism of the then President, Joaquin Balaguer.
In April a police and military commission set up by President Fernández to investigate the "disappearance" in 1994 of Narciso González reportedly stated that it had been unable to reach a conclusion owing to lack of evidence. Narciso González, a journalist and university lecturer critical of former President Balaguer, "disappeared" after reportedly being arrested by members of the army. A judicial investigation into the case remained active.
In March the Dominican Republic accepted the jurisdiction of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights.
AI country visit
AI delegates visited the Dominican Republic in October.
92
Amnesty International Report 2000
