CZECH REPUBLIC
CZECH REPUBLIC
Head of State: Vaclav Havel
Head of government: MilosZeman
Capital: Prague
Population: 8.9 million
Official language: Czech
Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes
1999 treaty ratifications/signatures: Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court
Roma continued to be vulnerable to racist attacks and did not receive adequate protection from the authorities. There were reports of ill-treatment by police officers.
Background
The issue of discrimination against Roma and their segregation within Czech society attracted international attention when in October the town council of Usti nad Labem constructed a wall to fence off Romani tenants from other residents who objected to them. Following international condemnation and a late response by the central authorities, who had failed to respond to the call in March by the UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination for preventive action, the wall was demolished on 24 November, after the central authorities paid a grant to the town council. Large numbers of Czech Roma continued to seek asylum in Western Europe and Canada.
Attacks on Roma
Reports of attacks and harassment of Roma, particularly by "skinhead" gangs, continued. Police officers reportedly often failed to intervene to protect Roma or to investigate allegations of such violence seriously. The perpetrators of assaults resulting in serious injury or death were often only convicted of lesser or peripheral offences by the courts. Q On 27 August, the landlord of some farmhouses in the village of DvorekuOhrazovic, southern Moravia, reportedly attacked his Romani tenants with the support of a gang of about 30 "skinheads" wielding guns, bricks, stones and tear gas. The police initially characterized the raid as an attack on property, not on people, and failed to protect the Roma against the threat of further attacks.
In November the authorities appeared to demonstrate greater resolution in addressing the issue. The Minister of the Interior considered outlawing some extremist organizations, and an investigation was initiated into 24 people Involved in an attack by a "skinhead" gang wielding metal bars, stones and handguns on a Romani gathering in a restaurant in /eske Buddjovice.
Ill-treatment by police officers
Some police officers appeared to target young people who were followers of alternative lifestyle movements, or who questioned police actions.
In May the Ministry of Justice stated to Al that no police officers were indicted for alleged ill-treatment of demonstrators in Prague at the May 1998 "Global Street Party". However, the Government Commissioner for Human Rights acknowledged to Al that the police used force arbitrarily and made arbitrary arrests. He noted that the report of the Ministry of the Interior's investigation concluded that several demonstrators had indeed been brutally beaten by police officers, but the culpable officers could not be identified or prosecuted. In the Commissioner's Report on the State of Human Rights in the Czech Republic, published in ' May, he criticized the system for investigating alleged police abuses, and proposed that it be made independent of the Ministry of the Interior. Q Stanislav Penc, a member of the Czech Human Rights Committee, was reportedly dragged by his hair, beaten and briefly detained by police officers on 27 January, after he queried the reasons why police officers who were wearing black uniforms, balaclavas, and reportedly no official Identification, demanded his identity document when they raided a Prague restaurant where he was dining with friends.
Al country report
• Czech Republic: Reported ill-treatment ofStanislav Penc by police officers in Prague (Al Index: EUR 71/002/99)
90
Amnesty International Report 2000
