LIBERIA
REPUBLIC OF LIBERIA
Head of state and government Charles G. Taylor
Capital: Monrovia
Population: 2.6 million
OfHcial language: English
Death penalty: retentionist
Human rights violations by Liberia's security forces, including torture and possible extrajudicial executions, continued to be reported. There were renewed outbreaks of fighting in Lofa county, during which further human rights abuses were reported, some of which were allegedly committed by members of the security forces. Human rights defenders, including journalists, continued to be at risk from the authorities. No significant effort was made to investigate recent violations nor to bring to justice the perpetrators of massive human rights abuses committed during the civil war which ended in 1997. No significant progress appeared to have been made in the restructuring and retraining of the security forces; many former combatants appearto have been included in security forces and paramilitary bodies without any meaningful attempt to rehabilitate or retrain them.
Background
During the seven-year civil war gross human rights abuses were committed by numerous armed factions including the Armed Forces of Liberia (AFL), the national army which often acted as an armed group outside government control, and the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL), whose cross-border attack started the war and which at times controlled most of Liberia.
All the warring factions committed serious human rights abuses, including deliberate and arbitrary killings of unarmed civilians, torture and ill-treatment of prisoners, summary executions, rape, hostage-taking and forced displacement of civilians. About 200,000 people were killed. Some 700,000 were forced to become refugees and an estimated 1.4 million people, half the pre-war population, were internally displaced. The UN estimated that some 15,000 to 20,000 children, some as young as six years old, had participated in the conflict.
The Abuja peace agreement which ended the civil war laid down a timetable for disarmament, demobilization and elections.
Disarmament and demobilization were delayed and not fully completed. According to the peace agreement, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Cease-fire Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) was in charge of disarmament and the UN in charge of demobilization.
Despite delays, the transition to an elected constitutional civilian government was completed in
Amnesfy International Report 2000
157
LIB
1997, Contested elections were won by Charles G. Taylor, former leader of the NPFL, and his party, the National Patriotic Party. The 1985 Constitution was reinstated and the Supreme Court reconstituted.
Once he was in power, President Taylor pressed ECOMOG to hand over responsibility for restructuring the army to him. Many former NPFL combatants were enrolled into the country's security forces without any significant attempt at retraining, which should have included training in international human rights standards. In addition, a number of special security units were created or restructured, largely manned by former NPFL combatants, including the Special Security Service, the Special Security Unit, the Special Operations Division (a special unit within the police), and the Ami-Terrorism Unit. These units have been accused of serious violations of human rights.
By mid-t999, the Liberian operations of ECOMOG had ended at President Taylor's insistence.
In mid-1999 a UN delegation visited Liberia to investigate events surrounding a renewed outbreak of fighting in September 1998 between forces loyal to President Taylor and supporters of Roosevelt Johnson, another former faction leader. The official death toll from the fighting in Monrovia was 52, with 49 people wounded, but independent and credible estimates suggested that the victims, including the dead and injured, ran into several hundred. Some of the killings were apparently extrajudicial executions. The report of the UN delegation had not been made public by the end of 1999.
The government was widely accused of providing arms, ammunition and fighters to the armed opposition in Sierra Leone, in violation of a UN Security Council resolution, before the conclusion of a peace agreement between the government of Sierra Leone and rebel forces in Lomé, Togo, in July 1999. Al urged the Liberian authorities to prevent military supplies for rebel forces from crossing its borders into Sierra Leone.
The National Human Rights Commission, set up by law in 1998, remained inactive. Its five Commissioners were not approved by parliament until late 1999, and its powers were limited. The Commission could not order witnesses to appear nor initiate investigations.
Treason trial
At least 34 people were charged with treason following the fighting in September 1998. Nineteen were arrested, five of whom were released after becoming state witnesses. Among those held and tried were; Bai Gbala, former political adviser to President Taylor; former Senator James Chelly; former Presidential Affairs Minister Charles Breeze; former Transport Minister Armah Youlu; former Deputy Justice Minister David Gbala; and former commander of the State House under President Samuel Doe, Edward Slanger. Others were charged/nadsenf/a, including Roosevelt Johnson, former faction leader and subsequently a minister in President Taylor's government. Roosevelt Johnson sought refuge in the US embassy during the fighting in September 1998 and was subsequently flown out of Liberia.
In April, 13 of the defendants were convicted of treason, an offence carrying a sentence of death or life imprisonment. One defendant was acquitted. Those convicted were sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment, and the Judge declared that the reason for the lenient sentencing was the "need for genuine reconciliation in the country". Leave to appeal was granted both to the defence, which claimed that the prosecution had failed to prove its case, and to the prosecution, which claimed that the sentences were illegal.
Al sent a delegate to observe the trial and was concerned about the competence of the court and irregularities in the trial proceedings. Some of the defendants told the delegate that they had been ill-treated before and during the trial. Some appeared to have been beaten severely, and at least two had loss of hearing and broken limbs.
Sedition trial
A group of military officers, nine of whom were charged with sedition, was arrested in connection with the fighting in Monrovia of September 1998 and brought to trial during 1999. Their trial was suspended several times by a Court Martial Board amid controversy about the government's reported failure to ensure adequate financial resources for the trial. By the end of 1999, the trial was suspended indefinitely. Concerns were also expressed about the perceived lack of guarantees for a fair trial and about alleged intimidation of defence lawyers. Moreover, the defendants were reportedly ill-treated and held in conditions which might have amounted to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. They were reported to have been regularly denied food and medical care. On at least one occasion defendants fainted during the trial proceedings, reportedly because they had been denied food for several days. The prisoners were also repeatedly beaten and flogged in the early days of their detention.
Human rights defenders
Human rights defenders continued to be threatened and harassed because of their work. In March the Justice and Peace Commission of Liberia (J PC), a human rights non-governmental organization, and FOCUS, a children's rights group, were sued by legislators from Sinoe, Maryland, Grand Kru and Bong counties after publishing a report on child slavery. The legislators said reports of forced labour by the J PC and FOCUS damaged the image of their counties, making it difficult to obtain international assistance. The legislators asked for damages of US$10 million. AI urged the government to respect the right of all human rights defenders to carry out their work without harassment or fear of arrest.
In March, and again in December, journalists wére detained on charges which were apparently politically motivated. Police briefly detained Isaac Menyongi of Heritage newspaper for refusing to disclose the source of his article about a South African businessman's ties to Liberian officials. Also in March, Philip Moore, a reporter with the independent newspaper The News, was arrested on charges of "criminal malevolence". He was released a day later after intervention from the
158
Amnesfy International Report 2000	158
LIB
Press Union of Liberia and the JPC. In December, police arrested the news editor of the Concord Times newspaper, Sarkilay Kantan, and a reporter on similar charges, following their articles about corruption in government and state-run companies. Four other journalists were also sought for arrest. Q In December, police arrested James Torh, the executive director of FOCUS, on charges of sedition in connection with comments he had made in a speech at a high school. James Torh had a record of speaking out about human rights concerns in Liberia and had publicly criticized President Taylor over the issue of a truth commission to investigate past abuses. He was released on bail after three days. Q A journalist was arrested and detained in January for four days, apparently because of his investigative work on the involvement of Liberia in the Sierra Leonean conflict. He was allegedly beaten and held naked. He was accused of treason and espionage, but no formal charges were brought against him. The police authorities denied his arrest. His fiancée was briefly detained when she tried to locate him. A few weeks later, he was again seized by plainclothes security officers, and released only after the intercession of senior officials and foreign representatives. He had previously been arrested and reportedly tortured in August 1998.
Violations by the security forces
Human rights violations by the security forces, including rape, were widespread. Incidents of harassment, beatings and serious injuries against civilians continued to be reported with alarming regularity. In March members of the military, searching for a missing man, detained and beat elders in the village of Dambala, Grand Cape Mount county, near the Sierra Leone border. Villagers complained that the soldiers had raped several women and had looted money and goods. The alleged violations followed several hours of shooting in the village. Military authorities admitted that looting had occurred but denied the allegations of violence and rape. The authorities reportedly set up an inquiry into the incident, but by the end of 1999 there had been no investigation.
On 4 August at least one civilian was reported to have died after police reportedly belonging to the Special Operations Division attacked a group of street sellers in the red-light district in Paynesville, Monrovia. It appears that the police intervention was ordered to stop street sellers from trespassing on private land. Officers armed with guns and machine-guns were reported to have violently assaulted and in some cases beaten unarmed sellers, including women and children, and to have arrested about 15 civilians.
Members of the security forces frequently threatened vulnerable individuals and groups in order to extort money, goods and services.
Street children in slum areas of Monrovia were reportedly harassed, intimidated and flogged by members of security forces, including members of the paramilitary Special Security Unit and the Special
Operations Division. Although some members of the security forces accused of abuses were reportedly dismissed by the security forces, many of those responsible for human rights violations enjoyed impunity.
Fighting in Lofa county
Relations between Liberia and neighbouring Guinea deteriorated when the Liberian government accused Guinea of allowing armed opposition forces to base themselves across the border and launch attacks into Liberia. Guinea denied the allegations, and accused Liberia of cross-border attacks on Guinean villages. There were several cross-border incidents, and civilians were subject to harassment and violence at the hands of Liberian security forces, especially members of the Mandingo ethnic group, which had opposed Charles Taylor during the civil war.
In March 1999 at least two people were killed, and eight houses and a mosque burned down in the town of Zowudomai, Lofa county, in one of several inter-communal clashes between members of the Lorma and Mandingo ethnic groups.
In April the town of Voinjama was reportedly attacked by a group of armed men. A number of civilians, mostly belonging to the Mandingo ethnic group, were reportedly killed in Voinjama during and after the fighting. Some were alleged to have been deliberately killed by the Liberian security forces. Others, including children, were reportedly detained without charge or trial by the security forces in Voinjama for several weeks after the fighting. Some were reportedly beaten.
In August the Liberian government announced that armed men had crossed the border from Guinea and infiltrated the town of Kolahun and other villages and towns in Lofa county. Fighting was reported to have broken out between the attackers and government security forces. At least six aid workers were abducted by the attackers. Later in August a commission of representatives from the Liberian and Guinean governments and five other ECOWAS countries was created to find a solution to the security problems between the two countries.
However, in September the Guinean authorities announced that 28 villagers had been killed, many injured and property looted by members of Liberian security forces in a cross-border operation in three villages near the town of Macenta. An unknown number of people had reportedly been wounded and property had been looted. At least one Liberian soldier was reported to have been taken prisoner by the Guinean authorities. The Liberian authorities denied the allegations.
Refugees
The assisted voluntary return of refugees from West African countries after the end of the civil war continued at a slow pace. The Liberian Refugee, Repatriation and Resettlement Commission complained that security personnel at checkpoints were harassing returnees.
Amnesfy International Report 2000
159
LIB
Up to 9,000 Liberians, most belonging to the Mandingo ethnic group, fled Lofa county and sought refuge in Guinea and other neighbouring countries after the April fighting. Hundreds of others were reported to have left other counties, including Nimba county, for Guinea.
Al country visit
Al visited Liberia inJuneand Julyto research human rights violations since the end of the war and to analyse the institutions put in place in Liberia forthe protection ofhuman rights.
