GUATEMALA
REPUBLIC OF GUATEMALA
Head ofstate and government: AlvaroArzu Irigoyen
Capital: Guatemala City
Population: 11.2 million
Official language: Spanish
Death penalty: retentionist
A commission of enquiry into past human rights violations established underthel996 Peace Accords published its report in February. It concluded that official forces and their civilian adjuncts had been responsible for the vast majority of the gross abuses committed during Guatemala's bitter civil conflict. All but a handful of those responsible continued to evade justice. Attempts to address impunity for past human rights violations were hampered by the intimidation of victims, witnesses and judicial personnel involved in human rights prosecutions and in the exhumations of mass clandestine graves, and by widespread judicial corruption. A numberof abuses which occurred after the Peace Accords also remained unresolved. By the end of 1999, death sentences had been imposed on at least 32 people, including some who reportedly suffered from mental impairment, after tria Is which fell far short of international standardsof due process. No executionswere reported. Security officia Is reportedly used high crime rates as a pretext to harass, intimidate, torture and extrajudicially execute political opponents and to obstruct human rights monitors and others inquiring into past violations. Frustration at crime levels led to an increase in lynchings of suspected petty criminals, some allegedly instigated by the security forces. In 1999,72 lynchings were officially recorded; the true number was believed to be much higher. The general lawlessness was fuelled by the easy availability of unregistered small arms, allegedly illegally imported and sold by criminal rings which included military and police officials.
Background
The 1996 Peace Accords—negotiated over several years under the aegis of the UN and agreed by the government and the former armed opposition, the National Guatemalan Revolutionary Unity (URNG) — formally ended the civil conflict which had raged over a period of more than three decades. Following the Accords, the armed opposition was largely demobilized and the overall rate of abuses declined significantly. However, there were occasional reports that small groups of genuine or purported former members of armed opposition groups carried out acts of aggression or intimidation in the countryside.
The Accords agreed in principle a number of far-reaching measures, many relevant to human rights protection; the magnitude and complexity of these
measures meant that the Accords and the gains attained under them remained vulnerable. In May a number of proposed constitutional reforms, aimed at formalizingkey military and judicial reforms agreed in the Accords, were rejected in a national referendum.
In December the UN Mission in Guatemala (MINUGUA) judged that the government's serious shortcomings in implementing the Accords had weakened efforts to ensure respect for the rule of law and citizens' rights. By the end of 1999 the provision in the Accords calling for the disbanding of the Presidential High Command, which serves as the army's high command, had still not taken place, owing to "insufficient funds."
However, other provisions in the Accords were implemented. In December the military announced a new military doctrine which it said reflected its new role in a democratic society at peace, and an Indigenous Women's Defence Agency was inaugurated. Also in December, a law went before Congress to establish a Peace and Harmony Commission, as recommended by the Historical Clarification Commission established under the Accords.
The UN Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography found in July that child prostitution and trafficking in children were major problems. In November, the Latin American Institute for the Prevention of Crime described violence against women as a grave problem.
Impunity
The Historical Clarification Commission report, the result of 18 months of investigation involving 42,000 victims of human rights violations, was made public in February. The Commission recognized the responsibility of the military and its civilian adjuncts for the vast majority—93 per cent—of the atrocities committed during the years of civil conflict. It also found that in four specific areas, the army's counter-insurgency campaign had perpetrated genocide against indigenous people, who made up 83 per cent of the victims. The Commission also pointed to the role played by the US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) in these violations. Data obtained in 1999 by human rights groups under the US Freedom of Information Act confirmed that as early as the 1960s, the USA had formulated, encouraged and helped implement a counter-insurgency strategy which relied on clandestine actions by "death squads", made up of police and military agents but wearing plain clothes in order to maintain "government deniability", to eliminate suspected "subversives". During a visit to Central America in March, US President Bill Clinton made an unprecedented apology for US involvement in "the dark events" of Guatemala's tragic conflict.
Progress in human rights cases
In November the third trial of former civil patrol leader Cándido Noriega resulted in his conviction for human rights violations in the early 1980s against indigenous villagers of Tululché, El Quiché department, including extrajudicial executions, torture and mass rape. His
114
Amnesty International Report 2000
CUA
lawyers appealed against the verdict and 220-year sentence. Throughout the proceedings, survivors, witnesses, judicial personnel and staff of the Guatemalan Bishops' Conference (CONFREGUA), involved in the case were intimidated and threatened. In May, indigenous CONFREGUA lay worker Juan Jeremías Tecú who accompanied and interpreted for the indigenous witnesses, was seized for several hours, beaten and threatened with death.
In September, the government finally paid compensation to the family of !3-year-old street child Nahamán Carmona López who died in 1990, after being savagely kicked by four policemen. The officers served only half of their 12-year prison sentences.
In December the Inter-American Court of Human Rights ruled that there was significant evidence that five street youths who "disappeared" from the centre of Guatemala City in 1990 had been seized, tortured and murdered by identified members of the National Police without regard for detention procedures specified in Guatemalan legislation and that the Guatemalan state had not fulfilled its responsibilities to protect the victims and investigate their deaths.
In December in Spain, Nobel Peace Prize winner Rigoberta Menchú filed charges against eight former Guatemalan officials for genocide, state terrorism, torture and extrajudicial executions, carried out while they were in office. Victims included four of her relatives; four Spanish Roman Catholic priests; and 37 others, both Guatemalan and Spanish nationals, who died during an attack on the Spanish embassy by the Guatemalan security services in 1980. Among those named in Rigoberta Menchú's lawsuit was retired General Efrain Ríos Montt, the country's leader during the most brutal phase of the army's counter-insurgency campaign in the early 1980s. He was elected to Congress in the 1999 elections and will serve as its President.
Set-backs in human rights inquiries
Investigations into many past human rights abuses were slow. In the few cases where individuals were convicted, the sentences passed usually failed to reflect the gravity of the offence or were overturned on appeal.
Q In August. 25 soldiers were convicted in connection with the extrajudicial executions of 11 returned indigenous refugees, including two children, inXamán, Alta Vera Paz, in 1995. The commanding officer and 10 soldiers in his squad were found guilty of manslaughter and sentenced to five years' imprisonment. Fourteen others convicted of complicity to manslaughter were sentenced to four years' imprisonment. The sentences were commutable to fines of five quetzales (US 5 cents) per day. Fifteen other soldiers involved in the action were acquitted. After appeal, 10 soldiers were sentenced to nine years' imprisonment for homicide and three additional years, commutable at the same rate, for bodily harm. The commanding officer was acquitted and released. A request by the Public Prosecutor that the acquittal decisions be set aside was pending at the end of 1999.
US human rights groups published material which they claimed recorded the activities of a Guatemalan military unit responsible for the kidnapping, torture and execution of suspected left-wing political activists. The document, reportedly sold to them by a low-ranking Guatemalan military official, listed 183 people allegedly seized between 1983 and 1985. According to the published material, several had been released after they agreed to act as army spies. The majority, however, were listed as secretly killed in custody. Much of the information accorded with Al's records for that period, but the Guatemalan military denied the document's authenticity. Some Guatemalan human rights groups initiated legal proceedings based on the document and prosecutors from the Public Ministry were assigned to investigate these cases. Local human rights groups believed some of the victims were clandestinely buried at the old Military Polytechnic, now the new National Civil Police Training Institute, Exhumations began in 1999, but the Institute's director, a police inspector, who requested them received death threats.
Proceedings against several former armed opposition leaders for ordering the killings of former supporters during internal disputes, also remained pending at the end of 1999,
The unsolved murder of Bishop Cerardi
Bishop Juan José Gerardi, Coordinator of the Archbishop's Human Rights Office (ODHA) was brutally beaten to death outside his home in 1998, two days after presiding over the public presentation of the report of the Guatemalan Roman Catholic Church's Inter-Diocesan Recuperation of the Historical Memory Project (REMHl) concerning the civil conflict. Despite a tremendous and sustained public outcry in Guatemala and abroad, the case remained unresolved. Four people and a dog were arrested at various points in connection with the case, but none remained in custody at the end of the year. A number of people involved in the case, including members of ODHA's staff, two former judges, a prosecutor, a witness and a member of the Presidential High Command who accused colleagues of involvement in the murder, fled abroad after death threats.
Possible 'disappearance'
Carlos Coc Rax, an indigenous peasant leader and father of nine, went missing in April in circumstances suggesting he may have "disappeared". He had led local Kekchi villagers in El Estor, Izabal department, in trying to protect their plots of land against encroachment by local landowners and in protesting against the policies of the local subsidiary of a Canadian mining company which held a concession in the area.
Death penalty
At the end of 1999, some 32 people were on death row. Lack of adequate legal representation and lack of respect for international standards of due process were concerns in virtually all of their cases. In several cases, people condemned to death appeared to be suffering from mental impairment.
115	Amnesty International Report 2000

GUI
Q One of those closest to execution at the end of 1999 was Kekchi-speaking peasant Pedro Rax Cucul, condemned to execution by lethal injection for a homicide carried out in 1996. He was found wandering around the day after the machete murder with the arm of the victim in the bag in which he carried his salt and tortillas. Doctors found him to be suffering from paranoia, and he was being treated in the course of 1999 in a mental hospital. However, the judge handling his case said his behaviour "fell within normal parameters", and that the execution should proceed. An alternative proposal was that he be kept under psychiatric observation until such time as his mental faculties were judged to have been restored, at which point he would be executed.
Administration of justice
In March MINUGUA found that inadequate recruitment, selection and training, exacerbated by a lack of effective internal disciplinary mechanisms and the reintegration of former police and army personnel into the new police force were undoubtedly factors in continuing human rights abuses.
In August the UN Special Rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers reported that corruption, lack of resources, threats and intimidation still prevailed in the judicial system. Many prisoners remained in detention without trial for long periods, in overcrowded conditions; corruption and drug-trafficking were rife in prisons and inmates were sometimes the victims of "social cleansing."
AI country reports and visits
Reports
•	Guatemala:Tothe dead weowe the truth (AI Index: AMR 34/007/99)
•	Guatemala: Words are not enough (AI Index: AMR 34/008/99)
•	Guatemala: Exhuming the truth forjustice(AI Index: AMR 34/023/99)
•	Guatemala: Making human rights an electoral issue (AI IndexAMR34/035/99)
Visits
AI delegations visited Guatemala in March and June. An AI Guatemala Trial Observers Project sent lawyers to trials arising from 1982 massacresatTululchéand Agua Fría, El Quiché, and Río Negro, Baja Vera Paz.
