SWITZERLAND
SWISS CONFEDERATION
Head of state and government: Ruth Dreifuss
Capital: Bern
Population: 7,1 million
Official languages: German, French, Italian
Death penalty: abolitionist forall crimes
There were further allegations of ill-treatment of criminal suspects by police officers, and some foreign nationals were subjected to cruel and dangerous methods of restraint during their forcible deportation. One man died during deportation. The trial of a Rwandese national forwarcrimesseta historic precedent, although accompanied by concerns that the anonymity of witnesses was inadequately protected. A national referendum, launched by non-governmental organizations campaigning for refugees' human rights, voted In favourofa new asylum lawalreadyapproved by parliament. There was concern that It restricted access to refugee determination procedures and that some of its provisions were open to restrictive interpretation and might result in the refoulement (forcible repatriation) of people at risk of serious human rights violations. A new Federal Constitution, updating the 1874 Constitution, was also approved by national referendum. It was expected to come into force in 2000 or 2001 and paved the way for proposed reforms in the area of civil rights and justice, including the eventual unification ofthe existing 26 cantonal codes of penal procedure and the three federal laws on penal procedure.
Alleged ill-treatment
Further allegations of police ill-treatment of criminal suspects were reported. There was continued concern that certain fundamental safeguards against ill-treatment in police custody, such as the right to inform relatives of arrest and to have immediate access to a lawyer, had still not been introduced in all cantons, as recommended by intergovernmental bodies in previous years. Q Investigations were opened into an administrative complaint which the parents of a 14-year-old boy from the Kosovo province of Yugoslavia lodged against three Geneva police officers in October. The boy had been detained for several hours following a street disturbance. He said that he was an innocent
bystander, but that an officer ordered a police dog to attack him and that it bit his right thigh. He claimed that police forced him to the ground, handcuffed him, and insulted his parents and nationality. He said that at the police station he was hit on the back of the neck with a bottle of water, that officers stood on his feet, crushing them, and squeezed him so tightly around the neck that he had difficulty in breathing and feared he would die. The police called in a doctor to examine the dog-bite and a medical report by the boy's own doctor recorded physical injuries compatible with his allegations, as well as psychological trauma.
Restraint methods during deportation
At the end of October the Federal Office for Refugees stated that 6,449 rejected asylum-seekers and illegal immigrants had been deported from Zurich-Kloten airport during 1999, that in 41 cases a two-man police escort and light restraints such as handcuffs were required to execute the deportation, and that in 25 cases—so-called "Level 3" deportations — heavier restraints were necessary.
According to Zurich airport police. Level 3 restraints could be employed in cases where a deportation attempt had already failed because of the individual's physical resistance. However, there were claims that they were also used in some cases where the deportee had not resisted. Some of the restraint procedures used were cruel, degrading or dangerous.
During the first half of 1999 deportees reported having breathing difficulties as a result of adhesive tape being placed across their mouths and a helmet, described as being similar to a motorcycle helmet, placed over their heads, while more adhesive tape was wrapped over and around the helmet, forcing closed their jaws. They said that they were handcuffed, had their feet shackled and were bound by belts to a wheelchair. A Lebanese deported in January claimed that he was left alone in a room in this condition for several hours before his flight, unable to see because he was blindfolded and experiencing difficulties in breathing and hearing. This detainee and others also reported being deprived of food, liquid and access to a lavatory for many hours until they reached their destination. Once in the plane, they were strapped to a seat, still bound hand and foot. Q In March Khaled Abu Zarifeh, a Palestinian, died at Zurich-Kloten airport during a deportation operation. The Zurich cantonal authorities subsequently confirmed that adhesive tape had been placed over his mouth and that he had been strapped into a wheelchair. A judicial investigation into his death had not concluded by the end of 1999. Q In May, while preparing a man for forcible deportation to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, police officers noticed that he had difficulty in breathing through his nose but nevertheless taped his mouth, inserting a small breathing tube through the tape. He said he continued to suffer breathing difficulties during the flight,
Al sought information and clarification from relevant Zurich and federal authorities about the methods of
226
Amnesty International Report 2000
SYR
restraint officially authorized for use and about the three individual cases mentioned above. Basing its position on the expert opinion of internationally recognized forensic pathologists, AI explained its opposition to the use of any materials or methods of restraint which could block the airways of a deportee, such as covering the mouth with adhesive tape. Such practices are highly dangerous and can result in fatalities. AI requested copies of any written guidelines issued to police officers on the use of restraints during forcible deportations and clarification of aspects of police training. AI asked whether detainees automatically received a medical examination before forcible deportation and the use of restraints.
In response Zurich Cantonal Department for Security provided copies of two written answers the cantonal government had given to questions raised in Zurich's cantonal parliament. In one, issued in August, the government stated that adhesive tape would no longer be used to cover the mouth during deportations, and that a new type of open-faced helmet was in use, described as "a light rubber helmet, as used in boxing". A so-called "chin-cup" was attached, to force the jaws together, and a cover which could be placed across the mouth, with a small aperture for a breathing tube. The authorities stated that the cover was to be removed "as soon as the person calms down or there are signs of a deterioration in his health" and that while it was in use the person should be kept under permanent observation. Despite several requests, by the end of the year the Zurich cantonal authorities had not supplied Al with copies of any written guidelines issued to police officers. However, they indicated that by then a standard practice had been introduced for police officers to obtain a medical certificate from a medically qualified person before carrying out a forcible deportation.
Trial of Fulgence Niyonteze
In April a military court in Lausanne found Fulgence Niyonteze, a former local government official in Rwanda, guilty of a number of crimes, including murder, incitement to murder and war crimes, in the context of the 1994 genocide in Rwanda. His appeal against the sentence of life imprisonment was pending at the end of 1999.
Fulgence Niyonteze had been living in Switzeriand since October 1994. His trial set a historic precedent. Previously, trials of those accused of crimes connected with the 1994 genocide had taken place either in Rwandese courts, or at the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) set up by the UN in Arusha, Tanzania. Although several individuals believed to have played a leading role in the genocide were known to be living in countries in Europe, North America and Africa, none had been tried in any other foreign country by the end of 1999.
Al encourages governments of countries where individuals suspected of participation in the genocide are residing to investigate allegations against them and, if sufficient evidence is found, to bring them to justice, in accordance with international standards for
fair trial and without recourse to the death penalty. It welcomed, therefore, the precedent set by Switzeriand. However, there were serious concerns that the anonymity of witnesses, many of whom asked to testify anonymously for their own security, was not adequately protected during the trial.
Al country reports
•	Switzerland: Alleged ill-treatment by Geneva police-The case of "Visar" and Clement Nwankwo (Al Index: 1 EUR 43/003/99)
•	Concernsin Europe, January-June 1999: Switzerland (Al Index: EUR01/002/99)
