SOLOMON SLANDS
SOLOMON ISLANDS
Head of state: Queen Elizabeth 11, represented by Moses Pitakaka
Head of government Bartholomew Ulufa'aiu Capital: Honiara Population: 0.4 million
Official languages: Melanesian Pidgin, English Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes
Throughout the year, violent inter-ethnic conflict in the context of land disputes led to widespread human rights abuses and suffering among thousands of displaced civilians. Emergency laws restricted public reporting about alleged human rights abuses, including deliberate killings and indiscriminate shootings of civilians, by both police and armed militant groups.The failure to investigate abuses and to bring those responsible to justice fuelled mistrust between ethnic groups and undermined peace initiatives.
Background
Long-running disputes escalated into widespread violence between islanders from Guadalcanal and local settlers from other provinces, mostly from Malaita. During the year, an estimated 32.000 people—almost a quarter of Guadalcanal's population — fled their homes because of police shootings and actual or threatened violence by organized armed groups known as "militants". In June, police roadblocks in Honiara temporarily prevented humanitarian supplies from reaching villagers. Hundreds of homes were burned down or looted. During the height of the conflict, government restrictions on information hampered adequate monitoring of the human rights situation by the international community. Fundamental rights and media reporting were limited by laws enacted under a four-month state of emergency which ended in October.
Shootings and brutality
There were reports of deliberate killings of civilians, by both militant groups and police; of police brutality during arrests; and of police indiscriminately shooting at village huts containing women and children. At least 13 people were reported killed and scores injured, although the real figures were believed to be much higher. There were reports that at least seven people were killed by police, some in suspicious circumstances. There were no impartial inquiries into these abuses. The trial of a police officer charged with the fatal shooting of a suspected militant in 199B was continuing at the end of the year. Q In early September a 16-year-old boy, who was reportedly unarmed, was confronted by police who
shot him in the back and killed him as he ran away near Suaghi village, northeast of Honiara.
Kidnappings
Up to 20 people were reported missing, presumed kidnapped by rival ethnic groups. At least four were freed by police, released or found alive.
Prison conditions
Suspected members of militant groups and other prisoners were held in an overcrowded prison block lacking basic sanitation. Prison conditions amounted to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment, juvenile inmates were not held separately from adult prisoners and convicted prisoners were held together with those awaiting trial. Work on new prison buildings was halted for financial reasons.
Intergovernmental organizations
Commonwealth Special Envoy, former Prime Minister of Fiji Sitiveni Rabuka, negotiated two peace agreements, and the UN sent two humanitarian missions to the Solomon Islands. The mandate of an international Peace Monitoring Force — set up in October under the auspices of the Commonwealth and comprising Fijian and Vanuatu police officers supported by Australia and New Zealand—was extended into 2000. In November, the UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights considered the situation in an extraordinary session with international agencies and non-governmental organizations.
Al country visit
Al delegates visited Guadalcanal and Malaita provinces in Septemberto conduct research and meet government and community leaders.
214
Amnesty International Report 2000
