BOLIVIA
REPUBLIC OF BOLIVIA
Head of state and government Hugo B^nzerSudrez
Capital: La Paz
Population: 7.8 million
Official language: Spanish
Death penalty: abolitionist for ordinary crimes
1999 Treaty ratifications/signatures: UN Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment; Inter-American Convention on
Forced Disappearance of Persons
There were reports of police brutality and at least one victim died of his injuries. Human rights defenders continued to be subjected to death threats and harassment, and the security forces reportedly committed human rights violations against coca-leaf growers and peasants in the El Chapare region. In mosteases investigations into alleged human rights violations were unduly delayed or never initiated.
Police brutality
Freddy Cano López, a Peruvian citizen, was arrested in May and detained at the Interpol headquarters in La
Paz. There were reports that the guards initially ignored his cries for help when a fire broke out in his cell. He was rescued eventually and taken to hospital, then transferred to lima, Peru, where he died in June from his injuries. His death provoked a national and international outcry, prompting investigations into allegations that the fire had been started by guards. In June the Ombudsperson presented the conclusions of her investigation to the Comisión de Derechos Humanos de la Cámara de Diputados. Human Rights Commission of the Chamber of Deputies. She stated that the constitutional rights of Freddy Cano López had been violated and recommended, among other things, that the Interpol cells be closed. In July the Commission ordered the three police officers identified as criminally responsible for the incident to be tried before a civilian court, and ordered internal disciplinary proceedings to be brought against the National Director of Interpol. The case had not concluded by the end of the year.
At least 14 students were beaten by police after they were arrested while taking part in a demonstration in La Paz in June against the government's proposed reform of the education system. Journalists covering the demonstration were also reportedly beaten by police and attacked by police dogs. The Ombudsperson's office confirmed that the students had been ill-treated, but Al was unaware of any proceedings initiated by the authorities to bring those responsible to justice.
Peruvian immigrants and political refugees complained of discrimination, harassment and lack of protection by the police and security forces. Ten Peruvian inmates needed hospital treatment after they were attacked by some 200 Bolivian prisoners in El Abra prison, Cochabamba, in August. The Ombudsperson ordered an investigation into the role of prison guards in the incident.
Structural changes in the police force led to the discharge of several police officers who had been involved in corruption or accused of offences committed while on duty. However, most police officers accused of human rights violations remained on active service.
Human rights defenders
Human rights defenders continued to receive anonymous death threats and to face harassment from local authorities. Leading members of the Asamblea Permanente de Derechos Humanos (APDH), Permanent Human Rights Assembly, were threatened throughout the country in the course of their work. Adalberto Rojas, President of the APDH in Santa Cruz, was among those threatened after they complained about the ill-treatment of detainees in the cells of the Fuerza Especial de Lucha contra el Narcotráfico (FELCN), Special Ami-Narcotics Force. Arturo Alessandri, President of the APDH in Oruro, was threatened by a local judicial official with a criminal trial after he objected to the illegal detention of a minor. Q National APDH President Waldo Albarracin was abducted and tortured by members of the police in

BOS
January 1997. In 1999 he received anonymous death threats that were believed to be linked to the investigation and trial of four police officers by a civilian court, ordered in April by the Comisión de Constitución de la Cámara de Diputados, Constitution Commission of the Chamber of Deputies. Three of the officers remained on active service and by the end of the year the trial had not concluded.
El Chapare region
The security forces continued their program of eradicating coca-leaf crops in El Chapare, Cochabamba Department. There were fewer reports of human rights violations than in previous years, but the presence of the army contributed to the persistent climate of uncertainty and fear. The army maintained its presence alongside the Policía Ecológica, Ecological Police; the Dirección de Reconversión de la Coca, the government agency in charge of supervising coca-leaf eradication; and the Unidad Móvil para el Patrullaje Rural (UMOPAR), Mobile Rural Patrol Unit.
There were new complaints that the combined security forces had threatened and beaten peasants, taken part in violent incursions in El Chapare towns, confiscated personal belongings, and burned crops and dwellings. Non-governmental organizations demanded investigations into the incidents. Q In September UMOPAR members burned the homes of four peasants in Central Tacopaya and beat Sebastian Cuevas of the Sindicato Villa Bolivar, Villa Bolivar Union. They also arrested Guillermo Llaveta and beat him during interrogation.
