JAMAICA
JAMAICA
Head of state: Queen Elizabeth II, represented by Howard Felix Cooke
Head of government: Percival James Patterson Capital: Kingston Population: 2.5 million Offícial language: English Death penalty: retentionist
At least 44 people vt^ere on death row. In July the government announced that it would consider withdrawing from the American Convention on Human Rights. Prime Minister P.J. Patterson stated that the government was taking this step because the Convention's monitoring body, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (lACHR), was taking too long to consider petitions filed by people under sentence of death. Reports of police brutality and excessive use of force continued.
Death penalty
There were about 44 people on death row at the end of 1999; no executions were carried out. Following the execution of nine men in Trinidad and Tobago in June, the Prime Minister stated publicly that, despite international lobbying, Jamaica would probably follow Trinidad and Tobago and hang its death-row inmates.
Twelve men were scheduled to be hanged in 1999. All were granted stays of execution pending the outcome of legal applications before national courts. The UN Human Rights Committee ruled in six of the cases that the state had violated the men's rights guaranteed by the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and recommended that the government commute their death sentences. The government refused to implement these recommendations and issued execution warrants despite the fact that under international law the government is under an obligation not to execute a person whose rights under the ICCPR have been violated.
One of the 12 men was issued an execution warrant even though the UN Human Rights Committee was still considering his petition. Two others were issued execution warrants despite the fact that the lACHR was still considering their petitions. In June the Jamaican Court of Appeal ruled that instructions issued by the government to the lACHR placing time limits on the lACHR's consideration of cases were unlawful.
Shootings and brutality by police
The government announced measures to address the rise in crime. These included the imposition of curfews, cordons and spot checks of individuals in 15 areas with particularly high levels of crime. The military were called upon to assist the police in maintaining public order. Incidents of shootings, brutality and ill-treatment by police were common. In May the

JAP
government announced the establishment of a police unit to investigate shootings and other complaints against the police, under the supervision of the Director of Public Prosecutions. In September the government announced that, in response to civilian complaints, 29 officers had been dismissed for misconduct and more than 1,000 had been otherwise disciplined. By August, 112 people had been killed by police officers. In many cases the circumstances of the shootings were disputed; police officers stated that they had fired in self-defence while witnesses stated that the victims were not posing a threat when they were shot.
Q During five days of sometimes violent demonstrations against fuel tax rises in April, seven people were shot and killed by police officers, some in circumstances disputed by witnesses. An unspecified number of people were injured. Q In one incident in July, up to 35 homeless people were illegally and forcibly removed from Montego Bay by police officers. Some of those removed were sprayed with a chemical thought to be Oleorosin Capsicum spray ("OC" or "pepper" spray) or mace. They were driven to a remote mudlake approximately 80 kilometres away and left there. Reports that some people drowned were rejected by authorities. In October a police inspector and two other men were ordered to stand trial by the Director of Public Prosecutions; the trial was set for February 2000. O On 21 August, Michael Gayle, a paranoid schizophrenic, was beaten severely by members of the armed forces and police after trying to pass through a roadblock near his home after curfew. He was reportedly kicked repeatedly in the stomach and beaten by a number of soldiers after an altercation with one of them. He died as a result of a ruptured abdomen. At the Coroner's inquest, the jury returned a majority verdict that all military and police personnel on duty at the roadblock at that time should be charged with manslaughter.
Police officers convicted of murder
In October, three police officers were convicted of the murder of David Black and sentenced to life imprisonment. David Black had been beaten to death at a Trelawny police station and his body dumped at sea in September 1995.
Children
In July the government removed all those under 18 years of age from police lock-ups. The move was taken after Human Rights Watch published a report showing that children were being subjected to abuse while being held with adults in the detention facilities.
