ALBANIA
It remains more difficult to obtain detailed, reliable and up-to-date information on human rights violations in Albania than in any other country in Europe. It is also particularly difficult to obtain an adequate understanding of official attitudes there to human rights problems, to international concern regarding such problems and to the type of work undertaken by Amnesty International. Because of both of these factors A1 has not yet been able to design and implement a program of effective actions for prisoners in Albania.
Prerequisite to future actions for Albanian prisoners is persistent research on patterns and individual cases of human rights violations there. During the past year the Research Department continued to work on this task as a priority. At the end of 1975 details were supplied to A1 by a former political prisoner who had recently managed to leave Albania. He had served 12 years of a 16-year sentence, with hard labour, for anti-communist activity and assisting others trying to escape Albania. He claimed to have been systematically tortured during pre-trial detention in the early 1960s.
Many of the reports of torture which have reached AI in the past also related to cases several years old. However, the relative frequency of. such reports, corroborated by more recent evidence has led AI to the judgement that torture of political prisoners is still being used for the purpose of extracting testimony or confessions.
General prison and labour camp conditions are reported to be very poor.
156	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
with medical assistance totally inadequate. During the year AI received reports of an uprising at the Spa? camp on 21 May 1973 in protest against poor food. Allegedly the four ringleaders were executed by military personnel who had been called in to form an ad hoc tribunal and carry out the sentences. When the food did not improve a second uprising took place. About 170 prisoners were reportedly tried and their sentences increased.
Among prisoners reported to AI were three brothers who, in the 1960s, had tried to escape with their families, but were caught and returned to the Albanian authorities by Yugoslav border guards. After being exposed before the public in Shkoder, they were sentenced to long terms of hard labour, one of them to 25 years.
It appears that religious persecution is intense in this "first aetheist state in the world". A clause on religion in the new draft constitution now under discussion claims that Albania "recognizes no religion and supports and develops aetheist propaganda for the purpose of implanting the scientific materialist world outlook". AI has received details regarding the imprisonment of several Roman Catholic priests and a Moslem imam.
As pointed out in AI's Annual Report 1974/75 it is impossible to estimate with precision the total number of political prisoners in the country, although they appear to number in tens of thousands. AI has identified 31 labour camps and prisons in Albania, although this figure should not be seen as comprehensive. The number of prisoners in each labour camp appears to be around 1,500 and what reports have reached AT indicate that some of these camps hold only political and religious prisoners.
Most political prisoners are employed in industrial labour such as copper mining, but the ex-prisoner mentioned above has stated that he was kept in solitary confinement for two years in a small camp near Shkoder. Visits to prisoners from their relatives are reportedly extremely rare, perhaps only once a year for about five minutes in the presence of officials.
Despite this evidence of human rights violations in Albania, and the fact that Albania, although a member of the United Nations, has not signed the 1966 International Covenants on Human Rights, the review of the Albanian Communist Party recently attacked the "extraordinary" strengthening of repression in the Soviet Union, and referred to "the increase in prisons, concentration camps, psychiatric clinics, militia and army" there.
