HONDURAS
Prisoners arrested during a continuing agrarian crisis have been the focus of Amnesty International's action on Honduras in the past year. Although nc individual prisoner cases were taken up, a number of interventions were made over the short term detention of peasants and peasant leaders. The major intervention made by AI was in response to the torture and assassination oi nine peasant leaders and sympathizers in Olancho province in June 1975.
The Honduran peasantry - 70% of the population of 2.9 million - own only a tiny percentage of the cultivable land and has become increasingly desperate since a hurricane in September 1974 devastated much of the productive land, including the great banana plantations that have traditionally dominated the national economy. Subsistance crops were lost, and cropland spoiled by flood ing, while peasants reliant on full or part time labour in the banana plantations were left with no source of income. The hurricane was followed by a severe and continuing drought.
Although an agrarian reform law published in January 1975 provided the basis for the redistribution of lands, government reluctance to implement the law, coupled with conditions of near starvation in the countryside, led to increasingly militant demands by peasant federations for an effective agrarian reform. Peasant direct action - squatting on unused but cultivable land - led to massive arrests, as well as violent vigilante counter-action by landlords of the large estates and their armed guards.
103	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
On 25 June 1975 the crisis reached its peak when soldiers and armed estate owners attacked the headquarters of the (National Union of Peasants - Unión Nacional de Campesinos - UNC), in Juticalpa, the capital of the cattle ranching province Olancho. Five peasant leaders were killed and a number of leaders and bystanders were detained in the local jail. Among the detained was Father Jerome Cypher, a middle-aged priest from the United States. He was detained in the street in Juticalpa, stripped to his undershorts, beaten, and then taken to the Juticalpa jail.
The following day, Major José Enrique Chinchilla, commander of the Olancho military zone, told the press that most of the prisoners arrested on 25 June had escaped from jail during the night, and some of them had been seen in the nearby hills in the company of the radical Colombian priest Ivan Betancourt, who allegedly was at the head of a band of some 600 armed peasant guerrillas. Church authorities and trade unions denounced the killings of 25 June and asked that the missing prisoners be located.
On 8 July Al wrote to President Juan Alberto Melgar Castro to express concern over the reported murder of peasant leaders in Honduras, apparently at the hands of local authorities and armed bands employed by estate owners, and the apparent failure of the authorities to investigate these killings. AI also requested information about the arrest of peasants and peasant leaders in May and June 1975 and presented a list of 85 prisoners for consideration. The letter referred specifically to disturbing reports that many of the arrests were carried out on the direct instruction of local landowners with a personal interest in agrarian cases.
On 18 July, the bodies of nine persons who disappeared from Juticalpa on 25 June were discovered by a military commission on the estate of Manuel Zalaya, one of Olancho's wealthiest landowners. All the bodies bore marks of torture. The bodies had been buried in a 20 meter deep well that had been dynamited and bulldozed over. The bodies of Father Jerome Cypher and five UNC leaders who allegedly "escaped" from jail were found with those of Father Ivan Betancourt and two young women who accompanied him at the time of his detention. All had been savagely tortured before being executed with bullets to the head.
The subsequent report of the military commission charged Major José Enrique Chinchilla, subordinate army officers and two local landowners with responsibility for the crime. They were detained prior to trial before a civil court.
On 26 July, AI wrote to all members of the Honduran cabinet to express continuing concern over the grave human rights violations in rural areas. In August 1975, it was learned that most of the peasants and peasant leaders detained over the past months were released following negotiations by representatives of the UNC and other peasant trade union organizations with members of the Supreme Military Council, which is presided over by the Head of State, Colonel Juan Alberto Melgar Castro.
On 4 December AI Secretary General Martin Ennals wrote to President Juan Alberto Melgar Castro to express his recognition of the government's efforts to resolve the agrarian crisis, including the freeing of the peasant leaders, and the prosecution of those responsible for the Olancho affair. AI also requested information on the current stage of the trial of the 12 men indicted for the murders committed in Olancho.
AI sent a mission to Hondura? in Ma> 1976. The delegates were Dr Kurt
104
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 1975-1976
Madlener, specialist in hispano-american penal law at the Max Planck Institute in the Federal Republic of Germany, and Michael McClintock from the International Secretariat. The mission's purpose was to introduce the aims and objectives of AI to the government and to discuss the situation of human rights in Honduras.
The delegates enjoyed the full cooperation of members of the government, and discussed in detail the resolution of the Olancho crisis and the trial now in progress of those allegedly responisble. They met with five of the accused in the case in the Central Penitenciary in Tegucigalpa, including the landowner Manuel Zelaya and Major José Enrique Chinchilla.
