COLOMBIA
A rural peasantry largely unprotected by the rule of law has been a principal concern of Amnesty International in Colombia. On 22 July 1975, AI issued an appeal following the disappearance of six leaders of the Asociación Nacional de Usuarios Campesinos (ANUC — National Peasant Union) who had been detained with 319 peasants in Sincelejo, Sucre Department.
Most of the prisoners were held in the town's bull ring without food or sanitary facilities, but the six leaders were taken from the town in a police car. As a number of peasant trade union leaders have been tortured or assassinated in similar circumstances, there was considerable fear for the safety of the six men. They were later located in Sucre's national prison. This mass arrest of peasants followed police action against an unauthorized meeting under the auspices of the ANUC. The prisoners, including women and children, were detained on the accusation of rioting (supuesta asonada). The release of the detainees, including the six leaders, was later ordered by a judge in neighbouring Cordoba Department who ruled that no law had been broken. Local judicial authorities had disqualified themselves from ruling on this case, allegedly because of threats from large landholders.
Large scale guerrilla activities in much of the country, coupled with labour and student unrest over economic measures taken under the government of President Alfonso Lopez Michelsen, led in June 1975 to the imposition of a state of siege, severely curtailing civil liberties and granting the military extraordinary powers of arrest, as well as the right to prosecute civilians within the military court system. A decree law published in August 1975 granted police officers, mayors and state governors the judicial power - under the state of siege - to impose jail sentences for as long as 4 months for a broad range of minor offences.
AI wrote on 29 July 1975 to Colombian officials dealing with internal security problems, to express disquiet over the potential for abuse of human rights presented by the suspension of fundamental rights under the newly imposed state of siege AI also requested information on three cases of detention under the state of siege in which severe torture was alleged: Juan Gregorio Diaz Duque, detained in Pereira, and peasants Jacobo Araujo and Manuel Ordonez, of the municipality of Mercaderes. A reply was received from General Fernando Laudazabal Reyes, head of the Brigada de Instituciones Militares (BIM), who declared his inability under Colombian law to
96
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
release information of this nature to an international organization.
Four men, later taken up for investigation, were convicted in January 1976 of the assassination of the inspector general of the Colombian army, General Ramón Arturo Rincón Quinones in September 1975. The trial, before a military tribunal in Bogotá, was marred by numerous irregularities which led to serious doubts as to the impartiality of the court and the veracity of the witnesses for the prosecution. It was shown conclusively that German Villamil Garcia, convicted of taking part in the attack on General Rincón, was confined, at the time of the attack, to a psychiatric hospital where he was receiving electric shock therapy. A witness for the prosecution claimed he had met with fellow conspirators on the Sunday prior to the attack in a certain Bogotá cafe which the defence proved always remains closed on Sundays. Other prosecution witnesses were shown by the defence to be petty criminals. One was shown to have lied. None of the fingerprints found in the assassin's car belonged to any of the accused.
Major Genaro Nungo Mendez, the military prosecutor, was sharply criticized for statements to the court, in which he said that "to the military, everyone is guilty until proven otherwise. ... (It is) better to condemn an innocent man than to acquit a guilty one, as among the innocent one might be guilty". He also stated that in military courts suspicion should be adequate for conviction and that there should be no appeals.
German Villamil Garcia, Hugo Henry Casadiegos and Heriberto Ramirez were sentenced to 24 years' imprisonment. Ricardo Quiroga was sentenced to 28 years' imprisonment. All were immediately transferred to the maximum security island penal colony La Gorgona. The four are the only cases currently under adoption or investigation by AI in Colombia, although there are esti mated to be some hundreds of political prisoners.
