UGANDA
International attention during June and July 1975 was focused on the case of Denis Hills, a British lecturer who had been arrested in the capital Kampala on 1 April, and who was sentenced to death by firing squad after having been found guilty of treason on 11 June. The charges stemmed from a book M Hills had written, in which President Idi Amin of Uganda was described as "village tyrant".
On 12 June 1975 Amnesty International cabled William Eteki Mboumouna
81	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

Secretary General of the Organization of African Unity, and several African heads of state, asking them to appeal to President Amin to commute the death sentence and cease using Mr Hills' case for political ends. President Amin had earlier announced that Mr Hills would be executed if the British government did not comply with certain demands. On 11 July Mr Hills was released and allowed to leave Uganda after British Foreign Secretary James Callaghan had spent two days in Kampala negotiating his release.
In a clemency measure announced in early July, President Amin stated that death sentences would be reduced to 6 months' imprisonment, 10-year sentences to 2 months and 5-year sentences to 2 weeks.
On 1 October 1975, in a speech to the United Nations General Assembly, President Amin attacked AT as being "fed on rumours and concoctions from discredited criminals and exiles" and for having "taken no trouble to investigate or send a team to Uganda to see for themselves". The speech followed the publication of AI's Annual Report 1974/75, in which Uganda was one of the countries criticized for violations of human rights.
In response to President Amin's speech, AI Secretary General Martin Ennals requested an audience with the Ugandan ambassador to the United Nations during a visit to New York later in the month. The ambassador was informed of AI's concern about the situation in Uganda and also reminded that AI representatives had visited Uganda twice since President Amin seized power in 1971. The ambassador confirmed that the invitation made by the President for AI to send a team to Uganda still stood, but that the timing of any such AI mission would have to be decided subsequently. At the time of writing, no definite date had been set for such a mission.
On 25 June a commission of inquiry appointed by President Amin to investigate the "disappearance" of people in Uganda since 1971, reported back to him. The chairman of the commission. Justice Mohamed Said, stated that 308 persons had disappeared since 1971, but added, according to the Ugandan news media, that "there was not even the remotest suggestion that President Amin directed the disappearance of any person . . .".
In spite of this, however, reports of political arrests and "disappearances" continued to be received by A1 in August 1975 and again in December 1975. In April 1976 there were eyewitness reports of the brutal killing of prisoners in Naguru Barracks, Kampala.
