EL SALVADOR
No prisoners of conscience were taken up by Amnesty International in El Salvador during the period covered by this report. Allegations of human rights violations were infrequent, but severe.
AI acted on four cases of men allegedly in detention whose arrest was denied by security forces. As beatings and severe maltreatment had been reported by former prisoners prior to 1975 - and by a Roman Catholic priest who was briefly detained in early 1975 - there was considerable concern for their well-being. None of the men has been located, and AI is continuing to seek a clarification of their situation.
One of the four, Carlos Mauricio Carballo, was the elected community leader of the "22nd of April" Colony: a shanty-town housing some 1,000 families on the outskirts of San Salvador. Se침or Carballo was carrying out negotiations with the city administration on behalf of the community members to buy land.
Se침or Carballo reportedly left the community on 13 August 1975 for the mayor's office in downtown San Salvador to discuss the land question and never returned. Five days before, his home had been visited by five men some of whom were said to have been members of the parapolitical organization Orden (Spanish for "order") - an organization headed by President Arturo Armando Molina that parallels the official government party Partido de Conciliaci칩n Nacional. Orden has members throughout El Salvador and a daily radio program. Members of the opposition in El Salvador credit Orden with a para-police or para-military role in which armed civilian members use minor violence against political opposition members and work in support of official security forces.
Since August 1975, there have been rumours that'Se침or Carballo is in the custody of the National Guard. A writ of habeas corpus was unsuccessful in locating him in any place of detention.
By far the most serious human rights violation occurred on 30 July 1975. A student demonstration protesting alleged police brutality the week before on the branch campus of the National University at Santa Ana was trapped on an elevated highway bridge by security forces and fired upon. One student was officially acknowledged to have died there. But a dossier presented by AI to Salvadorean authorities in May 1976 listed 21 students seen dead or dying on the scene who "disappeared" after being removed in ambulances by security forces. Although writs of habeas corpus were presented in almost all of the cases, none of the 21 have been located.
A mission composed of Dr Kurt Madlener of the Max Planck Institute of the Federal Republic of Germany and Michael McClintock of the International
111	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

Secretariat visited El Salvador in May 1976 to discuss human rights questions with government officials.
