GHANA
A former Amnesty International adoptee, Joseph Henry Mensah, who served as minister of finance in Ghana's last civilian government (overthrown by a coup in January 1972) was re-arrested in early September 1975 and subsequently brought to trial with two other persons on a charge of sedition. The charge related to the production and circulation of a pamphlet critical of the economic policies of the ruling National Redemption Council.
On 24 November 1975, Mr Mensah was sentenced in the Accra Circuit Court to 8 years' imprisonment with hard labour, while his co-defendants were given 6 and 5-year prison sentences for abetment of sedition. Mr Mensah is reportedly carrying his case to the Court of Appeal. Pending the results of this appeal, AI has taken up all three defendants as investigation cases.
In a separate development, army personnel and civilians were arrested in November and December 1975, following an extensive restructuring of the government in October. On 23 December 1975 the Ghanaian authorities announced that they had uncovered a plot aimed at the overthrow of the government. No details were given, but they stated that those responsible had been arrested and would be brought to trial when investigations were complete.
Some 50 persons appear to have been arrested during this period, including Dr Kofi Awoonor, one of Ghana's most prominent poets and authors, who was detained on 31 December 1975. By April 1976 there was no indication that the release on trial of the arrested persons was pending. In consequence AI's Research Department began producing case sheets on those individuals about whom sufficient data was available.
Under Ghana's Preventive Custody Decree, which has been in effect since 1972, individuals may be held indefinitely without trial. A further cause for concern were reports reaching AI that some of the detained persons had been mistreated during interrogation. Allegations smuggled out of the prison where those arrested were being held reported beatings, stoppings and sexual abuse. The reports were similar to allegations made by individuals on trial for subversion in September 1972, who stated that they had been physically mistreated by military personnel during interrogation.
In May the trial by military tribunal of eight persons accused of plotting to overthrow the government began in the capital, Accra. The accused had been arrested in the closing months of 1975. AI made representations to the Ghanaian High Commission in London with a view to arranging for an AI observer to attend the trial. By the end of May 1976 AI groups were working on six investigation cases.
In two positive moves during the year, the Ghanaian government in August 1975 offered an amnesty to all persons involved in the secessionist National Liberation Movement of West Togoland; and in January 1976, to mark the fourth anniversary of the assumption of power by the military, the government commuted to life imprisonment the death sentences on all prisoners awaiting execution.
62
