ETHIOPIA
During August 1975, Amnesty International pressed the Ethiopian Provisional Military Government to mark the first anniversary of its advent to power on 12 September 1974 by declaring an amnesty for political prisoners. Rumours circulated in the international news media in August that the military government allegedly intended to execute certain of the prisoners on the anniversary. These stories became particularly prevalent following the death in prison of former Emperor Haile Selassie I on 27 August.
However, the executions did not take place, and on 12 September General Teferi Bante, Chairman of the ruling Dergue, announced the release of 55 political detainees, including four former cabinet ministers under the Selassie government. AI's International Council meeting, which was taking place at the time in St Gallen, Switzerland, cabled the Ethiopian government on 14 September welcoming the amnesty and requesting further releases.
60	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
In October 1975 there were further widespread arrests, mostly in student and trade union circles, and a state of emergency was declared in the Addis Ababa area. This was ultimately lifted in December 1975, and although some releases took place, an unknown number of the persons arrested in October remained in detention without trial.
In December Stephanie Grant, AI's Head of Research, visited Addis Ababa in order to express the organization's concern at the continued detention of political prisoners without charge or trial - especially the prolonged imprisonment of women and aged people - and to prepare the ground for a future AI mission to Ethiopia as a follow up to the mission which took place in February 1975.
There were more widespread arrests in February 1976, after a radical restructuring had taken place within the Dergue itself. A particular feature of this series of arrests was that it affected a large number of women, some of them widows of former Selassie government officials who were executed summarily in November 1974. Estimates of the numbers arrested vary from several hundred to 2,000: no exact figures are known.
On 1 March, shortly after the arrests, a Norwegian member of AI, Dr Arnt Meyer-Lie, was able to visit some of the detained women in Akaki Prison, Addis Ababa, in his private capacity as a medical doctor. Among those he visited were female members of the former royal family who have been held without charge or trial since September 1974. Reports in May 1976 indicated that many of the women arrested in February had been released.
On 8 March 1976 a partial amnesty for political detainees was announced by the Ethiopian authorities. This freed 97 prisoners, among them a number of military personnel and leaders of the Confederation of Ethiopian Labour Unions. In response to this measure AT cabled the Dergue on 9 March welcoming the amnesty and reiterating the organization's desire to send another mission to Ethiopia. No reply has been received at the time of writing, and the matter is being pursued through the Ethiopian embassy in London.
Meanwhile, AI continues to be disturbed at the human rights situation in Ethiopia, which, in spite of the amnesties mentioned above, has been marked during the past year by arbitrary and massive arrests, prolonged detention without trial of numerous prisoners including women, continuing use of courts martial for the trial of civilians and application of the death sentence against persons alleged to have opposed the regime in arms. Meanwhile the guerrilla war in the northern province of Eritrea continues to dominate the internal political scene in Ethiopia, in spite of an offer of amnesty to the secessionist forces by the Ethiopian government in May 1976.
