DEMOCRATIC KAMPUCHEA (CAMBODIA)
One year after troops from the National United Front of Cambodia (FUNK) entered the capital Phnom Penh on 17 April 1975, it remains hard to assess the human rights situation in Cambodia in the absence of independent inquiries. Information comes from two main sources: refugees now in Thailand and the official Phnom Penh radio. During the 12 months that elapsed since the Royal Government of National Union Khmer (GRUNK, now called Government of Democratic Kampuchea) came to power, an increasing number of reports from refugees have been publicized in the international press. They allege widespread executions.
Earlier reports concerned seven leaders of the former Lon Nol government, termed "super-traitors" and condemned to death by the Second National Congress of the Cambodian People in February 1975. Four of the seven had fled the country before the liberation army entered Phnom Penh. In November 1975, Deputy Premier Yeng Sary confirmed during a visit to Bangkok that three leaders of the former regime had been executed. They were former Premier Long Boret, Prince Sisowath Sirik Matak and Lon Non, brother of former President Lon Nol. Later in November, the Cambodian Head of State, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, stated in an interview that "no one had been executed in Cambodia after the communist take-over except several of the seven 'super-traitors' who fell into their hands".
New allegations of large scale executions were made at the beginning of 1976 by refugees arriving in Thailand. A number of these testimonies seem to be based on the belief, rather than evidence, that people who disappear from a village or other place of work have been taken away by the army to be executed. Few refugees seem to have actually witnessed executions. However, some accounts cite eye-witness reports. According to a report in the British newspaper The Guardian on 9 February 1976, a refugee from Battambang province named Soum Heap stated that during the summer of 1975, he and other people from his village witnessed the execution of soldiers from the former Lon Nol army, allegedly beaten to death by Khmer Rouge guards at Arak Bak Kor (Battambang province). Another press report (Le Monde, 17-18 February 1976) stated that new executions took place in January 1976. it mentioned in particular a textile factory in Battambang where 27 workers were executed. However, neither the source nor details are given clearly.
On 18 February 1976, Amnesty International wrote to Cambodian Prime Minister Penn Nouth, expressing deep concern at these reports and urging GRUNK to make enquiries into a number of allegations. In the letter, AI reaffirmed its opposition to the death penalty as it had previously stated in a cable to GRUNK on 16 May 1975.
The letter also referred to the Constitution of Democratic Kampuchea which came into effect on 5 lanuary 1976. Noting that article 20 of the new constitution introduced a clause forbidding "reactionary religions", AI
138
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
requested details and inquired about the policy adopted by the Cambodian government vis-a-vis ministers from various religions in Cambodia.
In April 1976 Prince Sihanouk resigned as head of state. A new government was formed, and Khieu Samphan, formerly deputy premief, was elected president of the new state presidium. On 11 May 1976, AI appealed to President Khieu Samphan to make inquiries into allegations of executions. At the time of writing (end of May 1976) no response has yet been received from the government.
The Research Department is now attempting to assess the scope of the allegations made by refugees as they relate to human rights.
