SPAIN
Widespread hopes of an improvement in the human rights situation accompanied the accession to power of Prime Minister Carlos Arias Navarro in January 1974. Furthermore, it was felt that a certain liberalization might follow the death of Generalísimo Francisco Franco on 20 November 1975.
167	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

Certain measures have been taken to change the laws and a partial pardon was declared by King Juan Carlos I to mark his accession to the throne. But substantial numbers of political prisoners remain and new arrests have occurred regularly.
The legal rights of Spaniards are theoretically guaranteed by the Fuero de los Españoles (Charter of the Spanish People - 1945), but special legal provisions exist which enable these rights to be overruled. On 25 April 1975 a state of exception was declared in the two Basque provinces of Vizcaya and Guipúzcoa which lasted until 26 July 1975. This is one step short of martial law. It curtails six of the fundamental rights guaranteed by the Fuero: the rights to free expression, privacy of mail, assembly and association, habeas corpus, freedom of movements and residence and freedom from arbitrary house search.
During the state of exception in Vizcaya and Guipúzcoa, Amnesty International received numerous reports from many sources alleging massive detentions, accompanied by maltreatment. The reports also told of illegal transfers of detainees from the other Basque provinces of Navarra and Alava into the zone covered by the state of exception, abuses of the normal judicial processes and widespread and systematic torture of detainees. AI sent a mission to Spain to investigate these reports. The mission, which lasted from 19 to 29 July 1975, consisted of an American lawyer, Thomas Jones, and Dr Burkhard Wisser, a professor of philosophy in Karlsruhe in the Federal Republic of Germany.
Mr Jones interviewed 15 victims of torture who had been released from prison. They gave convincing and consistent accounts of severe and systematic beatings with a variety of weapons, of jalanga (beating on the soles of the feet), of burning with cigarettes and of near drowning through being submerged in water while suspended upside down. In addition to interviewing the released prisoners, Mr Jones spoke with numerous witnesses of torture who confirmed the first-hand testimony of the victims. He also gathered evidence of legal abuses in the Basque region and confirmed the existence of the practice of illegal transfers of detainees. These transfers enable the authorities to detain people indefinitely without access to lawyers and to deny them the possibility of appealing to the courts.
During his stay in Madrid, where Mr Jones was joined by Dr Wisser, talks were held with officials of the Ministry of Justice, the Papal Nuncio, the Dean of the Junta de Gobierno of the Spanish Lawyers Association and other interested parties. The delegates were, however, refused permission to visit Basauri prison outside Bilbao to talk to prisoners believed to have been tortured.
The evidence collected was published in September 1975 in the Report of an Amnesty International Mission to Spain. In addition to specific recommendations to the government, the report included two appendices drawing attention to the occurrence of torture elsewhere in Spain and the serious problem of the death penalty. AI described the report as "conclusive and appalling."
In August 1975 Secretary General Martin Ennals asked the Spanish embassy in London about the impending decree law concerning the suppression of terrorism. This drastic law, approved by the cabinet on 22 August, effectively placed the whole of Spain under a state of exception. In addition, it meant that sentences applicable under previous legislation were increased. In the case of offences against the state, members of the armed forces, security
168
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
forces or other public officials, the maximum sentence for the particular offence had to be applied. In cases of the death of any people in these categories, or the death or mutilation of a kidnapped person, the decree law laid down that the death penalty was mandatory* The terminology used in the decree law permits the classification as terrorists of communists, anarchists and separatists. Because of the procedure laid down for trial, defence lawyers are severely restricted. In the "most summary" procedure before a military tribunal, the defence lawyer may have as little as four hours in which to prepare his client's defence.
This decree was subsequently amended in February 1976. Fourteen of the 21 clauses were abolished, including the use of the "most summary" procedure. However, the right to search without a warrant and to detain suspects for up to five days - which, on the authority of the competent judge, can be extended to 10 days - remained.
In 1975-76 the criminal law against "illicit association" remained the principal legal grounds for political imprisonment in Spain. In July 1975 AI sent Dr Kurt Madlener, professor of law at the Max Planck Institute in the Federal Republic of Germany to observe the trial in El Ferrol of 23 shipyard workers adopted by AI groups. The workers had been arrested in March 1972 and charged with illegal association, illicit propaganda, public disorder and sedition. Ten of the accused were sentenced to terms of imprisonment ranging from one to 7 years.
In September 1975 a French lawyer, Aimé Léaud, was sent to observe at the trial in Madrid before a public order court of four AI-adopted prisoners. The four were charged with "illicit association in a leading role" (asociación ¡licita en grado dirigente) in the Frente Revolucionario Antifascista y Patriota (FRAP - Revolutionary Anti-fascist and Patriotic Front), a splinter group of the Communist Party in Spain. Three of the accused were sentenced to 15 years and the fourth to 18 years. Leave to appeal was refused. Subsequently Maître Léaud was detained for 18 hours by the police and then expelled from the country on the grounds that he had taken notes during the trial.
During the period covered by this report, death sentences were carried out on five people found guilty, at four separate trials, of the murder of police officers.
AI sent Dr Madlener as an observer to the trial in Burgos of José Ignacio Garmendia and Angel Otaegui Etcheverria. They were accused of the murder of the local chief of the intelligence service near San Sebastian in April 1974 and of being members of Euzkadi Ta Azkatasuna (ETA - Basque Homeland and Liberty). Dr Madlener in company with other international observers was refused entry to the trial which lasted just five hours. The two defendants were sentenced to death.
Señor Garmendia was found guilty of having committed the murder on the basis of his confession. This had been obtained while he was still in hospital following a shot in the head at the time of his arrest. He was physically unable to sign his confession so his fingerprint was placed on it. He subsequently denied the confession. AI appealed to the Spanish Head of State, Generalísimo Francisco Franco, for commutation of the sentences. Señor Garmendia's sentence was subsequently commuted to 30 years' imprisonment on appeal. But Señor Otaegui was one of the five men shot by firing squad on 27 September 1975, despite worldwide appeals to the government.
169	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
On 25 November 1975 King Juan Carlos I proclaimed a limited pardon for certain categories of offenders. This was applicable most notably to prisoners serving sentences of less than 3 years. However, the pardon excluded prisoners convicted of crimes of terrorism and acts allegedly associated tfith terrorism. These included propaganda and membership of terrorist organizations or groups named in the Suppression of Terrorism Decree. The total number of people excluded from the pardon remains a cause for dispute, but figures of 500 to 1,000 are commonly put forward. AI groups with Spanish prisoners wrote to Spanish authorities urging an extension of the pardon and asking whether their adopted prisoners had benefited from it. From numerous official and unofficial responses, it became clear that many prisoners of conscience had been released before expiry of their sentences.
One of the first major political trials since the accession of King Juan Carlos I was held 8-10 March 1976 in Hoyo de Manzanares, a military barracks outside Madrid. Nine officers of the armed forces accused of conspiracy with intent to rebel through their membership of the Unión Militar Democrática (UMD - Democratic Military Union) were tried by a military tribunal. The UMD is a body of exclusively military personnel whose goals are the reform of state and military institutions. Hélène Toledano, a French lawyer, was sent to observe the trial on behalf of AI. Although it was supposedly a public trial, she was denied entry. The defendants were found guilty and given prison sentences ranging from 24 to 8 years.
AI has maintained its adoption and investigation program for the new arrests and re-arrests which have occurred since the death of Generalísimo Franco. Recently, however, many more short term detentions have been reported. The period the majority of them may last is from overnight to up to 10 days. There has also been an alarming increase in allegations of torture, especially in the Basque provinces. Some of these are well attested cases and although official investigations have been promised, no results have yet been announced.
In 1975-76 AI groups worked on a total of 489 cases, of whom 238 were released, 126 under the pardon of November 1975.
