GUATEMALA
Deaths and disappearance resulting from the extra-legal action of para military groups and official security forces continued to dominate Amnesty International work on Guatemala during the period covered by this report
A dossier detailing 134 cases of political murder in which security forces appeared to be implicated was submitted to the Organization of American States (OAS) Inter-American Commission on Human Rights in June 1975, after prior submission to President Kjell Laugerud failed to elicit response The dossier dealt with murders which occurred in the first seven months of President Laugerud's régime.
Characteristics differentiating these and other cases of "disappearance" and extra-judician execution from acts of common criminality include the practice of abducting victims before murder, without requests for ransom, and the high percentage of bodies that are found with marks of torture or mutilation Most victims disappeared after abduction by heavily armed bands of men.
Peasant smallholders, tenant farmers, members of agricultural cooperatives and landless peasants make up the vast majority of the victims, even if only those reported in the national press are considered. Petty criminals in the cities are also frequent targets of these actions. The police reports in the press stress the criminal antecedents of certain victims, in apparent justification of the killings.
AI action has focused both on the production of information material on Guatemala - such as a feature article on the situation of deaths and dis appearances - and on concrete actions on behalf of individuals who have "disappeared". Members of security forces are believed to have played an active role in many abductions. Those abducted have largely been peasants, but one, Valdemar Orozco de Leon, was a former naval officer working in a government development program.
In only a very small percentage of these cases have the abductees been released alive and well. In one case taken up by AI in 1974, a university studen; leader, Byron de León, his release by his unidentified captors was reported shortly after appeals for information on his whereabouts. But only recently. AI learned that Byron de León again "disappeared" in late 1975 and has never reappeared.
The most grave single case of mass detention - by security forces - anc disappearance reported this year occurred in the isolated northern Department of Quiché on the cooperative farm Xalbal near the municipality of Chaju! ÀI has received notorized statements from community representatives of Xalbal reporting the arrests by uniformed army troops of cooperative members Miguel Sales Ordonez, José Felipe Sales, Alfonso Ortiz and Sebastian Felipe Jimenez. The arrests took place on 7 July 1975 in the Xalbal village market place. All have since disappeared.
A total of over 30 campesinos (peasants) "disappeared" from the Xalba: area between 10 June and 7 July last year. Others included Gabriel Carmelo Torres, Juan Perez Ramirez and Baltazar Tomas.
AI is also working on 20 other similar "disappearance" cases which occurred between February and May 1976 in Quiché Department.
A mission to Guatemala was carried out in April 1976 by two Al delegates Dr Kurt Madlener of the Max Planck Institute of the Federal Republic ot Germany and Michael McClintock of the International Secretariat spoke to members of government and of the legal profession, as well as private indi-
101	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

viduals concerned with the situation of human rights in Guatemala. HAITI
It is difficult to assess accurately the present number of political prisoners in Haiti. Estimates range from 400 (the more usual figure) to 3,000. Amnesty International has 255 names. For the over all period of the Duvalier dynasty - since 1959 - the Fédération Haitienne des Syndicats Chrétiens, in Caracas, Venezuela, estimated that there were "more than 3,000 people executed and tortured to death".
The reasons for such vague estimates are inherent in the character of the régime. It is believed that the government itself is not able to produce an accurate account of prisoners' whereabouts. In any event, prison conditions, disease, brutality, torture and executions inevitably lead to a drastic reduction in the prison population. Arbitrary executions, starvation, appalling hygienic conditions, disease and torture account for one of the highest mortality rates amongst prisoners in any country.
Arrests are carried out without warrants and often take the form of disappearances or kidnappings. The families may subsequently be unable to find any trace of their missing relative. In other cases, the police or the tunton macoute ("voluntary" presidential secret service) block off an entire neighbourhood and proceed to arrest indiscriminately as many as hundreds of citizens. Following severe interrogations, some are released and others are tortured and remain in prison.
Information in AI files suggests that torture does not depend on modern, sophisticated techniques, but takes the form of more traditional brutality, sometimes applied until the victim's death. Its application appears arbitrary rather than systematic. Reported methods include whipping, beating with sticks and the "jack" - the prisoner's arms and feet are tied, the bound arms are pinned between the legs, the four limbs being then locked by a transversal stick. (Reports say that this method is commonly applied to peasants by rural policemen.)
The paucity of information about the current situation of political prisoners, and the lack of response by the Haitian government to public opinion and approaches from international governmental and non-governmental organizations, have limited the usefulness of many of the standard operational procedures of AI. Casework for 74 prisoners by AI groups has proved to be a difficult experience: in most cases, members have been unable to make contact with the prisoner or the family and the authorities rarely acknowledge inquiries. Only on very rare occasions is a release reported. In the majority of cases, the uncertainty as to whether the adopted prisoner is even still alive discourages systematic activity. Letters from AI Secretary General Martin Ennals in the past have likewise remained unanswered.
At the beginning of December 1975, AI learned of the arrest, at Port-au-Prince airport, of Alix Pierre-Louis, who was returning after a course of study in Belgium. An urgent action was issued, but there has been no further news of Alix Pierre-Louis.
During the past year, AI has made use of the procedure of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States (OAS), whereby a member country is required to respond to individual complaints within a certain period of time, failing which the complaint is accepted and published by the commission. Haiti has been repeatedly con-
102
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 1975-1976
demned in the past, but even where the Haitian authorties have replied to the complaints, the information they have produced has not necessarily corres ponded to the allegations and inquiries submitted by, or via, the commission,
On 30 May 1975, AI submitted to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights a list of 74 adoption/investigation cases with the request thai the commission use its good offices to persuade the Haitian government to bring these prisoners to trial or order their immediate release. The government responded to the commission's inquiry on 28 August 1975, but the limited information it provided referred to only one of the list of 74, Maitre Hubert Legros. It claimed that he had been released, but omitted to mention that he had been re-arrested shortly afterwards.
AI urged the commission to seek further information from the Haitian government, whereupon the commission, at its 36th session, 6-24 October 1975, decided to renew its request for an adequate response to Al's submission A number of adoption groups have also made use of this commission's complaints machinery in the case of individual Haitian prisoners.
AI has also been able to provide information for the defence of Haitians in the United States who are threatened with repatriation, identifying the risks that would be involved.
On 22 December 1975, President-for-life Jean Claude Duvalier announced an amnesty for 31 prisoners, sentence reductions for criminal offences and the abolition of capital punishment in favour of life imprisonment with hard labour. AI understands that one prisoner included in the amnesty (an AI adoptee) has been freed, but past experiences of such "amnesties" has shown that prisoners listed are not always released and that some may have been released, or in exile, for some time previously.
In such a difficult situation, AI actions on Haiti have not been able to reach the same level of intensity and efficiency as on more accessible countries
