CHILE
During 1975, the number of political prisoners remained relatively constant at 5,000-6,000. By the end of April 1976, this total dropped below 5,000, a decrease which was largely due to the release of prisoners into exile under the provisions of decree law number 504.
However, this downward trend does not reflect a general improvement in the human rights situation over the past year. Earlier patterns of arrest, torture and imprisonment, either without trial under the State Security Law operative in time of "state of siege", or with nominal hearings before a military tribunal without adequate defence, and forced exile, have become institutionalized.
Amnesty International has been especially concerned at the problem of disappearances. Since the coup in September 1973, it is estimated that well over 1,500 people have been arrested but never subsequently been located by their family and friends. It is impossible to know whether these people are dead or are being held incommunicado in prisons or camps. In every case writs of habeas corpus presented by the family have been rejected.
Immediately following the refusal by the Chilean government in June 1975 to admit delegates from the United Nations Ad Hoc Working Group on
93	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

Human Rights in Chile, the Chilean press published a list of a total of 119 Chileans who had allegedly been killed abroad by their own comrades or had died in confrontations with the Argentinian police. Of these 119, seven were AI investigation cases and in a further 45 cases, the arrests had been notified
to AI.
Several of those appearing on the list had been the subjects of the AI Campaign for the Abolition of Torture appeals during 1974 and 1975. AI adoption groups responded by addressing inquiries to the Chilean authorities. In August, in response to almost unprecedented pressure both from outside and inside Chile, President Augusto Pinochet Ugarte ordered an inquiry into the matter.
In support of its belief that many of the 119 had in fact been arrested inside Chile by the Chilean authorities, AI obtained a sworn statement from a former adopted prisoner, Dr Katia Reszcynski Padilla, to the effect that six of the 119 had been detained in Santiago. In a letter on 8 September 1975 to the President of the Supreme Court, Jose Maria Eyzaguirre, A1 presented Dr Reszcynski's testimony as evidence germane to the inquiries. No reply has been received.
In a special campaign to mark Chilean Armed Forces Day and the second anniversary of the 1973 coup, AI groups and sections pressed the junta to release or identify the whereabouts of the hundreds of "disappeared" Chilean citizens. In December 1975, AI included in a submission to the UN Ad Hoc Working Group on Human Rights in Chile an analysis of statements received directly from a large number of ex-prisoners and prisoners' families. These said that 34 of the 119 mentioned above had been seen in detention centers inside Chile at different times during 1974 and early 1975.
In November, the Cardinal Archbishop of Santiago, Monsignor Raul Silva Henriquez, announced the closure of the Committee of Cooperation for Peace in Chile (Comité Pro Paz). This was an ecumenical committee established shortly after the coup of September 1973 to assist political prisoners and their families legally, financially and socially. Cardinal Silva Henriquez's announcement gave rise to an intensification of existing harrassment of churchmen and others connected with the Comité pro Paz, and at least 13 people, laymen and women and priests were arrested in that same month.
AI responded immediately by publicly appealing for the release of these people. Those arrested included three executive members of the Comité Pro Paz in Santiago, among them the lawyer José Zalaquett who, although released on 30 January 1976, was expelled from Chile on 12 April 1976. British doctor Sheila Cassidy was among those arrested during this period. AI sent a cable to Cardinal Silva Henriquez expressing concern at the arrests and offering him support in his humanitarian work.
The Comité Pro Paz was finally closed in December. It was replaced by a similar organization - the Vicaria de la Solidaridad. By the end of April 1976 more than 160 priests and nuns had been expelled from Chile and about 40 others had been arrested and three had died as a result of repression.
September 1975 marked a period of harrassment against certain sectors in the universities in Santiago. Forty-four people were arrested in one of the largest purges to take place in the universities since 1973. AI sections and Campaign for the Abolition of Torture (CAT) groups appealed for the immediate release of these students and teachers. Many were later released in
94
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
an amnesty of 163 people announced by General Pinochet in December 1975. AI did not receive allegations that these particular detainees were tortured, but all those arrested lost their jobs or their places in the university.
Some of the most intensive work carried out by AI adoption groups has been for prisoners in two major armed service trials: the trials of the Chilean Air Force (FACH) and navy personnel. The latter were arrested shortly before the coup by navy elements who were partially responsible for the overthrow of the previous government of President Salvador Allende Gossens. The majority of the FACH prisoners have now been released into exile under the provisions of decree law 504, and many have been welcomed and helped in Europe by AI groups on arrival. But by the end of last year, there still remained 27 people in prison, including Captain Raúl Vergara Meneses and Captain Carlos Carbacho Astorga.
In the majority of these 27 cases, the prisoners were still awaiting the final decision of President Pinochet on their "pardon", despite the fact that the decision had been made about their colleagues some time previously. AI sent a cable to President Pinochet on 15 December requesting that 18 of those prisoners, who had applied for exile under decree law 504, be released and permitted to take advantage of the visas that had been offered them in other countries. But by the end of April 1976 11 of these prisoners, including the two mentioned above, were still being held. Moreover, in January, Captain Raul Vergara was transferred to an isolation cell and later to another part of the public prison of Santiago. At the end of March 1976 he was being held there with common law offenders, contrary to Chilean law. AI undertook a series of initiatives on behalf of this adopted prisoner early in 1976.
In the other armed services trial, the sentences passed on the 57 naval marines and civilians - all now AI cases - were finally announced in May 1976. At the moment of writing this report, the defendants are awaiting final ratification of their sentence by the naval court. As soon as the sentences are confirmed, these prisoners will be entitled to apply for exile in the normal way under the provisions of decree law number 504. This group of prisoners is being held in three different prisons in Valparaíso, Concepción and Talcahuano.
AI protested vigorously following an incident in Valparaiso prison on 31 October 1975, when all prisoners were removed from their cells and beaten, robbed and humiliated. In April 1976, reports were received of an epidemic of tuberculosis in this prison. At least three of those who had already contracted the disease were defendants in the naval trial. As a result of this further indication of the sub-standard prison conditions in Valparaiso prison and the consequent danger of the health of the inmates, AI asked the Chilean authorities for the release of the prisoners whose cases it had taken up.
The use of torture is still known to be widespread in Chile. This was documented in the UN Ad Hoc Working Group's report in February 1976 and by information AI continues to receive from ex-prisoners and contacts in Chile. The Campaign for the Abolition of Torture has undertaken urgent actions on behalf of at least 48 people since June 1975. The Chilean government's response to the UN report did not attempt to deny that torture is used but put arguments forward in justification.
However, the junta has recently introduced a decree which strengthens existing legal protection for detainees against torture. Decree law 187 of 28 January 1976 specifies that all prisoners should be examined medically both on arrest and prior to release. The law was officially described as a
95	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

measure to protect the detainee against illegal physical punishment. It gives the minister of justice and the president of the Supreme Court the authority, for the first time since the coup, to visit certain recognized detention centers for political prisoners. These include 4 Alamos, one of the prisons in Santiago where prisoners are held strictly incommunicado.
Decree law 187 also alters and emphasizes the existing regulation that a prisoner's family must be notified of arrest. Initial hopes that this law represented a serious attempt to protect the rights of prisoners have been disappointed by information on at least five cases up to the time of writing. This suggests that the decree is being observed no more than previous decrees which appeared to be providing some protection to the prisoner.
At the end of April 1976, AI had 252 adoption and investigation cases. During the past year AI had also had CAT actions for 63 people and further appeals on mass arrests in Chile.
