SRI LANKA
Trials by the Criminal Justice Commission of prisoners detained for their alleged involvement with the 1971 insurgency have continued at a slower rate than anticipated. On 31 December 1974, 399 prisoners were awaiting trial before the commission and, on 25 November 1975, Minister of Justice Felix Dias Bandaranaike stated in parliament that 300 persons were still awaiting trial. But, he added, 200 could be released on bail.
At its April 1976 meeting, the International Executive Committee of Amnesty International decided to make public the report of the 1975 AI mission to Sri Lanka. The report describes in detail the trial' of political prisoners before the Criminal Justice Commission. Its major findings and recommendations were published in last year's annual report. However, the up-dated report also points out that 12 prisoners have now been sentenced to
148
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
death before the ordinary courts for acts committed during the insurrection and calls for the abolition of the death penalty.
The report refers to the fact that the judgement of the Criminal Justice Commission passed in "Inquiry number 1", the so-called main case of alleged leaders of the insurrection, has not yet been published, although the verdict was handed down in December 1974. This seriously hampers attempts by those then sentenced to make representations to the president. Although the Criminal Justice Commission Act does not provide for appeal, the president has the constitutional right to grant pardon to any persons sentenced in any court in Sri Lanka. Moreover, prisoners sentenced in "Inquiry number 1" can no longer consult their lawyers, since visits to these prisoners have been restricted to blood-relations. The AI mission report recommends that political prisoners should have the same rights as ordinary prisoners, without any restrictions as regards to who visits them.
AI has made available an initial grant of £1,000 (US $2,000) for legal aid to political prisoners awaiting trial before the Criminal Justice Commission. The grant, which is available in instalments, is now being used to contribute to the defence costs of prisoners awaiting trial before the commission. The Legal Aid Committee of the Bar Association of Sri Lanka is assisting with this project.
AI has further made available a grant to the central prison library in Colombo for the purchase of textbooks in Sinhala, Tamil and English. The first instalment of the grant has been used to buy books which are now available to political prisoners in Magazine, Welikada, Mahara and Bogambara prisons. AI has also sent some 200 titles in English, requested by the prisoners, to Magazine prison, Colombo.
At the time of the 1975 AI mission, most of the Tamil prisoners who had been detained without trial for periods up to 3 years were being released. By the summer of 1975, no more than five were still in detention. But when the mayor of Jaffna was assassinated on 27 July 1975, 200 young Tamils were arrested on suspicion under the emergency regulations, including nearly all those who had been released over the last year.
On 2 September 1975, Deputy Minister of Defence and External Affairs Lakshman Jayakody stated in parliament that "about 30" of these prisoners have been kept in prison for security reasons. But the Research Department knows of 46 Tamils detained under the emergency regulations, none of whom has so far been charged with a specific offence. Of the 46, nine have been adopted by AI groups. Among them is Ananda Vinayagam, a prisoner who had spent three years in detention without access to a lawyer. He was rearrested in June 1975 and was on AI's Prisoners of the Month Campaign in October 1975. Another 23 cases are currently being investigated.
