IRAN
Amnesty International has continued to study with deep concern the treatment of political prisoners in Iran. There has been an identifiable increase in the repression of opposition within Iran and an extension of the activities of SAVAK (Iranian National Intelligence and Security Organization) to countries in which Iranians are living abroad, in an attempt to prevent criticism of the Iranian regime.
The exact number of political prisoners in Iran is not known, but AI believes it to be several thousands. Other sources have given approximate numbers which range from 25,000 to 100,000. The Shahanshah of Iran Mohammed-Reza Pahlavi himself has stated publicly (National Broadcasting Company of the United States of America television program, "Meet the Press", 18 May 1975) that fewer than 3,000 persons were imprisoned in Iran on charges related to "terrorist" actions. However, AI has reliable information about many prisoners who have clearly not been involved in any violence. These include Nasser
183	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

Rahmani-Nezhad, Saeed Soltanpour, Mohsen Yelefani and Mahmoud Doulat-Abbadi, who were arrested while preparing a production of Maxim Gorki's play "The Lower Depths". They were sentenced in November 1975 by a military tribunal to between 2 and 11 years' imprisonment. Nasser Rahmani-Nezhad, who received the 11-year sentence, was alleged to have been severely tortured.
The torture of political prisoners during interrogation appears to be routine practice, but prisoners may also be subjected to torture again at any time during their imprisonment. On two occasions appeals were made on behalf of alleged victims of torture. In August 1975 AI received reports of the renewed torture of Abbas Sheibani, a doctor of medicine, about whom previous reports of torture had been received in 1973. Dr Sheibani has himself been outspoken in the past about the use of torture in Iran and was arrested in 1971 because he spoke publicly against torture.
In January 1976 information was received about the alleged torture of Ayatollah Hoseinali Montazeri, a 65-year-old religious leader who was arrested in late 1974. Ayatollah Montazeri is said to have lost his hearing because both his eardrums have been perforated. It is also reported that his 85-year-old father was beaten up and severely injured because he refused to cooperate with the security police, SAVAK.
As in previous years the number of executions in Iran has been a matter of great concern to AI. In lune 1975 two political prisoners were executed, and in the first two months of 1976 alone 15 executions were reported. In most cases AI received no prior information about the executions. But in the case of 10 political prisoners who were sentenced to death on 31 December 1975, AI cabled an appeal for commutation of the sentences to the Shah and Secretary General Martin Ennals visited the Iranian embassy in London to ask that an AI observer should be allowed to attend the appeal hearing in Teheran. Appeals were also sent to the Shah from many of AI's national sections. Only one of the 10, Mehdi Gheyouran, was reprieved. The remaining nine prisoners were executed on 24 January 1976.
On five separate occasions in the past year amnesties have been declared for prisoners tried by military tribunals. A total of nearly 1,200 prisoners are reported to have been released, but it is not known whether any of these were adopted prisoners of conscience.
AI groups are working on 118 cases of prisoners in Iran.
