REPUBLIC OF SOUTH VIETNAM
During the weeks that followed the access to power of the Provisional Revolutionary Government (PRG) in South Vietnam on 30 April 1975, Amnesty International received confirmation from official and unofficial sources that political prisoners detained under the defeated Thieu regime had been released. However, direct news from some of the released prisoners was not received before the autumn of 1975, when postal communications were reestablished with South Vietnam.
One of the letters received by an AI group at the end of October 1975 was signed by a former prisoner on Con Son island, Nguyen Tri Dung, who described the liberation of Con Son at midnight on 30 April 1975, a few hours after the National Liberation Front troops entered Saigon. His letter confirms press reports on the evacuation in several stages of the island. Mr Dung says that he "left Con Son on the third ship on the evening of 16 May 19-75 and arrived in Saigon the next evening". Nearly 2,000 prisoners were evacuated from Con Son in May 1975.
Later confirmations of releases and news of former prisoners were also received from the Committee for the Improvement of the Prison System in South Vietnam - which announced that after the release of prisoners its task had come to an end - and from the World Salvation Religion, a Buddhist congregation. Many Buddhist monks had been imprisoned under the former
150
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
regime for refusing to be drafted into the army.
In May and June 1975, the press reported on public executions of thieves and looters in the Saigon area. These, however, concerned a small number and were interpreted by observers as an attempt to cunb a wave of crime which affected Saigon after the change of government. Journalists also recalled that the city had no police force and that, when the prisons were opened at the end of April, common criminals had been released as well as political prisoners.
On 10 June 1975, AI wrote to the PRG Foreign Minister, Mrs Nguyen Thi Binh, inquiring about the new government's policy on capital punishment, and reaffirming AI's opposition to the death penalty. It recalled the assurance given in May by a PRG representative in Paris to AI Secretary General Martin Ennals that it was contrary to the policy of the PRG to execute a person or to use a policy of retaliation towards Vietnamese citizens. The letter also made reference to an earlier proposal that an AI mission should visit South Vietnam.
In an interview published on 22 July 1975, Mrs Nguyen Thi Binh stated that the PRG's policy "is one of clemency, national concord, for those who repent ... but we are determined to punish all acts which affect the revolutionary power of the people. And unfortunately, there are also a few cases which we must punish severely at the command of the population." Mrs Binh also said that acts of sabotage were still carried out by supporters of former President Nguyen Van Thieu, referring to soldiers and officials of the former government who had gone into hiding and kept weapons, sometimes engaging in an armed resistance to the new authorities.
Hence, according to the official Liberation Radio, on 4 July 1975 the Military Court of the Military Management Committee of Chau Doc city condemned to death Le Nhat Thanh, formerly a first lieutenant in the defeated army, accused of "counter-revolutionary activities" for "hoarding arms and joining others to steal money and state property". During the trial, which was public and attended by 10,000 people, ex-Lieutenant Thanh refused to admit his guilt in spite of his father's plea. The report however did not say whether the sentence had been carried out.
Later in September, the South Vietnamese newspaper Giai Phong announced that death sentences had been passed by military courts on two war criminals in Rach-Gia, on the Gulf of Thailand, and on two former intelligence agents in Can Tho, 120 kilometers south of Saigon.
However, whereas the press and radio gave quite regular reports on arrests of people accused of being involved in intelligence work, of forming "underground cells" with a view to "instigating armed resistance against the revolutionary forces", etc, very few accounts mentioned executions or death sentences.
In a letter sent on 20 February 1976 to PRG President Huynh Tan Phat, AI inquired about a few problems arising from the "re-education" process. In June 1975 the Military Management Committees, which replaced the old municipal administrations, announced in several cities that all soldiers and personnel of the "puppet armed forces", as well as policemen, intelligence agents and personnel of the former administration below the rank of bureau chief, who had previously reported for registration, should attend "reform study" for three days.
151	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
Likewise in the countryside dozens of "reception centers" were set up for military and civil officials of the former regime to register. "Re-education" was carried out in the same fashion either in the villages themselves, or at the district re-education centers for higher officials. For ordinary soldiers and low ranking persons of the former administration the period of three days appeared to have been respected, and a certificate allowing them to seek employment was given to them after they had completed the course.
On the other hand, the length of "re-education" seemed not to be strictly defined as regards high ranking military and civilian officials. It varied from province to province, depending on the former rank and also apparently on the willingness to undergo "reform". It was reported to be longer for military and police officers.
Concern about the fate of officers who were taken away from Saigon in May after surrendering to the revolutionary forces was voiced in July 1975 by their wives or other members of their family who had since remained without news and did not know where they were. There were even rumours that the officers had been taken away to be executed, but one source stated this was founded on the news that several officers were reportedly killed in a truck accident when they were carried out of Saigon. In his letter to President Huynh Tan Phat, however, Secretary General Martin Ennals mentioned the case of a general of the Rangers Division of the former regime's army, General Do Ke Giai, whose family reportedly remained without news several months after he was taken away by the revolutionary forces on 8 May 1975.
News of releases of military officers from re-education centers or camps started appearing in the press in September 1975. A first group of 800 were allowed to return to their families on 9 September. The releases then seem to have been continued through the following months, but the total number of those released, as well as of those still undergoing re-education, is not known in the absenceof official figures.
On 20 December 1975, foreign and local journalists were invited to watch the reunion of 120 released officers with their families at Song Tahn camp and reported that a camp official had said the returning officers would be kept under surveillance by local authorities before the restoration of their full rights as citizens. This was confirmed by an article in Le Monde on 14 February 1976, according to which military and civil officials of the former regime would recover their civil rights after completing their "re-education stage", except for "high-ranking" military and civil officials who would have to undergo a "probationary period of six months to one year" under the control of their local revolutionary committee before being allowed to exert their civil rights.
In his letter to the PRG President, AI Secretary General inquired about the criteria according to which the local revolutionary committees will recommend the restoration of civil rights for these people. He also noted particularly the principles which guided the policy of the PRG towards officials of the former regime and welcomed the recent releases.
The letter also referred to reports which reached AI in the autumn of 1975 concerning people detained in the central highlands after the end of the war. Two cases in particular concerned a Roman Catholic nun and an evangelical pastor, allegedly arrested in June 1975 in Cong Turn (Kontum province) for having been previously in contact with foreigners. They had reportedly not been engaged in propaganda or violent activities against the PRG. AI requested
152	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
details of these cases, while recalling that it does not adopt persons who have used violence, or cases of espionage. However, the Secretary General expressed AI's concern to see all persons arrested tried in conformity with international judiciary principles, such as those presented in the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
On 23 March 1976, the Saigon Press Agency announced that the PRG was setting up people's tribunals, appeal jurisdictions and reorganizing police forces as a basis for a "democratic and progressive judiciary". Three decrees containing the basis for a future penal code put an end to the exceptional military jurisdictions which were functioning since the end of the Vietnam war in April 1975.
One of the decrees outlaws "counter-revolutionary crimes", defined as all acts "endangering national defence, the national democratic people's revolution and the construction of socialism", which might be punished by a term of imprisonment or the death penalty, depending on the gravity of the case. Another of the decrees concerns guarantees given to individuals by the penal legislation, and mentions the obligation for the "relevant authorities" to provide a written warrant before arrest, search or inquiry, except when people are "caught red-handed".
