CZECHOSLOVAKIA	*
As of June 1976 Amnesty International adoption groups were working for 35 prisoners in Czechoslovakia (CSSR). But this figure should not be taken as an indication of the total number of prisoners of conscience in that country. It reflects rather the difficulty of obtaining information on political imprisonment in the CSSR.
During the past year a number of people, including many known dissenters, were repeatedly brought in for questioning and warning and their homes were searched and their papers taken away from them. This was especially the case in the tense atmosphere before the 15th Congress of the Czechoslovak Communist Party which opened on 12 April 1976.
Continued harassment of religious believers was evident. A number of Roman Catholic priests were forbidden to carry out their ministry and there were cases of short term arrests and prolonged interrogations. Reportedly Roman Catholic nuns were barred from attending state schools of nursing and receiving diplomas. In October 1975 two Roman Catholic laymen, one of them a scientist, were accused of influencing young people towards religious faith.
AI's Annual Report 1974/75 stated that political prisoners had been excluded from the amnesty of 8 May 1975. After completion of the report, AI learned that five Al-adopted prisoners of conscience with sentences of up to three years had been released under article 1 of that amnesty. Among them was a Silesian priest, Father Frantisek Jurecka, who had been sentenced in April 1974 to 15 months' imprisonment for his religious activities. He was dangerously ill during his imprisonment, and his AI adoption group had made repeated but unsuccessful attempts, including an approach to CSSR diplomatic authorities, to send him medicaments necessary for his recovery. In March 1975 he suffered a stroke and half of his body was paralyzed. Father Jurecka was released under the amnesty of 8 May 1975. After a short stay in hospital, he died in August 1975.
A citizen of the German Democratic Republic who attempted to escape to the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG) via Czechoslovakia and two FRG citizens who helped in this and other escape attempts were all adopted by AI.
The first trial in Czechoslovakia of a conscientious objector known to AI was held in December 1975. Frantisek Matula, a student of theology, was expelled in May 1974 from the Comenius theological faculty in Prague for taking part in a protest action. When called up for military service in April 1975 he refused to obey on grounds of conscience. He was arrested in September 1975 and in December 1975 sentenced to 15 months' imprisonment, suspended for three years.
Foreign news agencies reported from Prague on 2 April 1976 that 19 young people, members of two "beat" groups performing unorthodox music, had been detained and charged with creating public disorder. Evidently they had not engaged in politics, but manifested their protest against the established order by their appearance, by their way of life and by creating an artistic and cultural milieu of their own. AI is investigating their cases.
159	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
The most distinctive of the cases adopted by AI are a group of six intellectuals, prominent supporters of the so-called "Prague Spring" that marked the term in office of former Czechoslovak party leader Alexander Dubcek. All six were sentenced to prison terms ranging from 2\ to 6| years on charges of subversion (under article 98 of the CSSR penal code).
The most recent and most comprehensive information on the treatment of political prisoners in Czechoslovakia is contained in a letter dated March 1976 to CSSR President Gustav Husak from the relatives of five of the last-named prisoners: Dr Milan Hiibl, Jiri Müller, Antonin Rusek, Professor Jaroslav Sabata and Dr Jan Tesar. The letter and the detailed documentation attached to it deal with all aspects of prison life. They show conclusively that although these political prisoners were sentenced to imprisonment in the first (the mildest) category, they receive worse treatment than most other prisoners. Particularly disturbing is the fact (well documented from other sources as well) that these prisoners are required to do work under such conditions of monotony, physical strain, high production norms and lack of hygienic protection that their physical and mental health is endangered. AI has translated and distributed the document.
On 7 April 1976 AI wrote to Dr Husak in support of the families' appeal to him. AI appealed for the release of the five men, all of whom are in a poor state of health and are serving their fifth year in prison.
