BRAZIL
Since early 1975, about 2,000 suspected communist sympathizers have been detained throughout Brazil. The actual figure of those still in detention is around 700-800, 240 of whom have been adopted by Amnesty International. The majority of detainees have either been charged or convicted under the Law of National Security. This relates to the organization of political parties banned by the state and carries a penalty of 2 to 5 years' imprisonment.
The arrests started in the major centers such as Sao Paulo and Rio de
90	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
Janeiro, but quickly spread to other provinces such as: Bahia, Parana, Santa Catarina, Goias and, most recently, Pernamubuco and Sergipe. Many of those arrested were indeed active members of the pro-Moscow Brazilian Communist Party (Partido Commutiista Brasileiro - PCB), including the acting secretary general of the PCB, Marco Antonio Tavares Coelho. But later arrests included progressive members of the Movimento Democratico Brasileiro, the only legal opposition party, journalists, lawyers, trade unionists and others whose connection to the PCB ranged from the tenuous (many admitted past membership, but stated that they had long ceased to be members) to the non-existent.
There has been a growing tendency by the linha dura (hard-liners) to link members of the MDB with the illegal communist party. In the November 1974 elections to the Senate and House of Representatives, the MDB had fought a successful campaign on human and civil rights issues. It had called for the restoration of habeas corpus for political crimes and for an inquiry into cases of "disappeared" persons. However, its success was officially attributed to communist support, and so any initiative by the MDB party on torture or disappearances was dismissed by the government as subversion.
Moves in 1976 to silence criticism from the MDB party have culminated in five deputies being cassados (ie losing their parliamentary mandate and having their political rights suspended for 10 years). One of the deputies was Lysaneas Maciel, who worked on human rights.
About 150 members of the MDB party are estimated to have been detained during the wave of arrests. Some are key party officials such as Manoel Teodosio, the regional organizer for the state of Pernambuco, who was arrested in March 1976 when he had gone to protest about the detention of his two sons, and Sergio Santana, an MDB town councillor in Salvador da Bahia who testified in court that he had been tortured. Nevertheless, he was sentenced to 2| years' imprisonment by a military court in March 1976.
One of the most interesting developments in 1975-76 has been the number of documents issued by political prisoners themselves. The most detailed is the "Sao Paulo" document, which was sent to the President of the Brazilian Bar Association in November 1975. In it, 35 prisoners recount the physical and psychological coercion used to force them to sign incriminating "confessions" prepared by the security agents. They describe their appalling prison conditions - inadequate diet and sanitary facilities, the incidence of torture. Finally they cite some 55 eye-witness accounts of death or mutilation of prisoners under torture.
The motive behind the documents is possibly to give support to the campaign for a general amnesty, which has the backing of members of the church, the legal opposition party and the Brazilian Bar Association. However, the prospects for such an amnesty now look slight. In a speech on 1 August 1975, President Ernesto Geisel said that there could be no "decompression" until the threat of subversion had been overcome. He categorically rejected the possibility of a general amnesty and the abolition of the laws of exception and refused to allow an investigation into disappearances and the activities of the security forces.
Over the past 18 months, AI has received numerous allegations of torture, in many instances substantiated by affidavits or denounced in the Brazilian congress by parliamentarians. Celio Borja, president of the House of Repre sentatives and member of the ARENA party (pro-government) personally] delivered a letter about the torture of the communist Marco Antonio Tavares
91	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
Coelho to the minister coordinator to the Presidency in February 1975. Lysaneas Maciel in his last speech as a deputy on 2 April 1976 accused the government of torturing and killing political prisoners.
Reports received from victims in Recife, Salvador da Bahia, Rio de Janeiro, Sao Paulo, Curitiba in Parana, Florianopolis in Santa Catarina indicate that systematic torture continues to be practised throughout Brazil. During the last year AI intervened urgently on behalf of about 200 potential victims of torture. One of the worst centers for torture is in Sao Paulo at the headquarters of the Second Army, Comando de Operates da Defesa Internal Departamento de Operagoes Internas (CODI/DOI - Command for Internal Defence Operation/Department of International Operations), about which the Brazilian Justice and Peace Commission wrote in October 1975: There is in Sao Paulo a huge torture complex which has at its disposal the most modern and sophisticated equipment, and which requires an increasing number of staff - jailers, drivers, executioners, typists, public relations officers, doctors and others - to run.
Between August 1975 and January 1976, four deaths of prisoners occurred in CODI/DOI, Sao Paulo. After the first death, that of an officer of the Policía Militar (state militia), Lieutenant José Ferreira de Almeida, AI wrote to President Geisel expressing concern about reports that the lieutenant's body bore clear signs of torture and that according to his lawyer, the cell was too low for the prisoner to have hanged himself as stated by an army spokesman.
On 25 October 1975, Vladimir Herzog, a journalist, died in custody hours after he had voluntarily presented himself at CODI/DOI for questioning. The official cause of death was suicide. More than 400 journalists contested the facts about his death, and 30,000 people, in protest, attended a memorial mass celebrated by Cardinal Arns in Sáo Paulo cathedral. Three months later, a metal worker, Manoel Fiel Filho, was found dead in similar circumstances. As a result, President Geisel summarily dismissed General D'Avila Melo from his post as commander of the Second Army and the operations of CODI/DOI were temporarily suspended.
In April/May 1976, AI conducted a campaign on behalf of prisoners in northeast Brazil - the majority of them peasants - who had been given particularly harsh sentences for political crimes during a period of severe repression in 1970. (One man had a double life sentence and 66 years, others had sentences of 72 and 66 years.) Although many of them are not prisoners of conscience, nevertheless, since many of their trials were conducted without a proper legal defence or with other irregularities, AI decided to press the Brazilian government to review their cases and where appropriate grant the right to appeal for a dimunition of their sentence or parole.
In February 1976, AI submitted supplementary evidence regarding violations of human rights in Brazil to the 32nd session of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights. This included a detailed study of the 22 "disappeared" persons who featured on the list that Cardinal Arns, the Archbishop of Sáo Paulo, handed to the government in 1974. AI also provided additional information on the disappearance of trade unionists, student leaders, journalists and lawyers.
One such case is Jaime Miranda, who was arrested by security police in Rio de Janeiro in February 1976: he was not seen again. The president of the Brazilian Bar Association stated: "1 am sure Mr Miranda is imprisoned and being tortured." Later unconfirmed reports allege that Jaime Miranda died as
92
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
a consequence of torture.
In October 1975, AI sent a report to the International Press Institute's conference in Sao Paulo on the torture of journalists and censorship.
In November 1975, AI made an urgent intervention on behalf of Cesar Queiroz Benjamin who had been arrested when he was a minor and held intermittently in adult penal establishments and psychiatric clinics for the past four years. AI acted after a civilian judge who ordered Cesar Benjamin's release informed his family that he could not guarantee Cesar's security, as the death squad had threatened to murder the youth as soon as he left prison. At the last minute, the Supreme Court overruled the judge's decision and Cesar remains in prison.
AI was pleased to learn of the release of Manoel da Conceicao dos Santos, a peasant leader from northeast Brazil, who was badly tortured during different periods of detention between 1968 and December 1975. He has gone into exile.
In the months prior to President Geisel's visit to France and Britain in April and May 1976, AI made various approaches to the Brazilian authorities in an attempt to obtain agreement for a mission which would discuss with ministers and persons in authority the present human rights situation in Brazil. One such approach elicited the following reply from the Brazilian Ambassador to Britain, Roberto de Olveira Campos:
For a government to accept an investigation by a self-appointed foreign body - the impartiality of which has not been the object of independent evaluation of judgement - with respect to the observance of constitutional rights of its own citizens, would be tantamount to admit that its legal institutions, Parliament and Tribunals, are incapable of preserving the Constitution and/or are guilty of violating it. We have confidence in our institutions and are thus unable to defer their responsibilities to any international organization.
Despite this rebuff, AI will continue its attempt to enter into a dialogue with the Brazilian government.
