REPUBLIC OF CHINA (TAIWAN)
In May 1975, Amnesty International sent a mission to the Republic of China (Taiwan) to inquire into a nationwide commutation of prisoners' sentences ordered by Prime Minister Chiang Ching-kuo in memory of his late father, President Chiang Kai-shek. Dr James Seymour, the American professor delegated by AI, had extensive talks with Minister of Justice Wang Jen-yuan and other officials of the Republic of China (ROC) and discussed particular cases and groups of cases of political prisoners in which AI had taken an interest. Dr Seymour was told in particular that, under the commutation, death sentences would be reduced to life imprisonment and lesser sentences would be cut by a third or a half. The proposed amnesty, only the second in Taiwan since 1949, would apply to all prisoners, thus including for the first time
126	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
political prisoners.
Following the mission, AI wrote to Prime Minister Chiang Ching-kuo on 1 July 1975, welcoming the act of clemency and urging the Prime Minister to reconsider a number of restrictions attached to the amnesty. AI noted that the "Statute for Commutation in 1975", which was to become effective on 14 July, specifically excluded certain categories of "criminals". For example, "those who joined the Chinese Communist Party and committed the crimes described in item 1, article 2 of the Statute for the Punishment of Rebellion" should not be granted commutation on the basis of the "current basic anti-communist national policy".
AI subsequently requested details on the procedures by which individual cases were to be assessed for the commutation and recommended full observance of the provisions for individual rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Republic of China Constitution of 1947, which are now under permanent abrogation by martial law in Taiwan.
AI urged that the restriction of article 4 of the statute, which made the commutation conditional, be dropped and recommended that the "right to leave any country" guaranteed by article 13(2) of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights and by article 10 of the ROC constitution under "freedom of residence" be applied to released prisoners. When the law was implemented, it appeared that some of these restrictions were lifted in at least a number of individual cases.
In July, some 7,600 prisoners were released, among whom less than 200 were political prisoners, and a smaller number had their sentence reduced without qualifying for release. In August, AI learned from official sources how the commutation affected some investigation and adoption cases. Of 55 prisoners, 13 were released on 14 July, eight were reported to have been released earlier and 23 had their sentence reduced by one-third. A few other cases remained unclear: four well-known political prisoners in particular seemed to have been excluded from the commutation.
However, on 15 September 1975, these four detainees and four other prisoners appeared in a military court in Taipei for appeal hearings reported to have been initiated by the prosecution. James Seymour again went to Taiwan to observe the trial, which took place in Taipei from 15 to 20 September 1975. Although he was not allowed to attend the trial, which was held in camera, Dr Seymour learned from official and private sources that the eight defendants received reductions in their senter .e. As of September 1975, the remaining term to be served was well under two years for all of them.
This appeal trial was interpreted by many observers as a further sign of the "liberalization" which the government seemed to have initiated with the announcement of the amnesty measure in April 1975. There were reports that talks were going on abroad between ROC officials and representatives of the Taiwanese exile community. In Taiwan itself a monthly magazine, the Taiwan Political Review, which carried articles reflecting an independent political line, was allowed publication in August 1975. There was speculation that further change towards liberalization could culminate with the elections to the Legislative Yuan (Taiwan legislative body) which were to take place at the end of December 1975.
However on 23 October Pai Ya-tsan, a candidate for one of the supplementary seats in the Legislative Yuan elections, was arrested after publishing a
127	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

leaflet as a campaign statement. The leaflet, which consisted of 29 questions addressed to Premier Chiang Ching-kuo with the request that he answered these questions publicly, covered matters of foreign policy as well as internal issues. It urged the Prime Minister, for example, to abolish martial law and to release all political prisoners in Taiwan. Several other people were also arrested in connection with the printing of the leaflet, but were released after questioning during the following weeks.
Reports in February 1976 said that Pai Ya-tsan had been sentenced to life imprisonment in November during a trial held in camera by a military court, and confirmation was received from official sources. AI sent a cable to President Yen Chia-kan, urging him to grant Mr Pai an open retrial with full rights of defence, as had been previously asked in an earlier appeal in December. Mr Pai was sentenced for "plotting to overthrow the government", a charge falling under the Statute for the Punishment of Rebellion. This statute was drawn up in the context of martial law and effectively provides for the suppression of all dissent
Further indications of political tightening were given by the banning from publication of the Taiwan Political Review for a year after the elections for the Legislative Yuan had been held on 20 December 1975, and by several "exemplary" executions of common criminals in January and February 1976.
In September 1975, appeals were sent by AI groups and national sections on behalf of Hsieh Ts'ung-min, a well-known editor adopted by AI, who was reported to need urgent medical attention as a result of torture inflicted on him after he was arrested in 1971. In March 1976, as reports reached AI that he had not yet been granted access to hospital, a further appeal on his behalf was sent by AI to Premier Chiang Ching-kuo. Other prisoners, allegedly tortured during interrogation period and whose health is reported to have seriously deteriorated after several years in prison without proper medical attention, have also been the object of appeals and campaigns in 1975-76.
AI groups with Taiwanese prisoners are currently working on some 80 adoption and investigation cases. Group inquiries often remain unanswered, except in a few cases where the ROC authorities have been responsive or when contact was established with private sources in or outside Taiwan. In spite of the releases which took place during the summer of 1975, it is believed that several hundred political prisoners are still detained in Taiwan. However, estimates of the total number of political detainees vary from 200-300, according to sources close to the government, to several thousands, according to Taiwanese abroad.
