MALAYSIA
Work on Malaysia in 1975 was marked by the taking up of a large number of cases of men detained without trial for long periods in the Batu Gajah Special Detention Camp in the state of Perak, West Malaysia. Two men, one formerly a member of the opposition Labour Party of Malaya, have been held in the Batu Gajah camp since 1964. The average length of detention of the 60 men whose cases have been taken up is 8 to 9 years without trial. In all about 140 men are held in two blocks in the Batu Gajah camp.
Essentially, these cases typify a violation of basic human rights which is of major concern to Amnesty International: extremely long term political detention without trial. The Internal Security Act of 1960, under which the detainees are held, invests the Malaysian government with sweeping powers of arbitrary arrest and detention by executive order.
The detainees in Malaysia as a whole, who number several hundred men and women, are held on the basis of the allegation that they pose a threat to national security. With few exceptions they are alleged by the government to be members or sympathizers of some branch of the illegal and underground Malayan Communist Party (MCP). Among the detainees are members of
141	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

opposition parties, including the Labour Party of Malaya and the Partai Sosialis Rakyat Malaya (the People's Socialist Party of Malaya), students, manual workers and tradespeople.
During 1975 AI groups were active on the cases of 75 political detainees. Four adopted prisoners of conscience, three of them women, were released from detention. Two adopted students, Khoo Ee Liam and Juliet Chin, were released separately in December. One adopted prisoner who remains in detention is Professor Syed Hussein Ali of the Department of Anthropology and Sociology, University of Malaya, who was arrested following student demonstrations against the government in December 1974 and who is detained in the Kamunting camp in Perak state.
In East Malaysia, three candidates of the opposition Social Justice Party, who were detained in the state of Sabah shortly before general elections began in 1974, have now been released. In March 1976, however, AI learned that Mohamed Noor Mansor, secretary general of the Berjaya Party, had been detained for questioning under the Internal Security Act. The Berjaya Party is an important Sabah opposition group which won more than half of all the seats in elections for the state assembly in April 1976. The reported detention is under investigation by AI.
Datuk James Wong, deputy president of the opposition Sarawak National Party (SNAP), who was detained in Sarawak with other SNAP members in October 1974 and subsequently adopted by AI, was released from the Kamunting detentio camp in West Malaysia on 30 January 1976. He has returned to Sarawak, although hie is prevented by a restriction order from resuming any political activities.
On 4 October 1975 the government of Malaysia enacted new regulations governing trials for alleged offences against national security. Entitled the Essential (Security Cases) Regulations, 1975, they introduce special procedures for dealing with cases certified as security cases by the public prosecutor. One article of the new regulations shifts the burden of proof onto the defence, with the effect that defendants in security cases will be presumed guilty until proved innocent. Witnesses will be permitted to give evidence in the absence of both the accused and the defence counsel. Trials in security cases will be held without juries, and judges will be restricted by having their discretionary powers curtailed. Upon conviction, the judges will be obliged to pass maximum sentence, which may include the death penalty.
Since the early months of 1975 there has been a significant escalation of guerrilla violence by the underground Malayan Communist Party in West Malaysia. In this situation, the exact application and practical effects of the new regulations are not yet clear. However, AI is deeply concerned at the possibility that, among others, adopted prisoners of conscience - men and women who are detained without trial for the non-violent expression of their political beliefs - may now be brought to trial under provisions which deny many of the most basic legal principles.
AI has urged that all men and women detained under the Internal Security Act in Malaysia should either be brought to trial with any evidence against them being presented openly and in full accordance with recognized norms to ensure a fair trial, or be released immediately and unconditionally.
142
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
