TANZANIA
During the period 1975-76 Amnesty International groups continued to handle approximately 50 adoption and investigation cases in Tanzania - 18 of them persons imprisoned in mainland Tanzania, and the remainder held on the island of Zanzibar.
The majority of those held on Zanzibar was arrested in April 1972 after the assassination of the Zanzibari president, Sheikh Abeid Karume. They were tried between May 1973 and May 1974, when the trial culminated in a series
79	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

of death sentences and long prison terms. Following the sentencing, the convicted men carried their appeals to the Zanzibar High Court. On 11 November 1975, the High Court upheld the death sentences imposed on 24 of the prisoners (10 of whom were originally sentenced in absentia, since they were held on the mainland of Tanzania). Nineteen others had their sentences reduced to terms of imprisonment. Of those who were sentenced to prison terms at the end of the original trial in May 1974, two had their sentences reduced and five were acquitted - although their actual release has not been confirmed. One man who had originally received the death sentence was also acquitted by the High Court.
On hearing of the results of the appeals, the International Secretariat asked AI groups with prisoners on Zanzibar to appeal to the Zanzibari authorities not to carry out the death sentences. In addition, a major campaign for a commutation of the sentences and a general amnesty for political prisoners on Zanzibar was timed to coincide with the 11th anniversary on 12 January 1976 of the advent to power of the Afro-Shirazi Party (ASP) in Zanzibar. At the time of writing it appears that none of the death sentences have yet been carried out, and that the prisoners are continuing their appeal procedure by having their cases considered by the ruling council of the ASP. Final decision on the cases will lie in the hands of President Aboud Jumbe of Zanzibar.
On mainland Tanzania, parliamentary and presidential elections took place towards the end of October 1975. President Julius Nyerere, who has been Tanzania's head of state since independence, received 91.5% of the votes cast. Following his successful re-election, President Nyerere announced an amnesty on 1 November 1975 which freed 7,308 common criminals and reduced the sentences of a further 3,685. According to news reports, political prisoners were excluded from this act of clemency.
In early November 1975 AI launched a major campaign involving adoption and coordination groups to press for a general amnesty for political prisoners on the Tanzanian mainland on 9 December 1975, the anniversary of the country's independence.
Although several long term AI adoptees were released from mainland prisons during 1975 - including Gray Mattaka, a journalist whose conviction on a treason charge had been quashed by the East African Court of Appeals in 1971, but who had been detained by presidential order even since - an unknown number of persons are still reported to be held under the provisions of Tanzania's Preventive Detention Act, which provides for indefinite detention without trial.
They include refugees from other African states, relatives and associates of former cabinet minister Oscar Kambona, and former Tanzanian minister for economic affairs Abdul Rahman Babu, who was one of those sentenced to death in absentia by the Zanzibar court in May 1974. Mr Babu's health gave cause for concern in late 1975, after he had smuggled out of prison an appeal for assistance.
According to eyewitness accounts reaching the Research Department, conditions at Tanzanian prisons such as Butimba Prison, Mwanza, and Ukcmga Prison, Dar es Salaam, are not good, .and some prison staff reportedly behave brutally towards convict prisoners.
80
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
