RHODESIA
Amnesty International's concern over the deepening political crisis in Rhodesia, and its consequent effect upon human rights, was reflected by the two campaigns in which AI groups participated during the year and by the publication, in March 1976, of a 16-page Amnesty International Briefing on Rhodesial Zimbabwe.
On 11 November 1975, Prime Minister Ian Smith's Rhodesian Front regime celebrated the 10th anniversary of its unilateral declaration of independence from Great Britain (UDI). AI groups appealed to Mr Smith to mark the anniversary by granting a general amnesty for all political prisoners as an indication of his administration's desire to achieve a just and equitable settlement of the constitutional issue. Regrettably, no such amnesty was granted and the numbers of people detained or imprisoned on political grounds have continued to rise since November.
AI groups made new approaches to the illegal Smith regime in April 1976, this time concerning the use of the death penalty in Rhodesia. Reminding the regime that all executions had been carried out in secret since April 1975, AI groups appealed for an immediate end to the use of the death penalty in Rhodesia and a complete revision of the legislation under which it is imposed. In a letter to the British government, which theoretically retains legal responsibility for Rhodesia, AI asked that Queen Elizabeth II should be advised to grant reprieves to all prisoners under sentence of death in Rhodesia.
The use of the death penalty, which may be applied to a wide range of poli-
71	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

tical as well as certain criminal offences, was one aspect of the Rhodesian situation criticized in the AI briefing paper. This report also expressed concern at the holding of political trials and detention review tribunals in camera and condemned the continuing use of torture and the government's refusal to order an inquiry into alleged atrocities committed by Rhodesian security forces. Referring to the Smith government's use of detention without trial and other restrictive measures to repress African political opposition, the briefing paper stated that the number of uncharged political detainees had doubled during 1975 to more than 700.
The briefing paper drew attention also to the forced settlement of large numbers of rural Africans in so-called "protected villages" as part of the Smith government's counter-insurgency policy. Reportedly numbering more than 100,000, the inhabitants of "protected villages" live under conditions of curfew in fenced and fortified encampments which they themselves call "cages". AI has provided relief assistance for people in "protected villages", where health and sanitation conditions are reportedly unsatisfactory. It is also preparing a scheme whereby AI groups will be asked to "adopt" certain tribal trust lands containing "protected villages".
"Protected villages" were created by the Smith government in response to th intensification of guerrilla warfare along the country's northern and easte borders. By moving the rural African population into encampments controlled and regulated by white district commissioners, the authorities intended to deny insurgent guerrillas the cooperation or support of the local people.
•However, despite the implementation of this policy on a vast scale and the creation of curfew zones along almost the entire length of the Mozambique and Botswana borders, guerrilla activity reached very significant proportions in the first months of 1976. In March, Mozambique closed its border with Rhodesia and in April nationalist guerrillas operating from Mozambique temporarily cut the only direct rail route from Rhodesia to South Africa.
The escalation of guerrilla warfare in early 1976 - a sign of growing African disillusionment over the prospects for a peaceful transfer to majority rule -followed repeated attempts by the African National Council (ANC) to negotiate a political settlement with the Smith government. In August 1975, a meeting between ANC leaders and Mr Smith was arranged at Victoria Falls on the initiative of Zambia's President Kenneth Kaunda and South African Premier John Vorster, but no progress was achieved.
Shortly afterwards, the ANC divided into two rival sections - one led from exile by Bishop Abel Muzorewa and the other by the veteran politician and former political prisoner Joshua Nkomo. The Muzorewa section broke off all negotiations with the illegal regime following the Victoria Falls conference, but Mr Nkomo's wing of the ANC entered into further, protracted discussions with Mr Smith in October 1975. In March 1976, however, Mr Nkomo also broke off negotiations when no meaningful progress had been achieved. His one success had been to obtain the release of several long term political detainees, including John Chirisa and Reverend Canaan Banana (both AI adoptees), in January 1976.
During the course of the Smith-Nkomo negotiations, in January 1976, the Rhodesian Prime Minister announced several significant ministerial changes in his cabinet. These involved the transfer of Senator Desmond Lardner-Burke from the Ministry of Justice, Law and Order, where he had been since UDI, and the appointment in his place of Hilary Squires. Hopes that the change of
72
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
minister might inaugurate a "liberalization" of government policy in the human rights field were dispelled by Mr Squires' eariv ministerial pronouncements.
While still Minister of Justice, Law. and Order, Senator Lardner-Burke was responsible in September 1975 for the enactment of legislation effectively indemnifying members of the Rhodesian security forces for all actions undertaken while on active service in the guerrilla war zone since December 1972, In fact, the Indemnity and Compensation Act was introduced following the commencement of several actions for damages brought in the Rhodesian High Court by individuals alleged to have been tortured by the security forces. Under the terms of the act, the minister was also given authority to waive all such actions before the High Court - an authority which he exercised immediately to terminate the outstanding law suits. These included an action pending against Chief Jeremiah Chirau, one of four African chiefs appointed to Mr Smith's cabinet in April 1976. The minister had earlier rejected appeals for an official inquiry into the torture allegations.
In February 1976, another court action against the Ministry for Law and Order was initiated by the relatives of Dr Edson Sithole, the information secretary of the Muzorewa wing of the ANC. Dr Sithole, a former long term political detainee and AI adoptee, was abducted together with his secretary, Miriam Mhlanga, outside a Salisbury hotel on 15 October 1975. His relatives and a private detective investigating the case allege that Dr Sithole's still unexplained disappearance is a result of Rhodesian security police action. However, Solicitor General Charles Waddington denied government responsibility during a High Court hearing on 5 February. Nevertheless, the government subsequently dropped a court action for defamation against the editors of Property and Finance, a rightwing journal which had also alleged security police participation in the abduction.
AI groups were working on the cases of 300 adopted prisoners at the end of April 1976. Throughout the year, AI groups provided substantial relief assistance through the Bulawayo-based Christian Care organization to prisoners, former prisoners and their families. AI also made sizeable grants to various relief and rehabilitation projects in the country.
