NAMIBIA
The political situation in Namibia became increasingly tense in the last months of 1975. This was due to South African military action in Angola, Namibia's northern neighbour, and to the intensification of nationalist guerrilla activity. On 16 August 1975, Chief Filemon Elifas, the Chief Minister of the Ovamboland tribal area or "bantustan", was assassinated near his home at Ondangua. Sporadic guerrilla attacks were subsequently reported at Groot-fontein and Okahandja and in Ovamboland.
Following the death of Chief Elifas, who was perhaps the foremost supporter of the South African administration in Namibia, security police detained many members of the South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO) and the Namibia National Convention (NNC), the two political organizations most critical of continued South African rule. More than 50 SWAPO and NNC supporters were detained in Ovamboland alone, while others were reported arrested in Windhoek. The National Chairman of SWAPO, David Meroro, who had been detained for six months in 1974 under the Terrorism Act, narrowly escaped arrest and sought asylum in Botswana.
In late November 1975, after three months in detention, six SWAPO supporters were charged under the Terrorism Act. None of the defendants - three men and three women - was charged with direct participation in the murder of Chief Elifas although the three men were all accused of providing indirect assistance to the assassins.
The trial began at Swakopmund in February 1976 and was concluded on 12 May. Two of the defendants were acquitted, two others were convicted and
68
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
sentenced to terms of 5 and 7 years' imprisonment, and two men, Hendrik Shikongo and Aaron Mushimba, were sentenced to death.
Following the imposition of death sentences on Mr Shikongo and Mr Mushimba, A1 cabled an immediate protest u> South African Prime Minister John Vorster. A1 also appealed to United Nations Secretary General Kurt Waldheim and UN Commissioner for Namibia Sean MacBride to intervene personally to prevent the executions being carried out.
Reports at the end of May said that confidential documents relating to the defence of the SWAPO supporters had been leaked to the security police by certain individuals employed by the defence attorneys. An official complaint was subsequently made to the Supreme Court by lawyers representing the SWAPO defendants. It is expected that the Chief Justice of South Africa may now order a re-trial.
During the course - of the Swakopmund trial, several defendants and state witnesses alleged that they had been subjected to torture while detained incommunicado by the security police. Two detainees called as state witnesses, Victor Nkandi and Axel Johannes, each alleged that they had been severely beaten. They said they had made statements to the security police only under extreme duress. After detailing their treatment both men refused to testify for the state. They were then each sentenced to one year's imprisonment for contempt of court.
Further information concerning the use of torture by the South African security police in Namibia was revealed by David Meroro after his escape to Botswana, and by Reuben Hauwanga, a SWAPO official who left the country in January 1976 after more than 3 months in detention. According to these reports, methods of torture included severe beatings and hanging by the ankles for prolonged periods.
Dr Otto Triffterer, Professor of International Criminal Law at Giessen University in the Federal Republic of Germany, visited Namibia in March 1976 in order to observe the Swakopmund trial proceedings on behalf of AI. Professor Triffterer also discussed the situation of other uncharged detainees with political leaders in Namibia.
Further arrests of SWAPO supporters took place in May 1976 when 20 people were reported detained in the Windhoek area. Ten of them appeared in court on 18 May on charges under the Terrorism Act. They were all remanded in custody until 25 June 1976.
The South African authorities also announced new security measures in May 1976. Under emergency regulations issued by proclamation on 19 May, the authorities were given powers of arbitrary detention without charge in the Ovamboland, Kavango and Eastern Caprivi region. They were also empowered to prohibit or disperse meetings and to create a depopulated zone along the entire Namibia-Angola border, a distance of more than 1,600 kilo metres.
In January 1976, Deputy Secretary General Hans Ehrenstrale attended the Dakar international conference on Namibia and Human Rights, organized by the Strasbourg-based International Institute of Human Rights. AI's International Secretariat prepared an annotated list of Namibian political prisoners for the conference participants.
69	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

