URUGUAY
Despite persistent and extensive violations of human rights in Uruguay, the country attracted little international attention until the end of 1975. The fact that the military takeover was gradual (a civilian president has been maintained) obscured the progressive erosion of civil liberties.
Since the dissolution of Congress on 27 June 1973, there has been a severe restriction on any form of organized opposition to the regime. All left-of-center parties were banned and all political activity and press freedom were severely curtailed. All public servants, including teachers, had to take the "oath of democratic faith", to demonstrate that they have never belonged to any of the organizations now banned by the government, or to any organization which has attacked the existing system of government.
In such a situation, the numbers of detained peaceful dissenters have increased dramatically. Up to 1973, the majority of political prisoners were members of (or were accused of being connected with) the Movimiento de Liberación Nacional (MLN - National Liberation Movement) Tupamaros urban guerrilla organization. However, since then, their proportional number in the total of political prisoners has sharply decreased, and the majority nowadays belong to non-violent political factions, including the right-of-center, traditional Nacional-Blanco (White) and Colorado (Red) parties, the Christian Democrats, Socialists, populists and various leftwing organizations, notably the Communist Party. The Communist Party (banned December 1973) has recently become the
113	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
principal target of repression. After initially arresting only the leaders the security forces intensified persecution to include the cadres, which were particularly hit by the wave of arrests that took place at the end of October and during November 1975. Between 400 and 650 people were arrested mainly in Montevideo. Following government allegations of communist preparations for armed insurrection, some 300 further arrests took place in late January and February 1976, throughout the country. Re-arrested in January 1976 was General Liber Seregni, the populist presidential candidate of the Frente Amplio in the last elections (1971).
The total number of political prisoners has been estimated at between 3,000 (Newsweek, 2 June 1975) and 6,000 (exile sources: Punto, Caracas November 1975). Amnesty International assesses the present number at approximately 5,000. In December 1975, it could be said that one in every 500 citizens was in political detention, and an average of one in every 50 citizens has suffered interrogation or short-term detention in recent years. Uruguay therefore has the highest per capita ratio of political prisoners in Latin America.
The number of cases under adoption or investigation by AI has almost tripled since April 1975 and now stands at 174. Relief sent to prisoners' families has also increased. However, the alarming increase in human rights violation in Uruguay required a major organization effort over and above normal adoption work, and a worldwide campaign against torture in Uruguay was launched on 20 February 1976 (for details see Campaign for the Abolition of Torture section). Extensive documentation and background material were prepared for this campaign, which involved the participation not only of all levels of Al's membership, but also of numerous other international nongovernmental organizations and interested individuals. News releases were issued in the course of the campaign and these received extensive coverage throughout the world.
On 19 February, Uruguayan Foreign Minister Juan Carlos Blanco, denounced the campaign at a major news conference. This was followed by a series of editorials and leading articles in the government-controlled Uruguayan media accusing AI of being an "instrument" of international communism. The articles presented a distorted picture of AI.
Rapidly escalating repression, plus the postponement of national elections, stimulated a wider dissent, not only among the small civilian sector of the ruling élite, but also among the military. Reports in April 1976 said that approximately 100 officers had been arrested.
Information received by AI indicates that the use of torture has become routine in nearly all cases of political imprisonment. Furthermore, this quantise intensification has been accompanied by increasingly brutal methods, leading to a high number of deaths as a consequence of torture. AI printed a list of 22 people who had died under torture between May 1972 and November 1975, and this was distributed widely in the course of the campaign. However, by June 1976, nine additional cases were reported.
Number 20 on this list was Alvaro Balbi, a 32-year-old student of medicine and amateur musician who was married with four children and whose wife was again pregnant. He was arrested with others at a meeting to discuss a housing cooperative on 29 July 1975 and was dead a few hours later. The official explanation that his death was the result of an attack of asthma (the first he had ever suffered) was unconvincing in view of the clear evidence of
H4	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 1975-1976
torture: fractures, ruptured liver, burns and multiple bruises. There were indications that he died under the "submarine" method of torture (semi-asphyxiation by immersion in a tank of water). A formal denunciation presented by his father, Selmar Balbi (a prominent teacher and trade union leader) was ignored by the judiciary. However, the father's open letter to President Juan Maria Bordaberry, seeking justice, was translated into several languages and widely circulated by AI.
As the use of torture has become so generalized, CAT appeals have been issued at an average rate of one every month between April 1975 and the beginning of the campaign in February 1976, and many have been for large categories of detainees, sometimes grouped by profession (dock-workers, doctors, etc). Included in these urgent actions (and subsequently adopted) was the eminent Uruguayan mathematician, former parliamentarian and Communist Party leader José Luis Massera, arrested on 22 October 1975 and tortured.
Prior to the campaign, in a letter to President Bordaberry dated 8 December 1975, AI suggested that an independent investigative commission be allowed into Uruguay to discuss allegations of torture. No response has yet been received, although this initiative has been supported by a petition signed by 350,000 people, from countries all over the world calling upon the Uruguay government to allow an independent investigation.
The impact of the campaign has undoubtedly been considerable, and its effects are now reaching governmental circles in several countries. Members of European, South and North American legislatures have noted the situation of human rights in Uruguay with growing concern.
To date, few of the cases taken up by AI have been released, and release is often followed by re-arrest. More alarmingly, in recent months, those accused of membership of an illegal organization - in some cases, even prior to proscription - are being charged with "subversive association" and given maximum sentences (6-18 years).
Lately, Uruguayan political refugees in Argentina have been brutally harassed. Four Uruguayans, including two prominent parliamentarians, Senator Zelmar Michelini and the former speaker of the Chamber of Deputies, Hector Gutierrez Ruiz, were abducted in Buenos Aires in May 1976 and found assassinated two days later. Furthermore, more than 11 bodies have been found badly mutilated in the River Plate. It is feared that certain "hard line" sectors of the Uruguayan regime have been connected with these murders (see section on Argentina).	\
