KENYA
During the middle and latter part of 1975, Kenya experienced a political crisis which began with a lethal bomb explosion in a Nairobi bus park on 1 March. This was followed several days later by the discovery of the murdered body of J. M. Kariuki, a prominent politician renowned for his outspoken opposition to the ruling group surrounding President Jomo Kenyatta. A parliamentary committee of inquiry into the murder produced in lune 1975 a report which appeared to implicate senior security officers in the killing of Mr Kariuki. Critics of President Kenyatta's rule became more vocal during the middle of 1975. Student riots occurred in Nairobi, the capital, and a parliamentary select committee was appointed to look into the question of corruption in government.
By September 1975, however, President Kenyatta began once more to take the initiative against his detractors. Following a speech in parliament in which he had accused the government by implication of "killing KANU" (the Kenya African National Union, Kenya's only lawful political party), Martin Shikuku,
63	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

a member of parliament, was arrested and detained, along with the deputy speaker of the Kenyan parliament, John Marie Seroney, who had refused to overrule Mr Shikuku's statement. Both men were detained under the Preservation of Public Security Regulations, which permit indefinite detention without trial.
Other members of parliament who had been critical of President Kenyatta also found themselves brought before the courts. One such case was that of Philomena Chelagat Mutai, a young parliamentarian who was arrested on 23 January 1976 and charged with incitement to violence on the basis of a speech she allegedly made at a meeting on 12 September 1975. Miss Mutai denied having incited violence, and Mr Seroney, with whom she had been closely associated in Kenyan politics, was brought from detention temporarily to appear as a defence witness on her behalf. She was, however, found guilty and sentenced to 2\ years' imprisonment. She is appealing against this sentence and has meanwhile been taken up by Amnesty International as an investigation case. Both Mr Shikuku and Mr Seroney have been adopted.
One long term AI adoptee, Ramogi Achieng Oneko, a former member of the banned Kenya People's Union (KPU) who had been in detention without trial since 1969, was released in October 1975. Another former KPU-supporter, Wasonga Sijeyo, remains in prison and is adopted by AI.
In a further amnesty measure, on 11 December 1975, President Kenyatta released 10,000 prisoners - apparently mostly common criminals - to mark the 12th anniversary of Kenya's independence. By the beginning of February 1976, however, 285 of them had been reconvicted of petty crimes.
During 1975 the death sentence was reintroduced in Kenya for armed robbery, and in November 1975 the first execution of a convicted robber took place - believed to be the first time the death penalty had been actually carried out on convicted robbers since Kenya's independence.
AI groups handled three adoption cases and one investigation case from Kenya in the year 1975/76.
