PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
In July 1975, the Research Department presented a program of research and diplomatic initiatives to the International Executive Committee, based on existing information in Amnesty International's files on specific features of political imprisonment in the People's Republic of China. AI has now designed a number of non-public initiatives and also a research project to determine the institutional structure of imprisonment in China. As a result of these research initiatives, more information has become available during the last 12 months on "reform-through-labour" and the legal system, revealing some of the features described below.
In January 1975, the Fourth National Congress of the People's Republic of China, meeting for the first time since 1964, adopted a new constitution which replaced the constitution of 1954. Chapter 3 of the new constitution is devoted to the "Fundamental Rights and Duties of the Citizens", of which the basic principles are defined in articles 26: "The fundamental rights and duties of citizens are to support the leadership of the Communist Party of China, support the socialist system and abide by the constitution and the laws of the People's Republic of China". However, article 28 of the new constitution, which deals with fundamental rights such as "freedom of speech, correspondence, the press, assembly . . . freedom to believe in religion . . ." etc, added
124
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
the "freedom to strike" to the rights previously guaranteed by the old constitution. It also states that "the citizens' freedom of person and their home shall be inviolable. No citizen may be arrested except by decision of a people's court or with the sanction of a public security organ."
However, specialists have noted that in the last 10 years procedures for arrest and trial have increasiingly been applied without any clear reference to statutory law. In an interview with Peter Griffiths, Peking correspondent of the British news agency Reuter, the deputy director of Tientsin People's High Court, Hai Shuang-lu, defined the four grades of court that exist at national, provincial, district and county level. Mr Hai then explained that each grade of court has a director and deputy director, and under them a chief judge, deputy chief judge and other judges. The directors are appointed by the corresponding level of the National People's Congress (the Chinese national assembly) and the judges by the "revolutionary committees of the corresponding level".
The interview, which took place in Tientsin in August 1975, and was attended by several senior members of the Tientsin judiciary, showed that some discrepancy may exist between the descriptions given in various provinces of the structure of the court system itself. According to members of the Kwang-tung Institute of Law and Political Science, interviewed in May 1974, by Gerd Ruge, Peking correspondent of the West German newspaper Die Welt (see Annual Report 1974-75), the role of defence lawyers has naturally disappeared as people have access to published laws and regulations and "have the right to defend themselves in court". The Tientsin legal officials, however, stated that lawyers exist in China. "They have legal training, but do an ordinary factory or office job until asked to defend an accused person". Mr Hai added that prisoners usually prefer to defend themselves or to be represented by relatives and friends. "If they insist on an attorney, one is appointed by the court, free of charge".
Another important aspect of the legal system in China is the participation of the ."masses" (generally ordinary people who belong to the same unit as the defendant) in some forms of "public trials" during which, Mr Hai said, judges "arrive at the right decision after extracting the opinions of the broad masses". According to the interview, he later stated that in major "counter-revolutionary and criminal cases", going to the masses is not just a question of listening to their opinion, but of "mobilizing the population and organizing mass rallies to criticize the crime and publicly decide the punishment".
The interview confirmed what had already been described by other sources as the policy generally adopted by the authorities in cases involving the death penalty. When a convicted criminal "deserving death" has not aroused the "great indignation" of the masses, his execution may be suspended for a number of months or years. In this case he will be sent to a labour camp where, depending on his behaviour, his sentence may be commuted to life imprisonment or a fixed jail term. The category of crimes falling under those arising the "great anger of the masses", thus liable to the death penalty, has never been clearly defined, partly because the penalty seems rather to depend on the circumstances of the case and on the background of the accused.
One of the rare accounts of a visit to a Chinese prison after the cultural revolution was given by Ingemar Lindmarker in the Swedish newspaper Svenska Dagbladet, after he was permitted along with other foreign journalists
125	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

to visit a prison in Shenyang (Liaoning province) in 1972. Members of the prison administration classified the prison's 2,000 prisoners into non-political cases and "counter-revolutionary" cases. The latter category was further divided into "historical counter-revolutionaries" (people who worked for the former Kuomintang régime, for the wartime Japanese occupation forces, or other foreign agents before 1949), and "modern counter-revolutionaries". These are "people who are still affected by bourgeoisie ideas, dreaming of reestablishing capitalism and overthrowing the socialist system".
As appears to be the rule in all prisons and labour camps in China, a strong emphasis is given to the "reform" of prisoners, who daily spend one or two hours of study in their cells. Ingemar Lindmarker reported that torture is forbidden. In the Shenyang prison, the most severe punishment, that followed an attempt to flee, consisted of a fortnight in solitary confinement with "hand-shackles". The prison administration admitted to the visitors that "opposition" existed among the prisoners, taking for instance the form of "sabotage against production by destroying machines".
In serious cases, the prison administration may present a demand to the judicial authority to increase the sentence. On the other hand "good behaviour" may result in a reduction of sentence. This follows a directive from Chairman Mao Tse-tung, which says: "Mildness will meet all who confess their crimes, but severe punishment for those who refuse to confess and who continue to commit crimes."
On 5 April 1976 supporters of late Premier Chou En-lai gathered in Peking's Tian An Men Square in a demonstration in memory of the prime minister. Funeral wreaths and poems with political overtones were put on the Monument to the People's Heroes. During the demonstrations clashes seem to have occurred between militiamen and some demonstrators. Later the New China News Agency reported that a group of people had been arrested. The report, dated 7 April 1976, said that "active criminals and major suspects" were detained, some of whom "hurriedly handed over their daggers, knives and notebooks on which they had copied the reactionary poems".
On 17 May 1976, AI wrote to Prime Minister Hua Guo-feng to inquire about these arrests. AI noted that according to the news agency some of the people arrested may have used violence against militiamen or police guards who were present in Tian An Men Square. But A1 expressed its concern that people who merely posted poems on the Monument to the People's Heroes and were nonviolent demonstrators may have been arrested as well.
