NIGER
Former President Hamani Diori, overthrown by a coup in April 1974, remains in detention without trial. He is reportedly held under relatively good conditions at the military camp at Zinder, on the edge of the Sahara Desert. Several other supporters of the Diori government remain in detention or restriction throughout Niger, although five former ministers were released on 3 August 1975 to mark the 15th anniversary of the country's independence.
On 2 August 1975 President Seyni Kountche announced the arrest of his deputy, Major Sani Souna Sido, and two other persons, for alleged involvement in an abortive plot. The others arrested were Maitourare Badjo, former secretary to the cabinet under the Diori government, and Djibo Bakary, leader of the Sawaba party, a leftwing organization which had been banned under the Diori regime.
Mr Bakary had returned from exile to Niger in September 1974, on condition that he not involve himself in political affairs. Although at the time of his arrest the Niger authorities announced that Sawaba supporters would not be persecuted, further arrests were made in October 1975 after Sawaba members allegedly held a private meeting to discuss how best to express to the government their concern at the detention of Mr Bakary. The prisoners, who have not yet been tried, are reportedly held at Bilma, Agades, N'Guigmi, and Tillabery. Eighteen Sawaba prisoners, including Mr Bakary, have been taken up by Amnesty International as investigation cases.
An attempt on 14 March 1976 to overthrow President Kountche's government by force failed, and the authorities announced that the coup's alleged leaders - Major Moussa Bayere, Captain Sidi Mohamed and Ahmed Moudour, the secretary general of the Niger National Union of Workers' - had been arrested. In subsequent trials nine persons were sentenced to death for their alleged involvement in the coup.
On 13 April 1976 AI expressed concern at these sentences to President Kountche and called for their commutation. On 21 April, however, seven persons, including the three leaders, were executed.
