ANGOLA
Amnesty International's activities in Angola were necessarily limited in 1975-76 by the outbreak of a bitter civil war between three rival nationalist movements in the months immediately preceding the country's assumption of independence on 11 November 1975. The International Secretariat collected data concerning imprisonment and torture and intervened in those instances where sufficient documentation was available.
In November 1975, AI appealed to MPLA Minister of Justice Diogenes Boavida to free two foreign journalists who had been detained. Both men were subsequently released.
Following sporadic fighting between supporters of the rival groups, the Popular Movement for the Independence of Angola (MPLA), the National Front for the Liberation of Angola (FNLA) and the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA), the leaders of the three movements met at Nakuru, Kenya, on 21 June 1975. They agreed to work together for national unity and closer understanding, to free all prisoners taken in the fighting and to guarantee to each other the right to political activity anywhere in the country. However, they were unable to implement the agreement and the transitional government formed from representatives of the three movements finally disintegrated in August 1975.
Further clashes between the rival movements led to the outbreak of a full scale civil war in the last months of 1975 and to the intervention of South African and Cuban armed forces. In the north, the military defeat of the FNLA was accomplished by MPLA forces before the end of January 1976, and in the south, UNITA resistance to the MPLA advance ended the following month.
During the war, the MPLA forces captured 13 foreign mercenaries employed by the FNLA and seven South African soldiers. At the time of writing, preparations were being made for both groups of prisoners to be tried by a People's Revolutionary Tribunal in Luanda. According to reports, the mercenaries could face a possible death sentence.
In April 1976, divisions within the MPLA led to the arrest of more than 100 supporters of the Active Revolt, an opposition faction within the MPLA, and the Angola Communist Organization, reportedly a pro-Maoist group. The detainees included Father Joaquim Pinto de Andrade and Gentil Viana, both founding members of the MPLA and longtime political associates of Angolan President Agostinho Neto Both men were imprisoned in Portugal with Dr Neto in the early 1960s.
