VENEZUELA
Venezuela took measures towards improving human rights both domestically and on the international level during the past year. The Venezuelan delegation played an outstanding role in supporting United Nations resolution 3452 (XXX) concerning the protection of all persons against torture and other forms of ill-treatment, which was'adopted by the General Assembly on 9 December 1975.
In recent years Amnesty International has received many allegations of severe torture in Venezuela. These allegations referred specifically to interrogation methods of the DISIP (División de Inteligencia Policial - Police Intel-legence Division), the PTJ (Policía Técnica Judicial - Technical Judicial Police) and the DIM (División de Inteligencia Militar - Division of Military Intelli-
115	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

gence). However in 1975 there were signs of a positive change in the domestic situation. Judicial authorities, for example, intervened on several occasions to order the investigation and, in some instances, the arrest of members of security forces implicated in the practice of torture.
In September 1975 three agents of the DIM, Rafael Emigdio Pacheco, Jesús Garcia, and Antonio Guedez Pérez were tried and sentenced for murdering a leftwing lawyer after his arrest and interrogation under torture. President Carlos Andres Pérez congratulated the judge after he sentenced the men to long prison terms. Each of these intelligence agents had been named in the numerous detailed testimonies by prisoners now in military custody that have been received by AI.
On 21 April 1976 AI wrote to Attorney General José Ramón Medina requesting his intervention in a number of cases of alleged torture reported by prisoners held at La Pica Prison in the State of Monagas. According to their statements, at least four of the prisoners - Tomas Manuel Pérez Marcano, Efraín Antonio Medina Romero, Luis Javier Rodriguez and Evaristo Figueroa - were subjected to severe beatings and electric shocks by agents of the DISIP as recently as September and October 1975.
All other testimonies from prisoners held in La Pica, as well as in the military prison Cuartel San Carlos, referred to torture suffered before 1975 while they were in the custody of the PTJ, the DIM, and the DISIP, and in the notorious "theatres of operations" (teatros opcracionales). These were military camps established in isolated rural areas during the late 1960s as centers for counter-insurgency operations.
Attorney General Medina himself had previously intervened in the case of Jesús Emilio Valderrama, a 22-year-old student who was allegedly abducted by DIM agents on 23 January 1976 and severely tortured: Although local authorities denied the allegations, Dr Medina ordered a full investigation into the case.
Although no cases of individual prisoners were taken up by AI in the past year, increased research focused on prisoners held in military prisons under the military court system. On 22 December 1975 AI cabled President Pérez to express the organization's recognition of Venezuela's positive measures in support of human rights. But the cable drew attention to the many prisoners held under military justice who had been imprisoned for long periods without trial. The secretary general of the Presidency, Efraín Schacht Aristeguieta, cabled AI to report that President Pérez had communicated the contents of AI's cable to the Minister of Defence for his information and consideration.
On 6 January 1976 major Venezuelan newspapers ran an official government advertisement entitled "In Venezuela there are no Political Prisoners", listing 57 prisoners and the crimes for which they are allegedly responsible. The advertisement said that all were being tried for crimes against life and property. It should be noted, however, that all are being held under military justice. All but three, DIM agents Rafael Emigdio Pacheo, Jesús García and Antonio Guedez, are accused of varying degrees of responsibility in military rebellion. All are civilians.
AI information on 50 of the 57 prisoners adds a further dimension to government information. Disregarding the three police agents listed, it was found that only seven of the remaining prisoners known to AI had been tried and sentenced. Forty had been held for more than one year with no progress in their trial beyond the initial formal declaration of the prisoner before the
116	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 1975-1976
court. Formal charges had not been brought in their cases. Twenty of the 40 had been imprisoned for over 2 years. Ten had been imprisoned more than 4 years without trial. The majority of the prisoners known to AI said they had been severely tortured immediately after arrest.
Amnesty International is currently studying the cases of 83 prisoners held in military custody under martial law.
