SUDAN
On 30 July eight Sudanese soldiers were executed by a firing squad in southern Sudan after being found guilty of mutiny in connection with a violent incident at the garrison of Akobo, on the Ethiopian border, the previous March. At the same trial, 48 soldiers were sentenced to prison terms ranging from one to 15 years.
An unsuccessful attempt to overthrow the government of President Jaafar el-Nimeiry on 5 September 1975 resulted in widespread arrests, both of civilians and military personnel. During the early hours of the revolt, which the Sudanese authorities attributed to elements of dissolved political parties, the rebel forces managed to free 51 detainees from Kober Prison in the northern part of the capital, Khartoum - the main prison used to house detainees held under the
78	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
provisions of the National Security Law promulgated in June 1973. Most of these released prisoners were recaptured within a few days. In addition, 185 persons, mostly military personnel, were arrested by 13 September for their alleged involvement in the coup attempt.
Immediately after the suppression of the coup, special state security courts were established to try those believed responsible. On 16 September 1975 the Sudanese People's Assembly approved retroactive constitutional amendments conferring wider legislative and executive powers on the president, and giving the legislature increased power to determine the circumstances under which persons might be placed under preventive detention or house arrest. This development was seen as a means of strengthening the government's emergency powers in the light of the 5 September coup attempt.
On 25 November 1975 military tribunals began hearing the cases of officers and men accused of having participated in the attempted coup. By the end of February 1976, 20 alleged participants had been sentenced to prison terms ranging from 6 months to 12 years. Sixteen persons had been executed and 18 persons had been acquitted. At the end of April 1975, the number of untried detainees was still estimated at several hundred.
In November 1975 Amnesty International's International Executive Com mittee approved a high-level mission to Sudan in conjunction with a similar mission to Ethiopia and Somalia. Preparations for the mission were underway at the time of writing.
