REPUBLIC OF KOREA
The past year has seen a progressive broadening of political repression in the Republic of Korea (South Korea), with a consequent proliferation of violations of basic human rights. Largely invoking a threat of invasion and subversion from North Korea, the administration of President Park Chung-hee has taken steps to suppress dissident activity in all quarters. Leaders of opposition parties, church leaders, lawyers and university teachers, journalists, students and others have been subjected to arbitrary arrest, detention and harassment. Prominent dissidents have been brought to trial on charges unsupported by evidence.
Since the summer of 1975, several hundred students reportedly have been arrested under Emergency Regulation number 9. Promulgated on 13 May 1975, this is the most recent in a series of presidential enactments designed to outlaw all forms of criticism of the revised 1972 constitution whch allows President Park to hold office for life. Ten thousand people are officially admitted to be kept under surveillance under the provisions of the 1975 Public Security Law. In March 1976, 18 of South Korea's most respected political and religious figures were indicted under Emergency Regulation number 9 in connection with a declaration calling for the restoration of democratic freedoms.
As noted in the report of the Amnesty International mission which visited South Korea in the spring of 1975, torture is frequently used by law-enforce-ment agencies, both in an attempt to extract false confessions and as a means of intimidation.
Over the past year AI groups have worked for the release of 40 prisoners of conscience in South Korea. Although the Roman Catholic bishop of Wonju City, Monsignor Daniel Tji Hak-son, an adopted prisoner, was released from prison in 1975, AI took up the cases of a number of other religious leaders. These included four prominent Korean Protestant pastors who were given prison sentences on 6 September 1975. Reverend Park Hyung-kyu was sentenced to 10 months' imprisonment, Reverend Kim Kwan-sok (secretary general of the Korean National Council of Churches) and Reverend Cho Seun-hyuk were given 6 months each, and Reverend Kwon Ho-kyung was sentenced to 8 months.
The case against the pastors related to the alleged "misuse of church funds" in helping the families of political prisoners. A representative of the West German donor organization "Bread for the World" testified in court that the organization considered the funds were properly used. The pastors had all been released by January 1976, although on 23 December 1975 the Court of Appeals added 2 months to the sentence passed on Cho Seun-hyuk by the
139	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

lower court in September.
On 11 September 1975 Hahn Seung-hun, a leading human rights lawyer and a board member of AI's South Korean Section, was found guilty of violating the Anti-Communist Law. The charges against Hahn Seung-hun concerned a collection of essays published in 1972 in which he lamented the execution of a former colleague as an alleged spy. He was sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment with 18 months' suspension of civil rights to follow. On hearing of the sentence AI's International Council meeting in St Gallen, Switzerland, sent a cable of protest to President Park. On 18 December 1975 Hahn Seung-hun was released from prison after the sentence had been suspended for 3 years by the Seoul High Court. His case is still before the Supreme Court.
On 31 December 1975 two former journalists of the Dong-A llbo newspaper were given heavy prison sentences upon being found guilty of violating Emergency Regulation number 9, the Anti-Communist Law and the National Security Law, Lee Bu-yong was sentenced to 8 years' imprisonment with 8 years' suspension of civil rights to follow. Song Yu Bo was sentenced to 4 years' imprisonment with 4 years' suspension of civil rights. On 3 May 1976 these sentences were reduced by the Seoul Appellate Court. Both men, who are adopted by AI, were prominent members of a movement aimed at opposing the many restrictions placed on the freedom of the press by the South Korean government.
The trial of the poet and writer Kim Chi Ha, who was first adopted as a prisoner of conscience in 1972, resumed in March 1976 but was then adjourned. Kim Chi Ha was rearrested on 14 March 1975 (only a short time after being released from prison) and charged with violations of the Anti-Communist Law after he had published an article describing the torture of fellow-prisoners. A trial began in May, but it was postponed and the period of pretrial detention allowed under law expired in September without the trial having resumed.
A military court reinstated Kim Chi Ha's earlier life sentence, which had been suspended, as a means of keeping him in prison. Kim Chi Ha, who suffers from tuberculosis, may face a death sentence if convicted. Proceedings were due to resume on 18 May 1976, and at the time of writing AI is organizing extensive campaigns in many countries to try to ensure that Kim Chi Ha is given a prompt and fair trial.
On 10 March 1976 AI cabled President Park to protest against the arrest and interrogation of more than 20 prominent men and women in connection with a declaration calling for the restoration of democratic rights in South Korea. Eighteen of these highly respected citizens have been indicted under Emergency Regulation number 9 on charges of agitating to overthrow the government. At the time of writing, 11 of the indicted dissidents are under detention. The 11 include Kim Dae Jung, the former opposition presidential candidate, who is seriously ill; four Presbyterian ministers, including Moon Ik Kwan and his brother Steven Moon; three Roman Catholic priests, including Hahm Se Woong; and three university professors, including the well-known theologian Ahn Byung Moo.
The other seven indicted dissidents are not detained at present. They include former President Yun Po Sun, the distinguished Quaker leader Hahm Suk Hon, known as the "Gandhi of South Korea", former foreign minister Chung II Hyung and his wife Dr Lee Tai Young (South Korea's first woman lawyer),
140
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
and Professor Miss Lee Oo Chung, president of the Korean Church Women United.
The declaration, which was read out by Miss Lee Oo Chung at a meeting of 700 people in Seoul Cathedral on 1 March, called for the lifting of the presidential ban on opposition to the present political system, the release of political prisoners, and restoration of democratic freedom, independence of the judiciary and freedom of the press. A1 has adopted these leading dissidents as prisoners of conscience.
