SYRIA
A feature of Amnesty International's work in Syria this year has been the increase in general information on political imprisonment, prison conditions, treatment of prisoners and detention procedures, and in specific information received on individual political detainees.
It is still difficult however to give an accurate estimate of the numbers of people currently detained for political reasons. This is due to the insufficiency of reliable information and the powers of arrest and indefinite detention by
196	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
the security forces, which makes it probable that many cases never come to light. However, sources considered reliable by AI have put the figure at some 600, and the Research Department has the names of 323 at the time this report is being written. AI was investigating fresh reports in May 1976 of further wide scale arrests caused by internal opposition to Syria's involvement in the Lebanese civil war.
Of the prisoners known to AI, 286 have not as yet been brought to trial, although many have been detained for up to five years. Detention without trial for indefinite periods of time and without legal access has continued to be the predominant feature of the human rights situation in Syria over the past 12 months. This problem has been raised by AI Secretary General Martin Ennals with Adnan Omran, the Syrian ambassador in London, both in person on 23 July 1975 and subsequently in a letter of 20 August. The letter included a list of names of the 89 untried political prisoners known to AI at that time. No reply has yet been received.
Of the 286 untried detainees, 79 are known to have been arrested since June 1975. They include rightwing Moslem Brethren, communists, Nasserists, Palestinians and Iraqi-faction Baathists, many of them students and workers. Reports say that arrests are frequently made on suspicion of potential as well as real opposition to the government. AI is about to take up a substantial number of these cases.
AI is currently working on 34 cases in Syria, 15 of them taken up over the past year. One new case is a group adoption of seven members of the Qabani family who were arrested in November 1974 after the escape from prison of one of their relatives. Three of them are still detained. Five other new cases are of prisoners who were initially abducted from Lebanon. They include Lebanese lawyer Mahmud Baidun, abducted in mid-1971 for his open opposition to the Syrian regime, and Zouheir AI Shulak, a lawyer and businessman, whose arrest in April 1970 was due to critical articles which he wrote in the Lebanese press.
Of the new cases there have been two releases: Muhammad Basal in January 1976 and Mahmud Hamra during 1975. A message of thanks from a newly-adopted prisoner was received by a participant in one of the AI Prisoners of the Month Campaigns in which the new adoptee was included. This is the first response AI has ever received from an adopted prisoner in Syria while still in detention.
There have been no other reported releases of adopted prisoners. Members of the former government continue to be detained in a separate cell on the first floor of AI Mezze military prison. AI has learned that the former president, Dr Nureddin Atassi, who suffers from diabetes and has spent a large part of his internment in the adjacent military hospital, has lately been moved back to the prison itself. These men have now been detained for nearly six years without any form of charge or trial and, according to information received by AI, on the direct orders of President Hafez Assad.
Secretary General Martin Ennals brought up the cases of eight Al-adopted Syrian Kurds, imprisoned without trial since 1973, when he visited the Syrian ambassador Adnan Omran in London in July 1975. In his August letter, Mr Ennals asked the ambassador to transmit AI's concern about the Kurds to his government. AI has recently learned that they are thought to be currently held in AI Kassaa, one of the detention centers of the security forces on the outskirts of Damascus.
192	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
No news has been received of Albert Elia, an adopted prisoner, former head of the Jewish community in Lebanon, who was abducted in September 1971, but AI continues to work on his behalf.
There has been one instance of capital punishment in the last year. On 31 July AI sent a cable to President Assad «urging him to commute on humanitarian grounds death sentences passed on four Palestinians and one Syrian, all reportedly members of the Arab Communist Organization. They were executed on 2 August after being convicted by the higher division of the Supreme State Security Court "of carrying out acts of terror and sabotage". It is -mHerstood by AI that no independent legal representation was permitted.
Allegations of torture and death as a result of torture have been a cause of grave concern. During the past year AI has received numerous reports of ill-treatment and torture from a wide variety of sources. The consistent nature of the allegations indicates the routine use of severe methods of torture during the first months of imprisonment. AI has also received a first-hand account from a prisoner who alleges that he was severely tortured by electric shocks and burning.
Reports have been received of four deaths as a result of torture. On 19 September 1975 AI wrote to President Assad expressing extreme concern at reports of the deaths of Abdul Wakif Ismail Khalif, a 27-year-old teacher from AI Hasake in April 1975, and of Zuheir Shukeir, a 21-year-old student from Damascus in July 1975. On 24 May 1976 AI wrote asking for an urgent inquiry to be made into the reported deaths as a result of torture of Safi AI Shatti AI Mubarak, a peasant from AI Dardara in AI Hasake province, on 12 December 1975, and of Subhi Salih Uthman, a former student at Damascus university, in February 1976. In May 1976 an appeal was made for Ramadan Hajulah, reported to have been imprisoned without trial since June 1975 and badly tortured for the first three months at AI Kassaa.
AI has proposed sending a high-level mission to Syria during 1976 to hold governmental talks. But as of the date of writing no reply has been received from the Syrian authorities.
