CHAD
In April 1975 the repressive regime of President N'garta Tombalbaye was overthrown in a coup, during the course of which the president was himself killed. The new government, under General Félix Malloum, announced at the end of April that 172 political prisoners had been released, and that no further persons were being held for political offences. Seventeen Amnesty International adoptees were amongst those released, but an equal number were amongst the more than 70 persons who had died in prison or disappeared during the course of their imprisonment under President Tombalbaye.
During mid-1975 the Chad coordination group of AI's German Section cooperated with the Brussels-based Comité National Tchadien pour la Défense des Détenus Politiques in collecting data on their prison experiences from persons released after the overthrow of the Tombalbaye regime.
In January 1976 AI Deputy Secretary General Hans Ehrenstrâle visited Chad in order to introduce the organization to the new government and discuss human rights questions. Mr Ehrenstrâle met the Chadian Minister of the Interior, Colonel Mamari Djime Ngakinar, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Commandant Kamoungoue Wadal, and several other high-ranking government officials. On his return, Mr Ehrenstrâle reported that he had found a positive attitude towards AI and a much-improved human rights situation from that which prevailed under President Tombalbaye. A small number of persons are, however, still believed held for political offences.
During mid-1975 news media gave widespread coverage to the case of Madame Françoise Claustre, a French archaeologist kidnapped by rebels in northern Chad in April 1974 and held since that time as a hostage. Her husband was also held by the rebels while attempting to negotiate her release. The case of Madame Claustre was discussed with the Chadian authorities by Mr Ehrenstrâle during his visit to Chad in January 1976, but constructive action on the part of AI was made difficult by the fact that the new Chad government itself appears to be in no position to influence the rebels to release the pair.
