MALAWI
Reports received by the Research Department in August 1975 indicated that approximately 170 prisoners had been released as a result of amnesties declared on 14 May 1975 (Kamuzu Day - a national holiday) and 6 July, the anniversary of Malawi's independence. Amnesties on these dates are traditional, but it is not known how many of the released persons were being held for political reasons, and how many were common criminals.
In September 1975 about 400 prisoners were being held without charge or trial at Mikuyu Detention Center near Zomba - since 1973 the main prison for political detainees. Zomba Prison was reported to hold 155 male and female detainees along with criminal prisoners, and a further 150 detainees were imprisoned at Lilongwe, Malawi's capital. Estimates in June 1975 put the total of political detainees in Malawi at approximately 1,000. New detentions are continually taking place, whereas releases are seldom reported.
In November 1975 Dr Hastings K. Banda, the Life President of Malawi, stated publicly that he had been considering granting an amnesty to detainee but had changed his mind because of alleged subversion among "teachers, businessmen and civil servants". In February 1976 a new wave of detention' among civil servants and staff and students of the University of Malawi was reported.
Most detainees in Malawi are not informed of the reason for their detention, which in its initial stages is theoretically limited to 28 days, but which may in fact be extended indefinitely. Very few are ever charged or tried. Conditions ai Zomba Prison are not favourable, but the situation of prisoners in Mikuyu Detention Center is reported to be particularly bad, with overcrowding, poo; diet and extremely limited exercise facilities. During the past year Amnest) International has received several reports of detainees being permanently in
65	THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976

capacitated by these conditions. It has also had confirmation that several prisoners have died in detention either of sickness of mistreatment.
A particular feature of the period after August 1975 in Malawi has been the renewed mistreatment of members of the Jehovah's Witness religious sect. Thousands of Jehovah's Witnesses were driven out of Malawi in late 1972 by harassment on the part of the Malawi Congress Party (MCP) which tried to force sect members to violate their religious principles by purchasing MCP party cards. Many of the refugees settled in northwestern Mozambique, near the Malawi border.
In August 1975, however, the new FRELIMO regime in Mozambique (see Mozambique) forcibly closed the refugee camps, and thousands of Jehovah's Witnesses moved back across the border into Malawi. There they were met with the same harassment which they had faced in 1972 - beatings, assaults, sexual abuse and torture at the hands of local MCP officials. In October 1975 sect members who had once more fled from Malawi into Zambia were forcibly repatriated against their will, and in the same month the Malawi authorities reportedly began to round up adult Jehovah's Witnesses and place them in detention.
In March 1976 the harassment of the sect members was reportedly continuing, in spite of international protests. Some sources indicated that thousands of Jehovah's Witnesses had been imprisoned, some of them at the detention center at Dzeleka, which, until the opening of the Mikuyu center in 1973, was the major place of imprisonment for political detainees.
In May 1976 President Banda ordered the expulsion of over 130 Asian residents in Malawi holding British passports. Unconfirmed reports stated that the expulsion had been on the grounds that the Asians had declined to listen to a radio broadcast of a speech by the president.
AI continues its attempts to bring the worsening human rights situation in Malawi to the attention of world opinion.
