JORDAN
Amnesty International has no adopted cases in Jordan, but during the year
188
THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 197 5-1976
initiatives have been taken on behalf of three groups of political detainees.
Early in 1976, AI received disturbing reports of the detention, often without trial, of 147 Palestinians. AI wrote to King Hussein on 27 February 1976 asking for an official comment on these reports. AI has received reports that some of the men have been on hunger strike in protest against harsh prison conditions, alleged torture, solitary confinement, lack of medical care and denial of access to lawyers or families. Their health is understood to be deteriorating.
The reason for the arrests was officially said to be possession of arms and the plotting of subversive activities in Jordan. However, AI has been told that most of the detainees were members of Palestinian organizations who were in Jordan for the purpose of organizing resistance in the Israeli-occupied territories, anc1 that their activities were within the terms of the Cairo and Amman agreements of 1970 on Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) activities.
In March AI received information on the arrest of 19 trade unionists, workers in a leather factory in Amman, who claim to have been wrongfully dismissed from their jobs and imprisoned without trial since January 1976.
AI also received the names of 12 Jordanians from the town of AI Salt reported to be under arrest since January 1976 for organizing a petition in protest against the pollution of the local drinking water supply. Deputy Secretary General Hans EhrenstrSle took up the cases of all three groups of prisoners when he visited the Jordanian ambassador in London, Ma'an Abu Nowar, on 17 March 1976. The ambassador denied the veracity of the reports concerning AI Salt but promised that an official investigation would be carried out immediately into both the case of the trade unionists and the 147 Palestinians, whose names were given to him. AI received an official denial of all the reports on 12 May 1976, but it is continuing its investigations.
