Algeria
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the imprisonment of 22 prisoners of conscience, all of whom had been arrested in connection with the establishment of two unauthorized associations. It was also concemed about the imprisonment of other possible prisoners of conscience; trial procedures which did not conform to intemational standards for fair trial; torture and other ill-treatment of prisoners; and the death penalty.
During 1985 Amnesty Intemational adopted as prisoners of conscience 22 individuals tried between 15 and 19 December by the State Security Court in Medea and sentenced to between six months and three years' imprisonment on charges including distributing leaflets harmful to the interests of the nation and forming two associations: the Ligue algérienne des droits de l'homme, Algerian League of Human Rights, founded in June 1985; and the Association des fils des martyrs, Sons of the Martyrs, reportedly formed in 1984 to help the families of victims of the war of independence. Both organizations had reportedly applied for official authorization but had received no response from the authorities. Among those arrested between July and September 1985 was Mmtre Ali Yahia Abdennour, President of the newly created Algerian League of Human Rights, a prominent lawyer and former minister, who had previously been arrested in October 1983 and held in detention without trial until May 1984 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984 and 1985). Amnesty Intemational appealed repeatedly on behalf of Maître Ali Yahia and the other individuals detained with him, seeking information regarding their arrest and detention and expressing concern about reports of ill-treatment and poor health of a number of the detainees.
322	Amnesty International Report 1986
Between 20 and 27 September an Amnesty Intemational delegate vkited Algeria to investigate the arrest and detention of these detainees. The delegate met relevant officials, including the Minister of Justice. Following the mission. Amnesty Intemational urged their immediate and unconditional release as prisoners of conscience. Amnesty Intemational also urged the authorities to investigate all allegations of torture or ill-treatment and to provide immediate medical treatment when necessary. In December the authorities replied, asserting that the individuals involved had been arrested and imprisoned for having broken the laws of the country, and that those detainees who had medical complaints were receiving adequate medical attention and supervision. An Amnesty Intemational delegate observed their trial in December.
On 19 December, another Amnesty International delegate observed the trial before the State Security Court in Medea of 40 alleged followers of ex-president Ahmed Ben BeUa. They were charged with conspiracy against the security of the state, forming an armed gang and possession of am«. Nineteen defendants, of whom three were not present, were sentenced to between one and 20 years' imprisonment; there were 21 acquittals. Among those acquitted was Muhammad Seghir Nekkache, a former minister. Most of those on trial had been arrested in early October 1983 but had not benefited from a presidential pardon in May 1984 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1985). Some had remained in preventive detention since October 1983, while others had been released provisionally. Amnesty Intemational had received allegations of torture and ill-treatment of a number of the detainees. Amnesty International was concemed about several procedural irregularities in the detention and trial of these 40 prisoners, including prolonged incommunicado detention and allegations that confessions presented as evidence in court had been extracted under torture. At the end of 1985 Amnesty Intemational was still assessing reports of the trial.
Amnesty Intemational leamed of two executions in March after all efforts to obtain clemency had been exhausted. The death sentences had been passed in 1981 and 1983 for murder. Amnesty Intemational appealed in both cases, explaining its unconditional opposition to the death penalty.

