Grenada
Amnesty International continued to assess the fairness of the trial of 19 former members of the New Jewel Movement charged with the murder of former Prime Minister Maurice Bishop and others in 1983 (see Amnesty International Report 1984 and 1985). The organization also raised concems about their treatment in prison.
Amnesty Intemational wrote to Prime Minister Herbert Blaize on 22 April, expressing concem at conditions under which the 19 defendants, who were still awaiting trial, were detained in Richmond Hill Prison. Among the concems raised were allegations that Andy Mitchell was beaten by Jamaican guards in November 1984, as a result of which he required 40 stitches in his head; and that he and several other prisoners had been placed on prolonged bread-and-water punishment diets, even though Andy Mitchell was said to be physically unfit to sustain such a punishment. Other concems raised included visits from relatives, ttends and lawyers being refused; restrictions on writing materials; and the withholding of letters sent by prisoners to relatives and contacts abroad, including correspondence between prisoners and their lawyers.
Amnesty Intemational said that some of the treatment, if confirmed, could be prejudicial to the prisoners' physical and mental health and amount to "cmel, inhuman and degrading treatment". Amnesty Intemational drew the government's attention to articles of the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, which were breached by some of the deprivations reportedly imposed. Amnesty International asked the govemment to ensure that the prisoners were treated humanely, in accordance with the UN standards.
On 19 July Amnesty Intemational wrote again to the govemment, expressing concem about the prolonged isolation of Phyllis Cocwd who, apart from court appearances, had been allowed no contact with other prisoners since her arrest in 1983. Amnesty Intemational referred to reports that her isolation had led to a deterioration in her physical and mental health. Amnesty Intemational also expressed concem that relatives coming from abroad had experienced difficulty in obtaining permission to visit her and that other visits had been restricted; that she had been denied contact with her husband in prison, with whom she needed to discuss arrangements for the care of their children; and that her letters to her children in Jamaica and
158	Amnesty International Report 1986
letters concerning legal matters had been withheld by the prison authorities. Amnesty International also expressed concern about reports that she had not received medical advice for a lump in her breast. Amnesty Intemational also raised concems about two other prisoners who were reported to be in need of medical attention. No reply to either of its two letters had been received by the end of 1985.
Amnesty International sent an observer to the trial of the 19 defendants which began on 8 August, after having been adjoumed twice in 1984. The trial was again adjourned on the application of the defence, who submitted that they had not been allowed adequate access to their clients in prison. They also raised a constitutional motion regarding the jurisdiction of the court. The trial had not been resumed by the end of 1985.
In May the Grenada Court of Appeals had mled on an earlier motion by the defence, in which it was claimed that the court system established by the former People's Revolutionary Government was no longer constitutionally valid (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984). The appeals court denied the motion, mling that the present court structure was legally valid.
Amnesty Intemational's observer to the trial also investigated the conditions under which the detainees were held. During the mission he visited Richmond Hill Prison and interviewed eight of the defendants, including Phyllis Coard. He subsequently raised the organization's concerns regarding their treatment with the Minister for Legal Affairs and the Chief Justice, both of whom said that they would look into the matter and inform Amnesty Intemational of any measures taken. No word had been received from the govemment by the end of 1985. Amnesty Intemational leamed, however, that there had been some improvement in the conditions under which Phyllis Coard was detained, including the granting of several visits from her husband.
