Lesotho
Amnesty International was concemed about the detention without trial of alleged opponents of the govemment and about continued reports of assaults on detainees. An inquest began into the death of a detainee who died in custody in 1984 but it appeared that there had still been no formal inquiry by the end of 1985 into the death of another detainee in late 1981. Nor had there been an inquest into the deaths of six South African refugees, all alleged members of the Pan-Africanist Congress of Azania (PAC), a nationalist political organization banned in South Africa, who were shot dead by Lesotho security forces in March in suspicious circumstances.
In December, six other South African refugees and three Lesotho nationals were shot dead by unidentified gunmen carrying silenced weapons. The govemment accused South African security forces of carrying out the killings but this was denied by the authorities in Pretoria. Responsibility was reportedly claimed by the Lesotho Liberation Army (LLA), the military wing of an exiled faction of the Basutoland Congress Party, but eye-witness accounts reportedly identifying the killers as white men suggested that South African forces might in fact have been responsible.
There was a political crisis in August when opposition political parties refused to participate in the first general election to be held since 1970, which was due to take place in mid-September, as they had not obtained full access to the electoral register. Only the mling Basutoland National Party had proposed candidates by the nomination deadline. They were then declared to have been elected unopposed.
Throughout 1985 there was sporadic guerrilla activity by the LLA. Suspected LLA sympathizers were believed to have been detained in a number of areas but Amnesty Intemational was able to obtain detailed information in only a few cases. Under the Internal Security (General) Act, all members of the police are empowered to detain people suspected of subversive activity without charge and hold them incommunicado for 14 days, following which detention for further, successive 14-day periods can be authorized by the Commissioner of Police and then the govemment minister responsible for security mattere. Those who were held included Hape Tsakatsi and his sister, Maleopo Tsakatsi, both from Leribe district, who were held
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII
59	Japan
incommunicado for almost a month, until an application for their release was laid before the High Court. Hape Tsakatsi was reported to have been assaulted in detention.
Nineteen other people who were detained were charged in November with activities in support of the LLA and remanded for trial in 1986. They included Mathabiso Mosala, President of the National Council of Women, and six other women.
An inquest into the death in custody of Daniel Moeketsi in April 1984 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1985) began in late 1985 but had not been concluded by the end of the year. According to information received by Amnesty International, it appeared that the police investigation into his death had not been thorough.
An inquest had been expected into the death of another political detainee, Setipa Mathaba, in November 1981. The inquest had been due to start in December 1984 and was to be attended by an Amnesty Intemational observer, but was postponed at the last minute. It did not appear to have begun by the end of 1985 and no new date for its start was known to have been set. Information received by Amnesty Intemational suggested that Setipa Mathaba's death had been a direct result of assaults in security police detention.
In March six members of the PAC were shot dead by security forces. At first, the government said that the dead were LLA insurgents but later admitted that they were South African exiles belonging to the PAC. They said that there had been an armed clash near Lesotho's border with South Africa's Transkei "homeland" but an unofficial source alleged that the PAC members had been unarmed.
