^ ' I Bahrain
Amnesty International was concerned about the continuing detention of political prisoners who were possible prisoners of conscience, some of whom had been detained for long periods without charge or trial. Reports were received of students being arrested on their return from study abroad. The organization sought further information on their situation as well as that of 18 political prisoners reportedly sentenced in December 1984 to prison terms ranging from five to seven years. Allegations of the torture and ill-treatment of prisoners were received.
During 1985 Amnesty International continued to investigate the cases of 15 political prisoners, 11 of whom were serving sentences of up to seven years for belonging to unlawful organizations. Another three — Salman Abdul Aziz Ali, Ali Al-Khayyat and Sayed Hashim Al-Musawi — had been held without charge or trial for between four and nine years under the Decree Law on State Security Measures of 1974 (see Amnesty International Report 1983). In April Amnesty International was informed that Nader Abu Drees, detained without charge since 1981, had been released, but the organization was unable to confirm this by the end of the year. In 1985 the organization did not receive any new information from the authorities on the reasons for the detention of these 15 detainees. According to reports, these prisoners had not been charged or tried, and were being held incommunicado, arousing concern that they might be tortured or ill-treated.
On 18 October Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of the Interior expressing concern about the reported detention of students on their return from study abroad, among them Abdullah Al Manai and Issa Al Ghayib. Amnesty International was informed that these two men, both held in Al Qala' Prison, were held without charge. Amnesty International asked for information regarding the reasons for their arrest and the anticipated date of their trial or release. The organization also sought assurances that they were being humanely treated. No reply had been received by the end of 1985.
During 1985 Amnesty International learned that 18 |X)litical prisoners reportedly sentenced on 24 December 1984 to prison terms of between five and seven years may not have received a fair trial, and that they may have been tortured and ill-treated. The 18 were reportedly sentenced for their connection with the Jam'iyat At-
324	Amnesty International Report 1986
Taw'iya Al-Islamiya, Islamic Enlightenment Society (see Amnesty International Report 1985) which the authorities claimed had close links with a proscribed organization, the Bahrain Islamic Liberation Front. Amnesty International was concerned that some or all of the 18 might be prisoners of conscience. It sought further information on these cases, and publicly expre^d its concern about reports that the detainees were not allowed access to their lawyers or ¿leir families, and that they had been tortured and ill-treated.
