Mauritania
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the restriction under house arrest of former head of state Lieutenant-Colonel Khouna Ould Haidalla, who was ousted from office in December 1984, and at least five other officials associated with his administration. Amnesty Intemational considered that they should be brought to trial in accordance with intemationally recognized legal standards or else released from restriction. However, 1985 saw a substantial improvement in respect of human rights following the formation of a new govemment in December 1984.
Most political prisoners had been freed in December 1984 after the accession to power of Colonel Maaouya Ould Sid' Ahmed Ould Taya. Amnesty Intemational received confirmation in early 1985 that those who had been freed had included two of the three prisoners who had still been of concern to the organization in early 1985 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1985). They were Deh Ould El Houssein and Adjutant Be Ould Bneijara. The third, Ladji Traore, was released in January 1985 after a trial which he was reported to have requested in order to clear his name. He alleged that he had been charged with financial misdemeanours for political reasons. He was acquitted at his trial.
El Kory Ould H'Meitty, the Secretary General of the Union des travailleurs de Mauritanie, Union of Mauritanian Workers, was also brought to trial in September 1985. He had been detained for several months under the previous government. He was reportedly charged with membership of a committee formed to advocate the substitution of Mauritanians in place of foreign workers, convicted and given a suspended sentence of six months' imprisonment.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	67	Japan
Fifteen other people also received six-month prison sentences in September. They were among some 45 people arrested for participating in an illegal demonstration calling for the expulsion of foreign workers from Mauritania. Many had themselves been expelled shortly before from Libya, where they had been working.
	
J 'V ■ ^	
L r	
■ \ ' i® Y ! '	
r \ f	
/	
