Bolivia
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the short-term detention of hundreds of students, trade unionists, lawyers, teachers, joumalists and others, most of whom Amnesty International believed to be prisoners of conscience, following the declaration of a state of siege by President Victor Paz Estenssoro in September. While many were released after 24 hours, over 400 were sent into intemal exile and were released only in October. There were reports that prisoners had been ill-treated in detention and had not received adequate medical attention. Amnesty Intemational reiterated its concern to successive governments about the continued detention of five Bolivians and two Chileans arrested in October 1983 who remained in prison despite an amnesty granted by
127	Amnesty International Report 1986
President Hernán Siles Zuazo in October 1984 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984 and 1985).
Presidential elections held on 14 July 1985 failed to produce an absolute majority for any of the candidates but Victor Paz Estenssoro, leader of the Movimiento Nacional Revolucionario (MNR), National Revolutionary Movement, was subsequently elected following a Congressional ballot and assumed the presidency in August. On 12 September the govemment placed all state enterprises under military control in response to an indefinite general strike called by the Central Obrera Boliviana (COB), Bolivian Trade Union Confederation, in protest agciinst the new government's economic policies. On 19 September the govemment declared a 90-day state of siege in response to mounting public protests against military intervention in state enterprises and the govemment's economic policies, and subsequently arrested over 1500 people, many of whom had been staging a protest hunger-strike. Amnesty Intemational believed that most of those detained were prisoners of conscience. Many were released after 24 hours, but approximately 460 people, including members of the executive board of the COB, were banished to remote regions of the country where they were confined in camps. Conditions in these camps were rep)ortedly poor and Amnesty Intemational received reports that some prisoners had been beaten and that adequate medical care had not been provided. In September Anmesty International expressed concem about the arrests and urged the govemment to release the prisoners immediately and unconditionally, unless they were to be charged with criminal offences.
An agreement between the govemment and the COB led to the suspension of the general strike on 2 October. The same day the Minister of the Interior stated that all those detained or confinados (banished) would be released. Most of the prisoners were freed during the first half of October but Amnesty Intemational was investigating the case of one trade unionist who was kept in detention and several others who were arrested in November and charged with alleged criminal offences as a result of the general strike. Amnesty Intemational considered the trade unionists to be prisoners of conscience who had been detained solely for their non-violent union activities.
One of those who faced prosecution was Fausto Ardaya, Secretary General of the Sindicato de Empleados de Empresa Nacional de Telecomunicaciones, State Telecommunications Workers' Union, and board member of the COB, who was detained on 20 September and banished to a camp in the town of La Magdalena in Beni Department. In October he was transferred to the Departamento de
128	Amnesty International Report 1986
Investigaciones Criminales, Criminal Investigations Department, of the Ministry of the Interior and subsequently to the San Pedro Prison in La Paz. A petition of habeas corpus presented on his behalf in November finally resulted in his provisional release in December. However, he faced possible future legal proceedings in connection with alleged offences during the general strike, including sabotage, as a formal complaint against him had been presented to the courts by the Empresa Nacional de Telecomunicaciones, State Telecommunications Company.
Two leaders of the Confederación de Trabajadores Fabriles (CTF), Factory Workers' Union — Armando Morales Gómez and Roberto Rojas — were arrested in November and held in the San Pedro Prison in La Paz. They were charged with several alleged offences including unlawful use of influence, decisions contrary to the state political constitution and murder. The State Prosecutor demanded the death penalty for both accused who were, however, released on 25 December, reportedly on the orders of President Paz Estenssoro.
Amnesty International reiterated its concem to successive govem-ments about the continued detention of five Bolivians and two Chileans arrested in Luribay on 27 October 1983. Following their conviction by the Tribunal Permanente de Justicia Militar (TPJM), Permanent Tribunal of Military Justice, then President Hemán Siles Zuazo decreed an amnesty and ordered their immediate release in October 1984. The military court, however, refused to implement the amnesty. In May 1985 Amnesty Intemational renewed its appeal for the implementation of the amnesty following a Supreme Court mling which, although rejecting a petition of habeas corpus on procedure grounds, stated that the continued detention of the prisoners was unlawful. On 23 August 1985, shortly after President Paz Estens-soro's govemment was swom in, the Minister of National Defence stated that the Luribay case was pending appeal before the Triburuil Supremo de Justicia Militar (TSJM), Supreme Tribunal of Military Justice, which had "complete autonomy in the administration of justice". The TSJM subsequently reduced the sentences of six of the seven prisoners to two and a half to three years' imprisonment each and the most serious charges were dropped. Nonetheless, Miguel Rodriguez Candia, who had already served his original two-year sentence, had his prison sentence increased by six months. In October Amnesty Intemational wrote to President Paz Estenssoro expressing concem that the appeal before the TSJM appeared to conflict with provisions of Article 48 of the Code of Military Justice which states that an amnesty "annuls all penal action and its effects and will benefit those on whose behalf it is declared, even if they have been convicted" and that those benefiting from an amnesty who are
129	Amnesty International Report 1986
imprisoned or detained "shall be immediately released".
The state of siege declared by the government of President Paz Estenssoro expired on 19 December and was not renewed.
