Greece
Amnesty International's main concern continued to be the imprisonment of large numbers of Jehovah's Witnesses for refusing to perform military service. Since 1977, four years' unarmed military service has been offered to Jehovah's Witnesses, but Amnesty International did not consider this a satisfactory alternative because it was twice the duration of armed military service and because there was no alternative civilian service outside the military system. At the end of
286	 Amnesty International knew of 283 Jehovah's Witnesses imprisoned for œnscientious objection to military service.
On 28 February Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Justice expressing concern about the continued prosecution of people on charges of "proselytism". In addition to cases of Jehovah's Witnesses (see Amnesty International Report 1985) reference was made to sentences of three and a half years' imprisonment passed on 22 December 1984 on Costas Macr^, President of the Hellenic Missionary Union, and on two other missionaries, Don Stephens, a United States citizen, and Allan Williams, a United Kingdom citizen. At the end of 1985 the three were free pending the hearing of their appeal. Amnesty International considered that Compulsory Law No. 1672/1939 (amending Compulsory Law No. 1363/1938), which prohibited proselytism, was in conflict with Article 9 of the European Convention on Human Rights, to which Greece is a state party, which upholds the right "to manifest religion or belief in worship, teaching, practice and observance". No reply had been received to this letter by the end of 1985.
On 7 August Amnesty International wrote to Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou concerning the alleged ill-treatment of a conscript soldier in Avlona Military Prison in August and September 1982. Although the ill-treatment was alleged to have occurred some time previously, the detailed account, which Amnesty International appended to its letter, suggested that the ill-treatment of imprisoned soldiers was frequent. Ainnesty International called for an inquiry into the treatment of prisoners in Avlona Military Prison and asked to be informed of any subsequent complaints of ill-treatment and of inquiries into them. No reply had been received to this letter by the end of 1985.
On 14 October and 1 November Amnesty International appealed to the Greek authorities not to return three ethnic Turks to Bulgaria in response to an extradition request from the Bulgarian authorities. Following their arrival in Greece from Bulgaria, Yusuf Bilalov, Said Mestanov and Huseyin Mestanov, who sought asylum in Turkey, had given interviews alwut arrests and deaths in Bulgaria during an official campaign to force ethnic Turks to adopt Bulgarian names. Anmesty International believed that these activities, rather than the alleged criminal acts cited in the extradition request, might have been the basis for the request and that, if they were extradited, they faced imprisonment and possibly death sentences. On 31 October the AÙiens Appeal Court approved the extradition request, but this decision was overruled by the Supreme Court in Athens on 10 December and the three men and their families were allowed to proceed to Turkey.

