El Salvador
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about reports implicating the Salvadorian military and security forces, as well as the paramilitary Brigadas de Defensa Civil, Civil Defence Patrols, and the patndlas cantonales, canton patrols, in the arbitrary arrest, torture, "disappearance" and extrajudicial execution of people from a wide cross-section of Salvadorian society. By comparison with previous years, when abuses such as "disappearance" and extrajuchcial executions had been reported on a massive scale, in 1985 violations appeared to be more selectively directed against people suspected of opposition to the govemment or of being sympathetic to the opposition.
Trade unionkts, human rights activists and those working with refugees were particularly subject to such abuses in 1985. Others appear to have "disappeared" or been arbitrarily killed simply because they were present in areas where security operations were taking place. For example, 19-year-old Evangehsta Cabrera was reportedly taken into custody on 15 January by govemment troops in Corinto, Morazan, when soldiers raided a house she was visiting and she was unable to produce identity papers. She was found dead some days later. She had reportedly been tortured, raped and shot. Despite repeated appeals from Amnesty International to the authorities to investigate her arrest and death, her detention was never acknowledged.
Amnesty International also remained concerned about the continued detention without trial for periods of up to five years of several hundred political prisoners and about reports of the systematic use of torture to extract confessions from new detainees. Torture was used in the context of Decree 50 of Febmary 1984 goveming proceeding against those accused of crimes against the state. Amnesty Intemational considered that the measure contained provisions, including a 15-day period of incommunicado detention, which faciUtated human rights abuses such as "disappearance" and torture.
During 1985 Amnesty Intemational also noted a new pattern of short-term detentions of opponents of the govemment, apparently as a form of harassment.
Finally, Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the continued inability of the Salvadorian judicial system to investigate and punish violations of human rights. With few known exceptions, the perpetrators of the many thousands of abuses in recent years had not
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	153	Japan
been brought to justice. Rather than institute genuine inquiries into reported violations, successive administrations blamed them on "extremist groups" which it was claimed were "out of govemment control" (the so-called "death squads").
In the context of continuing civil conflict, the administration of President José Napoleón Duarte, which had assumed power in June 1984, maintained, as had its predecessors, that victims in the Salvadorian countryside had been abducted or killed by the armed opposition, or had been members or supporters of the opposition who had died in armed confrontation with the military. However, Amnesty Intemational's study of incidents reported in 1985 suggested that, as in previous years, the majority of reported abuses against non-combatant civilians had been inflicted by forces under the authorities' control, although there were also reports of abductions and execution-style killings by opposition groups.
Whoever the perpetrator. Amnesty Intemational condemns as a matter of principle the torture or execution of prisoners by anyone. It made this position clear on 20 September 1985 in a telex to the govemmental El Salvador Human Rights Commission, which had asked it to intervene to secure the release of President Duarte's daughter, Inés Duarte Durán, abducted earlier that month along with a friend by opposition forces. Amnesty Intemational's message explained that, with the exception of groups which had acquired characteristics similar to govemments, its policy did not include making such appeals to non-govemmental organizations.
In view of the long-term and continuing pattem of gross human rights violations in El Salvador, Amnesty Intemational welcomed measures which the Duarte administration stated it intended to implement to ensure a retum to respect for human rights. Officials publicly announced, for example, that certain officers repeatedly linked to the "death squads" were to be removed from active duty, that the intelligence section of the Policía de Hacienda, Treasury Police, (consistently cited as responsible for the illegal detention, torture and murder of suspected opponents of the govemment) was to be disbanded and that the security forces were to be restmctured to make them more directly accountable to the elected authorities. Furthermore, an independent body was to be set up to investigate human rights abuses, particularly those allegedly committed by "death squads", and special inquiries instituted into a number of well-known unresolved cases of political murder. These included the killings of Archbishop Oscar Amulfo Romero and US joumalist John Sullivan in 1980; of at least 18 Indian peasants, including a child, by regular soldiers at Las Hojas, San Antonio del Monte, Sonsonate, in 1983; and of approximately 70 civilians, including children, by the
154	Amnesty International Report 1986
Salvadorian military during July 1984 in a number of small villages in Cabañas, northem El Salvador. Amnesty Intemational had repeatedly appealed for an in-depth investigation into these cases.
However, Amnesty Intemational found it necessary to repeat reservations that little was known about how any of the new investigative bodies proposed by President Duarte would operate, to which ministries or govemment organs they were to be responsible or what, if any, findings the announced inquiries had made. The organization also noted that the only known proceedings against military or security force personnel for human rights abuses were the convictions in May 1984 of five National Guards for the 1980 murder of four US churchwomen, the reported conviction in August 1983 of a civil defence commander for the murder of a seminary student, and the unsuccessful prosecution of two army officers for ordering two National Guards to kill two US agricultural advisers and the head of the Salvadorian Land Reform Institute in 1981 (although prosecutions against the two guards continued). Reports of continued human rights abuses by the military and security forces (including the Treasury Police) led Amnesty Intemational to believe that these few prosecutions and the other measures announced had not been adequate to ensure that members of these forces stopped such practices.
Trade unionists were a particular target of abuses during the year. In January alone Amnesty International recorded the deaths of three union leaders in circumstances suggesting official involvement, while in the course of 1985 it leamed of four who "disappeared" and 41 more who were detained, apparently because of their legal trade union activities. The violations occurred in the context of renewed trade union activism, street demonstrations and strikes. In addition to economic demands, protesting trade unionists were calling for the release of people arrested because of their trade union activities, the reappearance of "disappeared" colleagues, investigations into the apparent extrajudicial executions of others, and the abolition of the State of Siege, which has regularly been reimposed in El Salvador since March 1980. The State of Siege suspends freedom of assembly, movement, residence, thought and expression, and gives the military courts jurisdiction over civilians accused of offences including treason and rebellion and acts considered threatening to the peace or independence of the state.
One of the trade unionists detained during 1985 was Modesto Rodriguez Escobar, secretary general of two unions, seized on 4 July by heavily armed men in plain clothes after leaving a union meeting. He was held by the Treasury Police incommunicado, blindfolded and handcuffed, for seven days in a secret cell, where he said he was
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	155	Japan
repeatedly threatened with death and subjected to beatings and electric shock torture.
Amnesty Intemational was also concerned about abuses of human rights workers. In November the organization sought assurances that the safety of Joaquin Antonio Cáceres Hernández and Jorge Alirio Ponce Martinez would be respected following their detention by plain-clothes members of the National Police. Cáceres was Press and Information Secretary of the Comisión de Derechos Humanos de El Salvador (no-gubemamental) (CDHES), the non-govemmental El Salvador Human Rights Commission, and Ponce a former member. They were allegedly beaten and ill-treated in an effort to force them to sign declarations linking the CDHES with the armed opposition. Both remained in custody at the end of 1985. Since its foundation in 1978, CDHES membere had suffered a series of human rights violations, including the killing of its four founding members in circumstances suggesting official involvement.
In October Amnesty Intemational submitted testimonies to the govemment indicating that prisoners continued to be routinely subjected to both psychological and physical torture during incommunicado detention. Detainees stated that they had been forced — by beatings, sexual abuse, dmgs, mock executions, threats to relatives and families and the buming of flesh with sulphuric acid — to sign statements without being informed of their contents. In one such testimony Dr Eduardo Antonio Espinoza Fiallos stated that in April he was beaten with wooden clubs, subjected to mock executions and tied by the thumbs and suspended from a beam in the ceiling at the National Guard's central barracks in San Salvador. Dr Espinoza stated that he was arrested and tortured for giving medical aid to non-combatant civilians and members of the armed opposition, as well as to soldiere and officers captured by them. Dr Espinoza and others further charged that after being transferred into acknowledged detention, they received no response to requests for medical examinations to verify injuries caused by torture. Dr Espinoza was among those released by the govemment in October in exchange for Inés Duarte Durán and others held by opposition forces.
Amnesty Intemational also expressed its concern on a number of occasions about continued ill-treatment after detentions had been acknowledged. In Febmary, for example, reports were received that three women political prisoners had been shot and wounded and another beaten by air force personnel and prison guards from Mariona men's prison called in to end a protest over prison conditions and ill-treatment of inmates. In April guards allegedly beat a group of male political prisoners at Mariona with their rifles. Amnesty Intemational urged the Directorate of Prisons to investigate these
156	Amnesty International Report 1986
reports, to discipline those responsible and called for all prisoners to be treated in accordance with internationally agreed standards. Amnesty Intemational also repeated previous pleas that all detainees be charged and tried, or released.
During 1985 Amnesty Intemational submitted information on its human rights concems in El Salvador to various UN bodies including the Commission on Human Rights' Special Representative on El Salvador, the Special Rapporteurs on summary or arbitrary executions and on torture, the Working Groups on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances and on Indigenous Populations, Unesco and the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
In a statement to the UN Commission on Human lights in January, the organization noted measures announced by the govemment as intended to bring the military and security forces under control, but observed that the institutional framework enabling torture, extrajudicial executions and "disappearances", most notably Decree 50, continued to exist. Later in the year Amnesty Intemational reported to the UNHCR the arrest in June of four Salvadorians who had been volimtarily repatriated from Honduras. According to a foreign witness to their arrest, they were detained because the Salvadorian authorities considered the refugee camps in which they had lived in Honduras to be sympathetic to or working with the armed Salvadorian opposition. The four were released in August.
In December a UN General Assembly resolution on El Salvador noted the Special Representative's March 1985 report according to which the number of political prisoners and abductions in the country had increased. It deplored the continuing incapacity of the Salvadorian judiciary to investigate, prosecute and punish violations of human rights. It urged the authorities to intensify the reform of the Salvadorian judicial system in order to punish those responsible for the serious human rights violations which the Gener^ Assembly found had been and were still being committed in the country.
Amnesty Intemational also submitted information on its human rights concems in El Salvador to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (lACHR) of the Organization of American States (OAS). The Commission's 1985 report found, as had Amnesty Intemational, that little had been accomplished to implement the administration's declared intent to "promote, protect, and defend the full observance of human rights".
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	157	Japan
