Israel and the Occupied Territories
Amnesty International's concerns were the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience; the increased use of administrative measures, with no judicial involvement, to restrict individuals without charge or trial; and the denial of internationally accepted rights to prisoners captured by the Israeli Defence Forces (IDF) in south Lebanon. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about allegations of ill-treatment and torture of detainees in Israel, the Occupied Territories and south Lebanon.
During 1985 Amnesty International adopted five prisoners of conscience, two of whom were released during the year, and investigated the cases of 39 possible prisoners of conscience, 13 of whom were released. Eleven of the 44 prisoners were convicted of security offences, two were conscientious objectors to military service, 15 were under restriction orders and 16 in administrative detention.
Amnesty Intemational worked for the unconditional release of two selective conscientious objectors to military service: Rafael Kastan was sentenced in January to 21 days' imprisonment; Anatol Yablonca was sentenced in December to three months for refusing to serve beyond the pre-1967 borders of Israel.
Amnesty International investigated the cases of 11 people convicted of membership of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO). They included Kadhim Mahmud Muhammad Mar'i, one of nine arrested members of the Jerusalem Constmction Workers' Union whose cases Amnesty Intemational investigated. He was charged in mid-1984 with membership of the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (DFLP - a faction of the PLO) and with recmiting three members to the organization, and was sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment plus an 18-month suspended sentence. The authorities maintain that membership of the PLO is tantamount to advocating "terrorism", but Amnesty Intemational considers that

membership alone does not prove that an individual member has advocated violence. None of the charges against the trade unionists, which included holding meetings and reading DFLP literature, appeared to involve the use or advocacy of violence. Only one remained in prison at the end of the year.
At the beginning of 1985 approximately 1,130 Palestinians and Lebanese suspected of armed opposition to the IDF in south Lebanon were still detained, about 1,000 in A1 Ansar camp in Lebanon, 121 in Atlit prison in Israel, and three women in Neve Tirza prison in Israel. (See Amnesty International Report 1985.) On 20 February Amnesty International replied to the Israeli Government's letter of December 1984, reiterating its concern that the authorities had not respected the human rights of these detainees in accordance with internationally accepted standards.
Amnesty International continued to be concerned that most had not had access to a lawyer, that none had had access to their families, and that detainees who had appeared at appeal hearings, which were held in camera, were not confronted with all the evidence against them and were, therefore, unable effectively to refute the charges against them.
On 3 April 1985, in preparation for the Israeli withdrawal from south Lebanon, the IDF closed down A1 Ansar camp which then held over 1,800 detainees: 752 of these were handed over to the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) for release. Those remaining were transferred to Atlit prison in Israel. Between 11 April and 10 September all those from south Lebanon held in Atlit prison (1,171 in all) were released, in batches, into the care of the ICRC who assisted their return home. However, two Lebanese arrested by the IDF in August 1984 in front of witnesses (although the Israeli authorities consistently denied any knowledge of them), were not among those released. One, Tony Ghanem, reappeared in south Lebanon in December and reported that he had been held in solitary confinement and incommunicado for 16 months in different prisons in Israel. Amnesty International was concerned about the other who remained missing.
Amnesty International was concerned about detainees held in Lebanon by the South Lebanon Army (SLA), a mainly Christian militia, reportedly armed, trained and financed by the Israeli authorities, whose prison in the town of Khiam was reported to be run with the assistance of Shin Beth (the Israeli Intelligence Service). Following the official IDF withdrawal from south Lebanon in June 1985, an unofficial Israeli presence of up to a thousand members of the IDF and Shin Beth, assisted by the SLA, continued to control the "security zone", a strip of land running along the Lebanon/Israel
336	Amnesty International Report 1986
border. About 120 detainees, mostly Lebanese Shi'a Muslims, but also Palestinians, suspected of carrying out military operations against the SLA and the IDF, were reported at the end of 1985 to be held in Khiam prison. Amnesty Intemational was concerned that these detainees were afforded no judicial process of any kind, were not allowed to see a lawyer, were not charged, and that many were held incommunicado for long periods. Some family visits were permitted, but the ICRC had not been allowed access to the prison by the end of 1985 despite requests to both the SLA and the IDF. Amnesty Intemational expressed concern to the Israeli authorities and to the leader of the SLA in November 1985 that these detainees were being denied their internationally accepted rights and called for an intemational humanitarian organization such as the ICRC to have regular and frequent access to all detainees.
In August 1985, following a number of violent attacks on Jews in Israel and the Occupied Territories, the Israeli authorities decided to reimpose administrative detention, a measure which had been largely discontinued since 1982. The relevant legislation provides for individuals to be detained for up to six months without charge or trial by order of the Minister of Defence in Israel proper, or by the regional commander of the IDF in the Occupied Territories. Detention orders, which can be renewed after six months, must be ratified by a military judge within 48 hours in Israel and 96 hours in the Occupied Territories, and are subject to automatic judicial review within three months, but the reviewing judge may accept evidence without disclosing it to the detainee. The Attorney General's Directives on Administrative Detention, issued in 1980, stated that it was an "exceptional measure ... meant not as a punitive but only as a preventative measure . . . (and) justified only to avert a danger to state security or public security". Amnesty Intemational was concemed because this legislation might lead to people being detained for the non-violent exercise of their right to freedom of opinion and expression, and because it allows detention without trial.
By the end of 1985 Amnesty Intemational had received the names of over 126 people who had been administratively detained since July 1985, including students, joumalists and trade unionists. Two field-workers for a West Bank human rights organization who had been interviewing ex-detainees about prison conditions were also administratively detained. Amnesty Intemational believed that Zahi Jaradat and Ghazi Shashtari had been detained on account of their human rights work and called on the authorities to release them. Zahi Jaradat's order was reduced to three months on appeal.
The use of restriction orders was largely replaced after July 1985 by the use of administrative detention. Amnesty Intemational heard of

38 people who during 1985 were confined to their home town or village by day and to their home by night. Eight of these were later held under administrative detention orders. In August Amnesty Intemational wrote to the authorities because several people had clearly not benefited from the Attomey General's directive of September 1984 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1985) which aimed to minimize the inconvenience to restricted persons' lives and livelihoods. Amnesty Intemational asked how Ae directive was applied in the Occupied Territories, and what remedy existed for those contending that their personal lives and livelihoods were affected by restriction orders. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about Dr 'Azmi al-Shu'aibi, a dentist from the West Bank, who had been under a restriction order from 16 January 1983 and was detained in October 1985 pending deportation to Jordan. Amnesty Intemational asked the autiiorities to try Dr 'Azmi al-Shu'aibi or to release him and to give him adequate medical treatment for a lung complaint.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports that security suspects were ill-treated during interrogation by the military and the police in the West Bank and Gaza, including the routine use of hooding, enforced standing, beatings, sleep deprivation, threats and insults. A letter from the govemment of 31 January denied the use of such techniques to torture or ill-treat detainees, but failed to allay Amnesty Intemational's concems. The military police reportedly investigated allegations of ill-treatment made by young detainees held in the military detention and interrogation centre of Al Fara'a in the West Bank. To Amnesty Intemational's knowledge its findings were not made public by the end of 1985.
In August a military disciplinary court in Israel ruled in the case of General Mordechai, who, in April 1984 in Gaza, pistol-whipped two wounded Palestinians in his custody, both of whom later died. The court concluded that he had used "reasonable force" in an urgent attempt to find out if they had booby-trapped a bus they had earlier hijacked. Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Minister of Defence saying: "pistol-whipping a prisoner in order to obtain information from him amounts to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment, unconditionally prohibited under intemational law, and considerations of reasonableness can never be used to justify such treatment by law enforcement officials".
In Israel proper, there was much public debate about police bmtality during arrest and interrogation of criminal and security suspects in Israel, and about the need to reform the police disciplinary system and to improve the training of law enforcement officials. According to press reports, over 50 regular and border police were
338
Amnesty International Report 1986
convicted in 1985 of using unnecessary force in incidents occurring between 1981 and 1984.
Amnesty International received a number of reports of ill-treatment and torture from former detainees held in Khiam prison by the SLA. These reports revealed a systematic pattern of beatings and electric shock torture (see entry on the Lebanon). All detainees reported that Israeli Intelligence officers directed tiie interrogation while members of the SLA carried out the physical ill-treatment. In November Amnesty International wrote to the Israeli authorities and the leader of the SLA urging a public and impartial inquiry into these allegations.
During 1985 there were discussions in the Knesset (parliament) on whether to impose the death penalty for terrorist murders. The death penalty is retained under Israeli law but is not mandatory. The last execution in Israel was in 1961.
