Zambia
Amnesty Intemational's concerns were the detention without trial of several alleged opponents of the govemment and the death penalty. At least 25 people were sentenced to death and at least 11 executions took place.
Under the Preservation of Public Security Regulations the President is empowered to authorize detention without trial for an unlimited period. The grounds for detention may not be challenged in the courts. It is required that detainees be informed of the formal grounds for their detention, that their names be published in the Government Gazette and that their cases be reviewed by a specially established tribunal within one month and thereafter at half-yearly intervals. This tribunal can recommend release or continued detention, but the President is not obliged to implement its recommendations. Those in detention included some alleged political opponents of the govemment, and also large numbers of criminal suspects, particularly alleged dmg smugglers.
A number of those detained without trial, as well as five men under sentence of death at the end of 1985, were imprisoned as a consequence of a plot to overthrow the govemment of President Kenneth Kaunda in October 1980. A number of people were arrested after the plot was uncovered and were charged with treason, which carries a mandatory death sentence. In 1981 there were further arrests after an alleged conspiracy to help those facing treason charges to escape from prison. Three of those arrested in connection with the alleged escape plot remained in detention without charge or trial in 1985: Major Ronald Chansa, Faustino Lombe and Flight Sergeant Manfred Mwangana Mukumbuta. Amnesty Intemational was investigating whether they might be prisoners of conscience. In July, the organization urged President Kaunda to review the three men's cases and order their release if they were not to be promptly
116	Amnesty International Report 1986
charged with a criminal offence.
In February, a civilian pilot working for Zambia Airways, Pascoe McLeo Chansa, was arrested and detained under the Preservation of Public Security Regulations. The grounds for his detention were reported to be that he had held meetings with someone allegedly involved in the 1980 coup plot who had fled to South Africa to avoid arrest and had failed to report the meetings to the government. However, he was not charged and unofficial reports suggested that an additional reason for his detention might have been that an aircraft which he was piloting, and on which President Kaunda was travelling, experienced some flight problems and led him to be accused of deliberately endangering the President's safety. In October Pascoe McLeo Chansa filed a petition in the Lusaka High Court challenging his detention on the grounds that his detention order had been signed by the Secretary General of the ruling United National Independence Party, in the absence of the President and without his written authorization. However, judgment had not been given by the end of 1985 and Pascoe McLeo Chansa remained in detention.
In April the Supreme Court ruled on the appeal lodged by seven men convicted of treason for their alleged part in the 1980 coup plot and sentenced to death in 1983. The Supreme Court confirmed the death sentence on five of them, including Edward Shamwana, a prominent lawyer, while quashing the conviction of Valentine Musakanya, the former governor of the national bank, and one other. Anderson Mporokoso, who had been sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment on the lesser charge of misprision of treason (failure to report treason) was also acquitted on appeal. Amnesty Intemational appealed to President Kaunda to show clemency towards the five men, an appeal which was repeated in July. There is an advisory committee on the prerogative of mercy which is obliged by the Constitution to consider all cases where the death sentence has been imposed and to recommend whether the President should exercise the powers of clemency given to him by Article 60 of the Constitution. The committee had apparently not considered the cases of Edward Shamwana and those sentenced with him by the end of 1985.
Also in April the High Court turned down a petition filed by six of those sentenced to death in the treason case in which they alleged torture, solitary confinement, degradation and discrimination by the prison authorities.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the use of the death penalty. At least 25 people were reported to have been sentenced to death in 1985, mostly for murder or armed robbery. At least 11 people were hanged, all on 27 December. It was reported that one of these had been under sentence of death since 1975.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	117	Japan
