Benin
Amnesty International worked for the release of several prisoners of conscience and investigated the cases of more than 50 other people detained without trial for political reasons. Amnesty International was concerned also by reports that some of those detained were tortured or ill-treated.
Three former long-term political detainees who had been freed in an amnesty in August 1984 but shortly afterwards rearrested were held throughout the year. Dr Afolabi Biaou and Didier d'Almeida had both been arrested in November 1984 after an informal group of former detainees wrote to the authorities asking to be allowed to retum to their jobs and studies and protesting over the rearrest of two other former detainees — Hébert Offiki, who was detained in September 1984, and Emmanuel Alamou, detained in October 1984.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII
23	Japan
Dr Biaou, Didier d'Almeida and Emmanuel Alamou continued to be held without charge or trial throughout 1985 without any official explanation for their arrest. They had earlier been among some 35 long-term prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty Intemational, most of whom had been held without trial from 1979 to 1984 in connection with student protests against govemment policies. All three were again adopted as prisoners of conscience.
Following his rearrest in September 1984, Hébert Offiki was released uncharged in mid-March 1985. However, he was again rearrested on 9 May when the govemment accused the political detainees released in 1984 of orchestrating renewed student protest and unrest. He too was still detained without charge or trial at the end of 1985 and had been adopted as a prisoner of conscience. According to Amnesty Intemational's information, he had not been present on the university campus at the time of the unrest there.
Renewed student protest broke out in March and continued for several months apparently because of dissatisfaction with the body established to represent students' views, the Bureau exécutif de la coopérative universitaire, Executive Bureau of the University Cooperative, which was said by students to be govemment controlled. Following a demonstration by students, the university authorities in Cotonou acceded to demands for a new, elected student organization. A congress to elect student representatives was held at which calls were made for greater freedom of expression, for a fund to assist political detainees and for the university authorities to oppose police and security force incursions onto the university campus. President Mathieu Kérékou then ordered the dissolution of the new student organization and placed the university under the control of the Ministry of the Interior and the security forces, provoking a strike by the students which spread to schools. There were clashes between student demonstrators and the security forces which resulted in at least one death, that of Parfait Atchaka, a school student.
On 7 May, the govemment publicly accused the former student leaders released from detention in August 1984 of manipulating the students to provoke unrest. Subsequently, orders were issued for the arrest of five members of the new student organization, but they avoided arrest. The govemment closed the university and all schools and President Kérékou was widely reported to have told the security forces to shoot demonstrators on sight.
Schools and the university reopened on 10 June on govemment instmctions. Eighteen students, including the five whose arrest had been ordered, were barred from the university, however, because of their alleged subversive activities. One of the 18, Epiphane Yélomé, was detained, as was another student, Mampo Kassa, although no
vili	Amnesty Intemational Report 1986
charges were brought against them. They were still held without trial at the end of 1985. In all about 100 people were arrested in 1985 in connection with the student unrest and still detained at the end of the year. Some were held initially at Camp Guezo, a military camp in Cotonou, where they were kept in cramped conditions and reportedly subjected to torture and other forms of ill-treatment. Detainees were said to be subjected to the rodéo — that is, beaten with sticks while being made to run with heavy loads — and forced to crawl or walk barefoot over sharp stones and afterwards denied medical treatment for the injuries sustained. Léonard Kédoté, for example, a student arrested on 18 July, was said to have been taken to Camp Guezo and subjected to the rodéo. He sustained cuts and other injuries as a result but was reportedly denied medical treatment both at Camp Guezo and at Camp Alejo where he was later moved. He was still held without charge or trial at the end of 1985. Amnesty Intemational took up his case for investigation as a possible prisoner of conscience.
Basilien Biaou, another student, was widely mmoured in July to have died in custody as a result of torture. Subsequently, it emerged that he was still alive but information received by Amnesty Intemational suggested that he had become seriously ill as a result of torture. He was believed to be held at the '"'Maison blanche" (White House), a section of the commissariat central de Cotonou, the capital's main police station. He too was still detained without trial at the end of 1985 and his case had been taken up for investigation as a possible prisoner of conscience.
Further politically motivated arrests occurred in late October and November when a number of people were detained apparently because they were suspected of links with the banned Parti Communiste du Dahomey, Communist Party of Dahomey (as Benin was formerly named). Those arrested included two members of the university's teaching staff, Chabi Sika Karumou and Jérôme Houessou, both of whose cases were taken up for investigation by Amnesty Intemational. Jérôme Houessou's case had previously been taken up by the organization when he w^ detained without trial from March 1981 until August 1984. Following his rearrest, Jérôme Houessou was believed to be held at Parakou military barracks, where conditions have previously been reported as harsh.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986
25	Japan
