Guyana
Amnesty Intemational noted with con-cem the decision of the govemment to resume executions after 15 years during which none had taken place. Balkarran Singh and Donald Aulder were hanged on 10 October and Horton Blackman and Victor Bishop on 16 October. Three had been sentenced to death in 1981 for a murder committed during the course of a robbery in 1978 and the fourth, Donald Aulder, was convicted of murder in 1982.
These were the first executions since 1970 although the law provides a mandatory death sentence for murder. Under the govemment of former President Forbes Bumham, who died in office in August, there had been a long-standing policy not to carry out executions. In 1983 the Solicitor General stated that since the last execution in 1970 sentences of death had always been commuted to life imprisonment on the recommendation of the Advisory Council on the Prerogative of Mercy. However, President Desmond Hoyte, who succeeded President Bumham, announced in August that executions would resume to curb what he described as a growing
164
Amnesty International Report 1986
wave of violent crime. In September the Advisory Council on the Prerogative of Mercy recommended against commuting the death sentences of the four men.
On 8 October Amnesty Intemational wrote to the govemment saying that the execution of the prisoners on death row would be particularly cmel, given the long period which many had spent on death row while executions were in abeyance. It urged the President to take this into account in reviewing their cases and to commute their sentences accordingly.
Following the executions of Balkarran Singh and Donald Aulder the organization sent a message to President Hoyte expressing its deep regret at the news, and voicing its additional concern that the two prisoners had been given no opportunity to consult their lawyers or lodge final petitions for mercy after the warrants for execution were issued without warning on 8 October. Some 30 prisoners were under sentence of death at the end of 1985, some of whom had been on death row for several years.
In a reply to Amnesty Intemational's letter of December 1984 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1985) in which concem was expressed about four reported cases of police ill-treatment of criminal suspects held in custody, the Ministry of Home Affairs assured the organization that the incidents had been thoroughly investigated. It said that the death of Trevor Waterman in April 1984 had been investigated by a separate and independent unit of the police force, and three police officers had been charged with manslaughter. In an inquest into the death of Cleveland Alexander in May 1984, the Ministry reported, the jury had found members of the police force to be criminally responsible but the officer "most likely to have been criminally liable" had left the country and could not be traced. The two other cases referred to in Amnesty Intemational's letter had also been thoroughly investigated, according to the Ministry.
