Liberia
Amnesty Intemational's main concems were the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and probable prisoners of conscience, some of whom were detained without trial and others prosecuted for alleged political offences; reports of assaults on detainees, particularly following an unsuccessful coup attempt in November; the death penalty and allegations of extrajudical executions.
Many arrests were made following an attempt to overthrow the government of President Samuel K. Doe on 12 November. The
60	Amnesty International Report 1986
rebels were defeated after several days' fighting in the capital, Monrovia. They were led by Brigadier-General Thomas Quiwonkpa, who had reportedly left the country after being accused of compücity in another conspiracy against the govemment in November 1983 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1985). He was killed shortly after the coup attempt failed. Those detained following the coup attempt included alleged participants in the conspiracy and others who, reportedly, had not been involved and who were considered by Amnesty Intemational to be probable prisoners of conscience. Some had been imprisoned before as prisoners of conscience. The govemment announced its intention to hold separate trials for military pei^onnel and civilians implicated in the failed coup but it was not clear how many defendants there would be. No trials of civilians had begun by the end of 1985 but trials of military personnel were reported to be proceeding in camera.
The coup attempt occurred within a few weeks of Liberia's return to civilian mle after some five years' military govemment. The head of the military government, Samuel K. Doe, became the new civilian Head of State following presidential and legislative elections, the results of which were widely disputed. In the months preceding the elections, which had originally been scheduled for April but were delayed until October, several leading opposition politicians and others were imprisoned. They included Dusty WolokoUie, a prominent member of the Liberian People's Party (LPP), and John Karweaye, another LPP member, who were arrested on 15 July apparently after expressing doubts as to whether the elections would be fair. Both were held until 20 September and then released without charge. Dusty WolokoUie had been acquitted in June of violating a govemment decree against the "spreading of mmours, lies and disinformation" after he had appealed in August 1984 for the release of Dr Amos Sawyer, Chairman of the LPP, and other detainees then held (see Amnesty International Report 1985). Both the LPP and another opposition party, the United People's Party, were prohibited ft^om all political activity in August.
At the end of July, EUen Johnson-Sirleaf, a leading member of the Liberian Action Party (LAP), was placed under house arrest. A few days later she was detained and moved to the Post Stockade prison in Monrovia. The Minister of Justice stated that she would be charged in connection with a speech criticizing the govemment during a visit to the USA. Amnesty Intemational adopted her as a prisoner of conscience and appealed for her release. She was, however, tried in camera before the Special Military Tribunal and on 14 September sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment for sedition. Eleven days later, she was freed on the orders of Head of State Doe and in October she
61	Amnesty International Report 1986
contested the elections on behalf of the LAP.
Two journahsts who had been imprisoned for pohtical reasons in 1984 were also arrested in July. Momolu Sirleaf and Klon Hinneh of the Footprints Today newspaper were charged with "breach of security" after the publication of an article in which they alleged that they had been falsely imprisoned in 1984 by the National Security Agency and the Minister of State of Presidential Affairs. They were brought to trial but released in late September while their trial was still in progress.
Human rights abuses on a substantial scale occurred in the wake of the coup attempt of 12 November. As well as civilians and mihtary personnel apparently suspected of participation in the conspiracy, opposition political leaders and party activists were rounded up. Some of those detained were released after relatively short periods but many others were still believed held at the end of the year. There were reports of assaults on detainees and some were alleged to have "disappeared" in custody or to have been executed extrajudicially. At the end of 1985 Amnesty Intemational was receiving reports of political killings by government forces in Nimba county, the home area of the leader of the coup, Brigadier-General Thomas Quiwonk-pa, in the days following its failure. The victims appeared mostly to be civilians who had not been involved in the conspiracy but who were suspected by the govemment of being sympathetic to Thomas Quiwonkpa.
A number of opposition political party leaders and members were detained in the aftermath of the coup including Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf and Jackson F. Doe, Chairman of the LAP, and Gabriel KpoUeh and Edward Kessely, respectively leadere of the Liberia Unification Party and the Liberian Unity Party. Both Gabriel Kpolleh and Edward Kessely were released uncharged after some weeks but the LAP leaders were still held without charge at the end of 1985. Momolu Sirleaf, who had been imprisoned for a time earlier in the year, and another joumahst, Isaac Bantu, a local correspondent for the British Broadcasting Corporation, were also arrested in November and were among those still detained without charge at the end of 1985. Amnesty Intemational made several appeds to the govemment on behalf of those detained, urging that those unconnected with the conspiracy should be released at once and the others given prompt and fair trials. The organization called also for all necessary safeguards to ensure that those detained should not be tortured or ill-treated, or subjected to the death penalty or extrajudicial execution.
Amnesty International was particularly concemed about a number of people unconnected with the coup who were reported to have been
62	Amnesty International Report 1986
killed. One was Charles Gbenyon, a senior television journalist working for the Liberian Broadcasting System, who was killed at the official residence of Head of State Doe a few days after the coup attempt. He was apparently accused of complicity in the coup on the grounds that he had filmed events in Monrovia on the day it took place. Amnesty Intemational received information that he was bayonneted to death by soldiers. The govemment said that he had been killed accidentally while stmggling with a gun but his family were not permitted to see his body or to arrange an autopsy.
The death penalty remained a concern but it was not known how many people were sentenced to death or executed. In April, however, Moses Flanzamaton, who was alleged to have attempted to assa^inate Head of State Doe, was executed without being brought to trial. Four civilians alleged to have recmited him to assassinate the Head of State were arrested but soon after released for lack of evidence.
