Guinea
Amnesty International's main conœms were the detention of political prisoners without trial and reports of torture and secret extrajudicial executions.
At the beginning of 1985 some 60 or more former officials and relatives of President Ahmed Sékou Touré, who died in March 1984, remained in detention at Kindia. They had been arrested following the armed forces' seizure of power on 3 April 1984 and the formation of a new govemment headed by President Lansana Conté. According to the authorities, they were being held while investigations were conducted by the Commission nationale d'enquête. National Commission of Inquiry, to establish responsibility for the massive human rights violations and apparently large-scale financial misappropriation which occurred during the Sékou Touré administration. In April, on the first anniversary of the coup, President Conté reconfirmed that some of the Kindia detainees would be tried for alleged human rights offences. Later that month, however, Senaïnon Louis Béhanzin, a former ambassador, was released, and in May 30 other detainees who had also apparently been exonerated by the commission of inquiry were released from detention. They included Jeanne Martin-Cissé, a former Ministe of Social Affairs, and Aminata Touré, a daughter of the former President, both of whom had been seen by an Amnesty Intemational delegation which visited Guinea in October 1984 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1985).
On 4 July, with President Conté temporarily outside the country, there was an attempted coup in Conakry, the capital, apparently led by Diarra Traoré, the Minister of State for National Education and a former Prime Minister. The attempt was put down, however, by troops loyal to President Conté. Eighteen people were officially reported to have been killed but the real figure may have been higher. In the wake of the coup attempt, there were attacks on members of the Malinké tribal group resident in Conakry and on their property. Diarra Traoré, himself a Malinké, was captured and shown on television being bmtally assaulted; his son was killed when the house in which he lived was attacked by troops loyal to the President. Unofficial sources reported that some 200 people were arrested for alleged involvement in the days following the coup attempt.
On his retum to Conakry from abroad. President Conté reportedly
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII
53	Japan
declared that the authorities would punish severely those responsible for the coup attempt. He suggested that executions might follow quickly, stating that human rights organizations should intervene without delay or eke it would be too late. On 8 July Amnesty Intemational told the authorities of its concern about the threatening nature of the statements reportedly made by the President and called for human rights to be respected. In addition, Amnesty Intemational asked to send a delegation to Conakry to discuss with the authorities the importance of fair triak for those accused of involvement in the coup attempt and its opposition to the death penalty. The organization noted that President Conté had described himself as a committed opponent of the death penalty during the Amnesty International mission in October 1984. In the event, however, it was not possible for an Amnesty International delegation to visit Conakry in the immediate aftermath of the coup attempt because of difficulties affecting travel to the country and contact with the government.
On 19 July the authorities denied that any of those detained at Kindia had been executed, as unofficial sources had suggested, and stated that those involved in the coup attempt would receive fair trials. The authorities also announced a commission of inquiry into responsibility for the failed coup. In mid-August, this was reported to have completed its investigations. Two new courts were then established, the cour de sûreté de l'Etat, state security court, and the tribunal militaire, military tribunal, to try the civilians and soldiers allegedly involved in the coup plot. However, no trials were known to have taken place before either court by the end of 1985 and none of those allegedly implicated in the coup had been brought to trial.
Despite government denials, rumours persisted throughout the rest of 1985 that some extrajudicial executions had been inflicted in the days and weeks following the coup attempt. In particular it was reported that some 22 suspected political opponents of the govem-ment or associates of former President Sékou Touré had been extrajudicially executed on 8 July. In August Amnesty Intemational asked the government for information about those arrested as a result of the coup attempt and sought assurances that they were not being ill-treated. In response. Amnesty Intemational was told by a government official that no executions had taken place and that those responsible for the coup attempt would be tried. Despite this and other denials, the Paris-based magazine, Jeune Afrique, subsequently named eight former close associates of ex-President Sékou Touré who, it alleged, had been taken fi-om detention at Kindia where they had been held since 1984, and extrajudicially executed by the authorities for suspected complicity in the failed coup attempt. The government repudiated this report but did not produce those named
vili	Amnesty Intemational Report 1986
in public to disprove it and there was uncertainty regarding their fate and whereabouts — and that of others — at the end of 1985.
Serious allegations of torture of detainees were also made following the coup attempt. In November a French medical team which had received financial assistance from Amnesty Intemational withdrew from Guinea in protest against the torture of political detainees. The medical team went to Guinea in late 1984 to provide medical treatment to former prisoners and torture victims under Sékou Touré's govemment. Their withdrawal from Guinea occurred after they had apparently leamed of new cases of torture of detainees. They alleged that detainees held at the Alpha Yaya military camp in Conakry, in particular, were subject to torture, beatings and other ill-treatment — including the diète (diet), deprivation of food and water for days at a time, which was extensively used under Sékou Touré to weaken prisoners by starvation.
At the end of 1985, Amnesty Intemational was concemed about reports of torture on an extensive scale and the govemment's failure to account satisfactorily either for those long-term detainees alleged to have been summarily executed or for many other people detained in connection with the unsuccessful coup attempt.
