Ethiopia
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, some of whom had been held for over 11 years. It was also concerned about the detention without trial of other suspected opponents of the govemment. Some political prisoners were allegedly given prison terms in secret by a special govemment committee without being formally charged or tried. The organization was particularly concemed about reports of extrajudicial executions of political detainees, some of whom were reportedly condemned in secret. Amnesty Intemational received new allegations of torture and ill-treatment of political prisoners. It was also concemed about the government's continued failure to account for 15 political detainees and a church leader who "disappeared" in 1979 and were widely presumed to have been secretly executed without trial.
Conflict between the government and armed opposition groups continued during 1985 in several parts of the country, including Eritrea, Tigray, Gondar, Wollega and Hararghe regions. Civilians in these areas suspected of links with opposition guerrilla organizations were reportedly arrested, ill-treated and in some cases extrajudicially executed by the security forces. There were also reports that during the program of large-scale resettlement of people from famine-affected areas such as Tigray and Wollo, some people were imprisoned or summarily executed for resisting resettlement or seeking to escap)e from resettlement centres.
Further politically motivated arrests were reported to have occurred in 1985 but Amnesty Intemational was not able to estimate their number and received detailed information in only a few cases. It appeared that most of those arrested were suspected, by virtue of their regional or ethnic origin, of supporting armed opposition groups such as the Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF), the Tigray People's Liberation Front (TPLF) and the Oromo Liberation Front (OLF). The authorities disclosed no information about those detained, none of whom were known to have been formally charged or tried. Most were initially held incommunicado in interrogation centres under the control of the Ministry of State and Public Security, such as the Central Investigation Centre in Addis Ababa (known informally as Maekelawi (Central) or as the "third police station") and the Mariam Gimbi Investigation Centre in Asmara. The Special
vili	Amnesty Intemational Report 1986
Investigation Centre in the Grand Palace in Addis Ababa, headquarters of the ruling Provisional Military Administrative Council (known as the Dergue), was also used for this purpose. Conditions in these interrogation centres were harsh and torture extensive.
A large number of political prisoners, estimated at several thousand, were believed to be still imprisoned following their arrest in previous years. They were mostly held in prisons administered by the Prisons Department, not in interrogation centres. However, their prison conditions were believed to be very poor.
Those held throughout 1985 included 10 close relatives of the late Emperor Haile Selassie held without trial since 1974. Amnesty Intemational continued to press for their release as prisoners of conscience. They included his daughter, Tenagnework Haile-Selassie and her four daughters; three of his grandsons and their mother; and another relative, Zuriashwork Gebre-Igziabeher. They were all held in the Central Prison in Addis Ababa. The women were held in the women's section with about 50 other women political prisoners, while the three men were among about 1,500 prisoners, including many political prisoners, in the Alem Bekagne ("End of the World") maximum security section of the prison. Amnesty Intemational appealed to the govenunent to ensure all necessary medical treatment for Tenagnework Haile-Selassie and her daughter, Hirut Desta, both of whom were reported to be in poor health throughout 1985.
Among the other prisoners of conscience held throughout 1985 were over 40 members of the Oromo ethnic group who had been detained without trial since 1980. They included Tsehai Tolessa and Martha Kumsa, held in the women's section of the Central Prison in Addis Ababa, and Zegeye Asfaw, former Minister of Law and Justice, and Abba-Biyya Abba-Jobbir, a former High Court judge, both held in the Central Investigation Centre in Addis Ababa. Several civil servants, students and other people of Tigrayan origin, who had been among a large number of Tigrayans arrested in 1984 for alleged links with the TPLF, were believed to be still detained without trial in prisons in Addis Ababa, Sebetta, Mekelle and Gondar at the end of 1985. They included Berhane Mamo, Mayor of Mekelle, and Desta Bezabeh, a Ministry of Agriculture official. Large numbers of political prisoners were also reported to be detained without trial in Eritrea, particularly in Sembel men's prison and Haz-Haz women's prison in Asmara, for alleged links with Eritrean opposition movements.
The Reverend Olana Lemu and several other members of the Ethiopian Evangelical Mekane Yesus Church continued to be detained without trial in Nekemte and other prisons in Wollega region since their arrest in 1981 for alleged support for the OLF,
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII
45	Japan
which was active in the region. Sixteen other prisoners of conscience and members of this church, including the Reverend Ula Fituma, who were arrested in Dembi Dollo in April 1984, were released in April 1985. They had reportedly been arrested for holding a church service which had been prohibited by the authorities.
Several members of other Protestant churches remained in detention during 1985, including Tesfaye Gabiso, a member of the Mullu Wongel (Full Gospel) Church, who had been held without charge in Yirgalem prison in Sidamo region with other church members since 1979. Members of the Meseret Christos (Mennonite) Church and Kale Hiwot (Word of Life) Church had also been detained for some years.
Two UN employees remained in detention throughout 1985 on political grounds without being charged: Tesfa-Mariam Zeggai, a statistician at the Economic Commission for Africa arrested in 1982; and Shimelis Teklu, an employee of the High Commission for Refugees, arrested in January 1984. Two other women employees of the UN Economic Commission for Africa — Azeb Abay and Haragwein Desta — who had been detained without trial since 1979 for alleged links with opposition organizations, were released on 21 June.
The government released 88 political prisoners on 11 September to mark the 11th anniversary of the revolution which brought it to power. The names of those freed were not divulged but they were believed to include several long-term detainees accused of links with left-wing opposition organizations. Amnesty International welcomed the releases but urged Head of State Mengistu Haile-Mariam to free all prisoners of conscience and to try or release other political detainees.
Amnesty International received reports during 1985 of prisoners being secretly sentenced to death or to prison terms by a special committee whose membere included representatives of the Ministry of State and Public Security. According to reports, these sentences were imposed without any recognized form of trial and without any opportimity for prisoners to submit a defence or appeal. Those sentenced to death in this way were reportedly summarily executed, while those sentenced to prison terms were transferred to civil prisons to serve the sentences. Summary executions of political prisoners were reported from Addis Ababa, Asmara and Harar in particular. Fifteen alleged members of the EPLF were reportedly taken from prison in Asmara and summarily executed on 10 January and similar summary executions were reported to have taken place there in October. Amnesty International received reports of the summary execution near Harar on 10 and 16 February of up to 40 long-term political detainees from Harar Central Prison, including Barentu
vili	Amnesty Intemational Report 1986
ChaUa and Daud Bakr.
At the end of 1985, Amnesty International was investigating reports of the "disappearance" from detention and alleged summary execution in November of over 60 political detainees, including several of the 19 alleged members of the clandestine Ethiopian People's Democratic Alliance (EPDA), who had been arrested in December 1983 and accused of distributing pamphlets critical of the government. Amnesty Intemational believed that they might be prisoners of conscience. Those alleged to have been summarily executed included Asegahegne Araya, a former senator. Another alleged EPDA member, Mengesha Gebre-Hiwot, "disappeared" from the Central Investigation Centre in Addis Ababa in mid-1985. He was said to have had his foot amputated earlier as a result of torture injuries. In September Amnesty International had appealed for information on Mengesha Gebre-Hiwot's whereabouts but had received no reply. Other pohtical detainees reportedly summarily executed in November included alleged members of the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Party detained without charge or trial in the Central Prison in Addis Ababa since 1977 and 1978.
Amnesty International's appeals to the authorities to resolve uncertainties about the fate of 16 people who "disappeared" in 1979 elicited no response. The 16 included the Reverend Gudina Tumsa, general secretary of the Ethiopian Evangelical Mekane Yesus Church, who was abducted in Addis Ababa, and 15 long-term pohtical detainees. On 4 Febmary the Ethiopian Representative at the UN in Geneva informed the UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances that "due to the severe drought and the catastrophic situation in the country and the consequential workload on Government agencies, the Government had not been in a position to carry out the necessary investigations [into these cases]". Amnesty Intemational was also unable to obtain any clear information on the whereabouts of Bealu Girma, a writer and former newspaper editor, who "disappeared" in April 1984. It was believed that his "disappearance" was related to criticisms of the govemment expressed in his novel, Orimiyya.
Amnesty International continued to receive allegations that political prisoners were tortured, particularly by the Hizb Dehninet, Pubhc Security organization, in Addis Ababa, Asmara, Mekelle, Harar, Gondar and other places. The pattem of torture and ill-treatment of pohtical prisoners was not believed to have changed markedly from that in 1984. Torture methods reportedly included prolonged beatings on the soles of the feet with the prisoner inverted, prolonged suspension from the ceihng in a contorted position, and electric shocks. Detainees under interrogation were held in harsh
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII
47	Japan
conditions and many prisoners were aUeged to have died as a result of torture and denial of medical treatment.
