Niger
Amnesty International was concemed about the detention without trial of at least 20 alleged opponents of the govemment and the imposition of death sentences on 12 others who were brought to trial in July or August. However, none of these 12 were reported to have been executed by the end of 1985. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about the renewed house arrest of former President Hamani Diori.
Between 20 and 25 people who were arrested following at least two unsuccessful coup attempts in 1976 and 1983 remained in detention without trial throughout 1985. They were reported to include Mamane Sidikou, a former head of the prime minister's office, and Lieutenant Idrissa Amadou, former head of the Presidential Guard. In December Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Minister of Justice to inquire into the legal status of those detained and to press for them to be brought to trial in accordance with intemational legal standards or released.
There were new arrests following an incident on 29 May when a group of people attacked a police station in the northwestem town of Tchin Tabaraden, causing several deaths. Twelve people, all members of the Tuareg community, were detained and were brought to trial in July or August. Amnesty Intemational received few details of their trial, which took place before a special military tribunal established by presidential decree. Amnesty Intemational asked the government in early July for information about the trial and called for it to be conducted fairly, but received no response. In late August the organization learned that all 12 defendants had been sentenced to death. Amnesty Intemational appealed to President Seyni Kountche to extend clemency to the prisoners under sentence of death. The authorities were subsequently reported to have announced a stay of execution and the prisoners were not believed to have been executed by the end of 1985.
In June former President Hamani Diori was once again placed under house arrest, apparently on account of the alleged activities of one of his sons in connection with a Libyan-based political organization; no opportunity w^ afforded to him to challenge the legal basis of the house arrest. He had previously been held under house arrest after his release from several years' detention without trial in 1980 until April 1984.
76
Amnesty International Report 1986
