Nicaragua
Amnesty International's concerns continued to centre on a pattern of short-term imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, and the incommunicado detention of political prisoners during pretrial interrogation. Restrictions on the right to a fair trial and poor prison conditions for prisoners of conscience and other political prisoners were continuing concems. In the course of 1985 Amnesty Intemational acted on behalf of 30 people held in short-term detention it believed were prisoners of conscience or probable prisoners of conscience. Twenty of them, all but two detained in December 1985, were reportedly still in detention at the end of the year.
Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about reports of the routine practice of torture and summary execution by irregular forces opposing the Govemment of Nicaragua, and about indications that other govemments assisting these forces may have contributed to, encouraged, or condoned these abuses.
Extraordinary powers under a state of emergency in force since March 1982 permitted the arrest of political prisoners without warrant and their prolonged incommunicado detention. Detainees included both collaborators with armed opposition groups and individuals who were believed to be prisoners of conscience.
Most prisoners of conscience and probable prisoners of conscience were detained because of their lawful activities in trade unions, political parties and other organizations in conflict with govemment policies. Some members of independent labour and political groups were apparently suspected of involvement with armed opposition groups but others appear to have been detained in order to harass
180	Amnesty International Report 1986
sections of the legal opposition. Some were detained briefly for questioning about the activities of their organizations; others were held for longer periods of up to several weeks without charge, apparently as a form of punishment.
Most detentions were reportedly carried out by the Dirección General de Seguridad del Estado (DGSE), the State Security Service. Some detainees were held for a few hours when ordered to report to the DOSE public relations office "Casa 50" for questioning. Others were held incommunicado for periods ranging from a few days to several months in the DGSE headquarters "El Chipote" in Managua.
Most detainees believed by Amnesty Intemational to be prisoners of conscience were released after several days or weeks in detention, without ever being brought before a court of law or formally charged. Those prisoners of conscience believed to have been imjustly convicted of crimes have, with few exceptions, been released under a law of pardon, not long after sentencing.
Political prisoners who were formally charged were held under the Ley para el Mantenimiento del Orden y Seguridad Pública, Law for the Maintenance of Public Order and Security (the Public Order Law). From April 1983 most of these cases were heard by a system of special courts, the Tribunales Populares Antisomocistas (TPA), Populcu" Anti-Somocist Tribunals, using special summary procedures. These severely restricted the time available for defence, and appeals against verdicts could be made only to the TPA's own appeal court. Amnesty International had not identified any prisoners of conscience among the prisoners held at the end of 1985 who had been convicted of politically motivated criminal offences, although some cases remained under investigation.
Two lawyers active in the defence of political detainees, and in legal opposition parties, were among those held during 1985 whom Amnesty Intemational believed to have been prisoners of conscience. Dr Salomón Calvo Arrieta was detained on 29 December 1984 and held in "El Chipote" for nearly six weeks, most of it incommunicado. After his release on 14 February authorities responded to Amnesty Intemational's earlier inquiries, stating that he had been under investigation for "activities against the maintenance of public order and security". Dr Roger Guevara Mena was detained on 5 Febmary and held incommunicado in "El Chipote" for 10 days, reportedly in poor conditions with restricted food and water, in isolation in a dark ceU.
Leaders of the Central de Trabajadores de Nicaragua (CTN), Nicaraguan Workers Confederation, were also arrested without warrant by the DGSE. CTN Deputy Secretary General José Altamirano Solis was detained on 14 December and reportedly
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	181	Japan
remained in incommunicado detention without charge in "El Chipote" at the end of the year. Although the legal basis of his arrest was not known, in similar cases in the past the authorities had accused CTN officials of maintaining contact with former union leaders who had left the country and played prominent roles in armed opposition groups. At the end of the year Amnesty Intemational was investigating the cases of four CTN leaders detained in December.
Amnesty Intemational was also investigating the cases of 20 members of the legal opposition parties Partido Social Cristiano (PSC), Social Christian Party, and Partido Conservador de Nicaragua (PCN), Nicaraguan Conservative Party, detained in December 1985. Hiey included the Secretary General of the youth branch of the PSC in Masaya, Sebastián Potoy Zuñiga, and members of the Masaya branch of the PCN.
Amnesty Intemational wrote to President Daniel Ortega on 4 June to outline its concem about the detention of prisoners of conscience under state of emergency powers, and the detention and interrogation procedures employed by the DGSE. The letter expressed concem at the extraordinary powers exercised by the DGSE to detain suspects without warrant or apparent basis in law; to hold prisoners for long periods of incommunicado detention subject to no known regulation; and to deny access to prisoners in pretrial detention even to court-appointed magistrates seeking to confirm their well-being under writs of habeas corpus (the right to habeas corpus remains in force under the state of emergency insofar as it guarantees those rights to life and physical security which may not be suspended).
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about reports by former prisoners held in "El Chipote" that they were subjected to long periods in small isolation cells with poor ventilation and no natural light; that lights were sometimes left on permanently, or that prisoners were held in the ,dark except at meal-times for a week or more; and that they were threatened with indefinite incommunicado detention and with the detention of relatives.
Amnesty Intemational's June letter to President Ortega urged an end to the broad powers exercised by the DGSE to detain without warrant or apparent basis in law; to hold prisoners indefinitely in isolation and incommunicado; and to present as evidence statements taken without the presence of private lawyers or any judicial authority. The organization urged the authorities to bring prisoners before liie courts without delay after detention, to give the courts unrestricted access to prisoners at any time, and to investigate allegations of coercion of any kind in the recording of prisoners' statements by the DGSE.
The terms of the state of emergency were twice modified in 1985.
182	Amnesty International Report 1986
A decree of 15 October extended its scope to suspend freedom of expression, freedom of movement, freedom of association, habeas corpus, and the rights to strike and to hold public meetings and demonstrations. These measures were relaxed by the legislature in November 1985, but continued to restrict freedom of movement in war zones; to limit freedom of assembly by requiring prior authorization for public meetings and demonstrations, and to ban strike action. Habeas corpus was restored, but for political cases only as a guarantee of those rights not suspended — such as the right to personal security — as under the terms of the state of emergency before 15 October. Political suspects continued to be liable to detention without charge and indefinite detention without trial, although suspects not released after questioning were generally formally charged and held for trial by the Popular Tribunals.
Amnesty Intemational received few concrete allegations of human rights violations from the Atlantic Coast region, where in 1981 and 1982 denunciations were made of "disappearance" and extrajudicial execution. Talks on regional autonomy between leaders of Miskito Indian organizations and Nicaraguan Govemment representatives, initiated in 1984, continued. In the context of the talks, an amnesty law was passed in April 1985 covering Miskito, Sumo and Rama Indian armed opposition groups and resulting in the release of 14 prisoners — reportedly all those then still in detention. In response to long-standing demands from Miskito and Moravian Church leaders, a compulsory relocation policy on the Atlantic Coast was modified and many residents of the Miskito resettlement areas returned to the Coco River area.
Although Amnesty Intemational identified few prisoners of conscience in Nicaragua, the number of prisoners charged with or convicted of political offences involving violence was considerable. Some 1,000 charged or convicted under the Public Order Law were in custody at the end of 1985. About 300 sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment or more were held at the top security Centro de Readaptación "Jorge Navarro" prison in Tipitapa, and most of the others were held at Managua's Centro de Readaptación "Héroes y Mártires de Nueva Guinea", known as the "Zona Franca" prison. The number of individuals in detention at any one time for investigation of Public Order Law offences, but not yet charged, was estimated to be up to about 500. Some 2,000 other prisoners at the "Jorge Navarro" prison had been convicted by special courts in 1980 and 1981 of committing crimes under the authority of the govemment of Anastasio Somoza. Most were former National Guards. Amnesty International appealed for information on some 50 former National Guards who were transferred to "El Chipote" in Febmary
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	183	Japan
after a hunger-strike to protest against poor prison conditions, but received no response.
Administrative reviews and legislative pardons resulted in some releases of political prisoner. A law passed on 30 April led to the releje of 113 prisoners, including 50 former members of the National Guard sentenced in 1980 and 1981 for offences under the Somoza govemment; three others had Public Order Law charges against them dropped, while the remainder had been convicted of such offences.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about a pattem of torture and extrajudicial killings by Honduran-based irregular forces opposing the Nicaraguan Govemment, and about aspects of assistance to these forces ft^om the Governments of Honduras and the United States of America which appeared to encourage or expressly condone such abuses (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1985). Opposition forces acting under the name Unión Nacional de Oposición (UNO), National Opposition Union, continued to routinely torture and summarily execute their captives.
Some captives seized in border areas by UNO forces were removed to military base camps in Honduran territory. Amnesty International was concemed that torture and death threats were apparently tolerated by Honduran and United States officials advising and supplying UNO forces. In one case, Nicaraguan forestry workers Fausto Cristy and Jorge Canales were seized with West German citizen Regine Schmemann on 14 June in Zelaya department near the Atlantic Coast by forces of the largely Miskito Indian UNO affiliate MISURA. The three were taken across the Coco River to the permanent MISURA base at Smm Laya, where they were reportedly interrogated, ill-treated, and threatened with summary execution. Following intemational protests, Honduran officials including a Honduran army officer weni to the camp and took custody of Regine Schmemann, escorting her to the Honduran capital where she was tumed over to her country's embassy. Her military escort refused, however, to intervene on behalf of her Nicaraguan fellow captives at Smm Laya. Amnesty Intemational appealed to the President of Honduras on 12 August on behalf of the remaining captives at Smm Laya, but received no response, and at the end of 1985 Fausto Cristy and Jorge Canales were still unaccounted for.
Although the number of detainees kiUed by irregular forces opposing the Nicaraguan Govemment could not be determined with precision, Amnesty Intemational believed it to total many hundreds since 1979.
184
Amnesty International Report 1986
