Federal Republic of Germany
As in previous years Amnesty International's prindpal (X)ncems were the imprisonment of conscientious objectors to military service, allegations that politically motivated prisoners were being held in isolation and the prosecution of individuals in viola-
tion of their right to freedom of expression.
279	Amnesty International Report 1986
The right to conscientious objection to military service is recognized in the constitution, but a few people are nevertheless imprisoned for refusing on grounds of conscience to do military service. Amnesty Intemational appealed on behalf of four conscientious objectore, all of whom had applied unsuccessfully to do alternative non-military service.
Among them was Andreas Kleuter who had filed five unsuccessful applications for recognition as a conscientious objector with the District Office of Military Administration in Coesfeld. In his applications he stated that it was incompatible with his conscience to perform military service because he would have to kill people in the case of a conflict between states. When called up by the army on
1	October Andreas Kleuter reported at the Wittekind military barracte but refused to obey orders. He was consequently put under seven days' military arrest followed by a second military arrest of 14 days. Andreas Kleuter filed a sixth application and was recognized as a conscientious objector by the District Office of Military Administration in Coesfeld on 13 November 1985.
Amnesty Intemational also intervened on behalf of Joachim Rieger who was imprisoned for approximately seven weeks from
2	April for refusing to report for military service. He was finally recognized as a conscientious objector in June and charges for refusal to obey orders were subsequently dropped.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports alleging that politically motivated prisoners were held in isolation. Most of these prisoners came from the Red Army Faction (RAF), and aU had been convicted, or were held on suspicion, of terrorist offences. The organization had repeatedly drawn attention to the dangers posed by solitary confinement to both the physical and mental health of prisoners and urged the govemment to seek alternatives. From December 1984 to January 1985 , 39 prisoners belonging to the RAF went on hunger-strike; one of their demands was reported to be an end to solitary confinement. During 1985 Amnesty Intemational sought information from both govemment and other sources on prisoners alleged to be in isolation.
Prisoners arrested on suspicion of terrorist offences are often placed initially under a special detention order forbidding contact with other prisoners. The Minister of Justice indicated in Febmary that the prisoners on hunger-strike were held on average for seven months before their detention orders were amended to permit association with other prisoners, and that in two cases this period had exceeded a year. Defence lawyers representing the prisoners claimed that the average period of isolation was longer because the prison authorities did not always implement the amended order. After this
280	Amnesty International Report 1986
initial period some offers of association with other prisoners (for example, communal exercise periods) were made. Many politically motivated prisoners turned down such offers, claiming that unacceptable conditions were imposed and that prisoners to whom they talked were frequently questioned by the authorities and transferred to other sections of the prison.
An example of such a prisoner was Volker Staub. After more than six months in isolation from other prisoners, he was, according to his defence lawyer, offered exercise with other prisoners early in 1985 on condition that he did not "politically agitate". He refused the offer.
No medical information was available on the effects of the prison conditions on the health of these prisoners because the prisoners have in the past refused examinations by prison doctors and the authorities are reported to have refused to allow prisoners to consult doctors of their own choice.
Amnesty International was concerned both about the length of time spent in pretrial detention in isolation from other prisoners and about the lack of medical information on these prisoners. The organization considered that in view of the harmful effecte of isolation it was essential that the health of prisoners in isolation should be regularly monitored, even where it was claimed by the authorities that these conditions were self-inflicted. It also considered that the prisoners concerned should have the option of being examined by doctors outside the prison system.
During 1985 Amnesty International investigated prosecutions under Aiticle 166 of the penal code which proscribes insulting religious or other conscientiously held beliefe in a way liable to disturb the public peace, or insulting a "church established in the country". Four people in Freiburg were charged under this article, apparently for making and distributing a poster advertising an "anti-clerical" week, which depicted a Christlike figure as a puppet in the hands of a priest. In September Amnesty Intemation^ wrote to the Federal Prosecutor expressing concern at the apparent use of Article 166 to punish the expression of views which did not involve advocacy of violence and requesting information on the background to the case. The trial began at the end of November but was suspended to consider defence representations and did not resume before the end of 1985.
In November Amnesty International published a short study of prosecutions brought in previous years against people for expressing views which, in the opinion of the organization, did not involve advocacy of violence.
Amnesty International Report 1986
