Jamaica
Amnesty International was concerned about the continued use of the death penalty in Jamaica and about the increased incidence of criminal suspects being shot dead by the police in unexplained circumstances.
Nine prisoners were hanged during 1985, bringing to 38 the number executed since 1980 when capital punishment resumed after a four-year moratorium (see Amnesty International Report 1983,1984 and 1985). When it leamed of impending executions. Amnesty
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	173	Japan
Intemational appealed on behalf of the prisoners to be hanged; however, warrants for execution are normally issued at very short notice, allowing scant opportunity for final clemency petitions to be made for or by the prisoner.
Amnesty Intemational appealed to the Govemor General twice in 1985 to stay the executions of Elijah Kerr and Louis Cooper, who were convicted of murder in 1977. They were scheduled for execution on 12 March, and again on 11 June, but received stays of execution on both occasions. The organization leamed of new evidence in their case which, according to their lawyers, cast serious doubts on their guilt. The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in the United Kingdom declined in November 1983 to hear their appeal, stating that any new evidence was a matter for the Jamaica Court of Appeals. However, the Judicial Committee stated that the case against the defendants was "thin" and that there "was no evidence capable of supporting the correctness of the purported identification evidence of Cooper and Kerr". However, the Jamaica Privy Council refused to refer the cases back to the Jamaica Court of Appeals, despite repeated requests from the prisoners' lawyers. In eventually granting a stay of execution in March, the Privy Council said that it would consider the matter further. However, a second warrant for execution was issued in June, without explanation. Although a stay was granted on this occasion also, it was not known whether the Jamaica Privy Council had decided to refer the cases back to the appeal court. In appealing to the Govemor General for clemency Amnesty International stated, "It is a proper function of executive review to exercise clemency in all cases raising even a 'scintilla' of doubt as to the defendant's guilt of a capital crime and to commute death sentences to life imprisonment. This leaves open the possibility of judicial remedy should new evidence come to light at any future stage."
Amnesty Intemational expressed concem to the Jamaican Govemment that several prisoners were executed who had not exhausted all the legal remedies technically available to them. In a message to the Govemor General, Amnesty Intemational pointed out that executions carried out while legal proceedings were still pending contravene Article 8 of the UN Economic and Social Council Resolution on Safeguards Guaranteeing Protection of the Rights of those Facing the Death Penalty.
In April Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Minister of Justice about the increasing incidence of criminal suspects being shot dead by members of the Jamaica Police Force. Amnesty Intemational referred to figures quoted by the Jamaica Council for Human Rights in December 1984, showing that 1,177 people had been shot dead by
174	Amnesty International Report 1986
the poHce since January 1979, of whom some 400 were idlled either in unexplained circumstances or in circumstances in which it was not alleged that police or other lives had been endangered. According to reports, some 250 people were killed by the police in 1984 and 20 members of the police force were killed by gunmen or other criminals. The organization urged the govemment to ensure that police behaviour conformed to international standards regulating the circumstances in which life-endangering force may be used. Amnesty Intemational requested clarification of the figures quoted and information on cases investigated by the authorities. It also asked to be informed of the outcome of an inquiry into the fatal shooting by poUce of two members and a former member of the Workers Party of Jamaica on 25 Febmary 1985. An official police statement said the three men were kiUed in a shoot-out; however, reports alleged that the men were seen with their hands above their heads and under police guard before the shooting. No reply had been received by the end of 1985.
