Swaziland
Amnesty Intemational worked for the release of five prisoners of conscience, all of whom were freed on 31 December. The organization was concemed also about other politically motivated arrests and about the use of the death penalty.
In January Amnesty Intemational took up the cases of Dr Sishayi Nxumalo, a member of parliament and a former minister; Colonel Mangomeni Ndzimandze, the army commander; and his deputy, Major Abednego Dlamini. Arrested in November 1984, they had been held uncharged for several weeks in apparent breach of the law. Arrested persons are required to be charged or released within "a reasonable time", a period generally taken by the courts to mean 48 hours. In early January two senior police officers were also arrested and held without charge. They were Titus Msibi, who had been dismissed as Commissioner of Police in June 1984 at the same time that Dr Nxumalo was dismissed from the cabinet, and Edgar Hillary, who was not formally dismissed as Deputy Commissioner of Police until some months after his arrest.
In response to an appeal by the organization, the Minister of Justice wrote to Amnesty Intemational on 9 January that those
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	99	Japan
detained could apply to the courts for their release on a writ of habeas corpus if they felt that their detention had been "unreasonably long" and that "it is the court that will then decide whether . . . release or further detention is warranted". However, when Dr Nxumalo did apply for habeas corpus to the Mbabane High Court later in January the govemment imposed a 60-day administrative detention order on him before the court could rule on his apphcation. Such detention orders are not subject to the jurisdiction of the courts.
The govemment took similar action against the four others on 23 January when they appeared in the Mbabane Magistrate's Court on charges under the Sedition and Subversive Activities Act. They were granted bail but were immediately served with administrative detention orders to prevent their release from custody. Their trial was scheduled to commence on 15 April before the Mbabane High Court. In March Amnesty Intemational informed the govemment of its intention to send an observer to the trial but, in fact, no trial took place. Sedition charges against the four defendants were withdrawn when they appeared in court on 15 April. The prosecutor told the court that new charges of treason would be substituted within two weeks but this did not occur. The four defendant remained in custody, however, under successive 60-day detention orders.
In mid-May, following the further renewal of his 60-day detention order, Dr Nxumalo went on hunger-strike, demanding to be released or charged and brought to trial. He was then charged with treason, although no detailed indictment was issued against him. He required hospital treatment on several occasions due to poor health. Amnesty Intemational adopted Dr Nxumalo as a prisoner of conscience at the beginning of 1985 and the other four in July.
In October there were important govemment changes. The Commissioner of Police appointed to replace Titus Msibi in mid-1984, Majaji Simelane, was dismissed, as were Prince Mfanasibili Dlamini and Dr George Msibi, two leading members of the Liqoqo, or Supreme Council of State. The powers of the Liqoqo, a national advisory body to the Monarch, were also reduced by the Queen Regent. It had been widely suggested that those dismissed had been largely responsible for the detention of Dr Nxumalo and the senior army and police officers. Majaji Simelane was subsequently charged with making false allegations against the detainees. He was released on bail and had not been tried by the end of 1985.
Following these changes, a special committee was estabhshed before which the five detainees appeared in turn to be questioned. The committee was expected to recommend whether the detainees should be released or held further. However, in early November, their detention orders were renewed for a further 60 days. On 14
100
Amnesty International Report 1986
November, Amnesty Intemational renewed its appeals to Prime Minister Bhekimpi Dlamini for the release of the five and expressed concem that they had apparently been required to appear before a panel which sat in camera and before which they had no right of legal representation. In early December Amnesty Intemational appealed publicly for the immediate and unconditional release of the five detainees. Shortly after, Edgar Hillary applied for habeas corpus, and the Chief Justice indicated that he would probably order Edgar Hillary's release if the authorities did not issue detailed charges against him. All five detainees were then released unconditionally on 31 December by order of the Queen Regent. Amnesty Intemational welcomed their release but, in doing so, called on the govemment to abolish the 60-day detention law or to amend it so that it would conform to internationally recognized human rights standards.
There were several other politically motivated arrests early in 1985 involving university students accused of distributing seditious pamphlets, and refugees from South Africa, but none were held for long. Some were deported and two students who were released on bail reportedly left the country voluntarily before they could be tried for sedition.
Amnesty Intemational remained concemed about the death penalty but obtained only incomplete information. At least two people were sentenced to death after being convicted of murder but it was not known if there were any executions.
