Mozambique
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the long-term detention without trial of political prisoners, some of whom had been held for more than 11 years, and by the continued imprisonment of others sentenced after unfair trials between 1979 and 1983. There were reports of torture of detainees and of the imposition of flogging as a judicial punishment. No death sentences are known to have been passed by the courts in 1985 but extrajudicial killings and mutilations of suspected opponents were reportedly carried out by govemment forces in areas affected by armed conflict.
There was continued conflict throughout the year, particularly in central and southern areas between govemment forces and guerriUas belonging to the Resistência Nacional Moçambicana (RNM or RENAMO), Mozambican National Resistance, who were alleged to have received assistance from South Africa in contravention of an agreement between the two countries. Amnesty Intemational received reports of killing and mutilations of captives by opposition forces during 1985.
Amnesty International continued to seek information about a number of long-term political detainees held without trial since shortly before Mozambique became independent in 1975, who were paraded at Nachingwea camp in southem Tanzania in March and April 1975. They included leaders of political groups which opposed the transfer of power from the Portuguese colonial govemment to the Frente de Libertaçào de Moçambique (FRELIMO), the Mozambique Liberation Front. After independence, these prisoners were reportedly transferred to detention camps in northem Mozambique but the govemment has withheld all information about them and failed to respond to inquiries from Amnesty Intemational about their fate and whereabouts. They effectively "disappeared" in prison; unofficial
259	Amnesty International Report 1986
sources alleged that they were secretly killed but Amnesty Intemational could not verify this.
Amnesty Intemational continued to investigate the cases of Victor Naitang, a former airline pilot, who was arrested in mid-1981 after a colleague defected to South Africa, and George Kumalo, a South African refugee arrested in mid-1983 reported to have become mentally unstable as a result of prolonged solitary confinement and severe ill-treatment. In neither case was there information to suggest that the prisoner's detention had been referred to the judicial authorities.
A large number of alleged opponents of the govemment were arrested in 1985, many apparently suspected of supporting the RNM. Amnesty International leamed the identities of those detained in only a few cases. For example, five people, including Abdulla Abacar, a motor-fitter, and four teachers, two of whom were expatriates, were arrested in May apparently on suspicion of spying. The four teachers were released uncharged in July but Abdulla Abacar was believed to be still detained without charge or trial at the end of 1985 although no evidence was known to have been produced to justify his imprisonment. Many of the prisoners detained over the past five years were arrested on suspicion of assisting armed opposition groups or of activities which could endanger the security of the state. In 1984 these prisoners were estimated by govemment representatives to number about 4,000. None were brought to trial in 1985 and there was no official announcement of any large-scale releases. Many of those detained were reportedly held by the Servigo Nacional de Seguranga Popular (SNASP), People's National Security Service, in detention centres in provincial capitals, or at Machava barracks {quartet), a detention centre near Maputo. Amnesty Intemational remained concerned that detainees were held by the SNASP for long periods without being referred to a judicial officer such as a judge or procurator. Others, apparently former members of the RNM who had surrendered to government forces, were reportedly sent to special centres, such as the Chiduco Rehabilitation Centre in Inhambane province. However, Amnesty Intemational did not know where the majority of prisoners were being held or which branch of the security forces was responsible for their detention.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the lack of safeguards for untried political detainees. The law which established the SNASP, Decree-Law No. 21/75, places no time limits on detentions by the security service. Article 3h of the law empowers the SNASP to conduct pretrial inquiries without reference to an investigating judge and Article 6 stipulates that no one detained by the SNASP may invoke their right under Article 315 of the Code of
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	69	Japan
Criminal Procedure to habeas corpus. Government officials continued during 1985 to refer to the "Legality Offensive" launched in November 1981 to stop abuses by the police and security forces, and in a speech to mark Mozambique's 10th anniversary of independence in June 1985 President Samora Machel stressed that such abuses would not be tolerated. In April an inspectorate known as the Irìspecgào Judicial e do Ministérìo Público, inspectorate of the judiciary and of the public prosecutor's office, was set up to supervise the administration of courts and prisons. Among other things it was to ensure that the correct legal procedures were being observed during the arrest and pretrial detention of suspects. However, it was not clear whether the new inspectorate would have any jurisdiction over prisoners held by the SNASP.
Amnesty Intemational continued to investigate the cases of several political prisoners who were sentenced to up to 20 years' imprisonment between 1979 and 1983 after unfair trials (see Amnesty International Report 1985). They included Bonifacio Ricardo José, a doctor, who was sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment in December 1979 by the Revolutionary Military Tribunal, a special court with jurisdiction over political cases. He was convicted of collaborating with a group which allegedly supported the RNM but Amnesty Intemational believed that the real reason for his imprisonment was his non-violent criticism of the government.
In April Amnesty Intemational published a 16-page document describing the use of torture in Mozambique since 1975. Torture was reported to be widespread in both ordinary prisons and in detention centres for political detainees. It was reportedly used as a method of interrogation and to punish disciplinary offences. Harsh beatings inflicted with a variety of instruments were most frequently reported but other forms of torture were described, including cordas (ropes), in which the victims' arms are tightly tied behind their backs. The report condemned the use of torture by opposition groups as well as by government forces. Amnesty Intemational submitted the report to the govemment and urged the introduction of measures to safeguard detainees and to ensure that all complaints and reports of torture are investigated by an impartial body which should make its findings public.
Many people were reportedly sentenced by the courts to be flogged, which Amnesty International considers to be a cmel, inhuman and degrading punishment. Law No. 5/83 which was introduced in March 1983 made flogging an additional penalty to imprisonment, which could be imposed by any court for a wide range of offences including crimes against state security, rape, robbery and black marketeering. In one case, Rafael Mendes, a militiaman, was
70	Amnesty International Report 1986
sentenced to 30 lashes, the maximum which may be inflicted at a single session, by a village court in Cabo Delgado province for firing a gun for no reason. Amnesty International was also concerned that Law No. 5/83 appeared to have encouraged "extrajudicial" floggings, that is whippings ordered by prison or security force personnel rather than by the courts. Complaints about abuses of this sort were brought to the attention of the authorities, for example in Nampula province in May and in Manjacaze, Gaza province, in October, but it was not clear what action, if any, was taken as a result.
