United Arab Emirates
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the use of the death penalty for offences including murder and adultery, and was concerned about the possible introduction of new capital offences. Amnesty Intemational had insufficient information to assess other possible concems in the United Arab Emirates.
During 1985 Amnesty International received reports of five executions and four death sentences. On 4 March two Pakistani nationals were reported to have been publicly executed by firing-squad in 'Ajman for murder, rape and armed robbery. Muhammad Saber Nur and Jawid Iqbal Muhammad Shafi' were both sentenced by the Federal Supreme Court and had reportedly been refused clemency by Shaikh Zayed bin Sultan Al-Nahayyan, mler of the United Arab Emirates. On 22 May an Indian national, Muhammad Jalal al-Din, was reportedly sentenced to be decapitated by sword by a Shari'a court in Ra's al-Khaimah following his conviction for murder. Amnesty Intemational did not know whether the execution had been carried out.
On 29 July Amnesty Intemational appealed to Shaikh Zayed bin Sultan al-N^ayyan, following reports that three people had been executed on 19 July. 'Awad Muhammad Khalfan al-'Azizi, an 'Omani national, Wahed Barshah Mir, a Pakistani national and Tammay Muhammad Ibrahim, a Bangladeshi national, were re-p>ortedly executed publicly by firing-squad in the Emirate of Abu Dhabi for murder. Amnesty Intemational reiterated its unconditional opposition to the death penalty and requested details of the trial and appeals procedures followed in the three cases. No response was received. In December three Indian nationals were reported to have

been sentenced to death. Sulaiman 'Abdallah Kutti and another man were reportedly sentenced to death on 12 December for murder and adultery respectively. On 15 December, Karkidel Kader Sulaiman w^ reportedly sentenced to death by stoning for adultery. Amnesty Intemational appealed to the authorities to commute the death sentences on 17 December.
A draft federal penal code to replace the separate penal codes in each emirate came before the country's Federal National Council for approval during its 1984-1985 session. According to Amnesty Intemational's information, the draft code provided the death penalty for 15 offences, including rape and crimes against the security of the state. However, at the end of the session in June, the Federal National Council decided to postpone a decision on the draft code until its next session in 1986.
Amnesty Intemational received no response in 1985 to its letter of 23 November 1984 to the Ruler of 'Ajman, in which it had requested information about sentences of amputation passed in 1984 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1985). The organization believes that the judicial punishments of amputation and flogging, provided for in the country's legislation, constitute cmel, inhuman and degrading punishment. However, Amnesty International did not leara of any sentences of amputation or flogging in 1985.
Yemen people's Democratic Republic of)
Amnesty International was concemed about the fate of 20 prisoners of conscience and nine possible prisoners of conscience, all arrested between 1%7 and 1977. The whereabouts of several of the prisoners remained unknown and they were possibly no longer alive. As in previous years, no response was received from the authorities to Amnesty Intemational's inquiries about them. The organization leamed of the release in 1985 of 12 prisoners of conscience, 10 of whom were farmers arrested in 1976 and sentenced in 1977 to 10 years' imprisonment for demonstrating against govemment agricultural policies.
Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about the trial by the Supreme Court of 12 possible prisoners of conscience, members of
364	Amnesty International Report 1986
the pro-Iraqi Ba'th Party; the passing of death sentences on three of them; and allegations that one of the defendants died under torture. The trial began on 23 July when 12 individuals arrested in early 1985 were accused of espionage and charged with treason. A 13th, a woman, was released for lack of evidence. In October Amnesty Intemational received reports that one of the defendants, 'Amir 'Abdullah bin Humam, had died under torture while in custody. On 10 November the Supreme Court, whose decisions are final, sentenced 11 of the defendants. Three of them, 'Ali bin 'Ali Salih, 'Abdullah 'Ali Bashbil and Khalid 'Abdullah al-Ribati, were sentenced to death, and the remaining eight received sentences of five to 15 years' imprisonment. No mention of 'Amir 'Abdullah bin Humam was made in the verdict. Amnesty Intemational sought details of the trial and the reported death in custody of 'Amir 'Abdullah bin Humam. The organization also appealed for the commutation of the three death sentences.
In May Amnesty Intemational submitted information about its concerns in the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen to the UN under its procedure for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations (the so-called "1503 procedure"). A copy of the communication, with a letter inviting comments, was presented to the govemment before submission to the UN, but no reply was received.
