Paraguay
Amnesty International's concerns included the continued detention of prisoners of conscience under Law 209 (In Defence of Public Peace and Liberty of Persons); the short-term detention without tried of other probable prisoners of conscience under the state of siege, particularly journalists, trade unionists and members of opposition parties, and reports of torture of political prisoners and criminal suspects. Another major concem was that legal proceedings in political trials did not appear to conform to intemationally recognized standards. A number of political prisoners were released during 1985.
Amnesty Intemational continued to work for prisoners of conscience detained under Law 209. They included four prisoners arrested in 1982, accused of membership of the so-called "Chinese wing" of the Paraguayan Communist Party (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1983,1984 and Í955). All four had been sentenced in March 1984 to four years eight months' imprisonment. Margarita Báez Romero subsequently had her conviction quashed in December 1984 by the Cámara de Apelaciones en lo Criminal, Court of Criminal Appeals, which ordered her release. She remained in detention,
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	185	Japan
however, pending the prosecution's appeal to the Supreme Court. On 8 April 1985 the Supreme Court confirmed the Appeal Court's ruling and Margarita Báez Romero was released on 13 April. In September lawyers acting for Emilio Lugo Valenzuela, Antonio González Arce and Roque Ruiz Díaz presented a petition to the Supreme Court requesting their provisional release on the grounds that they had served two-thirds plus six months of their sentence. They were provisionally released on 16 December.
Amnesty Intemational made frequent interventions on behalf of Dr Heriberto Alegre Ortiz, a lawyer detained on 7 September 1984 in connection with his legal representation of peasants involved in land disputes (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1985). Dr Alegre, whom Amnesty Intemational considered a prisoner of conscience, worked with the Programa de Ayuda Cristiana (PAC), Christian Aid Program, and was charged with inciting peasants to occupy land illegally. Legal proceedings continued throughout the first half of 1985 and on 12 June, after 10 months' detention, Dr Alegre was released and the charges against him dropped.
In April Amnesty Intemational sent a delegation to Paraguay to investigate the reported detention and torture of peasants involved in land disputes. In 1984 and, to a greater extent, in 1985 large-scale arrests of community members, which occurred in previous years, were replaced by selective detentions. The victims were usually community leaders responsible for negotiations over land tenure with the Instituto de Bienestar Rural (IBR), Govemment Land Agency. Typical was the case of Pedro Ayala, president of the Comisión Vecinal, Neighbourhood Ommittee, of the communities of San Sebastián and Aparecida in the department of Canindeyú. Although the Comisión Vecinal had been officially recognized by the IBR and negotiations were under way to legalize the community's land occupancy, the peasants were subjected to threats, harassment and intimidation by police, army and judicial personnel, and their houses and crops were bumed. In June 1984 Pedro Ayala was arrested and charged with illegal occupation of land and theft of wood and was detained in the Delegación de Gobierno, provincial govemment offices, in Puerto Presidente Stroessner. Despite the fact that in November 1984 the President of the IBR wrote to the provincial govemor urging him to investigate allegations of harassment and to protect the peasants from unauthorized eviction attempts. Amnesty Intemational received reports that during 1985 the abuses continued. Pedro Ayala was released in July 1985 and the charges against him were dropped.
While taking no position on land disputes as such. Amnesty Intemational w^ concerned that community leaders lawfully contest-
186	Amnesty International Report 1986
ing what they maintained to be their rights to land appeared to be subject to arbitrary arrest. Information gathered by the Amnesty Intemational delegates revealed a similar pattem of arbitrary arrests of peasant community leaders in many parts of the country.
On 29 August the UN Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities expressed concem at the repeated renewal of the state of siege which it considered to be at variance with constitutional provisions. The state of siege has been in force almost continuously for over 30 years, although confined since 1978 to Asunción and the Central department. Amnesty International continued to receive reports of arrests under the state of siege provisions and was concerned that those arrested were held without trial and in most cases appeared to be prisoners of conscience.
During 1985 Amnesty Intemational intervened on behalf of joumalists, trade unionists and members of opposition parties arbitrarily detained for short periods for the non-violent exerc^e of their human rights. In January, for example, 14 members of the Partido Liberal Radical Auténtico (PLRA), Authentic Liberal Radical Party, an unrecognized opposition party, were arrested in Itapúa department, apparently for attending a political meeting. All were released after several days incommunicado detention but Amnesty Intemational was concemed about reports that three prisoners had been tortured in police custody.
In some instances detention was followed by intemal exile or house arrest. Dr Enrique Riera, leader of the Movimiento Popular Colorado (MOPOCO), a dissident faction of the ruling Colorado Party, was detained for short periods in January, May and September. On all three occasions he was sent into intemal exile in Caraguatay. His ban^hment was lifted in October.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of Marcelino Corazón Medina, president of the Comité de Coordinación de Productores Agricolas, Coordinating Committee for Agricultura! Producers, who was arrested in Paraguari on 20 September. Between 20 September and 11 October he staged a hunger-strike in protest against his detention in the Sección Técnica de la Represión del Comunismo, Technical Department for the Suppression of Communism, which resulted in his transfer to the police clinic. He was released on 23 October.
Amnesty Intemational continued to express its concern about irregularities in the trials of political prisoners. Of particular concem were persistent reports that political defendants were forced to sign statements without being informed of their contents and that testimonies allegedly extracted under torture were used as evidence. Another major concern was the undue delay in trial proceedings
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	187	Japan
which resulted in some prisoners spending several years in detention before being acquitted or sentenced.
One such case was that of Remigio Giménez Gamarra who was arrested in December 1978. In 1981, after almost three years in pretrial detention, he was charged with several offences allegedly committed between 1958 and 1960. The charges included murder, armed robbery, drug trafficking and being a member of a subversive clandestine communist organization. By the end of 1985 no verdict had been reached in the trial. On 13 December Remigio Giménez Gamarra went on hunger-strike to protest against his prolonged detention. Amnesty Intemational expressed its concem about the delays in the legal proceedings, the fact that the statute of limitations on some of the alleged offences had expired in 1982, and the use of information allegedly extracted under torture while in poUce custody as evidence against him.
Amnesty Intemational called on the govemment to investigate reports of torture and deaths of criminal suspects in pohce custody. During 1985 a growing number of victims and relatives made complaints to the press and, in some cases, took action in the courts. In Febmary Agueda de Jesús Díaz brought a legal action against two police officers following the death of her son Pablo Martinez Diaz in pohce custody on 8 February. The authorities stated that he had committed suicide, although the death certificate gave the cause of death as a blow to the head. Agueda de Jesús Díaz maintained that her son died as a result of torture in detention. On 10 September the judge investigating the case ordered the preventive detention of three pohce officers.
In another case, Regina Chaparro, a maid, brought a legal action against the pohce for illegal deprivation of liberty and torture on 25 May. She had been arrested on suspicion of theft and taken to the Departamento de Investigaciones de la Policía (DIPC), Police Investigations department, in Asunción. In her testimony she stated that a pohce officer "attached the bare ends of two cables to my little fingers. Although I repeatedly tried to explain that I had not stolen anything, I was subjected to numerous electric shocks which caused my body to go into spasms and contractions." She was released on 5 June. No charges were brought.
Despite persistent reports, the authorities continued to deny that torture and ill-treatment occurred and branded lawyers acting in such cases as "agitators".
Brazihan settlers in Paraguay and indigenous people involved in land tenure disputes also suffered torture and ill-treatment in police and mihtary custody. In August thousands of Brazilian families who had settled in Paraguay over the last 15 years returned to Brazil and
188	Amnesty International Report 1986
stated that they had been forced to abandon their homes, land and crops because of systematic persecution by the Paraguayan police. They maintained that Brazilian settlers were subjected to repeated arrest and torture by the police, including beatings, having needles forced under the nails and the caballo, where the victim is harnessed like an animal and forced to pull heavy weights.
On 13 November church and indigenous organizations denounced the torture of members of the Mby'a Indian population on a private estate, the Estancia La Golondrirm, in the Caaguazii department. Re|X)rts indicated that during a series of attempted evictions by the landowner's hired men, between July and September members of the Mby'a were subjected to beatings and death threats, and a woman was raped. It was alleged that police officers were present during the most serious incident in July. In September representatives of the Paraguayan Catholic Church lodged a formal complaint in the criminal court at Villarrica against those responsible for the abuses of the Mby'a community.
In May Amnesty Intemational submitted information on its concerns in Paraguay to the UN under its confidential procedure for reviewing human rights violations (the so-called "1503 procedure").
V	
	
>	r, y
