Guatemala
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concerned about the widespread torture,"disappearance" cuid extrajudicial execution of people from all sectors of Guatemalansociety. An Amnesty Intemational delegation which visited the country in April collected evidence implicating all branches of the military and security services in such abuses. Eye-witnesses testified to the involvement of
Amnesty Intemational RefX)rt 1966	159
members of the regular military and security services (acting on occasion in plain clothes in the guise of the so-called "death squads", but under orders from superior), as well as Patrullas de Defensa Civil, paramilitary civil patrols, which operate under army supervision.
Under Chief of State General Oscar Humberto Mejía Víctores who came to power in August 1983, human rights abuses took place on a more selective basis than under the two previous administrations, when counter-insurgency campaigns had resulted in the mass killing of non-combatant civilians in the Guatemalan countryside. However, violations continued throughout 1985 on a large scale, and appeared to be part of a deliberate govemment program. Displaced persons, catechists and lay church workers, trade unionists, students, staff and employees of the University of San Carlos (USAC), and peasants living in the Patzún area, Clümaltenango were subjected to torture, "disappearance" and extrajudicial execution in 1985.
During 1985 Amnesty Intemational also received reports of execution-style killings of individuals by opposition groups. Suspected govemment "spies", government officials, politicians close to the administration, and military and police agents were reported to have been killed in this way. Amnesty Intemational condemns as a matter of principle the torture or execution of prisoners by anyone. Its examination of the available information led it to believe, however, that the majority of killings and other abuses of non-combatant civilians had been carried out by uniformed and plainclothes military and security agents acting under orders.
Amnesty Intemational has regularly submitted detailed evidence of official responsibility for large-scale human rights abuses to successive Guatemalan administrations. No substantive response, however, was ever received. Instead, a series of military administrations maintained that the abuses had been committed by extremist groups of the left and right that were out of govemment control. In a context of civil strife, the authorities claimed that peasant victims in mral areas had died in guerrilla attacks or in armed confrontation with govemment forces. According to statements periodically made by officials to the press and at intemational arenas, the country therefore had nothing to hide and was open to visits from intemational human rights investigatory bodies, such as Amnesty Intemational. However, no invitation to visit the country was received by the organization's Intemational Secretariat until May 1984, when the Guatemalan Ambassador to France announced that he had been mandated to negotiate terms of reference for such a visit.
An Amnesty Intemational delegation was eventually able to visit Guatemala in April 1985. It met govemment, military and security
160	Amnesty International Report 1986
officials, representatives of non-governmental organizations, and individuals. The delegation was greatly concemed about the discrepancy between the principles regarding respect for human rights espoused by officials whom it met and the testimonies it collected from victims, their famüies, and witnesses. Amnesty Intemational found this testimony to be intemally consistent and much of it was corroborated by information collected independently through other sources or at other locations. On two occasions, the delegation interviewed people who displayed fresh wounds and heavy bmising consistent with the torture they stated the army had inflicted on them only days before the delegation's arrival in Guatemala.
Among the cases which Amnesty Intemational's delegation investigated in detail were the deaths in March and April 1985 of Héctor Gómez Caüto and Rosario Godoy de Cuevas, leaders of the Grupo de Apoyo Mutuo por el Aparecimiento con Vida de Nuestros Hijos, Esposos, Padres y Hermanos (GAM), Mutual Support Group for the Appearance Alive of our Relatives. The GAM had been formed in 1984 to press for investigations into the fate of the "disappeared". The delegation found a number of contradictions in statements by different officials about these deaths as well as between these statements and the material evidence it collected while in Guatemala. It judged that the circumstances of the deaths were highly indicative of official involvement. Following its visit. Amnesty Intemational continued to press for further inquiries into the deaths of the two GAM leaders, and reiterated its call for steps to be taken to prevent any further abuses of members of the group.
Amnesty Intemational's delegation also investigated allegations of clandestine cemeteries and secret torture and detention centres. When the delegation tried to visit the mihtary base at Patzún in Chimaltenango, in order to investigate reports that the base was being used as a secret detention and torture centre and adjoined a cemetery used to dispose of bodies of those who died whñe in custody there, it was at first denied access to the base. It later succeeded in gaining access and found a covered pit containing remnants of food and an unmarked cemetery.
The delegation also collected testimony concerning 190 "disappearances", 19 of which took place in the Patzún area in the first half of April. Among them were Lucas Jocholá and his four sons (one of them reportedly mentally handicapped), all of them members of the local civil patrol. They were taken from their home at lam on 8 or 9 April, apparently because they were suspected of dereliction of duty in their patrol service. Also missing was cooperative worker Sebastián Coy, detained in the eastem district of the town late on the evening of 14 April, and reportedly taken to the Patzún military base.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	161	Japan
Over 100 other such cases reported to Amnesty Intemational between August 1983 and March 1985 had already been submitted by the organization to the Comisión Tripartita, Tripartite Commission, in March. This Commission, with representation from the Ministries of Defence and the Interior and the Attomey General's office, was announced by the govemment in November 1984, to inquire into the whereabouts of people whose "disappearance" had been reported to the authorities by relatives or by domestic and intemational human rights groups. Among the cases raised by the Amnesty Intemational delegates were those of six leaders of the USAC student association abducted by security forces in May 1984. The students included Carlos Cuevas Molina, son of a former USAC rector and the husband of murdered GAM leader Rosario Godoy de Cuevas. They were apparently abducted because they had been encouraging student support for workers who were then occupying the Coca-Cola bottling plant in Guatemala City in protest at its sudden closure.
Amnesty Intemational's delegation was repeatedly assured that inquiries into "disappearances" would continue and that the organization would be informed of any finding. However, in mid-1985, the Commission declared itself disbanded after reporting that it had been unable to establish the whereabouts of a single one of the many hundreds of "disappeared" persons whose cases had been submitted to it.
In the course of 1985 Amnesty Intemational expressed concera on several occasions about the failure of the judiciary to deal effectively with the hundreds of writs of habeas corpus presented on behalf of the "disappeared" by relatives and others. Amnesty Intemational knew of only one case in recent years in which filing a writ led to the location of the missing person. Among the cases in 1985 where habeas corpus writs were unsuccessful was that of Luis Femando de la Roca Elias, an engineering student at USAC, abducted in Guatemala City on 9 September. Three days later, according to his relatives, the young man was brought back to his home, bleeding from the head, by men in plain clothes who tortured him within hearing of his relatives and then took him away again. He was not located but the writ filed on his behalf did elicit the information that the licence plates of one of the cars used in his abduction had been issued to the General Justo Rufino Barrios military barracks in Guatemala City and the plates of another were registered to the Ministry of Defence. Neither in this nor in any of the other cases of "disappearance" or extrajudicial execution reported to Amnesty Intemational in 1985 was the organization convinced that the authorities had instituted genuine investigations to determine the circumstances of and responsibility for abuses.
162	Amnesty International Report 1986
A memorandum detailing Amnesty Intemational's long-term human rights concems in Guatemala was submitted in December 1985 to the outgoing administration of General Mejia Víctores, and to the incoming elected govemment of President Vinicio Cerezo Arévalo due to take office in January 1986. The memorandum contained information collected by Amnesty Intemational during its visit to the country and subsequently, and was accompanied by a series of recommendations the organization considered the govemment should implement to end human rights violations in Guatemala.
In its submission to General Mejia Víctores Amnesty Intemational repeated the objections it had expressed during the mission regarding the obstacles encountered by its delegation. These included problems in entering the Patzún military base despite previous assurances that Amnesty International could travel wherever it wished and interview whoever it wanted, and overt and covert surveillance of the delegation.
In submitting its recommendations and findings to President-elect Cerezo, Amnesty Intemational welcomed the declaration by the new govemment that it intended to promote a retum to respect for human rights in Guatemala. The organization stressed, however, the need for an in-depth investigation of how such human rights violations as "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions were planned and carried out. It would not otherwise be possible to identify and modify the institutionalized stmctures and policies which had permitted these violations to take place for more than two decades.
In 1985 Amnesty Intemational submitted information on its concems in Guatemala to various UN bodies including the Secretary-General, the Special Rapporteurs on Guatemala and on summary and arbitrary executions, and the Working Groups on Indigenous Populations and on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances.
In December a UN General Assembly resolution called upon the Guatemalan authorities to "prosecute and punish speedily and effectively those, including members of the military and security forces, who are responsible for violations of human rights". The resolution repeated previous requests that the govemment "investigate and clar^ the fate of those who have 'disappeared' " and urged it to protect "human rights defenders such as the Mutual Support Group". The General Assembly's resolution again invited the UN Commission on Human Rights to study carefully the report of the Special Rapporteur, as well as other information pertaining to the human rights situation in Guatemala, and to consider steps to secure respect for human rights, such as permitting the presence of the International Committee of the Red Cross.
Amnesty International also submitted information in 1985 to the

Inter-American Comnmsion on Human Rights of the Organization of American States. The Commission's 1985 report stressed its belief, following an on-site visit, that investigations should be undertaken at the highest level to determine responsibility for Guatemala's widespread pattern of kidnappings and "disappearances" and its particular concern that the members of the Mutual Support Group be accorded special protection.
Amnesty Intemational provided evidence supporting the claims of a number of Guatemalans seeking asylum abroad that they risked human rights violations, including extrajudicial execution, in their country of origin. One such case was that of school teacher and USAC law student Beatriz Eugenia Barrios Marroquin, who received refugee status from Canada after being abducted and tortured in November 1985. However, before the obligatory visa to enter Canada could be secured she was once again abducted on 10 December by armed men, believed to be members of the security forces, and her tortured body found some days later.
