Chile
133
Amnesty Intemational was conœmed about the arbitrary detention, imprisonment and banishment of prisoners of conscience; judicial irregularities in political cases; widespread torture; and the lack of progress in investigating the majority of long-term "disappearances". In addition, there was a steep increase in the number of violations of human rights by paramilitary squads believed to have links with the security forces, including abductions and at least one multiple execution.
Many violations of human rights took place in the context of states of exception. During the first half of 19^ there were three different states of exception in force, namely the "state of emergency", the "state of danger of disturbance to intemal peace", and the "state of siege", all of them provided for in the Constitution introduced in 1981. The state of siege was lifted in June but the two remaining states of exception continued in force. Most political detentions in 1985, for example, were carried out under the state of danger of disturbance to internal peace, set out in interim provision 24 of the Constitution. This empowers the executive to detain people for up to 20 days, to banish them to remote parts of the country for up to three months, to send them into exile, and to restrict the rights of assembly and information — all by simple administrative order and without judicial control. The application of these broad powers resulted in thousands of people being detained for participating in non-violent opposition activities such as street protests, leafletting, or involvement in community, trade union or student organizations. Of those arrested, 170 were subsequently banished {relegados) to remote places without charge or trial. Amnesty Intemational appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience banished by administrative order.
Nineteen individuals arrested in Febmary and March were held under the state of siege, which permitted indefinite detention without charge. They were sent to a military camp in Conchi, in a remote region with a harsh climate. Among those held in Conchi were trade unionists Antonio Deij, Amaldo Bravo and Abraham Rivas, agricultural workers' leaders Carlos López and Lino Lara, student leaders Gonzalo Rovira and Oscar Dávila León, and other students who had been eurested during demonstrations. Amnesty Intemational considered that they were prisoners of conscience and called for their
134	Amnesty International Report 1986
immediate release. After the hfting of the state of siege many of those held in Conchi were banished for three months under alternative administrative powers, again without charge or trial.
In June, a few days before the lifting of the state of siege, Organic Law No.18,415 was passed, increasing the scope of the states of exception. Among other provisions, it gave regional and local military authorities most of the administrative powers which were previously exercised on the authority of the President alone. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that no reasons have to be given for arrest, detention or banishment orders under the states of exception and there is no appeal to an independent authority.
The govemment maintained that the states of exception were necessary in view of the threat posed by terrorist activity. During 1985 there were many bomb explosions, most often at electricity pylons and public buildings, and a number of other attacks were carried out by armed groups, which, according to official sources, resulted in the deaths of nine police and security force officers. Amnesty Intemational nevertheless maintained that human rights standards, such as those in the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to which Chile is a party, must be respected by states in all circumstances.
In September there was a national day of protest called by the main trade union organization, the Comando Nacional de Trabajadores (CNT), National Workers' Command. The Ministry of the Interior then issued a public call for the prosecution of 87 named leading members of the CNT and other organizations which had participated in the protest. Of the 87, 12 top trade union and community leaders and 11 student leaders were charged with "instigating unauthorized demonstrations with the intention of overthrowing the govemment" and sent to prison. Following mass protests and intemational pressure, the charges against the students were dropped in October. The remaining 12, among them top CNT officials Rodolfo Seguel, Manuel Bustos and Arturo Martínez, were granted provisional liberty after one to three months' imprisonment, but the charges against them were not dropped. Amnesty Intemational had adopted them as prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty Intemational was also investigating other cases among the 310 long-term political prisoners in Chile, most of them held on charges of politically motivated armed offences. Amnesty Intemational was concerned at a pattern of judicial irregularities, including the reported use of unlawful or fabricated police evidence, and excessive delays in proceedings before military tribunals leading to periods of preventive detention of up to three years.
The conditions of detention of political prisoners were also a source
135	Amnesty International Report 1986
of concem. Several times during 1985 prisoners in Valparaiso, Quillota, San Felipe and San Miguel prisons, as well as those in the penitentiary and public prison in Santiago, went on hunger-strikes, issued statements and made submissions to the courts to complain against overcrowding, harassment, and poor medical attention.
Torture was used — as in previous years — to obtain information or confessions, and also, increasingly, to intimidate the community at large by singling out some individuals for punishment. Reports received by Amnesty Intemational showed a pattem of systematic torture of suspects arrested by the Central Nacional de Informaciones (CNI), National Information Centre — the secret police which is permitted to hold suspects in secret detention centres for "security reasons". In a significant number of cases the carabineros (uniformed police) and Investigaciones (plainclothes criminal investigations police) were also implicated.
Amnesty International intervened in numerous cases of alleged torture and urged the govemment to investigate complaints and bring those responsible to justice. It insisted that it was essential to stop the routine practice of incommunicado detention and to close down secret detention centres in order to prevent torture. The organization was particularly concerned that attempts by relatives, lawyers, and even judges to gain access to detainees were routinely obstructed, and that most petitions of amparo were rejected or held up by the courts. Amnesty Intemational knew of no cases during 1985 of a court ruling on a petition of amparo within the 24 hours prescribed by law.
Torture was corroborated in a few cases by civilian courts when individual judges succeeded in seeing detainees named in amparo petitions, or after deaths in custody. Investigating judges established that Hugo Vázquez Peña, who died in the custody of Investigaciones on 14 January, was a torture victim, as were Carlos Godoy Etchegoyen, who died in a carabinero station on 25 Febmary, José Randolph Segovia, who also died following arrest by carabineros on 26 May, and Pablo Yuri Guerrero who sustained severe injuries during incommunicado detention by CNI in July.
Torture was also used by clandestine armed squads, which were responsible for an increasing number of abductions and acts of intimidation, in particular death threats. These paramilitary squads, which sometimes identified themselves as members of the Acción Chilena Anticomunista (ACHA), Chilean Anti-communist Action, were usually heavily armed, travelled in cars with false registration numbers and attacked their victims in broad daylight, sometimes in busy streets or in their own homes, sometimes wearing hoods. They made use of secret detention centres, weaponry and intelligence facilities normally associated with state security forces and were
136	Amnesty International Report 1986
widely believed to have links with the official agencies.
The murder in March of José Manuel Parada, Manuel Guerrero and Santiago Nattino became a cause célèbre after the investigating judge uncovered the involvement of a unit of carabineros. The three victims had been abducted by an unidentified armed squad and had been found dead, with their throats cut, on 30 March. The carabineros at first denied their participation, but later their head and member of the military junta, General César Mendoza, resigned. The findings of the government's own intelligence service pointed to the carabineros' responsibility. By the end of 1985, however, most of the individual prosecutions brought by the investigating judge had been dropped by the higher courts.
Clandestine armed squads also shot demonstrators and harassed, intimidated and assaulted human rights lawyers, members of human rights organizations, relatives of political prisoners, students, church activists and clergy. Youth groups of the Catholic church working in poor neighbourhoods (poblaciones) were subjected to an intense campaign of harassment. Marcela Pradeñas, Cristian Quiñones, Rodrigo Lorenzo Muñoz, Rodolfo Quintanilla and María Margarita VUIicic Walberg were some of the young p>eople abducted by clandestine squads during the year. Each was kidnapped one, two or, in one case, three times, beaten and threatened. All had crosses bumt or cut into their bodies, a form of ill-treatment usually applied to victims associated with the church. Representatives of the Catholic church in Santiago asked the Supreme Court for an investigation into the activities of an "illicit organization" operating "with total certainty of its impunity" which it held responsible for 72 abductions, 93 cases of threats, and 114 cases of harassment of individuals from all walks of life, including many working with the church. Thtô request was refused.
Amnesty Intemational repeatedly called on the authorities to establish a full independent investigation into the clandestine squads, in addition to the ongoing judicial inquiries into individual incidents. The organization noted with concern the increasing number of attacks by these groups despite the tight security controls under the states of exception.
Judicial investigations into some killings and "disappearances" took a significant turn. In the past, it had been rare for complaints against the security forces to make progress in the courts. During 1985, however, some civilian judges carried out detailed inquiries into several cases, including the triple murder in March, the deaths under torture of Hugo Vázquez Peña and José Randolph Segovia, and the "disappearance" of a group of 13 people back in 1976. The investigation into the 13 "disappearances" centred on new information about a commando unit of the security forces which, according to
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	137	Japan
a self-confessed former member, was responsible for the physical eUmination of left-wingers in the years following the 1973 military coup. There was much public expectation that the investigation would shed some light on the fate of the 650 people who "disappeared" between 1973 and 1977.
These judicial inquiries were still in progress at the end of 1985. A number of members of the security forces had been named as suspects, but no one had yet been convicted. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that judges, lawyers and other individuals associated with these cases had been attacked or threatened by clandestine groups.
The death penalty was carried out for the first time since 1982 when two former police officers convicted of multiple rape and murder were executed. In keeping with its unconditional opposition to the death penalty, Amnesty Intemational appealed for the commutation of their sentences. Two men convicted of politically motivated offences faced death sentences passed by military courts in 1984. One of the men subsequently died during an attempted prison escape.
In December 1985 the UN Special Rapporteur on Chile, Professor Femando Volio Jiménez, visited the country to collect evidence on the human rights situation. It was the first time that such a visit had been allowed in many years. Professor Voho Jiménez later said that he had the full cooperation of the authorities during his visit.
An Amnesty Intemational delegation visited Chile in December and met human rights groups and representatives of the govemment.
