Colombia
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about a significant increase in extrajudicial executions and "disappearances" by forces accountable to the Colombian Ministry of Defence, and about the obstmction by the military of measures on the part of civilian authorities to halt these abuses and investigate past poUtical killings and "disappearances". The victims were leaders and members of trade unions, legal opposition parties, civic and human rights groups, and alleged supporters of Colombia's several guerrilla organizations. Amnesty Intemational's long-standing concems also included frequent reports of torture of both political and
	
't ^^	
■f' r	
	¿ Í H»
329	Amnesty International Report 1986
non-political prisoners and the short-term detention of prisoners of conscience, many of them peasants detained in the course of land disputes and organizers of industrial disputes.
Amnesty Intemational received reports of scores of execution-style killing by guerrilla groups. These included reports from Cauca department of execution-style killings of Indian community and regional leaders both by govemment security services and by the guerrilla group Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC), Colombian Revolutionary Armed Forces. In December reports were received of mass killings by another armed group, the Frente Ricardo Franco, Ricardo Franco Front. Javier Delgado, its head, acknowledged the "execution" of 154 men, women and youths whose bodies had been found in mass graves at Tacueyo and Corinto in Cauca department, and said they had been "infiltrators". Amnesty Intemational condemns as a matter of principle the torture or execution of captives by anyone, including opposition groups.
A nationwide state of siege imposed in May 1984 remained in force throughout 1985. Military courts had jurisdiction over civilians only on charges under Article 202 of the penal code, which penalizes possession of military weaponry with up to five years' imprisonment. In practice, however, the army continued to detain civilians accused of a broad range of political offences, while charging them under Article 202. Civil authorities responded in some of these cases by decreeing pardons or suspending military court proceedings under an amnesty law. At the end of 1985 an estimated 170 civilians were in detention facing trial by the military courts. Amnesty Intemational expressed concem in several cases in which it believed fake charges had been brought.
Amnesty Intemational received reports of torture by both police and military forces. Amnesty Intemational appealed on 14 Febmary on behalf of Alberto Rodriguez Garcia, leader of a slum dwellers' association in Cucuta, Santander department, who was detained on 7 Febmary by the army's Grupo Mecanizado No. 5. In a signed affidavit to the Public Ministry, a lawyer who had visited the garrison said that on 8 Febmary he had seen Rodríguez in an intemal courtyard "tied by his hands to a tree, blindfolded . . . exhausted", and was told by an officer that Rodriguez was being held without food or water, subjected to forced standing {plantones) and tied up by his hands "to get the tmth out of him". The prisoner was subsequently released on the order of a civil court, but rearrested in May, and was reportedly facing trial before a military court.
Torture was in many cases reported to have been a prelude to extrajudicial execution. The dead bodies of many victims appeared to be marked by torture. On 13 July Argemiro Giraldo, a peasant union

leader, and Bernardo Franco, an alleged member of a guerrilla group, were detained in San Pedro de Uraba, Antioquia department, while participating in a street demonstration. They were held in the headquarters of Army Engineers' Battalion No. 4. An army communiqué on 14 July said the two had been leaders of the demonstration, and that both had been shot while trying to escap>e. Forensic examinations, however, reportedly showed evidence of beatings as well as gunshot wounds. No response was received to Amnesty International appeals for the case to be investigated.
The courts found the armed forces responsible for torture in several widely publicized rulings during 1985. On 27 June the Council of State, the highest administrative tribunal, ruled that Olga López de Roldán, a physician, had been tortured in January 1979 in the headquarters of military intelligence, the Brigada de Institutos Militares, (BIM), in the capital, Bogota. It recommended criminal proceedings against the officers it named as responsible. It identified the commander of the BIM at the time — General Miguel Vega Uribe, the present Minister of Defence — as one of those responsible, and ordered the Ministry of Defence to pay punitive damages to Dr López and her family of 20 million pesos and 3,000 grams of gold. General Vega rejected the charge, and an appeal against the verdict was pending. Dr López' case was one of 30 case studies in Amnesty International's 1980 Report of an Amnesty International Mission to Colombia which illustrated a pattern of routine and systematic torture.
Torture was also an issue of public discussion and government commentary as a consequence of the publication in the news media of a confidential International Committee of the Red Cross report to the Colombian Government which cited complaints of torture. The year-end report of the Attorney General stated that the Public Ministry had raised 63 of the cases with the military prosecutor, and that in 10 cases military investigations had been initiated; in seven disciplinary measures had ensued; in five military personnel had been exonerated prior to the report; and in 40 no investigations had been initiated. Amnesty International had no specific information on the disciplinary measures and investigations cited.
The number of prisoners who "disappeared" in 1985 was apparently significantly greater than the number reported each year since 1979. Over 300 "disappearances" reported between 1979 and the end of 1984 remained unresolved. Colombian human rights groups estimated that about 200 f)eople were seized in 1985 by government forces and then "disappeared", and the Attorney General's report stated that 344 "disappearances" had been formally denounced in 1985, "a rise of 129 per cent" over the 150 reported in
140	. Of the 344 "disappeared", 206 remained imaccounted for: the report said 71 had been located alive and 67 found dead. The Attorney General also stressed the "insuperable obstacles" faced by civilian investigators and prosecutors.
Amnesty Intemational received detailed information on 87 "disappearances" in 1985. Among those on whose behalf the organization appealed was University of Cali professor of literature Pablo Caycedo Siachoque, a leader of the Unión Patriótica, Patriotic Union, opposition party. He was reportedly detained in Cali on 19 November and held initially at the army's Third Brigade headquarters. His whereabouts remained unknown.
Some prisoners were released after periods in unacknowledged detention. They included 13 in the Cali area who had been seized in what appeared to be a new pattem of "hostage" detentions. The victims were mothers, wives, and children of trade union leaders, political activists and former political prisoners. They were reportedly held in secret custody at the Third Brigade to obtain information about and intimidate other members of their families.
There was a significant rise in 1985 in reports of extrajudicial executions. In one widely reported case, 11 teenage supporters of the M-19 armed opposition group hijacked a tmck-load of milk on 30 September and attempted to distribute it in a southeast Bogota slum. They were surrounded by over 200 heavily armed police, and were all subsequently said by police to have been killed in shoot-outs. Witnesses told civilian investigators and the news media, however, that all or most were unarmed and had surrendered or been incapacitated before being shot in the head. Several had been forced to lie prone on the street before being shot. Official sources — including the Attorney General — confirmed that some had been shot whñe on the ground fi-om a distance of less than one metre.
Further evidence of extrajudicial executions by the armed forces emerged fi^om Ccises of attempted killings. An 18-year-old youth was detained when he reported to an army post in Huila department on 25 November; he was then taken by a patrol to an isolated area, shot in the head and body and left for dead. He survived, however, and reached a nearby hamlet. Since a previous arrest he had been required to register at the army post each week, a common procedure in zones where there are army counter-guerrilla operations. No military court inquiry into the failed execution was known to have been initiated.
Many apparent extrajudicial executions and "disappearances" in mral are^^ were attributed by the police to unknown civilians or to "paramilitary groups". However, Amnesty Intemational found no evidence that such groups existed independent of the army and
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	141	Japan
police. The information generally indicated that the police and army counter-insurgency forces were responsible, or rural police detachments assisting local landowner with grievances against the victims.
In April Amnesty Intemational appealed for an urgent investigation after the discovery of the body of Guillermo Quiroz Tietjen, a regional leader of the Asociacion Nacional de Usuarios Campesinos (ANUO), National Peasant i^sociation. His body reportedly had 14 bullet wounds and was marked with signs of torture. He had been detained on 13 April at his home in San Jacinto, Bolivar department, by five men who reportedly held military intelligence and police credentials. The Public Ministry recommended prosecution of several officers of the National Police and Departamento Administrativo de Seguridad (DAS), Administrative Security Department, but not of any military personnel, and jurisdiction over the case passed to the military courts. Of the many political cases in which the Public Ministry charged police and military personnel for torture, "disappearances" or killings, (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984 and 1985), none are believed to have led to trials and convictions by the military courts.
Members of Colombia's national and local human rights organizations were subjected to short-term detention, ill-treatment or torture, and death threats during 1985. One was killed in what may have been an extrajudicial execution. On 29 October, in Riohacha, Atlántico, gunmen shot dead Dr César Flores González, a lawyer on the Permanent Committee for the Defence of Human Rights of Bolivar Department who was also a leader of the Socialist Party. Since 1983 he had defended political detainees, and acted in cases of alleged torture, death in custody and political killings, including that of Guillermo Quiroz. He had also pressed charges against a former Bolivar F-2 (police intelligence) Commander for the torture and murder of two criminal suspects in November 1983; a case that resulted in August 1985 in the opening of military court proceedings against six police officers. He had himself received death threats, and in June 1985, after a brief period in police custody, was publicly denounced as a "subversive" by Bolivar's National Police Commander. Amnesty Intemational appealed for the killing to be investigated, and for other members of the Bolivar human rights organization to be protected. They had received intimidating visits to their homes from F-2 officers and anonymous death threats. The president of the committee, Dr Andrés Pérez Batista, received the message "You will be next".
A cease-fire pact had been negotiated by President Belisario Betancur with the larger guerrilla organizations in 1984, but the M-19 guerrilla organization in June withdrew its support from the pact. On
142	 November an M-19 force assaulted the Palace of Justice in Bogota, killing guards and taking some 400 hostages, including staff of the Council of State, and 11 of the 12 judges of the Supreme Court's penal chamber. They demanded negotiations over a series of demands. A combined army and police force equipped with tanks entered the building, and in subsequent fighting some 14 police and military personnel and 35 guerrillas reportedly died, and at least 46 of the hostages, including 10 Supreme Court judges, died in cross-fire, at the hands of the guerrillas, or in a fire that left most of the building a bumt-out shell.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about reports that some who left the palace when it was occupied by security forces were taken into army custody and subsequently "disappeared". Among 16 people unaccounted for since then were nine employees of the basement cafeteria of the building, an area untouched by the fire. Some of their relatives said that they had received anonymous telephone calls alleging that the missing had been seized by the army as suspected collaborators with the guerrilla force, and that they were in secret detention in Bogota army bases. Armed Forces spokesmen said no prisoners were taken during the incident, and despite charges that the missing people were in army custody, no civilian authority received access to the army facilities where they were allegedly being held. At the end of 1985 Amnesty Intemational was awaiting the findings of a high-level official inquiry into the incident.
An Anmesty Intemational delegation visited Colombia in December and was received by the Minister of Justice and the Attomey General. Talks were held with representatives of Colombian human rights organizations, and with lawyers acting for those missing after the Palace of Justice siege.
The Govemment of Colombia accepted the compulsory jurisdiction of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights on 5 July, and signed the UN Convention against Torture and Other Cmel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment on 10 April 1985.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986
VII	143	Japan
