Senegal
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about reports that a number of defendants brought to trial for alleged offences against state security had been tortured or ill-treated in pretrial custody. There were disturbing reports that at least seven other people detained in the same connection had died in pretrial custody, including at least four who were alleged to have been tortured shortly before their death.
During 1985 the authorities released more than 100 people who had been detained without trial since early 1984, after violent disturbances in the Casamance region following the conviction in December 1983 of 32 alleged sup|X)rters of autonomy for Casamance. Some of those released, who may have included prisoners of conscience, were reported to have been tortured following their arrest.
In all, more than 200 people had been detained following the December 1983 disturbances. The 105 who were not released were brought to trial in November 1985 before the State Security Court charged with offences against the security of the state. In November an Amnesty Intemational observer attended part of the trial which had not been concluded by the end of 1985. There was still insufficient information available to determine whether any of the defendants were prisoners of conscience. Amnesty Intemational noted irregularities in the composition of the court but these did not appear to have a substantial bearing on the faime^ of the trial. However, the organization was concemed that the evidence against many defendants relied ahnost entirely on statements made by them, which most defendants claimed had been made after torture or ill-treatment.
Most of the defendants alleged in court that they had been tortured with electric shocks or beaten while in custody by officers of the
82	Amnesty International Report 1986
police or the National Gendarmerie, but the State Security Court had not ruled on the validity of these allegations by the end of 1985. An Amnesty International delegate who had visited Senegal before the trial noted that some prisoners displayed scars consistent with their accounts. It was reported that at least seven people had died in custody after being arrested in connection with the Casamance disturbances. At least three of these deaths occurred in 1985. For example. Lamine "Pecos" Mané was reported to have been detained in January 1985 and to have been severely beaten while in police custody l^fore his case was brought before a magistrate on 13 February. He is reported to have died on 22 February. In this and similar cases, the authorities are not known to have instituted any autopsy or judicial inquiry into the deaths, in spite of the request by a lawyer for this to be done in at least one case.
Another person detained during 1985 who may have been a prisoner of conscience was a journalist, Boubacar Diop, who was arrested in August and charged with libel and insulting the authorities. The charge was based on an interview published by his newspaper with Maître Abdoulaye Wade, Secretary General of the Parti démocratique sénégalais, Senegalese Democratic Party. He had not been tried and remained in custody at the end of 1985. Amnesty Intemational continued to seek information about his case.
Amnesty Intemational noted that it had incorrectly reported in its Amnesty Intemational Report 1985 a statement by the Minister of Justice. In the cases of El Hadj Momar Samb and three others held in 1984, the authorities had in fact stated in September 1984 that the four would be tried by the correctional court, and not the State Security Court.
