Lebanon
Amnesty Intemational's concerns in 1985 were the wide^)read arbitrary arrest and detention without trial of political detainees and hostages; prolonged incommunicado detention of political detainees; "disappearances"; ill-treatment and torture of prisoners; and judicial and extrajudicial executions of prisoners.
In December Amnesty Intemational issued a document. Amnesty Intemational's Concerns in Lebanon, covering the period 1982 to 1985. The document described human rights violations reportedly committed by the Govemment of Lebanon, which was no longer in effective control of any part of the country, and the Govemments of Israel and Syria. The document also outlined human rights abuses attributed to the four main militias, namely: the Lebanese Forces (LF), a coalition of Christian militias which controlled East Beimt and the region to the northeast of Beirut; Amal, a predominantly Shi'a Muslim movement which controlled West Beimt, much of the southern suburbs of Beirut and parts of south Lebanon; the Progressive Socialist party (PSP), a predominantly Druze party, which assisted Amal in controlling West Beimt and also administered the Shuf mountains; and the South Lebanon Army (SLA), a mainly Christian militia, reportedly armed, trained and financed by the Israeli Defence Forces (IDF), which since June 1985 has assisted the IDF in controlling the "security zone" along the south Lebanon border. Amnesty Intemational considers that govemments, as the originators and guarantors of intemational human rights standards, bear responsibility for their implementation. The organization believed, however, that these four militias had effective control of territory and, therefore, had the means and the responsibility to protect human rights.
Amnesty Intemational had no information about the total number of political prisoners and hostages held in Lebanon during 1985. In the areas under their control, Amal, the LF and the PSP were aU reported to have arrested and detained political opponents, members
343	Amnesty International Report 1986
of rival factions held zs hostages, members of their own militia who committed disciplinary offences, and criminals. The Lebanese Government security forces estimated in October that the LF were holding 500 hostages, some of whom were Syrians. At the end of 1985 the SLA was reported to be holding around 120 Palestinians and Lebanese, mostly suspected of carrying out military operations against the SLA and the IDF. Detainees from all these categories were held without any normal legal process and with no right to challenge the accusations made against them.
The Lebanese authorities were reportedly no longer holding any political prisoners. Until April the Israeli authorities continued to detain in A1 Ansar camp up to 1,800 Palestinians and Lebanese suspected of armed opposition to the IDF in south Lebanon. (See entry on Israel and the Occupied Territories.) The Syrian authorities, who controlled the eastern and northern regions of tiie country, were reported to be holding in Damascus a number of Palestinians formerly held by Amal in Beirut (see below). They were also holding members of the LF, a number of whom were released between October and December (see entry on Syria).
Between 19 May and 22 June hostilities broke out between Amal and the Palestinians in the refugee camps in south Beirut. During this "war of the camps" Amal militiamen arrested hundreds of Palestinian combatants, suspected combatants and people living in the camps, as well as many Pdestinian students living in central Beirut. Estimates of the number of arrests varied between 500 and 2,000. Members of the mainly Shi'a Sixth Brigade of the Lebanese Army, which normally has a minor policing role in West Beirut but which was fighting alongside Amal, also made arrests and held detainees in their barracks. On 29 May Amnesty International wrote to the Lebanese President and to the leader of Amal, Nabih Berri, as Minister of Justice, urging the government to obtain and publish the names and details of all prisoners captured during the hostilities. Amnesty International added that "allegations that members of the Lebanese Army are involved in these acts make it the more imperative that the Lebanese Government take firm action to protect the human rights of people within its territory".
While many of these detainees were later released, a number remained unaccounted for, and the names of 99 "missing" prisoners were published in the Lebanese press in September. Amnesty International received reports from several sources that those who were considered to be leading pro-Arafat members of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), had been handed over to the Syrian authorities and detained without charge in Damascus. These were said to include Yahya AU Ma'rouf, Mahmud A1 Hariri and Khalid A1
344	Amnesty International Report 1986
'Arif, who were reported to have been seen in a detention centre known as "Branch Number 235" in Damascus.
Amal was also reported to have arrested in south Lebanon a number of Palestinians and Lebanese suspected of collaborating with the Israelis during their occupation of south Lebanon.
After August there were an increasing number of reported abductions in Beirut by the LF on the one hand and Amal and the PSP on the other. Many were retaliatory acts carried out by militia members to win the release of hostages, often relatives, held by the other side. Many Christian residents of West Beirut were abducted, reportedly to intimidate Christians into leaving West Beirut.
Amnesty International wrote to the Lebanese Government in December 1985 expressing its continued concern about the 2,000 people who had "disappeared" in Lebanon since mid-1982, many of whom had been arrested by the Lebanese Army or LF during 1982 and 1983.
Amnesty International received reports that detainees held by all the militias were subjected to ill-treatment. Although Amnesty International has only received detailed allegations regarding detainees held by Amal and the SLA, the widespread practice of incommunicado detention by all militias was of particular concern since it is Amnesty International's experience that it facilitates ill-treatment. Amnesty International received reports that some detainees had been allowed visits by members of their families, but many had not. The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) was permitted access to only a few detainees: some of those held by the LF in Qarantina, one of their prisons in Beirut; some Amal-held prisoners in Beirut and south Lebanon, (but none of those arrested by Amal during the "war of the camps" about whom there were many allegations of ill-treatment). The ICRC was not allowed access to detainees held by the SLA, nor to any detainees believed to be held by the PSP in the towns of Aley and Mukhtara in the Shuf mountains.
Amnesty International received many allegations of ill-treatment and torture, including first-hand reports from detainees held by Amal during the "war of the camps". One detainee said he was interrogated about being a member of the PLO and was beaten, threatened with execution, subjected to mock executions, made to believe that fellow prisoners had been executed and forced to watch his father being tortured. He said he was transferred to one cell full of prisoners who were bleeding and covered in bruises; some had broken bones and one died while he was there.
Another former detainee examined by an Amnesty International medical team on 19 July said that he was detained by Amal in Burj al
345	Amnesty International Report 1986
Murr between 20 May and 17 June 1985 and was interrogated about the location of PLO weapon depots. He said he was beaten on his body and on the soles of his feet; suspended from the "parrot perch" three times, once losing consciousness; subjected to mock drowning; pushed inside a tractor tyre and rolled down several ramps and, at the same time, given several blows to the head which made him lose consciousness. He said nylon wire was tied round his penis and a weight was suspended from it. The Amnesty Intemational doctors who examined him stated in their report that they had found scars on the skull, at the back of the upp)er left arm, and on the penis consistent with the described methods of torture.
Reports of torture from former detainees held by the SLA in Khiam prison revealed a systematic pattem. Detainees were hooded and handcuffed, taken from their cells to a place of interrogation and questioned about their participation in mihtary operations or pressured into giving information about the resistance forces or into collaborating with the IDF. They were beaten all over the body with electric cables, wooden batons and gun butts or kicked. They were subjected to electric shock torture on sensitive parts of the body. All detainees reported that Israeli Intelligence officers questioned them while meml^rs of the SLA carried out the physical ill-treatment. They said that elementary medical treatment was sometimes available, but that three detainees were reported to have died as a result of torture. In November Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Israeli Minister of Defence and the leader of the SLA expressing concem about the reports of ill-treatment and calling for a public and impartial inquiry into the allegations, and for an intemational humanitarian organization, such as the ICRC, to have regular and frequent access to ail detainees.
Both Amal and the PSP executed members of their own militia accused of murder, after going through a form of judicial process. Two were executed by the PSP and two by Amal. Amnesty Intemational called on the leaders of both groups to intervene to prevent any further executions.
Amnesty Intemational cilso received reports of the execution of captives by other opposition groups in Lebanon. Amnesty Intemational, as a matter of principle, condemns the execution and torture of prisoners by anyone, including opposition groups.
Amnesty Intemational also called on the Lebanese Government to commute all pending death sentences. A number of people reported to have been sentenced to death during 1982 and 19&3 were believed still to be detained; in a letter to Amnesty Intemational dated 29 November the Lebanese President, Amin Gemayel, confirmed that the executions of Nazih Sami Shaya and Joseph George Kazazian had
346	Amnesty International Report 1986
not been carried out (see Amnesty International Report 1985).
During the "war of the camps" there were many eye-witness reports of executions of Palestinians in the custody of members of the Amal militia. They included dozens of armed combatants captured in the refugee camps; civilians, including some women, children and medical personnel; and wounded combatants and non-combatants in the camp hospitals and in the American University Hospital. Most of these were seen being shot at point-blank range, although in a few cases people were seen being beaten to death in the street. There were also reports that some prisoners held in Burj al Murr were executed. In a telex to the Lebanese President and to the leader of Amal and Minister of Justice Nabih Berri, sent on 29 May, Amnesty International caUed for an investigation into allegations of torture and summary executions.
In December Amnesty International wrote to the leaders of Amal, the PSP and the LF to express concern about abuses of human rights committed by these three militias. Amnesty International drew attention to international standarck for the treatment of prisoners set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and in the International Covenant on CivU and Political Rights, which Lebanon ratified in 1972. The organization noted that torture and the arbitrary killing of prisoners is completely forbidden by international standards even in times of war or emergency. It said that in a civil war, with many different groups carrying out arrests and families often facing difficulties finding out what has happened to their relatives, measures should be taken to reassure families of the safety of detainees; the names of all detainees should be published; an independent humanitarian organization, such as the ICRC, should have regular access to all detainees; wounded or sick captives should have regular medical treatment; and detainees should be allowed to write to their families.
