Albania
Amnesty International was concerned about legislation which severely restricts certain human rights, imder which prisoners of conscience were imprisoned. Because of official censorship and restrictions on freedom of movement it was not possible to make an accurate assessment of the number of prisoners of conscience. The organization was also concerned about inadequate legal safeguards for people arrested and tried for political offences and about allegations of ill-treatment of detainees and harsh prison conditions. It did not leam of any death sentences or executions (such information is not made public), but remained concerned about the number of offences for which the death penalty could be imposed.
Following the death in April of Albania's leader, Enver Hoxha, First Secretary of the Central Committee Secretariat of the Albanian Party of Labour (APL), his successor, Ramiz Alia, publicly stated that he would pursue the former leader's policies. As regards official policy affecting human rights. Amnesty International did not leam of any major changes.
Although the authorities did not respond formally to Amnesty International's report Albania — Political imprisonment and the Law, published in 1984, Professor Paskal Haxhi, of Tirane University's law faculty, criticized the report in an interview with Danish television in September 1985. He declared that it contained not one per cent truth. He said no priests had been imprisoned for religious activities since 1968, and denied that political prisoners in Spac labour camp had twice during the 1970s rioted in protest against their conditions and treatment. He stated that no death sentences had been passed in
270	. He would not, however, give any figure for the total prison and labour camp population, nor for political prisoners, but said that there were at most 100 ordinary criminal and political prisoners held in Burrel prison, in addition to "some hundreds" held in labour camps.
To Amnesty International's knowledge the only official reference to an individual political prisoner related to Fiqrete Shehu, the wife of Mehmet Shehu, a former prime minister officially said to have committed suicide in December 1981. The editor-in-chief of Zeri i Popullit, the daily newspaper of the APL, confirmed to a visiting foreign journalist that she was serving a 25-year prison sentence for conspiracy.
Information received by Amnesty International indicated that in the previous three years people had continued to be convicted of political offences under various loosely formulated charges, including that of having engaged in "anti-state agitation and propaganda" under Article 55 of the criminal code. Many of the political prisoners about whom Amnesty International received information were reported to be serving prison sentences imposed under Article 55 for having expressed, in a non-violent manner, views critical of economic or political conditions in the country. Among such cases reported to Amnesty International during 1985 was that of a singer said to be serving a 20-year sentence (imposed in the 1970s) in Burrel prison because of songs he had sung which had displeased the authorities. A teacher was said to be serving a similar sentence, also in Burrel prison. Both these men had originally been sentenced to 10 years' impr^nment but had received a second sentence — again for "anti-state agitation and propaganda" — while still in prison.
Freedom of movement continued to be severely limited by the authorities. Paragraph 11 of Article 47 of the criminal code dealing with "treason" makes "flight from the state" an offence punishable by not less than 10 years' imprisonment or death. Amnesty International learned of two men serving sentences of 20 years' imprisonment in Burrel prison and Spac labour camp for having attempted to leave the country illegally.
Since 1967, when Albania was officially declared "the first atheist state in the world", all organized or public forms of religious belief have been illegal. In that year religious buildings were closed and all religious communities, Muslim and Christian, were deprived of legal status and their functionaries prohibited from exercising their offices. In past years. Amnesty International received reports of a number of clergy imprisoned or interned as a result. In 1985 Roman Catholic émigré sources claimed that Father Filip Mazrreku, a Franciscan from Shkoder, had died in Ballsh labour camp. According to these sources he had been a prisoner since the 1950s when he had been

convicted on charges of being an "enemy of the people, reactionary clergyman, and fascist sympathizer".
In addition to imprisonment, the criminal code provides for a supplementary penalty of banishment or internment for up to five years. This penalty may also be imposed administratively, without trial and for unspecified periods, both on those people considered by the authorities to represent a danger to the country's social system and on "members of the family of fugitives living inside or outside the state". Amnesty International learned that several members of a family regarded as politically suspect by the authorities had been interned for about three months shortly before the death of Enver Hoxha. Various members of this family were said to have been interned in the past.
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about inadequate legal safeguards for political prisoners during investigation and trial proceedings, in particular the absence of provisions entitling them to visits fi-om relatives and legal aid during investigation. In almost all cases, political prisoners were denied legal aid at their trials.
Former political prisoners have told Amnesty International that during investigation they were held in small, dark, basement cells, and often obliged to sleep on the cement cell floor or on boards with blankets but no mattress. They complained that they were given little to eat and were allowed little or no exercise. Several said that they were interrogated at night and deprived of sleep. Most alleged that they were beaten during investigation.
The conditions under which political prisoners are detained have regularly been described as very harsh, with poor food, hygiene and medical care. In Spac labour camp conditions for the mining of pyrites by political prisoner were said to be often dangerous.
During 1985 Amnesty International expressed its concern to the authorities that prison conditions for political prisoners did not conform with the UN Minimum Standard Rules for Treatment of Prisoners and it urged the release of all political prisoners convicted of offences not involving the use or advocacy of violence.
In May Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Albania to the UN under its procedure for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations (the so-called "1503 procedure").
272	Amnesty International Report 1986
