Uganda
Amnesty Intemational's main œnceras were the detention without trial of suspected political opponents of the govemment, including prisoners of conscience; torture and "disappearances" of prisoners on an extensive scale; and widespread extrajudicial killings by the army and other security agencies.
In June Amnesty Intemational published a report, Uganda: Evidence of Torture, which documented abuses of prisoners, especially those in the custody of the army or the National Security Agency (NASA). It included the findings of a surgeon and a forensic pathologist who had examined 16 alleged torture victims in Febmary and March at Amnesty Intemational's request. In all but one of these cases the doctors found physical signs consistent with the accounts of torture. The report also contained detailed recommendations for the impartial investigation of allegations of torture and for measures to stop the use of torture. After the publication of the report President Milton Obote invited Amnesty Intemational to send a mission to Uganda to discuss its contents. Amnesty Intemational accepted the invitation, but on 27 July, before a mission had visited Kampala, President Obote's govemment was overthrown in a military coup led by the army commander, Major-General Tito Okello.
There was continued armed conflict throughout 1985 between govemment forces and guerrilla fighters of the National Resistance Army (NRA), the largest armed opposition group. In the continuing conflict after the coup, the new military government co-opted many former soldiers firom the Ugandan army under President Idi Amin, a number of whom were allegedly responsible for previous human rights violations.
Many suspected political opponents of both govemments were detained without trial during 1985. Most were supporters of the Democratic Party (DP), which under President Obote was the legal opposition party; alleged supporters of the NRA; and villagers in areas where the army was conducting counter-insurgency operations. After the military coup, the new government released more than 1,200 people from civil custody in Luzira Upper Prison near Kampala. Some had been served with detention orders under the Public Order and Security Act 1967, but most had been held unlawfully. The new govemment stated that it would abolish the Public Order and Security Act, which permits indefinite detention
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	107	Japan
without trial, but at the end of 1985 more than 100 people were reported to be still held under its provisions: they were mostly officials of the former govemment and included some allegedly responsible for human rights violations. The govemment said that they would be charged and tried. A number of those detained after the change of govemment were reported to have been charged, notably Cris Rwakasisi, formerly the minister responsible for NASA. He was reportedly charged with the murder of George Kananura Rwabatooto, a former diplomat who "disappeared" in custody in 1981 and whose case was being investigated by Amnesty International.
Several of the Public Order and Security Act detainees had been adopted by Amnesty Intemational as prisoners of conscience. One was Professor Yoweri Kyesimira, a DP member of parliament, who was acquitted of treason by the High Court in March but was immediately rearrested. In April, after an application for a writ of habeas corpus, a High Court judge declared his detention illegal and ordered his release but the authorities kept him in detention until he was released after the 27 July coup.
Amnesty Intemational had also adopted eight joumalists detained in 1984 as prisoners of conscience. Four of them, Drake Sekeba and Sam Katwere of the Star and Francis Kanyeihamba and Sam Kiwanuka of the Pilot, were released in January. The other four, who worked for the DP paper Munnansi and included its editor Anthony Ssekweyama, were released after 27 July. All prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International were released after the coup, but the release of several other possible prisoners of conscience had not been confirmed by the end of 1985.
Amnesty Intemational received many reports of unlawful detentions by the army, both before and after the coup. Detainees were held in military barracks or detention camps where conditions were p)oor and torture rife. Many prisoners were believed to have died as a result of torture. After the coup some prisoners were released from military custody but new detentions were also reported in the following months.
In January, Amnesty Intemational received information about new detention camps set up by the army at Katikamu, Bowa, Mityana, Bukomero and Kabunyata in the "Luwero triangle", northwest of Kampala. Vincent Kirabo, the chairman of the Uganda Catholic Lay Apostolate, was detained in Katikamu after being arrested in Kampala in Febmary, apparently because of the Roman Catholic Church's criticism of human rights violations by President Obote's govemment. Amnesty Intemational appealed for him to be transferred to civil custody and released if he were not to be charged.
108	Amnesty International Report 1986
Later, Vincent Kirabo was transferred to police custody and released uncharged at the beginning of July.
Amnesty Intemational appealed on behalf of another prominent Roman Catholic detained by the army, George Bisoborwa, a former broadcaster and DP supporter who had been arrested in October 1984. He was held in Masindi military barracks in northwestern Uganda where he was reportedly tortured. In July he was apparently transferred to Masindi hospital to be treated for injuries resulting from torture, although he remained in custody. He was released after the coup.
There were new politically motivated arrests after the change of govenmient. For example, Eric Katalikawe, a senior official of the Uganda Tea Authority, was reportedly detained by soldiers in September and taken to Luzira prison. He was reportedly released after a govemment minister had intervened on his behalf, only to be rearrested and detained for a time in Mbuya military barracks. Amnesty Intemational appealed on behalf of five members of one family who were detained shortly after retuming to Uganda from Kenya in response to a govemment appeal to refugees to retum. They included Bernardetta Namwange and her 17-year-old son, who were reportedly tortured while they were detained at a camp at Nyimbwa, in Luwero district. They were released in December.
Amnesty Intemational published in June Uganda: Evidence of Torture. It detailed how almost all prisoners held by the army or NASA were regularly beaten with hammers, rifle butts, iron bars or pieces of wood with nails protmding. A number of ex-prisoners described how soldiers suspended a car tyre above a bound victim and set it alight, so that molten rubber dripped onto the prisoner. This was said sometimes to have been repeated for hours or days until the victim died. Rape and other sexual abuse were reported to be fi-equent. The 16 former prisoners examined by doctors for Amnesty Intemational's report displayed signs of various methods of torture. One said that he had been castrated with cattle gelding tongs and a woman had signs consistent with her account of being beaten with sticks, pangas (machetes) and gun butts, and being bumed with a paraffin or butane gas flame. She said that she had been raped; she later gave birth to a child. Other women had scars that they said had been made by a burning tyre in one case and a heated flat-iron in another.
After the coup Amnesty International continued to receive reports of torture by the army, in particular of rape and sexual abuse. In one widely reported incident 13 women and seven schoolgirls were abducted by soldiers in October and held in Luwero where they were repeatedly raped. In this instance a senior army officer later stated that those responsible would be disciplined. Amnesty Intemational
Amnesty Intemational Report 1966	109
also received reports from women who alleged that they had been detained and repeatedly raped by soldiers in September and October at Kanyonyi military camp in the Luwero triangle. Amnesty Intemational also received reports of children as young as three and six years of age being raped, and of women being sexually abused with a gun barrel.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports of large numbers of "disappearances" of people arrested by the army or NASA. In May an opposition member of parliament, Sebastian Ssebuggwawo, was reportedly abducted by soldiers in the Mityana area of Mubende district after expressing concern about an alleged army killing. Sebastian Ssebuggwawo was not seen again. After the change of government, two soldiers are reported to have been charged in connection with his "disappearance" but they had not been tried by the end of 1985.
Amnesty Intemational also received frequent reports of political killings of government opponents or villagers by the army. For example, in March it was reported that 31 people were arrested by the army in Mpigi district, driven to Kibutu village and hacked to death with pangas. Opposition members of parliament called for an inquiry but received no response from President Obote's govemment. Also in March, more than 20 people were reported to have been rounded up by troops in Mukono district and taken to Kasangati, 14 kilometres north of Kampala, where they were killed and buried in a prison compound. In June the High Court ordered the exhumation of four of the bodies for autopsy. After the coup, many such mass graves were uncovered, some containing several hundred skeletons.
New reports of killings of civilians were received after the change of govemment. For example, in October 19 people were reportedly killed in an army attack on a Catholic mission at Kasaala, 80 kilometres north of Kampala; 10 people reportedly died in a similar attack at Wakiso, 15 kilometres northwest of Kampala; and troops were reported to have killed 13 in another attack, 56 kilometres north of Kampala. In another incident in November, it is alleged that soldiers drawn from the supporters of former President Amin had killed 60 civilians in the Kamengo area, 65 kilometres southwest of Kampala. In each instance the victims were apparently unarmed non-combatants.
Amnesty Intemational remained concemed about threats to the safety of Ugandan refugees in neighbouring Kenya. In January the organization appealed on behalf of Florence Naggenda, who was reported to have been abducted from the Kenyan border-town of Malaba by a member of a Ugandan security agency. She was then
110	Amnesty International Report 1986
reported to have been taken to Tororo military barracks and later transferred to Luzira Women's Prison. She was released after the change of govemment. In October Amnesty Intemational approached the Ugandan Govemment about reports that a number of Ugandan refugees, including Bonny Kabugo and Frank Sendijja, had been abducted from Nairobi that month by Ugandan agents and were in custody in Uganda. The govemment confirmed that Bonny Kabugo and Christopher Katumba were in custody but said that they had been arrested inside Uganda. They did not confirm or deny reports of the abduction of Frank Sendijja and others. Reports reaching Amnesty Intemational continued to indicate that they had been arrested in Kenya. At the end of 1985 Amnesty Intemational was seeking to confirm reports that this group of prisoners had been released and had retumed to Kenya.
In May, Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Uganda to the UN under its procedure for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations (the so-called "1503 procedure").
