Japan
Amnesty International was concerned about an increase in executions and about the ruling party's introduction in the Diet (parliament) of a draft law, later withdrawn, which would have created a new capital offence. Amnesty International also requested information about allegations of ill-treatment made by a prisoner convicted of murder.
Amnesty International expressed concern to the authorities about three reported executions. The authorities report the number of executions but do not disclose the names of those executed. However, Amnesty International believes that those executed were Takuji Oshima and Sokichi Furuya, on 31 May, and Toshiaki Abe, on 25 July. All three had been convicted of murder.
According to statistics submitted by Japan to the UN there were five executions between 1979 and 1983. Amnesty International also knows of one execution in 1984. At the end of 19&5 some 75 prisoners were known to be under sentence of death; at least 22 of them had had their sentences upheld by the Supreme Court. Ten had been under sentence of death for between 10 and 34 years.
Although the government had previously stated its intention to reduce the number of offences punishable by the death penalty, in May the ruling Liberal Democratic Party introduced in the Diet a draft law imposing the death ¡penalty for acts of espionage which "seriously affect the security of the state". On 3 June Amnesty Intemational wrote to the authorities urging them not to widen the application of the death penalty but rather to abolish capital punishment and carry out no further executions. The draft law was later withdrawn.
On 7 June Amnesty Intemational asked the authorities whether they had investigated the claims made by Kazue Ishikawa, who was serving a life sentence for murder and whose appeal for retrial was rejected by the Supreme Court in May, that he had been ill-treated to force him falsely to admit to the crime. No reply was received.
Amnesty International Report 1986
