Argentina
During 1985 Amnesty Intemational focused its attention on the measures taken by the govemment and judiciary to deal with the many unresolved human rights issues outstanding from the period of military mle. A major development was the trial of nine military commanders accused of instituting procedures which led to the "disappearance" of thousands of people between 1976 and 1982. Amnesty Intemational continued to monitor investigations into the whereabouts of children who "disappeared" with their parents or who, it is surmised, were bom in secret detention camps. The organization also studied the cases of 14 prisoners convicted of violent offences after unfair trials by civilian courts under the military govemment.
In April Amnesty Intemational sent two observers to Buenos Aires to attend hearings before the Cámara Federal de Apelaciones en lo Criminal, Federal Criminal Appeals Ourt, in the trial of the nine military commanders who formed the juntas which ruled Argentina between 1976 and 1982. Amnesty International's concerns in the trial were whether the judicial investigative procedures would permit the facts about "disappearances" to be established and whether the defendants' rights to a fair trial would be respected.
Decree 158, issued in December 1983, set in train the court-martial of the nine military commanders. The case was first examined in camera by the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces, which had jurisdiction over all criminal prosecutions involving military, police or security personnel accused of human rights violations. After nine months the Supreme Council dismissed the case. Under reforms to the Code of Military Justice, Law 23.049, introduced by the civilian
124	Amnesty International Report 1986
administration, all decisions of the Supreme Council in such cases became subject to automatic review by civilian courts of appeal. After the decision of the Supreme Council, therefore, the case passed to the jurisdiction of the Federal Criminal Appeals Court in Buenos Aires. These proceedings, which were public, opened on 22 April 1985. The defendants faced over 700 counts of homicide, torture and abduction. The prosecution called more than 800 witnesses, many of them former "disappeared" detainees, who testified in detail about the severe ill-treatment they and fellow prisoners had received in secret detention camps. On 9 December the six judges delivered their verdict. The former President General Jorge Rafael Videla and the Navy Commander Admiral Emilio Massera, members of the military junta which overthrew the civilian govemment in 1976, were sentenced to life imprisonment on several counts of aggravated homicide, illegal detention, torture and robbery. Air Force Brigadier Orlando Agosti, the third member of the first military junta, was sentenced to four years and six months' imprisonment on eight counts of torture and three counts of robbery committed by his subordinates. The former President General Roberto Viola, who headed the second military junta, was sentenced to 17 years' imprisonment on 86 counts of kidnapping and 11 of torture. The Navy Commander Admiral Armando Lambmschini was sentenced to eight years' imprisonment on 35 counts of kidnapping and 10 of torture. The Appeals Court ordered all five men to be dishonourably discharged from the Armed Forces. Air Force Commander Omar Graffigna, also a member of the second military junta was absolved on the several counts of homicide, torture and kidnapping brought against him. The three members of the third military junta, the former President General Leopoldo Galtieri, Admiral Jorge Anaya and Brigadier Basilio Lami Dozo, were also acquitted on all charges. Both the public prosecutor and the defence lawyers of the five convicted lodged appeals in the Supreme Court of Justice.
In 1985 there were few developments in the hundreds of complaints pending before civiUan and military courts against middle and junior ranking officers accused of responsibility for "disappearances" and torture. In its summing up in the trial of the military juntas, the Federal Criminal Appeals Court recommended that investigations should continue into these cases.
One of these concemed Navy Lieutenant Alfredo Aztiz, who in March had been exonerated by the Supreme Council of responsibility for the grievous wounding and abduction of a 17-year-old girl, Dagmar Hagelin. Lieutenant Aztiz, who had been detained for three months on the orders of a civilian judge, was released. On 31 May the Federal Criminal Appeals Court nullified the mling of the Supreme
125	Amnesty International Report 1986
Council and overturned the decision of a navy judge in 1981 to acquit Lieutenant Aztiz. The Supreme Council was ordered to continue its investigations into the Dagmar Hagelin case. Earlier attempts by civilian judges to reopen the case had been blocked by the Supreme Council.
During 1985 Amnesty Intemational continued to gather information on the cases of children reported missing following the abduction and killing or secret imprisonment of their parents by members of the security forces in the 1970s. Argentine human rights organizations believed that about 100 children were still missing. Some of these children were abducted with their parents but the majority were thought to have been bom in secret detention centres and to have been forcibly separated from their mothers shortly after birth. Since 1977 about 30 children had been traced, some of whom had been adopted by ordinary families in good faith, using normal adoption procedures. In other cases, however, birth certificates had apparently been falsified to enable surrogate parents, some of whom were allegedly former members of the security forces, to claim the children as their own.
One such case was that of Maria Eugenia Gatica Caracoche, who was abducted on 16 March 1977 when she was 13 months old. Her brother Felipe, then aged four months, and their mother. Ana Maria de Gatica, were abducted one month later. The mother, separated from her children, spent some time in a secret detention centre in La Plata and was then released and obliged to go into exile with her husband. After the change of govemment in December 1983 the parents returned to Argentina and discovered that Felipe had been given to a woman who had registered him as her own child. Felipe was returned to the care of his parents in October 1984. The parents then searched for traces of María Eugenia and information they received led them to believe that a nine-year-old girl living with a police inspector in La Plata was their daughter. A judge ordered blood tests to be carried out which indicated that the child was almost certainly their's. In September the judge ordered Maria Eugenia to be returned to the care of her parents.
Amnesty Intemational also studied the cases of prisoners who were convicted of politically motivated crimes of violence in the 1970s. While the majority of political prisoners serving prison terms were released after the retum to civilian mle a group of 14 remained in detention (13 male prisoners in Villa Devoto Prison and one woman prisoner, Hilda Navas de Cuestas, in Ezeiza Prison). Amnesty Intemational received reports that most of the prisoners had been held in unacknowledged detention for some time before their status was regularized. All 14 prisoners alleged that they were tortured in
126
Amnesty International Report 1986
custody and 12 of them had made formal complaints to their judges who then failed to investigate the allegations. In virtually all of the cases the prisoners were convicted on the basis of confessions extracted under torture. Many were represented by court-appointed lawyers whom they never met; a civilian lawyer representing three of the prisoners, Dr Angel Pisarello, was abducted and killed in December 1976. Amnesty International concluded that the prisoners had been denied adequate defence and the right to a fair and prompt trial. In August an attempt to obtain congressional approval for a draft law which would have enabled the provisional release of the prisoners and expedited a review of the cases failed. Amnesty Intemational believed that there should be a prompt judicial review of the cases.
In September, before congressional elections and the final stage of the trial of the military juntas, there was a wave of bomb attacks on schools and military institutions. This led the govemment on 25 October to declare a state of siege for 60 days and to order the arrest of six military officers and six civilians. On 7 December the state of siege was lifted and those detained under its provisions were released without charge.
On 4 February Argentina signed the UN Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
