Trinidad and Tobago
Amnesty International's main concern was that executions might be resumed, although none took place during the year. While the death penalty remains the legal penalty for murder, no executions had been carried out since 1979. However, several of the 22 prisoners on death row in 1985 had exhausted their legal appeals and three were issued with warrants for execution. All three received last-minute reprieves.
Theophilus Barry, convicted of murder in 1981, was issued with a death warrant on 9 July, only nine hours before his scheduled execution at sunrise the following morning. He won a last-minute stay after the urgent intervention of a lawyer.
Andy Thomas and Kirkland Paul were also granted last-minute stays, only hours before their scheduled execution on 5 December. Warrants in their cases were suddenly issued at 4.30pm on 4 December, setting the execution for 7am the following morning. They managed to retain a lawyer to file an emergency application for a stay, which was granted pending consideration of a constitutional motion by the Trinidad Hi^i Court. The lawyer's motion challenged the constitutionality of carrying out executions after a long delay, and a hearing was pending at the end of 1985. Andy Thomas and Kirkland Paul were sentenced to death in 1975 for the murder of a police officer in 1973. At the time of the killing both men belonged to the National Union of Freedom Fighters (NUFF), a radical political group which was involved in several clashes with the police during the early 1970s, and which has long been disbanded. Although neither of them was found guilty of shooting the police officer, a witness claimed to have seen them in the car from which the fatal shots were fired. Both men had spent more than 10 years on death row, reportedly confined for 23 hours a day to small cells with little natural daylight. As a result of this solitary confinement, Kirkland Paul was reported to have spent some time in a psychiatric hospital.
In two letters to the government in April and July, Amnesty Intemational reiterated its reasons for opposing the death penalty and referred to the intemational standards which prohibit or seek to limit its use. It welcomed the comment made in October 1984 by Trinidad and Tobago's representative before the Human Rights Committee that consideration was being given to abolishing the death penalty. Amnesty International urged the govemment to take steps
196	Amnesty International Report 1986
to abolish the death penalty and requested that no further executions be carried out. No reply to either letter had been received by the end of 1985.
