Uruguay
Following the transition to an elected civilian government on 1 March after over 11 years of military rule, all political prisoners, many of them prisoners of conscience, were released. Amnesty Intemational's concems focused on the cases of 164 Uruguayans who "disappeared" between 1973 and 1982. Investigations into past human right violations, including these cases, were undertaken during 1985 by the legislature and the courts.
On 1 March the elected govemment of Dr Juho Maria Sanguinetti took office. One of its first actions was to legalize a number of trade union federations and political parties, including the Communist Party of Umguay; Confederación Nacional de Trabajadores, National Workers' Confederation; Federación de Estudiantes Universitarios del Uruguay, Umguayan Federation of University Students; Movimiento 26 de Marzo, 26 March Movement; and Grupo de Acción Unifica-dora. Group for Unifying Action. All these organizations had been banned after the military coup in June 1973 and many prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty Intemational had been imprisoned for belonging to them. Also legalized was the human rights organization Servicio de Paz y Justicia, Peace and Justice Service, which had been banned in 1983.
On 5 March restrictions on the news media were lifted and the constitutional recourse of gracia, pardon, was granted to all people facing prosecution before military courts. Among them were Wilson Ferreira Aldunate, leader of the Partido Nacional, National Party, who had been detained between June and November 1984 and adopted by Amnesty Intemational as a prisoner of conscience (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1985).
The Ley de Pacificación Nacional, Law of National Pacification, was passed in early March. It granted an amnesty to all remaining political prisoners except approximately 60 who were accused of homicide; their cases were to be reviewed by civil courts. However, the law stated that because of the torture and harsh prison conditions they had suffered, their sentences would be shortened by three days for every day served in prison if found guilty in the review, and any additional security measures imposed in addition to the sentence would be revoked. Article 5 of the law excluded from the amnesty police and military personnel found guilty of torture and of effecting
202	Amnesty International Report 1986
"disappearances" of prisoners, and public officials found guilty of covering up such crimes. Under the amnesty 193 political prisoners were released on 10 March. They included many who had been adopted by Amnesty Intemational as prisoners of conscience. On 27 March Amnesty Intemational welcomed the release of all the remaining prisoners of conscience.
Prisoners accused of homicide were released on 13 and 14 March and their cases passed to civil courts for review. They included Raúl Sendic Antonaccio, leader of the Movimiento de Liberación Nacional - Tupamaros (MLN), National Liberation Movement - Tupamaros. Amnesty International had repeatedly expressed concem about reports that he and eight other MLN leaders were inhumanely treated in detention (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984). On 15 November the court reviewing his case found him guilty of murder and passed a 23-year sentence. However, under the Law of National Pacification the 12 years he had already served counted as 36 years, and he remained free.
Parliament also repealed the Law of State Security and Internal Order of July 1972, under which civilians accused of crimes against the nation had been tried by military courts.
In November an Amnesty Intemational delegate visited the capital, Montevideo, to collect information about investigations by the legislature and the civilian courts into human rights abuses, including "disappearances", perpetrated under previous govemments since June 1973. In April a parliamentary commission, the Comisión Investigadora sobre Situación de Personas Desaparecidas y Hechos que la Motivaron, Investigative Commission on the Situation of "Disappeared" People and its Causes, was established. It reported in November on 164 Umguayans — including eight children — who had "disappeared" after arrest between 1973 and 1982. Of these, 127 "disappeared" after being abducted in Argentina by paramilitary units which allegedly included members of the Umguayan armed forces. Three were thought to have "disappeared" under similar circumstances in Chile and two in Paraguay. Thirty-two others "disappeared" after arrest in Umguay. In its report to parliament the Commission concluded that "all of the adults died as a result of the bmtal treatment to which they were submitted, or were directly executed". The Commission indicated that it had evidence of the involvement of members of the Umguayan security forces. Their names were not made public but were passed to the Supreme Court, together with evidence which the Commission had collected.
In a press interview in June President Sanguinetti stated that it was not a priority of his government to investigate possible "excesses" of the armed forces during its period of mle. He said, nevertheless, that
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	203	Japan
his govemment would investigate fully certain "dramatic episodes". One of those mentioned was the case of Elena Quinteros, a teacher who "disappeared" after being abducted from the grounds of the Venezuelan Embassy in Montevideo on 28 June 1976. In a speech to the Umguayan Senate in July, Senator Germán Araújo described the circumstances of her "disappearance" and named the police and military officers he alleged were responsible. It was later reported that two of the police officers named had been dismissed from their posts but to Amnesty International's knowledge by the end of 1985 none of the officers named had been prosecuted.
A former member of the military intelligence unit Servicio de Inteligencia de Defensa (SID), Defence Intelligence Service, testified to a court that he had participated in the abduction in early August 1976 of an elderly man whose description matched that of teacher and joumalist Julio Castro, who "disappeared" after arrest. The Umguayan authorities had told the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States in January 1978 that Julio Castro had left Umguay on a flight to Buenos Aires. This information was initially contradicted by Argentine immigration records and subsequent investigations were said to have established that the flight in question never landed in Buenos Aires, due to adverse weather conditions. Amnesty International continued to investigate the cases of Elena Quinteros, Julio Castro and the other Umguayans who "disappeared".
Evidence presented by relatives of the "disappeared" to civilian courts led to the opening of judicial investigations in numerous cases during 1985. However, their progress was obstmcted by an armed forces mling that officers should communicate with such courts only in writing, and by the refusal of military officers to testify in person. After a civilian judge ordered the arrest in August of two military officers accused of involvement in the abduction and torture of Umguayan citizens in Argentina the military courts claimed that the case fell within their jurisdiction. A Supreme Court verdict on the conflict over jurisdiction in this and other similar cases was awaited at the end of 1985.
In December Amnesty Intemational wrote to President Sanguinetti expressing its hope that future judicial procedures would establish the fate of the "disappeared" and bring those responsible to justice. The organization noted that the parliamentary Commission's conclusion that the adult "disappeared" were dead did not appear to have been reached on the basis of specific evidence in each case, and that the Commission did not have mandatory powers to obtain official information or to interview members of the armed forces. Amnesty Intemational also welcomed a proposal to provide detainees with
204	Amnesty International Report 1986
legal assistance from the moment of arrest. This reform, it believed, would considerably improve the existing legal and procedural guarantees for detainees, and would help safeguard against torture and ill-treatment.
On 2 March Uruguay signed the UN Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
