Somalia
Amnesty International's main concems were the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, some of whom had been detained without trial for over seven years; the detention without trial, or imprisonment after unfair trials, of other political prisoners; allegations of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners; and the extensive imposition of the death penalty.
In September President Mohamed Siyad Barre reportedly denied that there were any political prisoners in Somalia. He also reportedly offered to permit Amnesty Intemational representatives to go to Somalia but a proposal to this effect which the organization made in November had received no response by the end of 1985.
There was continuing armed conflict in 1985 between govemment
86	Amnesty International Report 1986
forces and two armed opposition groups, the Democratic Front for the Salvation of Somalia (DFSS) and the Somali National Movement (SNM). There were unconfirmed reports of extrajudicial executions of unarmed civilians by the security forces in areas of armed conflict.
There were new politically motivated arrests during 1985. In March more than 100 students belonging to the Somali Islamic Youth Union, the Muslim Brotherhood and other Islamic organizations were reportedly arrested in Mogadishu, Berbera and other towns. They were arrested shortly after the authorities placed restrictions on the religious activities of these organizations. The students were held in Mogadishu Central Prison. About 30 more members of the same Islamic organizations were arrested in July for their reUgious activities but all those detained were released by November without having been charged.
In July there were reports that at least 30 people, including Safia Hashi Madar, a housewife, and Said Dahar Jama, a student, had been arrested in Hargeisa because they were suspected of supporting the SNM. Twenty-six of them were believed to be still detained without charge at the end of 1985. Amnesty Intemational believed that they might be prisoners of conscience.
The organization was seeking information on Yasin Haji Hersi, a doctor arrested in September reportedly for criticizing the govemment, believed to be stiU detained without charge at the end of 1985. It also sought information on a number of people said to have been arrested in Koriolei in August for refusing conscription into the army.
Amnesty International continued to work for the release of prisoners of conscience detained in previous years. They included Yusuf Osman Samantar ("Barda'ad"), a politician and lawyer, held without trial since 1978; Abdirahman Hussein Jama, an accountant, and Abukar Hassan Yare, a law lecturer, both detained without trial since January 1981; and Abdi Ismail Yunis, former Dean of Education at the Somali National University, and Suleiman Nuh Ali, an architect, both detained without trial since 1982. Amnesty Intemational also pressed for the release of 20 people, including doctors, teachers and civil servants, who were convicted by the National Security Court in Hargeisa in 1982 of participating in a subversive organization. They received prison sentences for nonviolent opposition to the government after a trial which Amnesty Intemational considered to be unfair. One of the 20 was Aden Yusuf Abokor, director of the Hargeisa hospital. Three others were released in 1985 after serving three-year sentences.
Six former members of parliament arrested in June 1982 also remained in detention throughout 1985. They included Ismail Ali Abokor, a former Vice-President of Somalia; Omar Arteh Ghalib, a
278	Amnesty International Report 1986
former foreign minister; and Mohamed Aden Sheikh, former president of the Somali Academy of Sciences. Although arrested for treason, they had not been allowed access to defence counsel since their arrests and had not been brought to court. They were believed to be held in Labatan Jirow prison and to be denied contact with their families. In December Amnesty Intemational received information suggesting that they were about to be brought to trial before the National Security Court with some 26 other political detainees. The organization asked the govemment to confinn or deny this and to ensure full legal defence rights. Amnesty Intemational also called on the authorities to permit intemational observers to attend their trial. The trial had not started by the end of 1985. Amnesty Intemational was also concerned that some of the detainees were in poor health as a result of inadequate medical attention or ill-treatment. One, Abdullahi Jama Gallal, an army officer, had allegedly been tortured.
Amnesty International remained concemed about the continued imprisonment of 22 people, many of them secondary school students, who were convicted of treason in October 1984 by the National Security Court in Hargeisa. Seven were sentenced to death and the others to prison terms of three years to life after a trial which Amnesty Intemational believed, on the basis of the Umited information available to it, was not fair. It appeared that all 22 defendants might be prisoners of conscience. Some of those sentenced to death were reported to be under 18 years old at the time of the alleged offence. In November 1984 the govemment reportedly assured the Italian Govemment that those condemned to death would have their sentences reviewed, but no formal announcement of clemency had been made by the end of 1985.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the prolonged detention without trial in Somalia, of a number of Ethiopians. Some were civilians who had been abducted from Ethiopia by the Somali armed forces during an armed conflict in 1977 and were believed to be held in Hawai military camp, but the govemment had not acknowledged their detention. Others, including refugees who had fled from Ethiopia to avoid political persecution, had been arrested for alleged security offences or on political grounds.
Political prisoners were reportedly held in harsh conditions, with those detained in Lanta Bur and Labatan Jirow maximum security prisons being denied contact with their families and, in some cases, held in prolonged solitary confinement. Medical facilities and diet were reported to be inadequate. At Hargeisa prison political prisoners' families were apparently allowed to send food in to them but often had to pay bribes to prison officers. Prisoners held by the National Security Service (NSS), particularly in the Mogadishu
88	Amnesty International Report 1986
regional NSS prison known as Godka ("the hole"), were reportedly treated harshly and in several cases tortured.
Amnesty International appealed to President Siyad Barre to commute 11 death sentences imposed by the National Security Court during 1985 for offences including treason, espionage, armed robbery, homicide and embezzlement. Amnesty Intemational was seeking to verify reports that over 100 people were executed in 1985 after being condemned to death by the National Security Court, including 17 prisoners allegedly executed in Hargeisa on 30 July. There is no right of appeal against the sentence of the court, although death sentences require confirmation by the head of state. Those condemned were in many cases said to have been executed in public within 24 hours of sentencing.
