United Kingdom
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about allegations of ill-treatment during interrogation of political suspects and about judicial procedures in Northern Ireland. The organization also continued to investigate a number of killings by security forces there. Amnesty International sent a delegate to observe the trial of a civil servant charged with leaking internal government information. The organization also investigated allegations of ill-treatment of young people in detention centres in Britain, and of eight servicemen who were charged with passing on military secrets.
Amnesty International had written to the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland on 14 December 1984 urging him to investigate allegations that Paul Caruana had been ill-treated and tortured during his interrogation in Castlereagh Holding Centre in August 1984 (see Amnesty International Report 1985). On 31 January 1985 Amnesty International wrote again calling for full and prompt clarification of the facts. The government replied on 25 February that it was satisfied that the process in hand would ensure that all the allegations were thoroughly investigated. Amnesty International issued a news release on 27 March making its concerns known about Paul Caruana's allegations, and renewed its appeals to the authorities. On 4 April the government stated that the Director of Public Prosecutions had decided that the evidence did not warrant the prosecution of any of those involved. In July the authorities stated in a letter to Amnesty International that they could not reply to the organization's letters because the case was sub-judice as Paul Caruana had instituted civil proceedings against the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC). The civil proceedings had not come to court by the end of 19^.
Amnesty International was also concerned about other reports of

ill-treatment. Michael McCrory was one of over 20 people detained in Belfast on 1 October under the Prevention of Terrorism Act and interrogated at Castlereagh Holding Centre. He subsequently alleged that he had been systematically ill-treated throughout seven days of interrogation. He stated that he had been kicked, slapped, punched and shoved, and that the ill-treatment continued despite his lodging formal complaints.
Amnesty International continued to monitor cases in the special non-jury Diplock Courts in Northern Ireland in which former accomplices' statements formed the main prosecution evidence (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984 and 1985). In two such trials in 1985 most of the defendants were freed, while in a third, all the defendants were convicted.
In one of these trials the judge rejected the evidence of the prosecution witness, James Crockard, a member of the paramilitary Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF), and ordered the release of 17 of the 29 defendants on 21 February. The judge stated that the evidence did not "measure up to the required standard". Eight of the 29 were convicted on the basis of admissions they had made to the police. In another case the judge dismissed on 5 July the evidence of UVF member William "Budgie" Allen as "unworthy of belief, and ordered the release of 36 out of 47 defendants. Five others were convicted on the basis of confessions. Twenty-seven defendants were jailed for terrorist-linked offences on 18 December on the evidence of Irish National Liberation Army (INLA) member Harry Kirkpatrick, who was serving a life sentence for five murders and 72 other terrorist offences.
On 24 October Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Prime Minister expressing concem at the government's failure to deal adequately with issues raised by a series of killings of unarmed people by security forces in Northem Ireland since 1982. Since October 1982 there have reportedly been 31 fatal shootings by security forces in Northem Ireland. Eighteen of the victims were unarmed. Some of these killings took place in conditions compatible with allegations that they were deliberately planned. The organization called for an independent judicial inquiry to evaluate existing mechanisms for investigating and publicly explaining such killings, as well as the effectiveness of legislation governing the use of lethal force in law enforcement.
Amnesty Intemational continued its investigations into whether people had been deliberately killed on account of their beliefs as a matter of govemment policy. The organization was not able to reach a firm conclusion but believed that the mechanisms used to investigate these incidents, such as police investigations, inquests and criminal proceedings, had not produced sufficient evidence to
316	Amnesty International Report 1986
eliminate the possibility of unlawful use of lethal force for such purposes by the security forces. Amnesty International also believed that the laws and regulations governing the use of lethal force in law enforcement offered less protection against its unjustified use than do international standards. The government replied on 30 December that it recognized it was in its interest to have such incidents investigated promptly. However, the government stated that it was "totally opposed" to an independent judicial inquiry into particular cases or into investigative procedures and safeguards against deliberate killings by the security forces, because it felt that existing procedures were adequate.
The report of an official inquiry into the RUC operations surrounding three incidents in which six suspects were killed in late 1982 was completed in September. The inquiry, which lasted just over a year, was conducted under the established procedure whereby a senior police officer from another local force investigates controversial allegations. The report was submitted on completion to the RUC Chief Constable. However, by the end of 1985 the report had still not been passed on to the Director of Public Prosecutions.
Clive Ponting, a senior civil servant at the Ministry of Defence, was charged on 19 August 1984 under Section 2 of the Official Secrets Act with communicating internal information to an unauthorized person (in this case a member of parliament) in July 1984. The documents related to the sinking of an Argentine warship, the General Belgrano, by British forces during the South Atlantic war. Amnesty International sent an observer to the trial to help assess whether Clive Ponting could be considered a prisoner of conscience if convicted and imprisoned. The trial ended on 11 February with his acquittal.
Amnesty International was investigating reports of ill-treatment in several youth detention centres in Britain, which operate under a tough disciplinary program. On 2 May the organization wrote to the government about reports of ill-treatment by prison officers of boys held at the Aldington Detention Centre in Kent. Allegedly, boys were frequently punched in the stomach or slapped in the face as a form of punishment. The government replied on 16 May that the allegations had been referred to the |X)lice for investigation. By the end of 1985 the results of the inquiry had not been made public.
Amnesty International wrote to the government on 1 November about allegations that eight British servicemen had been coerced into making confessions. The eight servicemen were charged in April 1984 under Section 1 of the Official Secrets Act with passing military secrets to Soviet agents. One was dismissed by the judge early in the trial and a jury acquitted the others in October 1985. The organization received reports that during the interrogation period of

many weeks the eight servicemen had been held in solitary confinement and had been subjected to exhaustive and intensive interrogation without breaks, to days of constant exposure to fluorescent lighting, and to other forms of ill-treatment. The organization welcomed the government's establishment of an independent inquiry into whether the interrogations were carried out in accordance with lawful and proper procedures. The inquiry had not completed its hearings by the end of 1985.
