Yugoslavia
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience; during 1985 it worked on the cases of 269 individuals whom it knew or suspected to be prisoners of conscience, but it believed that the total number was considerably greater. The organization received a number of allegations that political prisoners had been ill-treated during investigation and it was also concemed about treatment and conditions in some prisons where political prisoners were serving their sentences. Amnesty Intemational continued to call for the release of two prisoners of conscience detained in the psychiatric section of Belgrade Central Prison Hospital. It learned of six death sentences, all for murder, but to its knowledge no executions were reported.
According to official figures 451 people were charged with political crimes in 1985 and 389 of these were accused of "verbal crimes". The number of people arrested and convicted of political crimes in Kosovo province continued to be high. Most of the accused were ethnic Albanians charged with distributing leaflets, writing slogans or other forms of organized activity in support of the demand that Kosovo province, which has a predominantly Albanian population, cease to be part of the Republic of Serbia and be granted republic status within the Yugoslav federation. There were also cases involving violence, such as sabotage and attacks on Serbs and Montenegrins living in the province.
According to the Kosovo Secretary of Justice, between the outbreak of nationalist disturbances in the province in 1981 and the end of 1985,1,200 people had been sentenced for political crimes and
105	Amnesty International Report 1986
a further 6,440 people summarily sentenced for minor political offences. Other official figures showed that in 1984, 218 adults and 29 minors had been convicted of political crimes in Kosovo and that the average sentence imposed was six years' imprisonment. There was an overall drop in political crimes reported in the first six months of 1985. However, in November and December there were mass arrests of ethnic Albanians in Kosovo and other areas, following which, according to official sources, 117 people were charged.
During the year over 40 political trials, in which nearly 150 people were convicted, were reported in the Yugoslav press. In most cases the charges did not include the use or advocacy of violence. Prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International included a number of ethnic Albanians, among them eight secondary school pupils aged between 16 and 19 who were sentenced to between three and eight years' imprisonment in Pec in May. They were charged under Articles 136 and 114 of the criminal code with belonging to a "hostile" organization formed by the two main defendants, Robert Rasaj and Hava Shala, and with writing slogans and distributing leaflets calling for republic status for Kosovo and for celebrations on the anniversary of nationalist demonstrations.
Amnesty International also adopted as a prisoner of conscience Gani Kadriu, aged 39, a school treasurer. In March he was sentenced under Article 133 of the criminal code to three years' imprisonment on charges of "hostile propaganda" by the district court of Titova Mitrovica. He was foimd guilty of having recorded songs broadcast by radio stations in Albania which glorified Albania's then leader, Enver Hoxha, the work of the Albanian communist party and life in Albania.
In February Miodrag Milic, Milan Nikolic and Dragomir Olujic were sentenced by the district court of Belgrade to two, one and a half and one years' imprisonment respectively under Article 133, in a trial that received considerable national and international publicity. The trial followed a police raid in April 1984 on a private apartment in Belgrade where 28 people had assembled to hear a talk at the so-called "Open Univereity" — an unofficial discussion group. The three were found guilty of expressing views that "maliciously and untruthfully portrayed the heritage of our liberation struggle, the building of socialism and the character and deeds of Tito". On appeal Dragomir Olujic was acquitted; Miodrag Milic's prison sentence w^ reduced to 18 and Milan Nikolic's to eight months. They had not begun to serve their sentences by the end of 1985. Charges against three other men originally indicted with them were dropped.
Other prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International who were convicted under Article 133 included two men sentenced

for having exercised their right to petition (guaranteed under Article 157 of the Constitution). In letters written to the authorities they had allegedly portrayed socio-political conditions in the country "maliciously and untruthfully". Hamza Asllani, a history teacher, was sentenced to two years' imprisonment in Prizren in October and Milenko Ribic, an unemployed political scientist, received a one-year sentence imposed by the district court of Osijek in November. Amnesty International also worked for the release of Saif Egrlic, a Muslim from the republic of Bosnia-Hercegovina. In February he was sentenced in Banjaluka to four years' imprisonment for having publicly expressed the view that Muslims in Yugoslavia did not enjoy equal status.
Article 133, which carries a penalty of one to 10 years' imprisonment, was the subject of considerable public discussion during 1985. Proposals were put forward for its amendment, including a proposal to abolish the section which penalizes those who portray sociopolitical conditions in the country "maliciously and untruthfully".
As in the past, Amnesty International learned of people imprisoned for contacts with political émigrés. It adopted Mirko Sunic, a retired judge, who was sentenced in November under Article 131 of the criminal code to four years' imprisonment by the district court of Zagreb for "participation in hostile activity". He was accused of having sent letters "full of lies and hatred for Yugoslavia" to the editor of a Croatian emigré newspaper published in London and of having given copies of emigré newspapers to others. The letters concerned policies which he considered discriminatory towards Croatian culture, history and national aspirations. At the same trial his daughter, Mima, was sentenced to 10 months' imprisonment for giving copies of an emigré newspaper to someone else. She remained at liberty pending appeal.
Amnesty International continued to call for the release of Radomir Veljkovic, forcibly detained in the psychiatric section of Belgrade Central Prison Hospital since 1973, and Milisav Zivanovic, similarly detained since 1976, as a result of the non-violent exercise of their right to freedom of expression (see Amnesty International Report 1984 and 1985). Amnesty International also sought further information about Vlado Perisic, aged 32, a worker from Sibenik, who was said to be forcibly detained in a psychiatric hospital in Popavaca, Croatia, after having been charged in 1982 with political offences.
Amnesty International was concerned about allegations that political prisoners were being ill-treated. In February Amnesty International wrote to the Secretary of Justice of Bosnia-Hercegovina about Vojislav Seselj, a prisoner of conscience convicted of "hostile propaganda" in 1984. He had told members of his family, who had
320	Amnesty International Report 1986
visited him in Zenica prison at the beginning of February, that he had been beaten by prison officials after refusing to answer a questionnaire about his political views and family circumstances. His back, arms and face were reportedly severely bruised. Amnesty International urged the authorities to investigate this incident. No reply had been received by the end of 1985.
Amnesty International continued to receive reports of harsh conditions in certain prisons where political prisoners were held. In October Vladimir Seks, a lawyer from Osijek and an adopted prisoner of conscience, wrote to the Croatian Secretary of Justice about the conditions and treatment of prisoners in Stara Gradiska prison, where he had served his sentence from March until August. He complained of the extreme cold from which prisoners suffered in the winter and spring in unheated cells. Prisoners in solitary confinement were in addition not allowed to cover themselves with blankets during the day, nor to Ue down or sit on beds; if they did they were beaten by guards. Hiey were obliged to use a bucket for a toilet, which was emptied only twice a week. Although under prison rules they had the right to an hour's daily exercise outside, they were rarely granted this. He also cited several cases in which guards had attacked and beaten prisoners for minor infractions of prison rules. His account tallied with earlier reports of conditions in Stara Gradiska received by Amnesty International.
Amnesty International learned of six death sentences imposed for murder. It appealed to the authorities to commute three other death sentences confirmed on final appeal. In each case the accused had been found guilty of the murder of more than one person.
