Malaysia
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about the long-term detention without charge or trial of approximately 60 prisoners, including a number of prisoners of conscience, under the Internal Security Act (ISA), 1960, and about the increased use of the death penalty.
Under the ISA people considered by the authorities to represent a threat to national security may be detained without charge or trial for renewable two-year periods. In most cases the government has accused ISA detainees of being members or supporters of the banned Communist Party of Malaya. The detainees have no opportunity to challenge their detention in court. Fewer detainees were held under this law than in previous years: according to a government statement in October, 152 ISA detainees had been released by then during 1985 and only two people had been arrested under this legislation in the same period. Nevertheless, by the end of 1985 Amnesty International was working on behalf of 47 prisoners whom it had either adopted as prisoners of conscience or taken up for investigation. Many of these detainees had been held without charge or trial since the mid-1970s. Several prisoners of conscience for whose release Amnesty International had appealed for many years continued to be detained, including Wong Yong Huat and Loo Ming Leong, both held without trial since 1972 (see Amnesty International Report 1985).
Among those held without trial under the ISA for whose release Amnesty International worked were members of the Islamic opposition party. Pas (Parti Islam se Malaysia). Haji Suhaimi Said, a lawyer and legal adviser for Pas, w^ arrested on 14 March and later served with a two-year detention order. A government statement accused him of actions which could "split the country's Malay and Muslim community" and "threaten public order and national security". He had been an election official for Pas in a by-election campaign in January, and had published a pamphlet describing clashes between supporters of Pas and the United Malay National Organization (UNMO) — the dominant party in the government — at Lubuk Merbau during the campaign. Another member of Pas, Abu Bakar bin Chik, also adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience (see Amnesty International Report Ì955), remained in detention throughout 1985.
Most prisoners detained under the ISA were believed to be held in
2A2	Amnesty International Report 1986
Taiping Detention Camp in Perak. Medical facilities at this camp were reported to be poor and many of the cells hot and poorly ventilated. Detainees in Taiping were reported to have gone on hunger-strike in October and November to protest about conditions. Some detainees were transferred to other places of detention such as the Special Branch headquarters in Johor Bahru, the Police Rehabilitation Centre headquarters in Kuala Lumpur or other police stations. There ISA detainees were reported to be held, usually in solitary confinement, for interrogation. While some detainees were later released others were merely returned to Taiping.
Amnesty International was concerned about the increased use of the death penalty during 1985. Thirty-six f>eople were sentenced to death and 10 executed. Thirty-three of these death sentences were imposed following convictions for drug trafficking. Possession of over 15 grams of heroin or fixed amounts of other drugs incurs a mandatory death penalty. Two Australian nationals, Brian Chambers and Kevin Barlow, were sentenced to death for drug offences in August. Their appeal was dismissed by the Supreme Court in December and by the end of 1985 a plea for clemency was reported to be pending before the Pardons Board of Penang. According to police sources hundreds of Malaysians and about 30 other foreigners were in detention facing charges of drug trafficking which carried mandatory death sentences.
The death penalty is also mandatory for the illegal possession of firearms under Section 57(1) of the ISA. Public debate on this issue was stimulated when one prisoner who had been sentenced to death under this legislation, Sim Kie Chon, obtained a stay of execution shortly before the date on which he was to be hanged. He had filed a civil suit alleging that the Pardons Board had acted unfairly in upholding his sentence when they had in 1983 commuted the death sentence imposed on a former cabinet minister convicted of murder. Appeals on behalf of Sim Kie Chon were then submitted to the government by a wide range of political parties, trade unions and other groups including Amnesty International and on 14 August, the day to which his execution had reportedly been rescheduled, the Attorney General announced that the King had granted a further stay of execution. Nevertheless the Vice-President of the Malaysian Bar Council, Param Cumaraswamy, was later charged under the Sedition Act for questioning the impartiality of the Pardons Board in connection with this case, and his trial on these charges opened in November.
243	Amnesty International Report 1986
