Comoros
Amnesty Intemational adopted more than 40 prisoners of conscience who were among 76 alleged opponents of the government sentenced to prison terms after unfair trials. Amnesty Intemational was concemed also about the reported torture and ill-treatment in pre-trial custody of some of those tried, and of at least one prisoner who was said to have been beaten to death during interrogation.
At least 30 Comorian soldiers belonging to the Presidential Guard of Head of State Ahmed Abdallah were detained on 8 March, apparently suspected of planning a mutiny against their officers who are European mercenaries. Many of the detained soldiers subsequently claimed that their intention had been to protest against their conditions of military service. However, the authorities alleged that they had intended to overthrow President Abdallah's govemment and that they had planned to do so with civilian opponents of the govemment, in particular members of the Front démocratique des Comores (FDC), the Comorian Democratic Front, an opposition party not known to have used or advocated violence. The mling Union comorienne pour le progrès, Comorian Union for Progress, was the only permitted political party. In the days following 8 March, European officers of the Presidential Guard detained at least 50 civilians suspected of opposing the govemment, including Moustoifa Said Cheikh, secretary general of the FDC, and other suspected members or sympathizers of the FDC. Some of the 50 civilians were released within a few days, but most of the people detained in March, both civilian and military, were held incommunicado for 24 days. They were reportedly held in harsh conditions without sufficient food. Some, including Moustoifa Said Cheikh, were reported to have been tortured with electric shocks. Other detainees were reported to have been beaten. One — Said Adamou, a hospital |X)rter — was said to have been beaten to death in late March while being
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII
39	Japan
interrogated. He was a French national who had been on holiday in the Comoros on 8 March and was apparently detained by mistake, since a prominent opponent of the govemment has the same name. Amnesty International repeatedly urged the govemment to investigate impartially his death and reports of torture. The organization also wrote to the French authorities to inquire into reports that French nationals — mercenary officers of the Presidential Guard — had participated in the ill-treatment of detainees, including the beating to death of Smd Adamou.
Between 4 and 8 November, 77 people accused of offences arising from the alleged coup attempt were tried by the Moroni criminal court or the Moroni correctional court. All those tried by the correctional court were civilians, and appeared to be accused of less serious offences than the civihans and mihtary personnel tried by the criminal court. According to observers, the prosecution in both courts produced no evidence that any civilians had participated in the events of 8 March. Many civilian defendants testified that the questions put to them by officers of the Presidential Guard during interrogation were restricted to their poUtical opinions. Moreover, many defendants alleged that they had been tortured in custody. Nevertheless, Moustoifa Said Cheikh was convicted of attempting to overthrow the government and was sentenced to life imprisonment. Some 50 other civilians were sentenced to lesser terms of imprisonment, some suspended. Those sentenced to less than six months were apparently released in view of the time they had spent in custody. One civilian was acquitted. Some soldiers were also apparently convicted on the basis of inadequate evidence. There was no evidence that any soldiers who were tried had intended to overthrow the govemment, although several admitted taking part in a mutiny. The court did not investigate adequately allegations by defendants that they had confessed only as a result of torture. All the soldiers were convicted of attempting to overthrow the govemment.
In view of the lack of evidence against the civilians and reports that they were in fact imprisoned for their non-violent political opinions, Amnesty Intemational adopted as prisoners of conscience all the civilians convicted in November who remained in prison. It also inquired about the arrest of up to 70 other people reportedly arrested shortly after the trial because they had criticized the proceedings or because they were considered sympathetic to imprisoned members of the FDC. Amnesty Intemational remained concemed that some of the soldiers convicted in November might have been prisoners of conscience, wrongfully convicted.
vili
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986
