Zaire
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the imprisonment and intemal banishment of prisoners of conscience; the detention without charge or trial of suspected government opponents; torture and ill-treatment of prisoners and the deaths in custody of people detained for political reasons. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about reports of extrajudicial executions by government forces in east and southeast Zaire.
Amnesty International leamed of several hundred politically motivated arrests during 1985. Most of those arrested were apparently released after a few weeks or months in custody. Most did not appear to be linked with armed opposition groups and many were believed to be prisoners of conscience. They were arrested for a variety of reasons. Some were suspected of supporting the Union pour la démocratie et le progrès social (UDPS), Union for Democracy and Social Progress, an unofficial opposition party banned under Zaire's one-party constitution. Some were detained on suspicion of supporting other opposition groups or of criticizing the govemment.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	111	Japan
In southeast Kivu region in particular, a number of people were arrested by soldiers and accused of being "Gaddafistes" (supporters of the Libyan head of state. Colonel Mu'ammar Gaddafi), apparently for the purpose of extorting money rather than because of their alleged political sympathies.
Several adopted prisoners of conscience arrested in 1983 and 1984 were released during 1985. They included 11 UDPS supporters, mostly former members of the National Assembly who had been "relegated" (sent into intemal banishment) by administrative order to isolated villages in late 1983. Their restriction orders were Ufted shortly before the 25th anniversary of independence in June.
Some of those released in June were rearrested, together with many other alleged UDPS supporters, in the last quarter of 1985. Tshisekedi wa Mulumba and Kanana Tshiongo, two former members of the National Assembly, were the first to be rearrested. They were arrested on 13 October, shortly after Tshisekedi wa Mulumba told a foreign joumahst based in Kinshasa that a meeting of UDPS supporters had been dismpted and people attending it had been assaulted by soldiers belonging to the Special Presidential Brigade. Kanana Tshiongo was detciined when he protested at his colleague's arrest. In late November they were charged with insulting the head of state and referred to the State Security Court, but they had not been tried by the end of 1985. During the weeks that followed their arrest, more than 100 other UDPS supporters were detained in Kinshasa and elsewhere by the national security service, the Agence nationale de documentation (AND), National Documentation Agency. They included several acknowledged UDPS leaders such as Bossassi Epole Bolya Kodya, who was arrested in Kinshasa, and Lumbu Maloba Ndiba, a former National Assembly member who was arrested in northeast Shaba. Both were adopted by Amnesty Intemational as prisoners of conscience and reportedly remained in detention at the end of 1985. Some of those arrested were freed after a few days or weeks, others were forcibly retumed to their provinces of origin. Other arrests of suspected UDPS supporters were reported in the provinces; in Kinshasa, Mbuji-Mayi and Kipushi (Shaba region) those detained were allegedly tortured. One man, Kana-Kange, arrested in Kinshasa in late October and retumed to his province of origin, was reported to have died in Kongolo in northeast Shaba in mid-November, a few days after his banishment there. Several people detained in Kinshasa were also reported to have died in custody there. Kamangu, a man arrested in Mbuji-Mayi, reportedly died in the town's AND detention centre in late October. In none of these cases was specific information available on the cause of death, but unofficial sources alleged that the prisoners had been ill-treated.
112	Amnesty International Report 1986
Several prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty Intemational remained in detention throughout 1985. For example, Kyungu Mukange, who was arrested in January 1984, was still detained without charge or trial at the AND detention centre in Lubumbashi at the end of 1985. He had previously been imprisoned in 1982 on account of his support for the UDPS. Another alleged UDPS supporter who was arrested with him, Kitenge bin Mawengo, was released uncharged in March.
Five other prisoners of conscience arrested in January 1984, including Ngwashi Chola, a trader, remained in detention throughout 1985 at the AND detention centre in Lubumbashi. They had initially been accused of planning to dismpt presidential elections in July 1984, but no formal charges were brought against them. Amnesty Intemational knew of the detention of other suspected govemment opponents in Lubumbashi and also appealed for the release of several people arrested in late 1983 or early 1984 who were "relegated" to isolated villages in Shaba region.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the long-term detention without charge or trial of a number of prisoners in Kinshasa. They included a former university lecturer, Kandol' Kand Nawej, who was arrested in September 1984, but who had already spent several years in detention in the early 198(te on account of his suspected political opposition, although he had never been charged. The official reason for his rearrest was not known. They included also seven people arrested in April and May 1984 after two bombs exploded in Kinshasa. Although they had apparently been questioned about the bombings and one — Kianzila el Busi — had been accused publicly of complicity, none was known to have been charged and no evidence showing their involvement in the bombings had been made public. Amnesty Intemational continued to investigate these cases as it believed that the detainees might in fact be held on account of non-violent political activities or family links with govemment opponents living abroad. It was also concemed that several had allegedly been tortured. One of the seven was released uncharged in December.
Elsewhere in Zaire Amnesty International was concemed about the short-term detention of alleged government opponents who were arrested by soldiers and kept in military custody unlawfully. The armed forces were responsible for numerous arrests during counter-insurgency of>erations in Kalemie and Moba zones in northeast Shaba and were reported to have detained large numbers of civilians for periods varying from several days to several months on the grounds that they had been in contact with armed government opponents. In many cases it appeared that there was no evidence to support these
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	113	Japan
accusations and that the arrests were carried out with the intention of extorting ransom money. These arrests were associated with a pattern of torture, brutal treatment and extrajudicial executions.
Similar arbitrary arrests by soldiers were reported in southeast Kivu, mostly of traders and young men who were accused of being "Gaddafistes", apparently solely because they frequently travelled away from home. While the Libyan head of state was visiting nei^ibouring Burundi in May he publicly called for the assassination of Zaire's President Mobutu Sese Seko; the authorities responded by claiming that Libyan-backed opposition groups had been infiltrated across the Burundi border with instructions to plant bombs in Zaire. Soldiers near the frontier were apparently authorized to arrest anyone suspected of having travelled abroad. Seven people accused of entering the country to plant bombs were presented to journalists and diplomats in Kinshasa in June; they were not known to have been tried and it was unclear whether they remained in custody.
Two political trials were known to have occurred during 1985. In September Ronald Van Den Bogaert, a Belgian national, was tried by the State Security Court in Kinsh^a. He had been arrested upon his arrival from Belgium in late July and found to be in possession of newspaper articles about Zaire and the UDPS and of several cassette recordings of a UDPS spokesperson in Belgium. He was initially held incommunicado by the AND but was transferred for further investigation by the State Security Court in late August. In September he appeared in court charged with possession of subversive materials and with organizing the distribution of such materials in Zaire. However, after the trial opened, he was further charged with conspiring to alter the country's constitution by advocating change to the one-party system, which carries up to 15 years' imprisonment. The evidence against him mostly concemed his activities in Belgium, where he had been in contact with members of the UDPS. He was found guilty and sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment with no right of appeal. He was adopted by Amnesty Intemational as a prisoner of conscience.
Also in September four university lecturers were tried by the State Security Court in Lubumbashi. At their trial they were accused of organizing an unofficial strike by university lecturers for higher salaries and inciting their colleagues to use violence against the authorities. They were convicted and sentenced to four months' imprisonment, which they had already spent in pretrial custody since their arrest in June. They were freed in October but deprived of their jobs. Amnesty Intemational considered them to be prisoners of conscience and had called for their release.
Amnesty International received many reports of torture and
114	Amnesty International Report 1986
ill-treatment of prisoners. Among the reported victims were both political detainees and suspected criminals. In particular, people detained during army counter-insurgency operations in northeast Shaba region appeared to have been routinely tortured. For example, while held at Moba airfield, a former official of the ruling party was reportedly hung upside down and beaten, burned with matches, pierced with needles and had a cord tied around his genitals and tightened. In another case, a teacher arrested in May in Moba was reported to have been whipped with barbed wire. Some months later, he and other former detainees who had been held in Kalemie and reportedly tortured still bore scars consistent with their allegations.
There were also reports that convicted criminal prisoners were subjected to ill-treatment and harsh conditions of imprisonment. For example, it was alleged that several prisoners held in Matadi, in Bas-Zaire, and Isiro, in Haut-Zaire, were badly burned when fetters were welded onto their ankles. Some eight prisoners in Matadi were alleged to have had feet or legs amputated in March as a result of infections caused by these burns.
Amnesty Intemational remained concemed about the death penalty. At least three people were sentenced to death, but the real figure may have been higher. Those sentenced were convicted of murder or armed robbery. In one case, a civilian was sentenced to death by a military court. In August President Mobutu Sese Seko commuted to life imprisonment a death sentence imposed in 1981.
Unarmed civilians were reported to have been executed extrajudicially by soldiers in the Moba area. In February govemment troops searching for armed opponents in the Nzawa area, north of Moba, found provisions near the village of Kansabala. About 30 villagers were reportedly detained and executed without any form of trial. In June Amnesty Intemational received detailed ¿legations of the execution of prisoners in Moba. In one incident five prisoners were said to have been shot outside a military detention centre during the night and buried in unmarked graves.
Amnesty Intemational also received reports of extrajudicial executions on Idjwi island, in Kivu region. The victims in this case were apparently suspected of criminal offences, such as stealing poultry and goats. At least 30 people were reported to have been executed on Idjwi island — either shot or deliberately drowned — between Febmary and May 1985. The killings were allegedly ordered by both the local zone commissioner (district officer) and the traditional mler of Idjwi, but the victims evidently received no form of trial under either the national legal system or traditional law. Although those responsible for the killings were not known to have been punished, the commissioner involved was reported to have been
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	115	Japan
transferred elsewhere after protests at his behaviour.
As in previous years, in May Amnesty Intemational submitted information about its concems under the UN procedure for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations (the so-called "1503 procedure").
