Singapore
Amnesty Internationa! was concerned about the continued detention of one prisoner of conscience who had been held without trial since 1966, and about the death penalty.
Chia Thye Poh, a former member of parliament representing the opposition Barisan Sosialis party, had been detained since 29 October 1966. During nearly 20 years of detention the authorities neither charged him with any criminal offence nor gave him an opportunity to challenge in court the accusations against him. On 15 May the Minister of Home Affairs stated in parliament that Chia Thye Poh had been "specifically instructed by the CPM [Communist Party of Malaya] to penetrate the Barisan Sosialis and engage in Communist united front agitation to destabilize the government ... by mounting a series of illegal demonstrations and industrial strikes", and added: "He will be released as soon as he is prepared to give a public undertaking disowning the CPM's use of force and terror to overthrow the government." In a letter to the Minister on 20 May, Chia Thye Poh categorically denied all these accusations and on 13 July his father said publicly that Chia Thye Poh had not been informed of these allegations either at the time of his arrest or in his subsequent detention order. Amnesty International was concerned that the authorities were apparently demanding a confession of guilt in exchange for release. Amnesty International believed that Chia Thye Poh had been detained for non-violent political activities and on 27 September renewed its appeals for his unconditional release.
During 1985 Amnesty International learned of three death sentences and one execution, all for drug trafficking. Under the Misuse of Drugs Act possession of over 15 grams of heroin or fixed amounts of other dru^ incurs a mandatory death penalty. In December Amnesty International app>ealed to all members of parliament for the commutation of outstanding death sentences and the abolition of the death penalty.
256
Amnesty International Report 1986
