Ghana
Amnesty Intemational's concems were the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, the detention without trial of other alleged opponents of the govemment and the death penalty. Two journalists detained in Febmary were beaten in custody; the govemment subsequently apologized for their ill-treatment. At the beginning of 1985 Amnesty Intemational was working for
vili	Amnesty Intemational Report 1986
the release of four prisoners of conscience. They included Dr John Nabila and S.K. Riley-Poku, both of whom had been ministers in the government of President Hilla Limann which was overthrown in a military coup on 31 December 1981. However, both were released on 6 March when the govemment reportedly freed 202 prisoners on the anniversary of independence. Official reports claimed that all 202 people released on that date were political prisoners. However, Amnesty Intemational received no response to its inquiries as to the identities of those released other than Dr John Nabila and S.K. Riley-Poku. Another former minister, Kankam da Costa, the last member of Dr Limann's government to remain in detention, was freed on 31 December. He too had been detained without trial since January 1982. The one prisoner of conscience who remained in prison at the end of 1985 was Jacob Yidana, a former Chief Superintendent of Police, who was sentenced to eight years' imprisonment with hard labour by a public tribunal in August 1983 for harbouring a fugitive from justice. Amnesty Intemational believed that his trial was unfair, and that the real reason for Jacob Yidana's imprisonment was his conduct of police inquiries into the political murder of three High Court judges and a former army officer in June 1982, which reportedly implicated members of the govemment.
The Preventive Custody Law, 1982 (PNDCL 4) continued to be used extensively to detain alleged opponents of the govemment, with more than 100 people being detained under its provisions during 1985. At least 40 of these were held throughout the year. The law empowers the Provisional National Defence Council (PNDC) to order the indefinite detention without charge or trial of anyone considered to be a threat to national security. Among those held were several long-term political detainees, including at least four former members of Military Intelligence who had been held since early 1982. They were Sergeant Samuel Danso, Corporal Simon Amedzake, Staff Sergeant Martin Komla Tanson and Sergeant Joseph Ankrah. The four were apparently suspected of having intimidated or assaulted members of the current govemment when they were themselves in opposition (see Amnesty International Report 1982). Many of those held under PNDCL 4 during 1985 appeared to be suspected of involvement in one of the numerous attempts to overthrow the govemment which had taken place since early 1982. However, at least one such detainee — Private S.K. Amponsah-Dadzie — had been acquitted of any offence by a public tribunal in August 1983. He was nevertheless redetained on 12 August 1983, shortly after his acquittal, and was still held without trial at the end of 1985. Amnesty Intemational appealed for him to be released if he were not to be charged and tried.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII
51	Japan
Other people who may have been prisoners of conscience were held for short periods. In February dozens of people were reportedly detained for some days in Kumasi after the discovery of a plan to assassinate Flight-Lieutenant Rawlings, the Head of State, during a visit to the city. Ten or more people detained in July were released uncharged in November. They included four who had been adopted by Amnesty Intemational as prisoners of conscience on at least one previous occasion. They were Tommy Thompson and Mike Adjei, respectively the owner and a staff member of the Free Press newspaper; Obeng Manu, a lawyer; and Sam Okudzeto, president of the Association of Recognized Professional Bodies. Govemment supporters stated that all those detained in July were held on suspicion of espionage on behalf of a foreign intelligence service, the US Central Intelligence Agency. Opponents of the govemment claimed that Tommy Thompson and othere had been detained because of their opposition to the govemment. Amnesty Intemational received no reply to its request for further information. It noted that, whereas some detainees were charged with espionage and subsequently released in exchange for a Ghanaian citizen convicted of espionage in the USA, Tommy Thompson, Mike Adjei, Obeng Manu and Sam Okudzeto were released without charge and were allowed to remain in Ghana.
At least two of those detained in Febmary in Kumasi were beaten. Baffour Ankomah and Osei Tutu, the editor and news editor of The Pioneer newspaper, were detained when their newspaper published an article which apparently displeased some members of the security forces. The two joumalists were detained and taken to Accra, where they complained of being beaten. They were subsequently released uncharged and received an apology from the govemment for both their arrest and their ill-treatment.
Amnesty Intemational learned that 58 people were sentenced to death, nearly all by public tribunals. Seven of these were sentenced in their absence. Sixteen people were executed by firing-squad, of whom 10 had been convicted of common law offences including armed robbery and murder. Six had been convicted of conspiring to overthrow the govemment in connection with one or more conspiracies to overthrow the govemment which were discovered by the security forces in December 1984. Major Abdul Ocran and others were convicted by a public tribunal sitting in camera for their part in the alleged coup attempt. Their appeal was rejected by the National Appeals Tribunal in May. Amnesty Intemational remained concerned about some aspects of the public tribunals which fell short of internationally accepted standards, such as the standard of proof which they required.
vili
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986
