Ireland
Amnesty International continued to investigate allegations of ill-treatment of prisoners. The organization was also concerned about the retention in law of the death penalty. During 1985 Amnesty International learned of five death sentences imposed by the courts.
Amnesty International received a letter from the Minister for

Justice on 22 February in reply to the organization's letters expressing concern about allegations of ill-treatment of prisoners in Portlaoise Prison (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1985). The Minister for Justice stated that the Director of Public Prosecutions had decided that no prosecutions were warranted, and that therefore the Ministry did not consider that any further form of inquiry would be justified. However, Amnesty Intemational continued to receive allegations that prisoners in Portlaoise Prison were being ill-treated. Sean McGuinness, Gregory Carroll, Fergal Toal, Dessie O'Hare and Eddie Hogan were reportedly beaten in April.
Thomas Eccles, Brian McShane and Patrick McPhillips were sentenced to death for murder on 28 March and given a stay of execution on 15 April; their appeal against the conviction began on 25 November.
Michael McHugh and Noel Callan were sentenced to death on 3 December. Because Michael McHugh refused to appeal, he was due to be hanged on 27 December. The President commuted his sentence to 40 years' penal servitude without remission. Noel Callan appealed against his conviction.
A bill entitled Criminal Justice (Abolition of Death Penalty) 1984, which would abolish the death penalty for all offences, was introduced in the Irish Parliament by three Senators. Amnesty Intemational wrote to the authorities welcoming the initiative and expressing the hope that the RepubUc of Ireland would abolish the death penalty totally.
Amnesty International's principal concerns were the excessive length of preventive detention and judicial procedures in political cases. The organization expressed concern about a case of alleged torture resulting in death and about cases of reported medical neglect of prisoners. It also collected information on prosecutions of officers accused of ill-treating prisoners from previous years. Amnesty Intemational continued to work for the release of imprisoned conscientious objectors to military service.
Law 398, promulgated in July 1984, reduced the length of
290	Amnesty International Report 1986
preventive detention — defined as the period between arrest and the passing of a definitive verdict by the highest court — from 10 years eight months to six years. In November 1985 this law resulted in the release of about 160 prisoners charged with serious crimes, because the permitted limit had been reached. The released prisoners, who included defendants in political cases, were subject to police supervision after release.
In the Rome section of the "7 April" trial (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1980 to 1985), The Motivation for Judgment and Sentence was published in May. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that some of the principal defendants had been kept in preventive detention for over five years and that sp>ecial legislation was applied retroactively to extend the permitted limits of preventive detention (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1980). There was also a delay of 15 months without any judicial justification between the committal for trial order and the first trial hearing. In addition, Amnesty Intemational was concemed that there was no opportunity for the court to examine Carlo Fioroni, the main source of information for the charges against the defendants. He had left the country by the time he was called for examination at the hearing. His testimony, which had been taken in secret during the investigation phase, was nevertheless admitted by the court.
On 3 December 1984 the Paduan section of the "7 April" trial opened after several postponements and after a change of President and jury at the prosecution's request. It continued throughout 1985. The 143 defendants in the Paduan trial included six whose cases were under investigation by Amnesty Intemational (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1980 to 1985). Four of these left the country a^er being acquitted by the investigating judge. They were nonetheless included in the list of defendants after the prosecution had appealed successfully against the investigating judge's decision. The prosecution also appealed successfully against the acquittal by the investigating judge in Padua of Professors Luciano Ferrari-Bravo and Emilio Vesce, who had earlier been convicted of formation of an armed band in the Rome trial. They were defendants in the Padua trial as well because they had been charged separately by the Paduan prosecuting magistrates with possession of arms. Amnesty Intemational's grounds for concem in the Padua trial were similar to those in the Rome trial, in particular the excessive length of pretrial detention, and the inability of the court to examine Carlo Fioroni. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed that the arms charges against Professors Ferrari-Bravo and Vesce appeared to be based on allegations which had already formed the basis of their conviction in the Rome trial.

On 29 August Amnesty International asked the Minister of Justice about an inquiry into the death in police custody of Salvatore Marino in Palermo. He was a young fisherman who had gone voluntarily to the police station to answer questions about the murder on 29 July of a police officer. Amnesty International received reports that he had been beaten and forced to swallow large quantities of salt water through a plastic tube. The post-mortem stated that he had died ft-om "respiratory constriction which had led to heart arrest" and referred to "injuries to the trachea". Eleven officers of the Rying Squad were arrested after his death and charged with "unintentional homicide". A further seven were arrested later. Subsequently 14 of the 18 were granted provisional liberty or put under house arrest.
On 10 July Amnesty International asked the Minister of Justice for information on the progress of judicial inquiries which had been established in 1982 in Rome, Verona and Viterbo into allegations of torture and ill-treatment of political detainees between their arrest and transfer to prison. The incidents were reported to have taken place in police stations, barracks and other places (see Amnesty International Report 1983). Amnesty International had received no reply to previous inquiries about these cases nor did any arrive by the end of 1985.
The judicial inquiry into violence against prisoners in San Vittore prison in Milan in September 1981 ended in November 1985. Amnesty International had written to the Minister of Justice in Deceml^r 1981 (see Amnesty International Report 1982) after receiving allegations of ill-treatment of prisoners. The inquiry found that during a prison transfer serious offences had been committed against 133 prisoners, most of whom had been charged with politically motivated crimes. It recommended that the former prison governor, two doctors and 19 officials be committed for trial on charges including premeditated infliction of injury, use of inappropriate weapons, failure to administer aid and failure to report the incidents.
On 28 November Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Justice about the health of Professor Paolo Signorelli, who had been held for five years in preventive detention at the prison of Regjna Coeli in Rome and was alleged to belong to the Nuclei Armati Rivoluzionari (NAR), the Armed Revolutionary Nuclei. He was reported to be suffering from cardiac and circulatory problems as well as a serious arthritic condition and to have fallen into a coma lasting six houre following a collapse. Amnesty International had received reports that Professor Signorelli had been denied necessary medical treatment and might therefore suffer an irreversible decline in health. No reply had been received by the end of 1985.
292	Amnesty International Report 1986
Amnesty International worked for the release of seven conscientious objectors to military service. They included objectors who had unsuccessfully applied to do alternative civilian service or who had refused alternative service in protest at its punitive length. In Italy alternative civilian service is 20 months, compared to 12 months' military service.
