Hungary
Amnesty International was con-œmed about the imprisonment of conscientious objectors to military service and about administrative measures such as banishment imposed on people for the non-violent exercise of their right to freedom of expression. The organization learned of the imposition of one death sentence and two executions.
Military service is compulsory in Hungary and the law does not provide for alternative civilian service outside the military system. Article 336 of the criminal code allows the courts to impose sentences of up to five years' imprisonment (five to 15 years in time of war) on those who refuse military service. Since 1977 members of some small Christian sects, including the Nazarenes and the Jehovah's Witnesses, have been allowed to do unarmed military service, but the authorities have refused to extend this to Roman Catholics. According to reports, in 1985 there were approximately 150 conscientious objectore serving sentences in Baracska prison where conscientious objectors are generally sent. Most of them were Jehovah's Witnesses who had refused to do any form of military service.
Amnesty International could not obtain details of these prisoners but it worked for the release of nine Roman Catholic conscientious objectors, all of whom, according to Amnesty International's information, belonged to small, pacifist, "basic communities" which advocate strict adherence to the teachings of the Bible. Five were adopted during 1985, including Gyorgy Hegyi, aged 19, from Budapest. In a letter to the authorities he reportedly offered to serve under military control for longer than the obUgatory duration provided he was not made to carry arms. He was arrested on 28 August and in a subsequent search of his home the police reportedly impounded a number of religious and other unofficial publications. On 2 September he was sentenced by the Budapest Military Court to 34 months' imprisonment under Article 336.
Amnesty International received a report that in 1985 there were up to 50 people serving prison sentences for political offences in Budapest Central Prison. The organization was unable to obtain details, but believed that most had been charged with "incitement". Under Article 269 of the criminal code people convicted of acts liable to incite hatred of Hungary's constitutional order or allies, or national, racial or religious hatred, may be imprisoned for up to two years. If a deliberate intent to incite is proved they face imprisonment
288
Amnesty International Report 1986
of between one and five years under Article 148. If the offence is committed before a "large public" or as members of a group the punishment may be increased to up to three years' imprisonment under Article 269 and two to eight years under Article 148.
Amnesty International was concerned about the continuing practice of imposing administrative penalties on people for the non-violent exercise of their right to freedom of expression, and about the introduction of new legislation increasing such administrative penalties. Decree No. 4/1985 allowed chiefs of district police stations to apply a variety of measures, including banishment, restrictions on movement, and denial of a telephone, to people whose behaviour "endangers the internal order of the Hungarian People's Republic, public order or public security". TTiere is no right of appeal to the courts against these restrictions which can be imposed for up to two years with a possible extension of one year which can then be renewed. Previously, under the analogous Decree No. 4/1976, the duration was for up to one year.
Amn^ty International was informed that Gyorgy Krasso, a 52-year-old economist from Budapest, was subjected to such administrative measures from November 1984 to 4 October 1985 because of his activity in unofficial publishing (see Amnesty International Report 1985). Lajos Nagy, aged 61, was banished in February 1983 to a farrh near the village of Komadi close to the border with Romania after having written letters about the human rights situation in Hungary to the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe held in Madrid from 19^ to 1983. He reportedly remained banished until his death in early December 1985.
Amnesty International learned of two executions, both for murder, one following a death sentence imposed in 1985. Amnesty International had appealed to the authorities to commute the sentences.
