Central African Republic
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the detention without trial of more than 100 alleged opponents of the govemment, some of whom were believed to be prisoners of conscience. There were disturbing reports that government security forces operating in the northwest of the country were responsible for arbitrary arrests, torture and extrajudicial executions in March and April. The organization was also concemed about reports of harsh conditions of detention and ill-treatment of prisoners.
Throughout 1985 the govemment of President André Kolingba maintained the ban on political activity, including membership of political parties and the expresión of views considered hostile to the govemment, imposed when it came to power in September 1981. In December President KoUngba announced that a new constitution would be drafted to replace the one suspended in 1981 but it was unclear whether this would permit political activity.
Following the release of 43 politick detainees at the end of 1984, Amnesty Intemational continued in 1985 to work for the trial or release of other political detainees. At the beginning of December President Kolingba ordered the release of 89 political detainees, but by the end of 1985 Amnesty Intemational had not yet established their identities.
Among those arrested in 1984 and held until at least December 1985 was François Kelefio, apparently detained on account of the activities of one of his relatives, a former government minister suspected of plotting against President Kolingba in 1982 who had escaped to neighbouring Chad. François Kelefio was arrested in August 1984, having earlier been detained without trial from March 1982 to September 1983. In 1985 Amnesty International investigated his case to establish whether he was a prisoner of conscience.
Other detainees arrested in 1984 whose cases were being investigated by Amnesty International included Etienne Orofara and François Ndjadder-Bedaya, both apparently suspected of having contacts with members of an opposition political party. Etienne Orofara, a teacher, had been arrested in Bouar in July 1984, and François Ndjadder-Bedaya, former deputy commander of the National Gendarmerie, had been arrested tlu^ee months later. Both are believed to have been released in December 1985.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII
33	Japan
At least 16 political prisoners convicted in previous years by the Special Tribunal after trials which did not conform with internationally recognized standards for a fair trial (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984) remained in prison during 1985. Among them were three men sentenced to death in May 1982 after being convicted of Ulegal possession of explosives, whose sentences were not known to have been commuted.
There were new politically motivated arrests during 1985. Several refugees from Chad were detained, such as Ngrabe Ndoh, who was arrested in March apparently because he had advised other refugees not to return to Chad. Amnesty Intemational appealed on his behalf and was informed by the Minister of Foreign Affairs in August that Ngrabe Ndoh was in protective custody. He was later reported to have been released and allowed to leave the country.
Most arrests reported to Amnesty International occurred in the northwest, in the Paoua area. In March security forces were deployed in this area to counter an armed opposition group, the "Commando Mbakara". Dozens of people, including local community leaders, were arrested on suspicion of opposing the govenmient and 15 villages near the town of Paoua were reportedly bumt by government troops. There were reports of torture and assaults on detainees and some were alleged to have been simimarily executed. In April Amnesty Intemational lu^ged the government to prevent further human rights violations and sought information about two detainees, Marc Loyom, a mayor, and François Djimbaï, a former political prisoner. The authorities did not reply but Amnesty Intemational later learned that both detainees, together with other people arrested in the Paoua area, were being held in Ngaragba prison in the capital, Bangui. It was not clear whether detainees' relatives had been informed of their whereabouts.
At the same time as the arrests in the Paoua area, a number of government employees originating from this area were also arrested in other parts of the country. For example, Léon-Joseph Ndombet-Assamba, a teacher of English, and three others were arrested at Bangui airport at the beginning of April upon their retum to the country from trips abroad and were detained without charge or explanation. They were adopted by Amnesty Intemational as prisoners of conscience and were all released uncharged after five months in custody.
The total number of political detainees held without trial was not known but was reported to be above 100 for most of 1985. Political detainees who were kept in detention for more than a few days were held in the capital, Bangui, in three detention centres: the Special River Port Commissariat on the Oubangui river, the National
vili	Amnesty Intemational Report 1986
Gendarmerie prison at Landja and the special section for political prisoners in Ngaragba prison.
Although none of the detainees from the Paoua area were brought to trial, several other people were tried for political reasons. Their trials were believed to have taken place before the Special Tribunal, a court with jurisdiction over all political cases and against whose findings there is no right of appeal, but this was not confirmed. In June Clément Nobona and eight other former students who had asked the Ministry of Education to employ them as teachers were arrested and charged with illegal political activity. Clément Nobona was reportedly sentenced to three years' imprisonment but his co-defendants were apparently acquitted. In July a 10-year prison term was imposed on François Guéret, a former government minister, after he was convicted of corresponding with a representative of a foreign power and insulting President Kolingba. He had initially been arrested in February, apparently for refusing to obey an official instruction that civilian members of the govemment should wear military uniform after policy disagreements with President Kolingba. A few days after his arrest, however, he apparently wrote a letter seeking help to Jean-Christophe Mitterrand, the son of President Mitterrand of France and a French presidential adviser on African affairs. It was on account of this letter that he was brought to trial and convicted. He was adopted by Amnesty Intemational as a prisoner of conscience. The third trial reported to Amnesty Intemational occurred at the end of October. The defendants were three Roman Catholic priests from Bossangoa arrested in September and accused of helping a former govemment minister to evade arrest in March 1982 for allegedly plotting against the govemment. They were apparently arrested after one of their students denounced them to the authorities after failing his exams. They were each convicted and sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment but were immediately pardoned and released by President Kolingba.
Amnesty Intemational also continued to receive reports of harsh conditions of detention in Bangui. In October prisoners held in Ngaragba prison protested at the inadequacy of medical attention available for both political and other prisoners and alleged that this had caused the deaths of four inmates in the preceding months. Elsewhere, Amnesty Intemational was particularly concemed about reports that untried detainees held by the National Gendarmerie in Landja were being kept in chains for weeks on end and that many were subjected to beatings and whippings by guards.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII
35	Japan
