Haiti
Y	Amnesty International was con-
^	cerned about the arbitrary
imprisonment, usually short-term, of prisoners of conscience; the torture and other cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment of political pr^ners; their detention, often incommunicado, without trial; and the death of a number of people
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	165	Japan
while in the custody of the security forces in circumstances suggesting that they may have died as a consequence of torture or that they may have been extrajudicially executed.
On 13 March Amnesty Intemational published Haiti Briefing detailing its concerns since President-for-Life Jean-Claude Duvalier took power in 1971. These concems had been submitted to the government on many previous occasions without response.
On 29 April there was a presidential amnesty for 37 political prisoners, 31 of whom had been the subject of Amnesty Intemational appeals. Among those benefiting from the amnesty were five men — Eugène Nazon, Schneider Merzier, Frantz Joachim, Frantz Héraux and Frid Esper — who had spent 18 months in incommunicado detention before being brought to trial in September 1984 and sentenced to life imprisonment. This sentence was later quashed on appeal by the Cour de cassation, the highest court in the country. At their second trial in April 1985 they were sentenced to nine years' imprisonment for "plotting against the security of state". With the exception of these five prisoners, the rest of those amnestied had been detained without charge for periods ranging from several weeks to more than five years. Among the latter were prisoners of conscience Bienvenu Théodore, Jocelyn Beauchard, Eric Alcindor and Frank Mmtre.
On 13 May Amnesty International informed President Duvalier that it welcomed the amnesty but expressed concem that a number of other prisoners, whom Amnesty Intemational considered to be prisoners of conscience, had not been accounted for. Among them were William Josma, arrested on 4 April 1981, whose detention had been officially recognized on several occasions by the Haitian authorities; Rock Dérose, a trade unionist detained on 13 November 1981; Labbé Rémy, a lawyer detained on 8 January 1981; and Joseph Pardovany, detained on 8 September 1983. By the end of 1985 there was no news of their whereabouts or fate. Amnesty Intemational also expressed concem about allegations that some of the detainees had been subjected to torture and other ill-treatment in the Casernes Dessalines military barracks. One man arrested in November 1984 stated that he was taken to the Casernes Dessalines on 2 November and beaten several times with an iron bar covered with mbber. He further aUeged that a then govemment minister was present during some of the beatings, and at one point he said he was kicked in the face by that minister. Another detainee, arrested on 7 November 1984, maintained that he was tortured by being beaten for several hours with an iron-tipped wooden stick after he had been tied by the arms and legs in the position called djak in Haiti (and in other countries is known as the "parrots' perch").
166	Amnesty International Report 1986
Human rights abuses occurred in a context of growing social unrest and widespread opposition to a proposed law on pohtical parties and changes to the constitution. The law on pohtical parties made the formal recognition of a political party conditional on acceptance of the institution of the Presidency-for-Life. The unrest and opposition to the government's plans were manifested in public demonstrations to which the govemment responded with mass arrests and the use of tear-gas, clubs and firearms.
Victims of short-term detention and harassment included suspected members of opposition political parties, opposition leaders, youth leaders, priests and church workers. On 24 April Amnesty Intemational appealed on behalf of nine people associated with CathoUc youth organizations who were detained in early April. Marc Aurèle Jozené, a community leader responsible for youth activities in Desarmes, was detained after participating in a retreat in Verrettes during Easter week. He was taken to the National Penitentiary in Port-au-Prince. The other eight people, all said to be associated with an organization called Jeunesse ouvrière chrétienne, Christian Working Youth, were arrested in Petit-Goâve on 5 and 6 April. Amnesty Intemational feared that they might be held in unacknowledged incommunicado detention and subjected to torture or ill-treatment. Marc Aurèle Jozené was subsequently released in the presidential amnesty of 29 April, while the other eight were believed to have been released the week before. No explanation was given by the authorities for their arrest.
Amnesty International monitored a number of other incidents of harassment and short-term detention of priests, church workers or people working with church-sponsored charity organizations. On 22 Ap^ Father Emile Joseph, a Cathohc priest, was reportedly shot at by a tonton macoute, a member of the paramilitary group in the service of the govemment known officially as the Volontaires de la sécurité nationale (VSN), Volunteers of National Security. Father Joseph escaped unhurt. On 20 May three workers ft-om CARITAS, an international Christian development agency, were reportedly detained in Beauchamp. They were allegedly beaten and forced to walk barefoot over 30 kilometres to Port-au-Prince, where they were subsequently released. It is believed that they may have been arrested for refusing to join the Comité national d'action Jean-Claudiste, National Jean-Claudist Action Committee, a pro-govemment group.
Members of the family of Sylvio Claude, President of the Parti démocrate chrétien d'Haïti (PDCH), Haitian Christian Democrat Party, who had himself been subject to imprisonment and harassment in previous years, were detained during 1985. His brother, Jean-Luther Claude, was arrested on 5 July at François Duvalier airport in
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	167	Japan
Port-au-Prince u|X)n returning from a visit to the USA. He was reportedly questioned for seven hours and then taken to the Casernes Dessalines barracks before being released. On 21 July, the eve of the referendum organized to approve the law on political parties and modification of the Constitution, Clervio Claude, son of Sylvio Claude, and five other people were arrested at the offices of VInferno, an independent publication, where the authorities claimed to have discovered copies of La Conviction, the publication of the PDCH. Clervio Claude and the other five people were released without charge or explanation on 25 August.
Other prisoners of conscience arrested during 1985, whose immediate release was also requested by Amnesty Intemational, were Hubert de Ronceray, President of the Unesco Committee on Conventions and Recommendations, director of the Centre haïtien d'investigation en sciences sociales, Haitian Social Science Research Centre, and a former govemment minister, and Gabriel Hérard, a joumalist. Hubert de Ronceray was arrested on 4 December and released without charge a month later. Gabriel Hérard was arrested on 29 December at François Duvalier airport in Port-au-Prince.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the death of a number of people while in the custody of the security forces in circumstances suggesting that they may have died as a consequence of torture or that they may have been extrajudicially executed. On 15 January Roland Noël, an employee of the Department of Commerce, was arrested at Hinche following an argument with a soldier. It was reported that the following day soldiers beat him in the courtyard of the barracks, in the presence of a group of children who were playing there. They are said to have taken his clothes off, tied his hands, hung him and beaten him. According to reports a soldier wearing boots jumped on him breaking several bones. He died on Monday 21 January. Roland Noël had been imprisoned at the time of the previous legislative elections for having supported an opposition candidate. In Janury 1983 another prisoner, Pierre Joseph, had been beaten to death in the Hinche military barracks. Amnesty Intemational was not aware of anybody having been charged with either of the killings.
On 23 April Tony Romain, an accountant, and one other man were killed, according to government officials, after an armed confrontation with the police when they were distributing political pamphlets. However, other sources maintain that they were arrested and summarily executed by the police. In its 13 May telex to President Duvalier Amnesty Intemational expressed concem about the incident and asked for an official inquiry.
On 9 October the Chief of Police of Port-au-Prince announced that
359	Amnesty International Report 1986
Dr Lionel Lainé, the Secretary General of the Parti national démocratique progressiste d'Haïti, National Progressive Democratic Party of Haiti, a party created by Haitian exiles, had been arrested the previous evening in the course of a shoot-out with police in Carrefour, a suburb of Port-au-Prince. A few days later another police communiqué announced that Dr Lainé had died as a consequence of wounds he had sustained during the shoot-out. However, according to eye-witnesses, he appeared to have been only slightly injured at the time of the arrest. The authorities reportedly refused to release Dr Lainé's body to members of his family living in Haiti.
A few days later, on 15 October, Michael Alcindor, said to be an ex-army corporal and a former employee of the Office national d'alphabétisation et d'action communautaire, National Office of Literacy and Community Action, was reportedly killed in armed confrontation with the security forces in Petit-Goâve. However, a letter reportedly signed by over 1,000 inhabitants of Petit-Goâve that was read out on the independent church-run radio station Radio Soleil claimed that he was murdered by the security forces and that the initial reports claiming he was wounded during a shoot-out were wrong. As far as Amnesty International was aware, no official statement was made concerning the circumstances of his killing.
Following the killing of Dr Lainé, dozens of arrests were reported and there was an increase in public demonstrations against the govemment of President Duvalier. During student demonstrations in Gonaïves on 28 November, soldiers entered the Immaculate Conception School and shot indiscriminately at students who had apparency not even joined the protests, killing three of them. The govemment announced a commission of inquiry into the incident. Amnesty Intemational expressed concem to President Duvalier about the dozens of people arrested in the course of demonstrations, asking for their names and the legal basis for the arrests to be made public and requesting clarification of the composition and terms of reference of the commission of inquiry. By the end of the year the govemment announced that charges would be brought against those responsible for the killings.
In May Amnesty Intemational submitted information on its concems in Haiti to the UN under its procedure for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations (the so-called "1503 procedure"). Communications were also sent to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	169	Japan
