Guinea-Bissau
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the detention without trial of several alleged opponents of the govemment, two of whom were freed at the end of 1985. Further politically motivated arrests occurred following the reported discovery in November of a conspiracy against the govemment and had resulted by the end of the year in the deaths of two detainees in circumstances which gave cause for concem.
Two members of the govemment of former President Luiz Cabral, which was overthrown in November 1980, were reportedly freed in late December. Umam Djaló and Constanino Tebceira had both been detained at fir^t in prison and later under house arrest without charge or trial from 1980 to 1983, after which they were restricted to isolated rural areas. Former Prime Minister Victor Saude Maria, who was accused of plotting against the govemment in March 1984, remained under house arrest in Bissau city throughout the year.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII
55	Japan
In June Rafael Barbosa, a former leader of the ruling political party between 1959 and 1962, was detained without explanation. He had previously been imprisoned from 1975 to 1981 for allegedly betraying nationalist guerrilla fighters during the war of independence from Portugal. He was rearrested later in 1981 and held in prison and subsequently under house arrest until the end of 1984. His arrest in June 1985 followed the arrests of two of his relatives in April, apparently in connection with the distribution in March of anonymous leaflets criticizing govemment economic policies. However, by the end of 1985 neither Rafael Barbosa nor his relatives were known to have been charged or brought to trial.
Amnesty Intemational was also concerned about the c^ of Fernando Delfim da Silva, a teacher studying in the Soviet Union who was repatriated to Guinea-Bissau and immediately arrested in June. He had apparently been heard to criticize the govemment and was believed still to be detained without trial at the end of 1985.
In November the authorities announced that they had uncovered a conspiracy to overthrow the govemment of President Joáo Bemardo ("Nino") Vieira. Those involved allegedly included Vice-President Paulo Correia and several senior military and civilian officials who were arrested. In all, at least 50 people were reported to have been detained by late December in connection with the alleged conspiracy, particularly members of the Balanta ethnic group. Among those held were Viriato Pam, a former Procurator General, and Colonel Lamine Cissé, a senior army officer who was also a judge in the Supreme Court. Some of the detainees were reported to be held at the "COP 2" detention centre in Bissau city {Comando Operacional — 2, formerly known as the "Second Squadron") where in the past political detainees are known to have been tortured.
Two of those detained were reported to have died in custody soon after their arrest. Joáo da Silva, who had been Minister of Culture and Sport prior to his arrest, was reported by the authorities to have been shot dead by guards after escaping from his cell at the "COP 2" detention centre in mid-November. Amnesty Intemational was unable to obtain any confirmation of the mmours that another prisoner, a former presidential bodyguard, had also died in custody. Amnesty Intemational expressed concem about these deaths and urged the govemment to establish an independent inquiry to investigate fully both'deaths and to make the findings public.
vili
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986
