South Africa
Amnesty International was concemed about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and the detention without trial of other political prisoners. Prisoners of conscience included people sentenced to prison terms for non-violent opposition to the govemment, detainees held without trial or awaiting trial, and pec^plc restricted under banning orders. Tliey also included some 90,000 people imprisoned in 1985 under the so-called pass laws, which apply only to black people and restrict their movement and residence. There were many reports of torture and ill-treatment of uncharged political detainees, several of whom died in custody. Amnesty International appealed publicly to the authorities in August to prevent assaults and torture of detainees by security police. Amnesty Intemational was also concerned about the continuing high rate of judicial executions. Several prominent opposition figures were attacked, abducted or murdered in circumstances giving rise to fears regarding thé existence of "death squads". Amnesty Intemational urged the authorities to investigate whether such attacks had been perpetrated by govemment agents. No such inquiry was initiated and by the end of the year, no one had been arrested for the abductions and murders of leading anXi-apartheid activists. During 1985 South Afiican security forces carried out extrajudicial executions of suspected political opponents in Botswana and, allegedly, in Lesotho.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	89	Japan
Amnesty International was concemed also about the high incidence of police killings of civilians in the context of black unrest, in view of increasing evidence that some black protesters were shot dead as a matter of deliberate policy. In March Amnesty Intemational called on the govemment to clarify the circumstances in which police could use live ammunition against protesters following an incident at Langa, near Uitenhage, when 20 black people were shot dead by police and others injured. The authorities did not provide such clarification.
The year was marked by protracted and widespread black unrest and human rights violations on an extensive scale. Some 10,000 people were detained without charge or trial for political reasons during the year and thousands of others were charged with politically motivated offences ranging from public violence to treason. Of those detained without charge, almost 8,000 were held under state of emergency powers introduced in certain areas in July. Some 2,000 of those detained under the emergency were under 16 years of age. Some were held only briefly, but others spent months in detention incommunicado and without any means of challenging their detentions before the courts. Many were assaulted at the time of arrest or afterwards, and some were tortured. In Transkei, where a state of emergency has existed for several years, there were also hundreds of political arrests. Outside those areas covered by the state of emergency, suspected opponents of the government were detained under the Internal Security Act. Several hundred people were detained incommunicado and in solitary confinement under Section 29 for security police interrogation and almost 2,000 others were held without charge for up to 14 days under Section 50. Others were held in "preventive detention" or as potential state witnesses in political trials. For example. Lord McCamel, a cleric and Chairman of the Vaal Civic Association, was held in solitary confinement throughout 1985 as a potential state witness in the trial of 22 other black community leaders, most of whom were arrested in 1984 but whose trial had not begun by the end of 1985.
There were also many detentions in the nominally independent "homelands", notably Transkei and Ciskei, under local laws similar to the Intemal Security Act. Those held included students, doctors, political activists, and human rights lawyers such as Prince Madikizela and Dumisa Ntsebeza in Transkei and Hintsa Siwisa in Ciskei.
The greatest number of detentions occurred after the imposition of a state of emergency on 21 July in parts of the Transvaal, Eastem Cape and Orange Free State. In late October, this was extended to the Western Cape area, including Cape Town, although the emergency had been lifted from several districts by the end of the
90	Amnesty International Report 1986
year. Arrests began immediately and continued throughout the second half of 1985. Those held included school children and students, teachers, trade unionists, journalists, black community leaders and clergymen.
Under the emergency, the police and other law enforcement personnel were given legal immunity from prosecution for acts committed "in good'faith" in connection with the emergency and substantial new powers of stop and search and arbitrary arrest and detention. All such personnel were empowered to arrest people and hold them incommunicado and without charge for up to 14 days, following which unlimited incommunicado detention without trial could be authorized by the Minister of Law and Order.
Detainees held under the emergency regulations had no recourse to challenge their detentions and were denied all visits unless expressly approved by the authorities. Some were held in prisons and others in police cells. The police were not required to disclose their whereabouts. It was also made an offence under the emergency, punishable by up to 10 years' imprisonment, for anyone to disclose a detainee's name without official authorization, although the authorities issued lists of those detained and released. A series of "Rules" governing the treatment of emergency detainees defined possible disciplinary contraventions punishable by up to 30 days' solitary confinement, reduced diet or corporal punishment. They included being "insolent or disrespectful", and complaining about their treatment in ways deemed "false, frivolous or malicious".
The Rules required medical examination of detainees on admission to prison and thereafter "regularly". In September Dr Wendy Orr, who had examined several hundred people detained in the Port Elizabeth area, told the Supreme Court there that many had complained of torture or assault and had injuries consistent with their allegations. The authorities denied the allegations but the court issued an interim order that the security police should not further assault detainees in Port Elizabeth and Uitenhage and stated that the immunity granted to police under the emergency should not protect police responsible for ill-treating prisoners. The court adjourned until 1986 for further hearing of the case.
Amnesty Intemational received reports of torture of detainees within two weeks of the imposition of the emergency. In particular, detainees in Port Elizabeth and at Protea Police Station, Soweto, were reported to have been beaten, given electric shocks, threatened with execution, and subjected to the "helicopter" - in which a victim is handcuffed at the wrists and ankles, hung upside-down on a pole inserted behind the knees, spun eiround and beaten. Among the victims reported were students, trade unionists and clergy.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	91	Japan
Several other court actions were brought on behalf of emergency detainees who were alleged to have been ill-treated, but not all were successful. For example, an urgent application brought in the Transvaal on behalf of trade unionist Amos Masondo, Sidney Molokoane and Kenneth Fihla, a student, was rejected on the grounds that their alleged ill-treatment had occurred some weeks before the court hearing and they were not considered to be at further risk. All three had been detained at the beginning of the emergency and were still held incommunicado at the end of 1985. They were adopted as prisonere of conscience by Amnesty Intemational.
Court actions were also brought on behalf of several detainees held under Section 29 of the Intemal Security Act. One concemed Billy Nair, a trade unionist, who was reportedly assaulted both before and after a court order was obtained restraining the police from ill-treating him. In two other cases the Natal Supreme Court ordered the release of detainees when the security police refused to divulge the reasons for holding them. One was that of Paddy Kearney, a church worker, and the second that of Richard Steele, a former prisoner of conscience, and other members of the End Conscription Campaign who had been detained in mid-September. A major report on torture was published in September by the University of Cape Town's Institute of Criminology which concluded that there was a high incidence of torture or ill-treatment, with some 83 per cent of detainees alleging physical torture or assault during detention.
Several detainees died in custody during the year. They included Sipho Mutsi, an 18-year-old organizer for the Congress of South African Students (COSAS) which was banned by the govemment in September. He was arrested on 2 May and died three days later. The police said that he had suffered a fit while being questioned but his body had whip marks and other injuries on the head, back and shoulders and an eye-witness re|X)rted seeing him lying handcuffed on the floor of the police station, being kicked in the face by police officers. No one was prosecuted in connection with his death. An inquest began on 6 December but had not been completed by the end of 1985. Andries Raditsela, a trade unionist, was arrested on 4 May at Tsakane township and was reportedly assaulted at the time. A few hours later he was seen by his parents suffering from injuries consistent with an assault. He was moved to hospital and died on 6 May, by which time the police had formally released him from detention.
There were many political trials during the year. In one, 16 leading members of the United Democratic Front (UDF) were charged with treason. Some had been held since 1984, others were arrested in Febmary. All were adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty
92	Amnesty International Report 1986
Intemational. Their trial began in October and was expected to last many months, but in December, 12 of the defendants were acquitted. Twenty-two other black leaders, including UDF officials and members of the Azanian People's Organisation, were also charged with treason and other offences relating to civil unrest in late 1984 in the "Vaal Triangle" area. Among them were several former prisoners of conscience including Tom Manthata, a community leader and church worker, and Mosioua Lekota, publicity secretary of the UDF. Under Section 30 of the Internal Security Act the courts were denied jurisdiction to release them on bail, so they remained in custody to await trial in 1986.
Six other people charged in connection with the Vaal Triangle unrest were convicted of murder and subversion and sentenced to death on 13 December. They had not been executed by the end of 1985 and were lodging appeals. Earlier, in March, two other people were sentenced to death after being convicted of a politically motivated killing. They were alleged to be supporters of the banned African National Congress (ANC) and to have killed a man whom they believed was a police informer. They too had not been executed by the end of the year.
The death penalty remained a major concem. In all, some 137 people were hanged at Pretoria Central Prison in 1985 and further executions reportedly took place in Transkei and other nominally independent "homelands". All those hanged at Pretoria had been convicted on criminal charges. However, one of the victims, Malisela Benjamin Moloise, was a political prisoner who was hanged in October, despite intemational appeals.
Several prominent opponents of the govemment "disappeared" or were killed by unidentified assailants who had not been apprehended by the end of the year. In May three Port Elizabeth community leaders disappeared while driving to the local airport. Their families believed that they had been detained by security police, citing threats that had been made earlier, but the authorities denied all responsibility. In June Matthew Goniwe and Fort Calata, two former prisoners of conscience, and two other Cradock community leaders, were abducted between Port Elizabeth and Cradock and subsequently found murdered. It was widely suggested that they and Victoria Mxenge, a human rights lawyer shot dead in Durban on 1 August, had been killed by people acting on behalf of the authorities. The government denied any responsibility but a police inquiry failed to identify those responsible. Amnesty Intemational appealed for an inquiry into the reported existence of a pro-govemment "death squad" but received no response.
South African security forces were responsible in June for the
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	93	Japan
extrajudicial execution of several refugees living in Botswana. Those killed were alleged by the government to include supporters of the ANC. In December several other alleged ANC members were among a number of people killed in Lesotho. It was widely suspected that these killings were also carried out by South African security agents but the govemment denied responsibility.
Within South Africa, in a number of incidents it appeared that black civilians may have been shot dead as a matter of deliberate policy. On 21 March police opened fire on a funeral procession at Langa township, Uitenhage, killing some 20 people. The victims, most of whom were shot in the back, included children. A judicial commission of inquiry was appointed to investigate the incident: this criticized police procedures but exonerated the police officers responsible for the killings. It was disclosed that they had been issued only with lethal weapons, on the orders of a senior police officer, and had had no other means of crowd dispersal. The Langa inquiry was the only one of its kind although there were several further mass shootings of civilians in other localities later in 1985. The number of such shootings appeared to increase significantly following the imposition of the state of emergency and the granting of immunity to the police.
An Amnesty Intemational observer attended part of the Langa inquiry proceedings. An Amnesty Intemational mission also went to South Africa in May to assess the impact of changes made in 1984 to the administration of pass law courts. This noted improvements in judicial procedures but found that many black people continued to be imprisoned under the pass laws and, in many cases, were ill-treated in custody or when released on parole to work for white farmers.
Amnesty Intemational submitted information on its concems in South Africa to UN bodies including the Ad Hoc Working Group of Experts on southern Africa, and the Sub-Commission on the Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities.
94
Amnesty International Report 1986
