India
Amnesty International was concerned about the detention of hundreds of political detainees held without charge or trial under preventive detention legislation or awaiting trial under special legislation permitting trial in camera. The organization received reports of torture, particularly from areas where armed opposition groups were active, some detainees allegedly dying in police custody as a result; and reports that alleged members of such groups were shot dead by security forces personnel after capture in staged "encounters". It was also concerned about executions.
In a number of states repeated acts of violence accompanied the activities of opposition groups and resulted in killings of police officers, officials and civilians, especially in Punjab. Amnesty
220	Amnesty International Report 1986
International acknowledged in its communications with the Indian Government that these events placed a heavy burden on the authorities charged with maintaining law and order and bringing those responsible for criminal acts to justice. Many people were detained on suspicion of involvement in such violent activities, either under the provisions of the National Security Act (NSA), which permits preventive detention without charge or trial for up to two years, or under other new legislation.
The Terrorist and Disruptive Activities Act 1985 was enacted in May, following a series of bomb explosions in New Delhi and neighbouring states which had killed an estimated 86 civilians. It was to be applicable throughout India for two years. The death penalty was made mandatory for "terrorist acts" which resulted in death. "Disruptive activities" were made punishable by three years to life imprisonment and defined as "any action taken, whether by act or by speech or through any other media, which questions, disrupts or is intended to disrupt, whether directly or indirectly, the sovereignty and territorial integrity of India". Advocating or inciting such activities were also made similarly punishable.
Government ministers assured Parliament that the central and state governments would not misuse the new legal provisions to curb any legitimate political or trade union activity. However, Amnesty International was concerned that the broad definition of "disruptive activities" could lead to people being detained for peacefully voicing political opinions or being tried under procedures not meeting internationally recognized standards. The Act allowed detention without charge or trial for up to one year. It permitted trials in camera, without the identity of witnesses being disclosed, made bail more difficult to obtain and limited appeals to the Supreme Court. The government said on 8 August that 33 such cases had been tried by 18 designated courts and that states were instructed to apply the Act's provisions "sparingly". Special courts were reported to have been established in the Union Territory of Delhi and Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Punjab and Uttar Pradesh, as well as in Jammu and Kashmir.
On 12 June the Andhra Pradesh state government declared that the Act would be invoked against Naxalites (members of left-wing revolutionary groups many of whom have resorted to violence) "who toe the Mao line of achieving |X)wer through the barrel of the gun". Amnesty International learned of hundreds of arrests of alleged Naxalites and their sympathizers during 1985, especially in Andhra Pradesh. Among those arrested under the Act was Dr Balagopal, General Secretary of the Andhra Pradesh Civil Liberties Committee, who was arrested on 16 November. In December Amnesty Interna-
221	Amnesty International Report 1986
tional expressed concern that he might have been arrested as a result of peaceful civil liberties activities.
Three other members of civil liberties groups were arrested on 11 and 20 September, immediately after the publication of a report on events in ^njab. Among them was the General Secretary of Citizens for Democracy, a New Delhi-based civil liberties organization. The printer of the report was also arrested. The report was proscribed by the government on the grounds that it could "create hatred and spread disaffection". The authors were to be charged with sedition but were released on bail after several days' detention, a magistrate ruling that no evidence had been provided of seditious material.
Throughout 1985 Amnesty International expressed concern about arrests and detentions in Punjab. In January it urged the government to review the cases of detainees where there was no evidence that they had been involved in violent activities. Among those held under the NSA were reported to be Sikh priests, religious preachers and leaders of political parties, detained for making "objectionable" or "inflammatory" speeches.
In March Amnesty International welcomed the release of eight leaders of the Sikh political party, the Akali Dal, Army of Immortals, whom it had considered prisoners of conscience, and the subsequent announcement by the Union Home Minister that the government was willing to release all detainees in Punjab against whom there were no criminal charges. Among such detainees were leaders of the All India Sikh Students Federation, the ban on which was lifted on 11 April. On 12 April Amnesty International asked for details of the individuals to be released, of whom 800 were reportedly held under the provisions of the NSA alone. By 17 July the government was reported to have ordered the release of 1,371 people, while reports in the international press estimated that some 4,500 people were still held in connection with political activities in the state.
This program of releases accelerated after Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi and Akali Dal leader Sant Harchand Singh Longowal reached agreement on 24 July over long-standing demands for greater autonomy voiced by members of the Sikh community. Punjab remained under central government administration until state elections on 27 September resulted in an Akdi Dal administration. By this date, a totsd of 2,200 further releases had been officially reported.
On 1 October Amnesty International informed the new Chief Minister of Punjab of its concerns in the state. The new government announced the release of 224 further detainees held under the NSA and established a committee to review the cases of an estimated 2,400 people stiU detained after arrest during the previous three years. By the end of 1985 the committee was reported to have recommended
222	Amnesty International Report 1986
the release of more than 2,000 detainees and the withdrawal of cases against 450 people arrested during or after violent events at the Golden Temple in June 1984. The central government subsequently said that 377 of them charged with waging war and awaiting trial in Jodhpur jail would not be released. Amnesty International was still investigating the cases of several Sikhs who had been detained for many months without charge or trial under the NSA. One was rearrested on 9 December for alleged sedition immediately after the Punjab High Court had ordered his release from over 12 months' detention.
During 1985 Amnesty International also expressed concern that existing legal safeguards for detainees in Punjab were not always observed. In March Amnesty International wrote to the Governor of Punjab about reports that in at least five cases the government had failed to release people detained without trial under the NSA, although their release had been recommended by the Advisory Board established under the Act. Anmesty International also received other complaints, some in the form of signed affidavits to the Supreme Court, alleging misuse by the police of their wide powers of arrest and detention under special legislation in force in Punjab. If a person wanted by the police could not be found relatives were allegedly arrested, sometimes beaten and detained. The police were also accused of falsely implicating i>eople in offences punishable under the Arms Act by planting weapons on them after arrest.
Amnesty International was concerned that political detainees faced trials by special courts. The Minister of State for Home Affairs stated that, as of 22 March, 1,785 cases had been conducted before special courts in Punjab and a further 3,264 cases were pending. On 24 July the Punjab Govenmient announced the immediate withdrawal of the Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act 1983 (which had widened army powers of arrest), declared that the state was no longer a "terrorist affected area" and restricted the mandate of special courts established under the 1984 Terrorist Affected Areas (Special Courts) Act (see Amnesty International Report 1985). Amnesty International welcomed these developments in a communication to the Prime Minister, pointing out, however, that those accused of "waging war" and "hijacking" would still face trial before special courts under procedures which shifted the burden of proof and permitted trial in camera. In its October communication to the Chief Minister of Punjab, Amnesty International welcomed the new state government's announcement of 26 September abolishing special courts and requested that the cases of those convicted by them be reviewed, as their procedures fell short of international standards for a fair trial.
Politically motivated arrests were reported from many other Indian
223	Amnesty International Report 1986
states, including Madhya Pradesh, Mizoram and Uttar Pradesh. These usually resulted in short-term detentions under the NSA. In Jammu and Kashmir, where some opposition parties advocated a plebiscite to determine the status of the territory, there were reports of hundreds of arrests for alleged anti-national activities. Among those arrested were members of the Jamaat-e-Islami, the People's League, the People's Conference, the Mahaz-e-Azadi and the Jamaat-e-Tulba. In April Amnesty International appealed on behalf of four members of these parties detained without trial under the Jammu and Kashmir Public Safety Act. On 21 November the Supreme Court granted compensation to a member of the state Legislative Assembly who had been detained without trial, observing that "if the personal liberty of a member of the Legislative Assembly is to be played with in this fashion, one can only wonder what may happen to le^r mortals".
Amnesty International received from many different parts of India reports of torture and ill-treatment of criminal suspects in police stations. It also received reports of people arrested in connection with political activities being tortured and ill-treated in the states of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Jammu and Kashmir, Maharashtra, Punjab, West Bengal and in the Union Territory of Delhi. In Andhra Pradesh, 238 villagers and tribal peasants in areas of Naxalite activity alleged in a petition to the Supreme Court that they had been tortured. In Orissa, a 13-year-old adivasi (tribal) boy was on 14 July reportedly beaten until unconscious. In Punjab, a judge visiting Nabha Central Jail reported that detainees had had a log rolled over their thighs or their legs pulled apart. Beatings on the soles of the feet and on the body, while suspended from the ceiling, were also frequently reported from Punjab. Similar allegations were repeatedly received concerning Delhi police stations, where Sikhs were interrogated about acts of violence which occurred in the capital.
In May Amnesty International expressed concern about the death in a Delhi hospit^ on 13 May of Mohinder Singh, alias Khalsa, allegedly from injuries sustained after arrest as a result of torture. His was one of six cases in 1985 known to Amnesty International in which people involved in political activities died, allegedly of injuries inflicted in police custody, in Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Delhi and Punjab.
Amnesty International also received several allegations that political activists were killed by the police in staged "encounters". In Uttar Pradesh those killed were criminal suspects, especially from among the Harijans, "scheduled castes". "Encounter" killings of political activists were reported from Andhra Pradesh, Bihar and Punjab. In one such incident in Andhra Pradesh in April, five alleged
224	Amnesty International Report 1986
Naxalites were killed and a survivor stated that they had been surrounded by police in plain clothes, stripped naked, stood in a row with their hands behind their backs and shot.
Although the Supreme Court had ruled that the death penalty should be imposed only in the "rarest of rare" cases, dozens of people were sentenced to death in 1985 as in previous years. In December Amnesty International wrote to the Resident of India expressing concern that the Rajasthan High Court had sentenced a man and a woman to be executed in public. Amnesty International welcomed the Supreme Court's ruling of 13 December that public executions should not be carried out, which the Attorney General had stated were "cruel and brutal". It appealed for commutation of the death sentence for these and other prisoners sentenced to death. The organization did not have information regarding the number of executions actually carried out.
