Burma
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about reports of human rights violations committed by the Burmese army, including arbitrary arrests, torture and extrajudicial executions of unarmed civilians. The death penalty continued to be imposed and one person was known to have been executed during 1985.
In 1984 the army had launched major offensives against govemment opponents, mostly from ethnic minority groups, in border
214	Amnesty International Report 1986
areas. Fighting continued during 1985, particularly in Karen state. The practice of compelling villagers to act as porters for army units in areas of conflict reportedly persisted (see Amnesty International Report 1985). In efforts to prevent the local population from assisting the Karen National Union (KNU), the main opposition group, villagers were reportedly forced to move to restricted settlements or camps, such as one established at Hlaing Bwe, Pa-an district. This was also said to have occurred in Kawkareik district and in other parts of the country. These camps were said to be surrounded by barbed wire and to be guarded so that the inhabitants are permitted to leave only during daylight hours in order to work in the fields.
Amnesty International received persistent reports of the killing of non-combatants in areas of armed conflict. The victims were said to have included viUagers who fled from their homes on the approach of army units, were subsequently discovered hiding in the jungle and were allegedly shot on sight and without provocation, on suspicion of belonging to the KNU. Traders crossing Karen-held territory have paid the KNU "taxes" on such passage of goods. In an effort to deter this trading activity, soldiers were reported to have killed two separate groups of traders during 1985. In late June, 12 traders of whom three were women were reportedly killed near Kawkareik, when soldiers belonging to No. 3 Company, No. 6 Battalion of the 44th Division, are said to have shot at them without warning. The same military detachment was also accused of killing at least 13 other unarmed traders on 2 July, again near Kawkareik.
In Arakan state, where a substantial Muslim population lives, there were continuing reports of arrests of suspected government opponents and the torture of these detainees in police and army custody. Amnesty International appealed on behalf of 18 men reportedly arrested between 15 and 30 September in Buthidaung. They included Abdul Gaffar, a postal official, and U Chit Maung, a clerk of Buthidaung People's Council. They were reportedly tortured during interrogation by beating, by having pins inserted under their nails and by having hot water poured into their nostrils. At the end of 1985 Amnesty International learned that they were stiU detained and had been charged with high treason.
Major Zin Mo, one of two North Koreans sentenced to death for killing four South Korean cabinet members and 17 others in October 1983, was executed in April. The other. Captain Kang Min-Chul, was understood to have been granted clemency for having confessed to the crime. Six people were sentenced to death by a court in Mandalay in September on drug-trafficking charges, the first time Amnesty International learned of the death penalty being imposed for such an offence.
215	Amnesty International Report 1986