Namibia
Amnesty International was concerned about the detention without trial of suspected opponents of the government, some of whom were believed to be prisoners of conscience. The organization was concerned also about renewed reports of torture or ill-treatment of detainees, and about the death in custody of a political detainee. There were also disturbing reports of political killings by security forces active in the northernmost districts, and there was continued concern about the death penalty.
There was continued conflict throughout 1985 between security forces representing the South African Government and the so-called Transitional Government of National Unity (TGNU), which was established in Windhoek in June, and African nationalist guerrilla fighters belonging to the South West Africa People's Organisation (SWAPO). The conflict resulted in many civilian deaths, as well as deaths of combatants, with each side accusing the other of politically motivated killings.
In May the South African Minister of Law and Order relinquished responsibility for the security police in Namibia, including the Koevoet (Crowbar) police counter-insurgency unit, which was subsequently renamed. The security police were placed under the authority of the South African Administrator-General in Windhoek until June, when the TGNU was established and given limited powers of self-government in Namibia. The South African Government retained direct responsibility for defence, foreign affairs and the constitutional status of Namibia.
The TGNU was empowered to amend existing legislation and
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986	VII	71	Japan
introduce new laws, which had to be signed by the Administrator-General. A Bill of Fundamental Rights was attached as an annex to the Proclamation of the South African State President which established the TGNU. It proclaimed certain fundamental rights but was of uncertain legal validity as it was merely an annex to the founding legislation. The rights proclaimed included those to freedom of association, assembly and expression, the rights to a fair trial and equality before the law and the right not to be arrested arbitrarily or detained without trial, or to be tortured or ill-treated.
In September, 21 sentenced political prisoners held in South Africa were returned to Namibia. All were then released by the TGNU in November. Some 15 of them had been held since 1966 or 1967 and sentenced to long prison terms in 1968 after a trial in South Africa which did not conform to international standards of fair trial.
Both before and after the TGNU took office, many people suspected of supporting SWAPO were detained without trial under Proclamation AG.9 of 1977. In areas designated as "security districts", which covered a large area from Windhoek in the south to the northern border with Angola, members of the security forces were empowered to arrest suspects without warrant and detain them incommunicado and without charge for 30 days at any place considered suitable. Continued incommunicado detention for an unlimited period could be authorized by the Administrator-General until June and by the TGNU thereafter.
In January Amnesty Intemational received information about more than 40 people who were detained in the north, in the Ovamboland district, under Proclamation AG.9. They included Sakeus Shaduka, a pastor in the Evangelical Lutheran Ovambo-Kavango (ELOK) Church, as well as evangelists and lay members of the Church. Several teachers and bank employees were also among those detained. Following the arrests Amnesty Intemational expressed concem that the detainees might be tortured or ill-treated and urged the authorities to disclose their places of detention and permit them immediate access to legal counsel. It called also for them to be brought to trial or released without delay.
One of those detained, Thomas Shindobo Nikanor, was arrested on 22 January in Ovamboland. Five days later, he was reportedly found dead in a cell at Osire, a secret detention camp in the Otjiwarongo district, some 500 kilometres to the south. The security police said that he had committed suicide by hanging himself with his socks. A post-mortem examination was carried out five days later but it was reportedly impossible to determine the time or cause of death because the body had not been satisfactorily refrigerated. An inquest began in the Otjiwarongo Magistrate's Court at the end of September
72	Amnesty International Report 1986
but had not finished by the end of the year.
Most of those detained in January had been released by the end of
1985.	Seven people, however, were cnarged in August with offences under the South African Terrorism Act of 1967 and Internal Security Act of 1950, both of which remained applicable in Namibia although they had been repealed in South Africa. The charges related to alleged SWAPO activities including a number of bomb explosions, at least one of which resulted in deaths. Their trial was due to start in
1986.	Several other people detained in January or February 1985 remained in custody at the end of the year under a provkion allowing the detention of potential state witnesses in political trials.
There were further detentions under Proclamation AG.9 throughout 1985. For example, several people were detained in Ovamboland in July, including Andreas Namweya, a 60-year-old ELOK evangelist, who had previously been held without charge from January to June, and Paulus Musheko, an ELOK pastor. Jonah Kambudu, another former detainee, and his wife Magdalena Kambudu, were also detained. Nahas Ndevahoma, a school principal in Ovamboland, was detained on 29 July. He was held for only a few days but during that time he was alleged to have been beaten repeatedly, to have been partially suffocated and to have been photographed being handed money by a South African soldier, apparently to suggest that he was an informer.
In all. Amnesty Intemational took up the cases of more than 40 political detainees during 1985 on the grounds that they were prisoners of conscience or for investigation as possible prisoners of conscience.
In Febmary Amnesty Intemational drew attention to widespread and systematic torture of uncharged political detainees in its File on Torture on Namibia. This described in detail individual cases of torture, several recent deaths in detention and the legal immunity conferred by the South African Govemment on all security force personnel under Proclamation AG.9 of 1977 or the South African Defence Act. It criticized the authorities' failure to institute adequate safeguards against torture of detainees, to ensure that torture allegations were investigated impartially and to bring to justice those responsible.
At the beginning of 1985 several civil court actions were outstanding against the authorities arising from alleged torture of detainees, in particular by members of the Koevoet police unit. In November 1982 Jona Hamukwaya, a teacher, died within hours of being detained by Koevoet personnel. An inquest had mled that his death was due to an "unlawful act or omission" but failed to identify who was responsible. Further cross-examination of Jona Hamuk-
73	Amnesty International Report 1986
waya's captors, however, was forestalled shortly before the c^ was due to be heard by the Windhoek Supreme Court, when the authorities agreed a substantial out-of-court settlement. Similar out-of-court settlements were made in respect of other former detainees who had complained of torture. No action, however, was known to have been taken by the authorities to identify or to bring to justice those responsible.
Following the death of Jona Hamukwaya and another detainee, charges had been laid in South Africa against Roman Catholic Archbishop Denis Hurley in connection with statements that he had made attributing responsibility for the deaths to Koevoet. The Archbishop's trial was due to begin in February and was expected to allow further evidence of alleged abuses by Koevoet to be laid before the courts. At the last moment, however, all charges against Archbishop Hurley were withdrawn.
In reponse to allegations of torture, the Administrator-General issued a three-page document in late January which stated that military personnel were warned that "any form of assault or mistreatment of detainees is both illegal and punishable", that the authorities would "not hesitate to act" against military personnel responsible for "unlawful acts of violence", and that special liaison officers existed to which complaints might be made. It stated also that a judicial commission of inquiry was investigating existing security legislation. The names of 68 military personnel sentenced for offences such as assault, theft and murder and details of other pending cases involving another 31 military personnel were appended.
This document failed to make any reference to the immunity provisions which have been invoked on a number of occasions to prevent the prosecution of security force personnel accused of abusing human rights. It failed also to refer to the actions of the security police and Koevoet personnel, and to explain, for example, why a certain security police officer remained in a senior position despite a finding by the Windhoek Supreme Court that a political detainee who had "disappeared" in his custody had actually died as a result of assaults and that his death was concealed by the security police.
The report of the judicial commission of inquiry into security legislation was apparently submitted to the TGNU in July or earlier but its findings had not been disclosed by the end of 1985.
Serious new allegations of torture were made in two cases before the Windhoek Supreme Court. During the trial of two alleged SWAPO guerrillas, who were sentenced to long prison terms in October for participation in the killing of a local radio announcer in Ovamboland, it was alleged that they had been detained incommuni-
74	Amnesty International Report 1986
cado for many months following their arrest during which time they had been brutally assaulted and tortured with electric shocks. Allegations of torture in detention were also made during a legal action on behalf of Josef Katofa, a shopkeeper from Ovamboland who had been detained incommunicado and without charge or trial since May 1984. He had first been held under Proclamation AG.9 but then in December 1984 was transferred to detention under Proclamation AG.26. In June a legal test case resulted in a court order requiring the authorities to permit him to consult his lawyer. Subsequently, a further order was obtained stating that Josef Katofa should be released if the authorities failed to justify his continued detention before the Supreme Court. In mid-September he was freed on the instructions of the Windhoek Supreme Court. In August Amnesty International had appealed for his release as a prisoner of conscience and for an impartid investigation into his alleged torture and ill-treatment.
There were further allegations of widespread assaults on civilians and extrajudicial executions by security forces in northern Namibia but in most cases of individual killings it was not possible for Amnesty Intemational to ascertain the circumstances in which they had occurred or to attribute responsibility. The introduction of a permit system goveming travel within and between the northernmost districts in March appeared to have added to the difficulties of obtaining reliable information from these areas. In one particularly disturbing incident in April, the partially decomposed bodies of several young men were unearthed at Oshikuku inside a recently-vacated Koevoet camp. Koevoefs commanding officer denied allegations by local residents that the men had been taken to the camp and killed. He stated that the bodies were those of SWAPO guerrillas who had been killed in combat with Koevoet.
Amnesty Intemational remained concerned about the death penalty. At least three people were sentenced to death after being convicted of murder and there was at least one execution.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1986
VII	75	Japan
