Bulgaria
Amnesty Intemational was con-cemed about large numbers of ethnic Turks who were imprisoned during a campaign of enforced assimilation of the ethnic Turkish minority and believed that many of them might be prisoners of conscience. Reports of the deliberate killing of ethnic Turks by the security forces also caused concern. The organization worked for the release of a number of other prisoners of conscience and leamed of 10 executions.
Despite severe censorship of information about political cases Amnesty Intemational obtained the names of over 250 ethnic Turks reportedly arrested between December 1984 and March 1985 when, according to officials, the entire ethnic Turkish minority — estimated to number 900,000 or 10 per cent of the population —"spontaneously" and "voluntarily" renounced Islamic names for Bulgarian ones. Amnesty Intemational adopted a number eis prisoners of conscience, most of whom were reportedly imprisoned for refusing to accept new Bulgarian names. For example, at about lam on 23 December 1984, police with dogs and troops with tanks reportedly surrounded the ethnic Turkish village of Gorski Izvor in Kardzhali district near the border with Greece. Officials reportedly then visited every household with identity cards akeady made out in new Bulgarian names. Aptula Mustafov Yumerov, Myumun Hasanov Tasimov, Hasan Tasimov and Hasan Dzhemilov Durakov were reportedly arrested for refusing to accept the new identity cards. Four days earlier, on 19 December 1984, a fifth man from Gorski Izvor, Sali Yusennov Chubakchiev, had been arrested. Amnesty Intemational was informed that there have been similar instances throughout the country in which the authorities arrested ethnic Turks whom they considered might actively oppose the name-changing campaign, before implementing it. The five men were reportedly still in detention in mid-April 1985 and Amnesty Intemational had no information about whether they had been tried.
In other instances ethnic Turks who attempted to protest peacefully against this campaign were reportedly arrested and imprisoned. Rasim Rezhebov, Salim Salimov and Ismet Abdulov were tried in early 1985, along with two young women, Hasine Mustafova and Ferdiye Salifova, by the District Court of Kardzhali. They had apparently tried to organize a meeting of ethnic Turks fi'om villages around Kardzhali to protest against the campedgn. This

meeting was scheduled to be held on 29 December 1984 in Kardzhali, but they were all arrested before it could take place. In December 1984, they had also gone to the Turkish Embassy in Sofia to request visas to emigrate to Turkey, but were unable to enter as the embassy was surrounded by police. All five were sentenced to between two and seven and a half years' imprisonment. They were adopted as prisoners of conscience.
In many cases ethnic Turks were reportedly released from detention after accepting new names, either for themselves or their dependants. One person from a village in southern Bulgaria testified to Amnesty Intemational that he was arrested in late 1984 after refusing to give his five-year-old son, who was named after his deceased brother, a new name. He was released after a week in custody and alleged that during that time he was reportedly insulted and beaten with fists and a sock filled with sand. He was released after his father had agreed to his grandson's name-change.
Amnesty Intemational was informed that ethnic Turks were forced to sign papers saying that they did not wish to emigrate to Turkey and that those who refused were faced with intemal exile. On 28 March, Stanko Todorov, a senior party and state official, reportedly stated that "there is not and will not be any emigration to Turkey" and that those who "do not wish to live in their native towns and villages can move out". In these cases, he added, the Bulgarian security forces had been instructed to ensure speedy removal, reportedly within hours, "not to Turkey but to other regions of Bulgaria where these people will be able to live peacefully and happily".
Amnesty Intemational also received a copy of an official document stating that Turks faced prosecution under the criminal code if they had their sons circumcised. Article 324(2) prohibits practising a profession connected with public health without suitable qualifications or permission and Article 20(2) deals with instigating a crime. People convicted under this legislation face up to three years' imprisonment or a fine of up to 1,000 leva ($1,000). Hyusein Mehmedov Osmanov, a 31-year-old shopkeeper from Mengishevo, was arrested in early August 1985 for having his five-year-old son circumcised four days after officials had come to his village at the end of July and made a list of all circumcised male children. He was later released.
Amnesty Intemational received the names of over 100 ethnic Turks allegedly killed by the security forces during the implementation of this campaign. In some cases the ethnic Turks resisted violently, and deaths reportedly occurred on both sides. In other cases, however, violence was reportedly used by the security forces against peaceful demonstrators. For example, on 24 December 1984
274	Amnesty International Report 1986
ethnic Turkish inhabitants of several neighbouring villages reportedly marched in peaceful protest to the town hall of Benkovski in Kardzhali district near the border with Greece. According to eye-witness accounts received by Amnesty International, the security forces used tear-gas and dogs and opened fire on the demonstrators. Six were killed, among them a two-year-old child and her mother, and 40 were wounded.
Amnesty International also received a number of reports alleging that ethnic Turks who refused to sign the "voluntary" name-changing declarations were summarily executed on the spot by the security forces. The organization was unable to verify these reports, but on 26 February and again on 16 October Amnesty International wrote to the authorities calling for a full and impartial investigation into these allegations. On 23 October Amnesty International wrote again asking the authorities to receive an Amnesty International delegation to discuss its concerns. No replies to these letters had been received by the end of 1985.
On 23 August Amnesty International made an oral submission to the UN Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities detailing its concerns regarding ethnic Turks in Bulgaria.
Amnesty International also worked for the release of a number of prisoners of conscience imprisoned on other grounds. They included Yanko Yankov, a 41-year-old jurist who taught law at Sofia University, who was sentenced in or around March 1984 to two years' hard labour as a furnace attendant in a chemical plant near Varna after having visited several foreign embassies where he reportedly discussed the human righte situation in Bulgaria and his wish to emigrate. In December 1984 he was tried again, with Tseko Tsekov, reportedly on charges of attempting to contact the United States Embassy, being members of an anti-state group, and slandering the Bulgarian leadership. They were sentenced to five years' and two years' imprisonment respectively.
Amnesty International worked for the release of Hristo Kulichev, pastor of the First Congregational Church of Sofia, and his brother Dimiter, who were arrested on 9 and 11 January respectively. They were sentenced in May to eight and six months' imprisonment respectively for "practising a profession without official permission" under Article 274(2) of the criminal code. The real reason for their arrest, however, was reportedly to ensure that a government appointee became pastor of the First Congregational Church of Sofia.
Amnesty International also adopted as a prisoner of conscience Kostadin Angelov Kalmukov who was sentenced to four years' imprisonment in 1982, reportedly for protesting against the repeated

imprisonment of his son Emil for conscientious objection to military service. Both Kostadin Kalmukov, himself previously imprisoned for five years for conscientious objection, and his son are Pentacostalists and refuse to carry arms because of their religious beliefe. Kostadin Kalmukov was imprisoned in Stara Zagora prison and Amnesty Intemational received allegations that on 25 December 1984 he was beaten unconscious by guards after he protested that Chr^tmas Day was designated an ordnary work day in the prison. The prison doctor was called but reportedly did nothing to help him. He was then reportedly thrown naked into a punishment ceU for 14 days, but was released from the cell after three days as his life was in danger from the cold.
The Bulgarian Constitution does not guarantee the right to freedom of movement and emigration is rarely f>erniitted. Those who attempt to leave the country without official permission face up to five years' imprisonment under Article 279 of the criminal code, and up to six years if the offence is repeated. Amnesty Intemational worked for the release of Sebattin Mahmudov Aliov, a 25-year-old ethnic Turk from Gotse Delchev, whose name was changed from Aliov to Uiev in the name-changing campaign. He was arrested in Febmary while trying to cross the border to Turkey hidden in a tmck. On 24 April he was reportedly sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment by the district court of Haskovo.
In May the National Assembly approved amendments to the criminal code providing a discretionary death penalty for acts of terror by means of explosives or other methods. Amnesty Intemational leamed of two death sentences, one for treason and one for murder, and of 10 executions, nine for murder, and one for terrorism.
