France
Amnesty International was concerned about the impr^nment of conscientious objectors to military service. The organization was also concerned about allegations that two Kanak independence supporters in the French overseas territory of New Caledonia were the victims of extrajudicial execution by French security forces.
Amnesty Intemational adopted as prisoners of conscience objectors to military service who were not offered the alternative of civilian service and also those who refused the alternative service because, at twice the length of military service, Amnesty Intemational considered it to be punitive.
Amnesty Intemational worked for the release of five conscientious objectors serving sentences of between four and 12 months. Some objectors were rearrested after serving their sentences. The law permits rearrest and detention for a total of one year.
In one such case. Christian Frigoult, a 24-year-old industrial designer, was released from the prison of Rennes on 10 December after completing a nine-month sentence for refusing military service on pacifist grounds. On leaving the prison he was arrested for refusing an order to put on military uniform. The tribunal of Rennes did not order his reimprisonment but he was taken to military barracks and held there under close arrest. He was due to be brought before the court again in January 1986.
Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about reports that two members of the Kanak Socialist Nationalist Liberation Front (FLNKS) in New Caledonia may have been extrajudicially executed on 12 January. Eloi Machoro and Marcel Nonnaro were shot and killed by members of the Groupe d'intervention de la gendarmerie nationale (GIGN), Intervention Group of the National Police, who had reportedly surrounded a farmhouse where the two men and some 37 other armed FLNKS supporters had gathered. GIGN officers claimed the Kanak group had opened fire. FLNKS spokespersons said no shots had been fired and that Eloi Machoro and Marcel Nonnaro were coming out of the farmhouse to negotiate with the officers when they were killed. Eloi Machoro was widely regarded as the most militant of the FLNKS leaders. On 8 Febmary, Amnesty Intemational asked the Minister of Justice about the position of the French Govemment with regard to these re|x>rts and on 21 Febmary received assurances from the Ministry of Justice that the killings
283	Amnesty International Report 1986
would be investigated. Amnesty International was not aware of the results of any official investigation by the end of 1985 and a civil suit, brought against persons unknown, had reached no conclusion.
