NICARAGUA
REPUBLICOF NICARAGUA
Head of state and government: Enrique Bolafios
Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes
International Criminal Court: not signed
UN Women's Convention: ratified
Optional Protocol to UN Women's Convention: not
signed
Violence against women remained a serious concern. People suffering from health problems reportedly linked to the use of pesticides on banana plantations sought redress from multinational companies and state support. Excessive use of force by police was reported.
Background
Civil unrest and political tensions intensified in 2005. There were efforts to strip the executive of powers and corruption scandals implicating government officials at the highest levels. Large-scale demonstrations took place in several towns against the rising cost of fuel, food and public transport.
Violence against women
High levels of violence against women and the inadequate response by the authorities remained a major concern. According to press reports, 25 women and girls were killed between January and August as a result of domestic or sexual violence. Q Xiomara Obregon Hondoy was shot dead by her partner on 12 April. She had reported his violent and abusive behaviour on a number of occasions to the authorities but they had failed to take appropriate action to protect her.
Right to health: state and corporate accountability
Banana workers formerly employed by US multinational companies intensified their struggle for compensation for health problems. They alleged that these were caused by the pesticides used on the banana plantations during the 1960s, 1970s and early 1980s. Health problems reported included skin and breast cancer; liver, pancreas and kidney problems; nervous disorders; and miscarriages. About 22,000 former workers and family members were estimated to be affected. By the end of 2005, '.000 former banana workers had reportedly died from pesticide related diseases. There were protests at the government's failure to comply with a March 2004 agreement in which commitments were made regarding medical and legal assistance for those affected, A new agreement was signed in August, setting out a legislative agenda to address the workers' demands, in particular around access to health care.
At the end of the year, court orders against several multinational companies in Nicaragua and the USA were still awaiting implementation or were the subject of appeals by the companies.
Indigenous peoples
In June the Inter-American Court of Human Rights ruled in favour of the indigenous group Yabti Tasba Masraka Nanih Asia Takanka (YATAMA) on the grounds that their right to judicial guarantees had been violated, leading to their exclusion from participating in the 2000 municipal elections.
In May the Awas Tingni indigenous community sought the intervention of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights with a new request for additional reparations. The Nicaraguan government had failed to comply with the Court's 2001 ruling ordering Nicaragua to provide reparations to the Awas Tingni indigenous community and demarcate and title their lands. The case had been brought after the state granted an exploration licence to a foreign-based logging company in 1994 in the community's ancestral territory without its consent and in breach of national and regional legislation.
Excessive use of force by police
According to press reports, police officers used excessive force against protesters during at least two demonstrations. In February, three people who had
Amnesty International Report 2006
197
NIC
occupied the Pañoleta farm in Chinandega were reportedly killed by police officers as they were forcibly evicted.
Lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LCBT) people
Nicaragua continued to criminalize gay and lesbian relationships. The LGBT community was reportedly prevented from filing complaints and subjected to arbitrary detention and abuse of authority by police officers.
