GUINEA-BISSAU
REPUBLIC OF GUINEA-BISSAU
Head of state: Joào Bernardo "Nino" Vieira (replaced
Henrique Pereira Rosa (interim) in October)
Head of government: Aristide Gomes (replaced Carlos
ComesJúniorin November)
Death penalty: abolitionist forali crimes
International Criminal Court: signed
UN Women's Convention: ratified
Optional Protocol to UN Women's Convention: signed
The risks of conflict and instability remained high. Political tension increased in the run-up to presidential elections in July, and the election of former President Joao Bernardo "Nino" Vieira failed to calm the situation. The police used firearms to disperse a demonstration, killing four people and injuring several others. There was no investigation intothislncident.
Background
Economic and social conditions remained dire and continued to threaten the stability of the country, ranked the sixth poorest in the world. In January, a
locust invasion threatened the cashew nut harvest, the country's main cash crop. Following a donors' conference in February, the government relied on international donors to pay salary arrears, especially to the armed forces, and to finance elections. International donors also pledged assistance to restructure the armed forces.
In March, a UN delegation visited the country to assist in efforts to combat the proliferation of illegally circulating small arms, estimated at around 175,000.
Former President Joao Bernardo "Nino" Vieira was sworn in as President in October having won the second round of presidential elections in July. The elections were declared free and fair by international observers. The delay in taking office arose because his opponent, Malam Bacai Sanhá, of the ruling African Party for the Independence of Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verde (Partido Africano da Indepéndencia da Guiñé e Cabo Verde, PAIGC), contested the results and demanded a recount of the votes.
At the end of October the new President dismissed the government. Three days later he appointed Aristide Gomes as Prime Minister. Aristide Gomes had been expelled from the PAIGC in May for supporting President Vieira in the presidential election. The PAIGC rejected the appointment as unconstitutional. The dismissed Prime Minister refused to hand over office and demonstrators in Bissau protesting against the new appointment burned tyres and caused some material damage. There were no arrests.
In October the government declared that it had fulfilled its obligations under the Ottawa Convention by destroying its stockpile of about 5,000 landmines. However, several minefields remained to be cleared.
There was conflict between Muslim groups in the city of Gabú in the east in February. A month later, the authorities accused the Muslim group Ahmadiof failing to co-operate with other Muslim groups and banned it from carrying out its activities. The group had been banned and arbitrarily expelled from the country in 2001 by then President Kumba lalá, but in January 2005 the ban had been lifted following a court order.
Political violence and impunity
Political tension heightened around the presidential elections and the army was placed on high alert. Tension was exacerbated by the Supreme Court's delay in making a decision to allow two former presidents to stand in the elections. Kumba lalá of the Social Renewal Party (Partido da Renovapáo Social, PRS) was overthrown from power in September 2003 and banned from seeking political office for eight years. Joao Bernardo "Nino" Vieira. a refugee in Portugal since being ousted in 1999, was forbidden to seek political office by the Constitution. Kumba lalá threatened to seize power if his candidacy was rejected. In May, the Supreme Court ruled that the two could stand-Opposition parties criticized the ruling as politically motivated. Despite the ruling, Kumba lalá declared himself President and occupied the presidential palace for a few hours. The army broke up a demonstration by PRS supporters and pledged loyalty to the government.
129	Amnesty International Report 2006

GUY
In June, Kumba iala rejected the results of the first ballot. The PRS organized a demonstration in his support, which led to violence in which people lost their lives. The Rapid Intervention Police reportedly beat demonstrators and used tear gas and live ammunition to disperse them, killing four and injuring about six others. There were reports that some of the demonstrators were armed with sticks, stones and guns. About 50 people were reportedly arrested, including Artur Sanha, Secretary General of the PRS. All were released uncharged after two days, pending an investigation. However, no investigation was carried out by the end of 2005.
A week before the second ballot, in July, a group of armed men wearing military uniforms attacked the Ministry of Interior. Two police officers were killed and several people were injured in the attack. Twenty people were reportedly arrested. The Army Chief of Staff blamed the attack on people acting outside the military command structure. No investigation into this incident was known to have taken place.
Similarly, there was no investigation into the killing in September 2004 of the Chief-of-Staff of the Armed Forces. Soldiers arrested in 2002 and released in 2004 pending trial were not tried.
Freedom of expression
In September the government dismissed the directors of the national television and radio stations. There were reports that the dismissals were politically motivated and related to the two men's alleged support for the President-elect, Joao Bernardo "Nino" Vieira.
