BAHAMAS
COMMONWEALTH OFTHE BAHAMAS
Head of state: Queen Elizabeth II, represented by Paul
Adderley (replaced Ivy Dumontin December)
Head of government: Perry Gladstone Christie
Death penalty: retentionist
International Criminal Court: signed
UN Women's Convention: ratified
Optional Protocol to UN Women's Convention: not signed
Death sentences were imposed by the courts. No executions were carried out. Detained asylum-seekers and migrants, the majority black Haitian nationals, were held in harsh conditions and reportedly ill-treated. Reports of police abuses continued.
Death penalty
The courts continued to pass death sentences. No executions took place. At the end of 2005, there were at least 39 prisoners on death row. Numerous people, including the Commissioner of Police, called for the resumption of executions in reaction to an increase in violent crime.
In April, 12 prisoners on death row at the Fox Hill Prison staged a three-day hunger strike to protest at their "inhumane" conditions. Inmates alleged inadequate sanitation, food, water and medical care. In October a new prison building was commissioned, for completion in 2007.
Police abuses
There were continued reports of police brutality. Q In January a riot erupted in Nassau Village after police allegedly abused Haitian women and shot a young man aged 19 in the face. A police investigation had not concluded by the end of 2005.
Amnesty international Report 2006
63
BAH
Asylum-seekers and migrants
There were continued reports of abuses against asylum-seekers and other detainees at the Carmichael Detention Centre. Inmates were reportedly beaten and received inadequate medical attention, food and water. Asylum-seekers were forcibly returned to countries including Cuba and Haiti without access to a full and fair determination procedure.
Hostility increased towards Haitian immigrants, unofficially estimated at 60,000 out of a population of 300,000, In 2005, according to the Department of Immigration, 5,543 irregular immigrants—4,504 from Haiti - were forcibly returned to their countries of origin.
Al country reports/visits
Visit
In May, Al sent a police expert to provide human rights training to members of the Royal Bahamas Police Force,
