Sierra Leone (Republic of)
In 1976, Amnesty International had received unconfirmed reports that about 500 political prisoners were being held, 90% of whom had not been tried. Lack of data on individuals had made it difficult to take up the cases, though further research is being carried out.
On 29 January 1977, unrest at Fourah Bay College in Freetown sparked off a crisis which spread rapidly to secondary and primary schools. It was reported, though not yet confirmed by Amnesty International at the time of writing, that in ensuing clashes between university students and the Internal Security Unit (ISU), several students were killed and several others seriously injured, including several girls who were reportedly raped and beaten. On 1 February 1977, a curfew was imposed and a State of Emergency was declared throughout the country.
On 15 April 1977 nominations began for the parliamentary elections scheduled for 6 May. Reports reaching Amnesty International indicated that in pre-election violence some members of the Opposition were killed and others detained. According to unconfirmed reports, about 120 people were killed in Bo district, and in a northern village 26 people were killed when the village was burnt down by a government candidate.
Regina James, a candidate put up by the opposition Sierra Leone
95
People's Party (SLPP) was reportedly beaten and raped by seven government supporters in Bonthe on nomination day; she was taken to Connaught Hospital in Freetown, according to reports, and later transferred to Pademba Prison in Freetown.
Other prominent people arrested and detained during this period included Salami Coker, Director of Radio and TV in Freetown; Kande Bureh, Deputy-Leader of the SLPP; Sanusi Mustapha, an elected leader of SLPP in Bo constituency; F.M. Carew, a barrister who defended several prisoners executed for political offences in July 1975, Dauda Sandi, an SLPP candidate who won his seat in Kailahen and Charles F. Margai, a barrister and SLPP candidate who won his seat in Moyamba South constituency, but was arrested on 21 May 1977.
Available reports indicated that hundreds of people had been arrested and detained, especially during the election period, without being charged and brought to trial. On 27 May 1977, therefore. Amnesty International cabled the Head of State President Siaka Stevens requesting him to bring the political detainees to trial or release them and to guarantee their personal security while in detention.
Somalia (Democratic Republic of)
On 1 July 1976, the Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party (SRSP) was established to take over the functions of the military Somali Revolutionary Council. The Marxist-Leninist policy of "scientific socialism" as applied pragmatically to Somali conditions is expected to continue. Major problems in the Horn of Africa centered on Somalia's territorial claims to Somali-populated territory in Ethiopia, and the future of the new Republic of Djibouti, which attained independence from France in June 1977.
Amnesty International has, at the time of writing, 12 adopted Prisoners of Conscience in Somalia. They include officials of the former civilian régime, overthrown in 1969, among them, the former Prime Minister Mohamed Ibrahim Haji Egal. Mr Egal has been detained without charge since July 1976. He was previously detained continuously from 1969 to 1974 when he was tried before the National Security Court and sentenced to 30 years' imprisonment. He was released under an amnesty granted in October 1975 and was then Somalia's Ambassador to India until the time of his re-arrest. Other detainees include former Police Commander Mohammed Abshir Musse, who has been in detention continuously since 1969 apart from a brief period of freedom in 1973, and Abdulghani Sheikh
96
Ahmed who was Minister of Justice and Religious Affairs until 1974. The recison for the detention of these people and an unknown number of others seems to be their disapproval of the military regime. Many of these and other political detainees are kept in total solitary confinement without any contact with relatives or the outside world.
On 11 May 1977, Amnesty International wrote to Brigadier General Siyad Barre, President of the Somali Democratic Republic, expressing concern about the use of detention without trial, the conditions under which detainees are held and certain aspects of the legislation concerning the Security Courts which are incompatible with internationally accepted judicial procedures.
Four foreign nationals were detained in November 1976 after their yacht had been shipwrecked. They were tried by the National Security Court in June 1977 on charges of espionage, of which they were acquitted, and illegal entry into Somalia, on which they were convicted and sentenced to terms of one or two years' imprisonment. They were freed in early July when President Siyad Barre commuted their prison sentences to a fine. They later claimed they had been tortured after arrest by National Security officers, but this was denied by the Somali Government.
South Africa (Republic of)
Long years of political oppression caused by the discriminatory apartheid policies of the White South African Government culminated, in 1976-1977, in a massive outburst of Black protest in Soweto, Guguletu, Langa and other African townships which spread throughout the country. Following the first incident on 16 June 1976, when police opened fire on a group of unarmed school students demonstrating in Soweto, Black protest grew spontaneously in reaction to, and in spite of, the ruthlessness and violence of the Government's response.
In the absence of official government figures, conservative press estimates put the number of people killed in Soweto and Cape Town alone at 499 between June and the end of December 1976. The dead, most of whom were victims of police shootings, included many women and children. Unofficial estimates suggest a much higher figure. According to unsubstantiated reports, police killed students who were wounded and arrested in the first disturbances in June 1976andthe victims were secretly buried in various Soweto cemetries.
Mass arrests, not only of active participants in the protest demonstrations but also of well-known African nationalist leaders and
97
members of the "black consciousness" movement followed the outbreak of disturbances in June 1976 and continued through into 1977. The detainees were held under two main laws. More than 130 people were detained under the Internal Security Act, newly introduced in 1976 to amend and broaden the scope of the earlier Suppression of Communism Act. First entitled the Protection of State Security Bill, the Internal Security Act was re-named because its abbreviated form—the "SS Bill"—had Nazi connotations. Among other things, the Act empowers the Minister of Justice, without reference to the courts, to order the preventive detention of any person for an indefinite period on security grounds.
Those detained under the Internal Security Act included Winnie Mandela, wife of jailed African National Congress (ANC) leader Nelson Mandela; Kenneth Rachidi, President of the Black People's Convention (BPC); Thami Zani, President of the South African Students' Organization (SASO) and former SASO Secretary General Barney Nyameko Pityana, whose v^dfe was also detained. The detainees were held in various prisons located in Paarl, Grahamstown, King-williamstown, Benoni and Johannesburg. Conditions of detention varied, but most detainees were allowed to receive mail, newspapers and visits from members of their families. However, information reaching Amnesty International indicates that some of the detainees were subjected to brutal physical assault when first imprisoned.
The Internal Security Act detainees were finally freed at the end of December 1976 following representations by church leaders and others within South Africa and considerable international pressure. None of the detainees were charged, nor were they compensated by the authorities for the months they spent in detention. Immediately after their release, several of the detainees were also subjected to partial house-arrest and other restrictions under five-year banning orders imposed arbitrarily, and without specific reasons being given, by the Minister of Justice. Those banned included Winnie Mandela and East London journalist Tenjiwe Mtintso, both of whom had been detained for more than 130 days, and sociology lecturer Dr Fatima Meer, who spent more than 120 days in detention.
Following the December releases, several other former Internal Security Act detainees were subsequently re-detained under the provisions of the Terrorism Act and other security laws. They included Sally Motlana, Vice-President of the South African Council of Churches, who was re-detained for a period of four days in February 1977, and Union of Black Journalists' President Joe Thloloe who was re-arrested in early March 1977 after serving a total of 112 days in detention under the Internal Security Act in 1976. Mr Thloloe
98
remained in detention without charge at the end of May 1977. Another former detainee and Amnesty International adoptee, Malebelle Joseph Molokeng, disappeared after being told to report to Johannesburg security police headquarters on 24 March. The authorities denied that he had been detained. He is still missing.
In addition to the Internal Security Act, the Terrorism Act of 1967 was widely used for detention purposes in 1976-1977. However, it is almost impossible, because of the nature of the Act, to assess accurately the number of people held under its provisions. Section 6 of the Act provides for the detention without charge for an indefinite period of any person suspected of "terrorism", which offence is defined in very broad terms as any activity likely "to endanger the maintenance of law and order" in South Africa. Detainees are held for interrogation at places decided by the security police. They are not held at designated prisons. Relatives are not usually informed when a person has been detained, nor are they informed of the place of detention. It is difficult therefore to be accurate as to the number of people in detention at any one time. However, aveiilable information suggests that, at the end of May 1977, there were more than 400 detainees, most of them held under the terms of the Terrorism Act. More than 200 others had been released uncharged since mid-1976. They included Tembani Phantsi, who was detained mcommw-nicado and in solitary confinement for a total of 513 days before his release on 12 March 1977. Thandisizwe Mazibuko, Thomas Manthata and George Wauchope were detained for periods of 238, 253 and 279 days respectively before being released uncharged in March 1977. George Wauchope, a leading member of the BPC, was re-detained in June 1977.
There were consistent reports throughout the year of the torture of detainees undergoing interrogation by security police. These were given added significance by the death in somewhat mysterious circumstances of at least 18 political detainees. Among those who died was Mapetla Mohapi, a SASO organizer, whose case was first taken up by Amnesty International when he was banned in February 1973. Mr Mohapi was alleged by security police to have hanged himself with a pair of jeans on5 August 1976 while detained incommunicado at Kei Road police station in Kingwilliamstown. A doctor who represented the Mohapi family at a post-mortem held soon after his death was detained on 12 August and held without charge until late December 1976. The doctor, Dr Mamphela Ramphele, was banned and restricted to an isolated village more than 1,000 kilometers from Kingwilliamstovm in April 1977. At the inquest held on Mohapi in March 1977, his wife claimed that an alleged suicide note
99
produced by the police was not in her husband's handwriting. The inquest was then postponed until September 1977.
Less than one month after Mapetla Mohapi's death in King-williamstown, Luke Mazwembe, a member of the Western Province Workers' Advice Bureau died within two hours of his detention by Cape Town security police on 2 September. Mazwembe was alleged to have hanged himself with strips of a blanket cut with a razor blade and tied with twine found in his cell. At an inquest held in November, a State pathologist said that although there were no indications of any other cause of death than by hanging he could not exclude the possibility that Mr Mazwembe had been killed and then hanged to fake a suicide. The police could not explain how twine and a razor blade came to be found in Mazwembe's cell.
More detainees died in November and December 1976 and in the first months of 1977. Wellington Tshazibane was alleged to have hanged himself while detained at John Vorster Square security police headquarters in Johannesburg two days after his arrest on 9 December. George Botha, a schoolteacher, was said to have jumped down the stairwell of the security police building in Port Elizabeth and to have fallen six storeys to his death on 15 December, five days after his arrest. In January 1977, Dr Nanaoth Ntshuntsha was alleged to have hanged himself while detained under Section 6 of the Terrorism Act at the small town of Leslie, east of Johannesburg. On 15 February, Matthews Mabelane fell to his death from the 10th floor of John Vorster Square police station where he was being interrogated following his arrest several weeks earlier. More recently, Aaron Khoza was alleged to have hanged himself, using two shoelaces and a jacket, on 29 March while detained for interrogation at Pietermaritzburg security police headquarters. He had been detained on 9 December, almost four months previously, more than 450 kilometers away in Krugersdorp.
Allegations of torture by security police were made by a number of detainees and defendants at political trials held in 1976-1977. At the trial in Pietermaritzburg of 10 people charged with membership of the banned ANC and with other offences under the Terrorism and Suppression of Communism Acts, several detainees summoned to testify as state witnesses alleged that they had been subjected to severe physical assault, threats and intimidation, and prolonged solitary confinement during interrogation by security police. Similar allegations were made by the accused. John Nene and Anton Xaba both stated that they had been beaten about the body, made to walk with gravel in their shoes, and told that they would be thrown to their deaths from the upper windows of the security police building.
100
Joseph Nduli, who claimed that he had been kidnapped from Swaziland by South African security police, alleged that he had been beaten, half strangled, given electric shocks and blindfolded for a continuous period of five days and nights.
Substantial allegations of torture were made in several other political trials, also by Nat Serache, a Black journalist who was detained three times in the seven months preceding April 1977. After escaping to Botswana, Mr Serache made a sworn affidavit describing his experiences in detention. He said that he and five other detainees were threatened with being shot by security police who said they were "tired of interrogating terrorists". Shortly afterwards, he was blindfolded and subjected to electric shocks until he agreed to sign several papers whose contents he was not allowed to read. At an independent medical examination carried out in Botswana, Mr Serache was found to have injuries consistent with his allegations.
Another former detainee, Tenjiwe Mtintso, said at the inquest into the death of Mapetla Mohapi that she had been slapped and punched, partially suffocated with a wet towel, and informed that her young child had died while under interrogation by Kingwilliams-town security police. Her allegations, like almost all allegations concerning the use of torture by security police, were dismissed by the South African authorities as unfounded.
Following the death of Matthews Mabelane in February 1977, Amnesty International urged South African Minister of Justice James Kruger to set up an independent public inquiry into security police methods and the treatment of political detainees. The organization also asked for permission to send a mission of doctors to South Africa to investigate conditions of detention and the physical state of various detainees and former detainees. Both these requests were refused by the South African Government.
Amnesty International made a further appeal to Mr Kruger in April when, following a well-publicized government sponsored visit to Robben Island, the main political prison, by South African and foreign journalists, it urged that foreign press correspondents should also be allowed to visit uncharged detainees held incommunicado at John Vorster Square police station in Johannesburg and other detention centers. This appeal was also rejected by the South African Government.
In June 1977, Amnesty International groups participated in a campaign to focus wider international attention on the problem of torture in South Africa and to force the South African authorities to take effective action against those who used torture. Amnesty
101
Intemational also called for the repeal of the incommunicado provisions of the Terrorism Act and for access to detainees to be granted to their relatives, legal representatives and to intemational humanitarian organizations.
It was not only uncharged political detainees who were the subject of Amnesty Intemational concem during the year. The number of people subjected to partial house arrest and other restrictions under banning orders imposed by the Minister of Justice increased to more than 150 by May 1977 following a wave of bannings directed against former detainees and political prisoners, organizers of Black trade unions, students, human rights workers, and other knovm opponents of apartheid. Several of those banned, including Winne Mandela and Dr Mamphela Ramphele, were restricted to isolated villages hundreds of kilometers from their homes. Amnesty Intemational continued to take up the cases of such prisoners and to give them appropriate assistance.
The number of convicted political prisoners serving sentences on Robben Island, South Africa's maximum security prison, also increased enormously during the year. More than 130 people were convicted and sentenced to terms of imprisonment on Robben Island, bringing the number of prisoners held there to a total of more than 400 by the end of May 1977. As a result of this sudden influx of new prisoners, unprecedented since the mid-1960s, there was a serious deterioration in relations between the prisoners and the prison staff. In Febmary 1977, after receiving reports conceming an attack on a group of prisoners by warders using guard dogs, Amnesty Intemational appealed to Minister of Justice Kruger to intervene personally in order to ensure that all Black poUtical prisoners received humane treatment. The South African authorities admitted that an incident had occurred, but denied that it was as serious as had been reported. Nevertheless, two months later, the South African authorities thought it necessary to allow certain foreign press correspondents and South African journalists to inspect conditions on Robben Island. However, the joumalists were not allowed to talk to prisoners of their own choice and had to agree to submit their reports before publication to the Department of Justice on so-called "security grounds". In Amnesty International's opinion, these conditions made it impossible for the journalists to obtain a clear understanding of prisoners' grievances.
Despite intemational pressure, the South African Govemment proceeded in 1976-1977 with its policy of dividing South Africa into a series of African "homelands", or bantustans. The first such
102
homeland, the Transkei, was officially declared to be independent by the South African Government on 26 October 1976. However, at the end of May 1977, no country had recognized the so-called independent status of the Transkei. This was hardly surprising. South African security laws, such as the Terrorism Act, continued to be enforced in the Transkei after 26 October and it was not until early 1977 that the Transkeian authorities decided that they should replace them with legislation of their own. Several months prior to the declaration of independence, more than 30 political opponents of the designated Prime Minister, Chief Kaiser Matanzima, were detained without charge. Among others, they included Hector Ncokazi, leader of the main opposition Democratic Party, and Mzwandile Msoki, a social worker employed by the South African Council of Churches. Mr Ncokazi was eventually released uncharged in February 1977. Mr Msoki was released, also uncharged, at the end of May. Amnesty International had appealed unsuccessfully for the release of these and other detainees in the Transkei in October 1976.
In July 1976, Amnesty International presented a written submission on political imprisonment and the use of torture in South Africa to the UN Commission on Human Rights Ad Hoc Working Group of Experts on Southern Africa. This statement subsequently appeared in several UN publications.
The same month, Amnesty International provided documentation for, and participated in, a Non-Governmental Organization Symposium on the Situation of Political Prisoners in Southern Africa, which was held in Geneva on 5-6 July.
Amnesty International groups were working on more than 130 adoption and investigation cases at the end of June 1977. In addition, Amnesty International gave substantial relief and help with rehabilitation to prisoners and their families.
