Angola (People's Republic of)
In 1976-1977 Amnesty International continued investigating the cases of a variety of people reportedly detained for political reasons. They included members of the Active Revolt, a dissident faction within the ruling Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA), and a group of Portuguese and other foreign nationals suspected of sympathizing with the rival National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA) and National Front for the Liberation of Angola (FNLA)—all nationalist organizations. The number of detainees was expected to increase significantly following an unsuccessful attempt to overthrow the Government of President Dr Agostinho Neto in May 1977. In fact, after the attempted coup, more than one hundred arrests were reported to have occurred in
62
Luanda alone. Those detained included a number of Portuguese nationals and Angolan supporters of Nito Alves, who was dismissed as Minister of the Interior by President Neto in late 1976. Mr Alves and a colleague, Jose Van Dunem, were both dismissed from the Central Committee of the MPLA only days before the attempted coup.
President Neto announced that he would adopt harsh measures in dealing with those involved in the coup attempt after it became clear that several senior government officials had been killed by Alves' supporters. Both Mr Van Dunem and Mr Alves were reported to have been arrested by late June.
While deploring the violent attempt against his Government, Amnesty International appealed to President Neto in June to ensure that detainees were not ill-treated during interrogation and that those responsible for the coup should be charged and given a fair trial in open court.
One year before, in June 1976, the organization appealed to President Neto, himself a former Prisoner of Conscience whose case it had taken up, to exercise clemency on behalf of four mercenaries sentenced to death in June 1976. Amnesty International made this appeal because of its opposition to the use of the death penalty in all circumstances. It was, however, unsuccessful, the mercenaries were executed by firing squad on 10 July.
These four death penalties were imposed following a well-publicized "show" trial of 13 foreign mercenaries captured during the course of the Angolan civil war. They had all been employed by the FNLA. The trial, which was held in June 1976 in the presence of a team of specially invited international observers, was conducted before a People's Revolutionary Tribunal in Luanda. The defendants were accused of various crimes, including in two cases the murder of other foreign mercenaries and with the newly-defined crime of "mercenar-ism". They were all convicted. Sentences ranging from 16 to 30 years were imposed on the nine defendants who did not receive the death penalty.
In a subsequent report on the trial written by Canadian jurist and Amnesty International member George H. Lockwood, one of the international observers invited to Luanda, it was argued that no crime of mercenarism did in fact exist under Angolan law at the time the mercenaries were captured. However, he felt that two of the four mercenaries sentenced to death had been rightly convicted of murder.
63