German Democratic Republic
Although the German Democratic Republic's authorities consistently deny the existence of political imprisonment in their country,
247
Amnesty International lias been reliably informed that at any one time during 1976-1977 there were several thousand men and women imprisoned in the country for political reasons. There is a relatively high annual turnover of such prisoners: the German Democratic Republic authorities released at least 1,300 to the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG) in 1976underthe"buying-outscheme" {Freikaufaktion). This exchange of prisoners against the delivery to the German Democratic Republic of goods such as bananas and coffee has been in operation between the Governments of the two Germanies since 1963-1964. Amnesty International is not in any way involved in any of these negotiations.
The GDR is a signatory to the UN International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights which guarantees freedom of thought, conscience and religion (Article 18), expression (Article 19), association (Article 22), the right of peaceful assembly (Article 21) and the right of everyone "to leave any country, including his own" (Article 12). 1976-1977 witnessed a marked increase in the number of GDR citizens who openly advocated that their Government respect these basic rights. Probably as a result there were more arrests for exercising these rights, reaching a climax in November 1976 when more than 100 intellectuals, artists and others signed petitions against the exclusion from the German Democratic Republic of the songwriter Wolf Biermann.
Prominent amongst those speaking up for Biermarm was the well-known physicist and dissident Marxist philosopher Professor Robert Havemann. Thirteen years previously Professor Havemann had lost his teaching post at the Humboldt University, East Berlin, and his membership of the Academy of Sciences as a result of his public lectures on the concept of freedom. In November 1976 he was placed under house arrest. His undergraduate daughter Sybille was expelled from the Humboldt University in December 1976. Others arrested from November 1976 on included the writer Jürgen Fuchs and his friends Thomas Auerbach, Thomas Grund, Reinhard Klingenberg, Bernd Markowski and Lutz Rathenow as well as the songwriters Christian Kunert and Gerulf Pannach.
At the time of writing ein unknown number of such protesters are still in pre-trial detention in East Berlin and elsewhere; others have lost their jobs, while some were made to recant. Some, including the writer Reiner Kunze and the jazz singer and popular filmstar Manfred Krug have been allowed to emigrate to the Federal Republic of Germany. Those still in pre-trial detention are likely to be charged with one or more "offences" under the more than 20 Articles of the penal code and other legislation—such as "defamation of the
248
state" [Staatsverleumdung) or "incitement hostile to the state" {staatsfeindliche Hetze)—yAnch. make exercizing freedom of thought, expression, association, assembly and movement in the German Democratic Republic criminal offences.
Another protest which highlighted the human rights situation in the German Democratic Republic brought at least 33 arrests. In August 1976, Pastor Oskar Brüsewitz burnt himself to death on the steps of his church in Zeitz near Leipzig in protest against the oppression of religion and discrimination against young Christians. In their own account of this incident the authorities villified the dead man. Thirty-five German Democratic Republic citizens wrote to the head of state, Erich Honecker, protesting about the official version of the incident. Amnesty Intemational has been reliably informed that among the 35 signatories were Rainer Langenau, Rudi Moldt and Ruprecht Schröter, from East Berlin. They were arrested and held in pre-trial detention. Others had their homes searched.
As in past years, many Prisoners of Conscience in the German Democratic Republic are serving prison sentences under Article 213 of the penal code, which makes "illegal crossing of the frontier" criminal {ungesetzlicher Grenzübertritt). Even planning to leave the German Democratic Republic, or helping others to do so, often results in the imprisonment of individual citizens, married couples, or small groups of friends, while the children of such families may be put in a children's home or with foster parents against their parents' wishes. During 1976-1977, people were still trying to escape by road, rail, sea or air despite the heavily fortified frontier with the Federal Republic of Germany. They also tried to escape via neighbouring communist countries such as Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Bulgaria even though these countries invariably return them to detention in the German Democratic Republic.
Release of Prisoners of Conscience in the German Democratic Republic is often arbitrary and unpredictable. Amnesty International groups were thus concerned with varying numbers of German Democratic Republic prisoners at different times during the year—highest total 144—80% of them being new Amnesty Intemational adoption and investigation cases. Two typical examples of Prisoners of Conscience released in 1976-1977 were Ernst Wilhelm and Georgios Bakalios. The former was a physicist who was once editor of a technical journal published by the Academy of Sciences in Berlin. He was first imprisoned in 1964 for allegedly distributing and discussing banned literature with friends. In 1968, he distributed leaflets protesting about the occupation of Czechoslovakia by Warsaw Pact forces. In 1970, he tried to escape from the German Democratic Republic via
249
Hungary. In 1971 a German Democratic Republic court sentenced him to 8 years' imprisonment on several charges including "incitement hostile to the state". While in Brandenburg prison he protested about various aspects of conditions there. He was punished for trying to educate fellow prisoners and for refusing to do compulsory prison labour. He staged at least one hunger strike in protest about prison conditions and ex-fellow prisoners reported that he had been a source of strength and inspiration. He suffered from a kidney complaint. Two Amnesty International groups adopted him in 1973. After his release in 1976 he expressed his appreciation for the work they had done on his behalf.
Georgios Bakalios was a Greek social worker employed by a church organization in West Berlin. His activities for this organization took him to East Berlin on a number of occasions. In May 1970, he and his elderly father crossed into East Berlin to obtain the necessary transit visas for his parents who were on a visit from Greece. Both men were arrested, but the father was released after 55/2 months; in 1972 the son was sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment for alleged espionage. An Amnesty International group adopted him in 1974.
