Benin (People's Republic of)
Amnesty International continued to work on five adoption cases with very little information on the conditions of the political prisoners being available. Two of them were reported to have quite serious health problems.
The three former Presidents, Hubert Maga, Justin Ahonadegbe and Sourou-Migan Apithy, whose restriction was mentioned in The Amnesty International Report 1975-1976, were still being held under house arrest, according to some sources.
A coup or invasion attempt which took place on 16 January 1977 seems to have led to a deterioration of the human rights situation in Benin. Several people were reported to have been arrested and detained during a subsequent house-to-house search.
At the time of writing, available information does not indicate what happened to the detainees, including one of the captured invaders, who was interviewed by a team of Organization of African Unity (OAU) delegates who visited Benin after the crisis.
It was, however, confirmed that the invasion attempt had hardened the official attitude towards political dissidents and had made the Government more determined to achieve political conformity within the one-party system.
In May 1977, the Research Department learnt of the arrest and detention of four people, apparently not connected with those reported arrested and detained after the 16 January incident. These reports are still under investigation.
In April 1977, it was leamt that Mrs Yvette Adjovi, a French national and widow of the late Mr Adjovi, a former Beninese Minister of Education, was arrested in early February 1977 in Cotonou where she was an assistant lecturer at the University of Benin.
Yvette Adjovi was allegedly held on the grounds that she was the last person seen at the airport vwth a Beninese student who was leaving for a study program on a government scholarship, but who, on arrival, wrote to the authorities deploring their actions and then renounced his government sponsorship.
Yvette Adjovi lost her husband eight years ago and she is the mother of six children and has one adopted child. Sources close to Amnesty International report that indirect appeals to the French Embassy in Cotonou had been to no avail. The organization has begun to investigate the report of Yvette Adjovi's arrest.
Alleged official censorship, fear of official reprisals and the absence of a free flow of information are major obstacles to investigating and confirming available reports and seeking further information on the number and treatment of political prisoners in Benin.
64