Egypt (Arab Republic of)
In January 1977, the most serious demonstrations of opposition to the Egyptian Government were countrywide riots lasting two days (18 and 19 January), during which hundreds of buildings were set on fire, about 80 people killed and up to 2,000 arrested. These included lawyers, joumdists, students, workers and members of the left-wing National Progressive Unionist Party (one of the three legal political organizations whose transformation into political parties was authorized after elections to the People's Assembly in October 1976).
294
Following the riots, which were provoked fay a Government announcement that subsidies on basic commodities were to be cut. Law 2 of 1977 was introduced. There was a referendum on it on 10 February, and it was approved by the vast majority of the population. According to this law "participation in or incitement of riotous assembly or public disorder" is punishable by life imprisonment with hard labour or lesser punishment. The same penalty is apphcable to participation in or intent to establish a clandestine or military organization hostile to the social system, and to "workers deliberately striking by agreement among themselves for the achievement of a common aim which could be damaging to the national economy".
On 8 February, Amnesty International wrote as follows to President Anwar Sadat expressing concern at some of the Articles contained in Law 2, also at some of the arrests which resulted from the riots: "We are very much aware that some of the detainees were arrested for allegedly participating in these demonstrations, during which buildings were damaged or destroyed, and people killed or wounded. We have, however, received reports that many others . . . were not actively involved in the demonstrations but were arrested, reportedly, on the grounds of their political affiliations." The letter pointed out that freedom of expression and opinion and the right to peaceful assembly and association are both guaranteed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights as well as in International Covenant on Political and Civil Rights, to which Egypt is a signatory, and urged that the Egyptian Government reconsider such severe penalties for the above-mentioned offences.
Amnesty International received a reply from the Egyptian Ambassador to London on 22 March and from President Sadat's Chef de Cabinet on 16 May, stating that "All measures taken after the incidents of last January were within the framework of the Egyptian Constitution", that many of those not involved in acts of sabotage had been released and "investigations are continuing to determine the situation of the remaining few" and that the new legislation was "designed to protect life and property".
In a further letter to the Minister of Justice dated 28 April, Amnesty International welcomed the fact that many of those detained had been released, adding: "We believe that several hundred, who were not involved in any acts of sabotage during the demonstrations, and including some who were not even present at the demonstrations, remain in detention without charge or trial. Many of those are reported to be members of political organizations such as the Egyptian Workers' Communist Party, the Egyptian Communist Party, the 8 January Party and the Revolutionary Current. Others
295
are members of the National Progressive Unionist Party." Amnesty International pointed out that the detention of such people appeared to violate Article 47 of the Egyptian Constitution and Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and asked whether these detainees would be released in the near future or charged and tried.
These matters were pursued by two Amnesty International delegates who visited Egypt in May 1977: Mumtaz Soysal, Professor of Constitutional Law at Ankara University, Turkey, and Vice Chairman of Amnesty International's International Executive Committee, and June Ray of the International Secretariat. During their discussions with the Minister of Justice and the Prosecutor General they were assured that all those not involved in acts of sabotage had full legal rights, including the right to appeal for release in an open court every 30 days, the court's decision being confirmed or vetoed by the President within 15 days. The delegates later attended one such court hearing when three students were appealing for release. On this occasion their appeals for release were refused. The delegates were permitted to visit two lawyers in the Abu Zaabal Prison where 49 people involved in sabotage and 46 arrested for political reasons (all arising from the January riots) were being held. The delegates asked also to visit a student in the Citadel Prison, but arrangements could not be made in time.
Amnesty International is still concerned at reports that many people did not have access to a lawyer or were not informed of the reason for their arrest until two weeks afterwards, also that a number of people were kept in solitary confinement in the Citadel Prison for up to two weeks before being transferred to other prisons. At the time of writing. Amnesty International believes that just over 100 persons are still being detained for membership of illegal political organizations or for allegedly having instigated the riots, although it is reported that 176 people are to be charged and tried for political offences. Amnesty International is investigating these cases.
Throughout 1976 legal proceedings continued against officials responsible for torturing prisoners under the regime of the late President Gamal Abdul Nasser (see Amnesty International Report 1975-1976). A number of officials were subsequently convicted, including Salah Nasr, former Chief of Intelligence, who was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment plus hard labour for ordering the torture of Mustafa Amin.
During the past year there have been seven executions in Egypt. In recent years, most death sentences have been passed on people found guilty of espionage for Israel. This year, however, there have
296
been two death sentences and one execution for espionage, while with the extreme deterioration of relations between Egypt and Libya, three people, allegedly agents for Libya, were sentenced to death and executed for planting bombs. Three others, also accused of being Libyan agents, were sentenced to death (two in absentia) for acts of sabotage committed in 1976. Two people were executed for their parts in an armed attack on Cairo Military Academy in 1974, and one for the attempted assassination of a former premier of the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen. Amnesty International appealed for commutation of the death sentences on humanitarian grounds in all cases.
Amnesty International launched Prisoner of Conscience Year in Cairo on 12 May 1977. This was arranged with the cooperation of the Egyptian Ministry of Information, and hosted by the Union of Arab Lawyers. Amnesty International delegates met Egyptian and Arab organizations including the Egyptian Bar Association, the Afro-Asian People's Solidarity Organization, the International Confederation of Arab Trade Unions and the Union of Arab Journalists. The considerable interest and support in Egypt indicates the possibility of forming an Amnesty International adoption group or National Section in Egypt.
