Ghana (Republic of)
Amnesty International's main concern about human rights in Ghana during the summer of 1976 focussed on the fate of a number of people arrested during November and December of 1975, when the Ghanaian authorities announced that they had uncovered a plot aimed at overthrowing the Government of General Ignatius Acheampong, which itself came to power by a coup in January
1972.
In May 1976, eight people were brought to trial before a military tribunal in Accra, charged with subversion, conspiracy to commit subversion and concealment of subversion. During the trial, which was attended by foreign observers, several of the accused alleged that they had been tortured. Amnesty International asked the Ghanaian High Commission in London to allow it to send an observer to this trial, but permission had not been given when, in late July, the tribunal concluded its hearings. Five of the accused were sentenced to death, two given prison sentences of 20 and 15 years, and one was acquitted. Amnesty International immediately launched an Urgent Action appealing for the commutation of the death sentences, which, at the time of writing, have not been carried out.
In August 1976, two new political trials began. One, before a
73
military court, involved four soldiers held in connection with the alleged 1975 coup attempt. The second was the trial of the prominent Ghanaian poet Kofi Awoonor, arrested in late December 1975, and charged with helping Brigadier A.K. Kattah, the supposed ringleader of the coup attempt, to escape from Ghana at the end of 1975.
Dr Awoonor was tried before a Special Court in Accra, and once more Amnesty International attempted to send a legal observer. A visa to visit Ghana and attend the trial was in fact issued to British magistrate and Amnesty International member Sir Osmond Williams, but this was cancelled at the last moment without explanation. Dr Awoonor's trial ended in October 1976 with his conviction on a chargc of subversion. He was sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment. However, the sentence was immediately remitted by the authorities and he was freed.
The following month the trial of the four soldiers before a military court ended with two death sentences, one sentence of 19 years' imprisonment, and one acquittal. Once again. Amnesty International appealed for a commutation of the death sentence, which by July 1977 had not been carried out.
During the year Amnesty International groups worked on the cases of three men who, in November 1975, received prison sentences ranging from five to eight years with hard labour on sedition charges in connection with the circulation of a pamphlet critical of the Government's economic policies. The heaviest sentence was imposed on J.H. Mensah, a former Minister of Finance in Ghana's last civilian Government, who had previously been adopted by Amnesty International when held without trial following the coup in 1972 which brought the present Government to power. Amnesty International adopted all three people convicted in the November 1975 trial, who are serving their prison sentences pending appeal. Mr Mensah's case was featured in the Amnesty International Newsletter postcard appeal in January 1977. The organization subsequently learned that Mr Mensah has been moved from Nsawam Prison, near Accra, to a remote prison in the Volta region of eastern Ghana. In mid-1977, reports stated that he had been moved back to Ussher Fort Prison, Accra.
Significant changes were made in Ghanaian legislation dealing with political offences in 1976. During May, a number of amendments were made to the Subversion Decree originally issued by the military Government in 1972, making the rulings of military tribunals immune from challenge in other courts of law. In September, an amendment to an earlier decree prescribed the death penalty for any person organizing or promoting the secession of any part of Ghana.
74
The Ghana Bar Association reacted to the continued use of miUtary tribunals to try civilians by calling on the Government in September to abolish them as contrary to "natural law and justice". The authorities did not comply vwth this demand.
The military Government took the opportunity presented by the fifth anniversary of its seizure of power Qanuary 1977) to announce an amnesty commuting to life imprisonment death sentences imposed on all prisoners other than those convicted of subversion. With the same qualification, it also reduced life sentences to 10 years with hard labour, and remitted half of the sentences of all prisoners who had served less than three years. It is not known whether any political prisoners benefitted from this amnesty. However, just before the announcement of the amnesty, a former cabinet minister, Mr Kojo Botsio, who was serving a life sentence after conviction by a military tribunal on a charge of subversion in 1973, was released on account of his failing health. In early 1977, Amnesty International heard that another political prisoner, David Afful Bimpong, who had been sentenced to 25 years' imprisonment by a military tribunal in late 1972 for concealment of subversion, had died in prison at Yendi in October or November of the previous year. Amnesty International subsequently approached the Ghanaian High Commission in London for further details about this case.
