Israel (State of) and the occupied territories
The number of prisoners in Israel and the occupied territories convicted for alleged security offences has considerably increased during the past year, leading to what is admitted by the Israeli authorities to be intolerable overcrowding of prisons. Mr Haim Levi, Israel's Commissioner of Prisons, stated, when addressing a meeting of prison officers in February 1977, that there were 3,227 prisoners convicted of crimes against the security of the state, 502 more than in the previous year. With two or three exceptions, all these prisoners are Arabs. In December 1976 nearly 400 Arab prisoners at Ashkelon jail went on hunger strike for six weeks in protest against prison conditions. On 27 January 1977, Amnesty International appealed to the Israeli Attorney General, Professor Aharon Barak, to initiate immediate improvements in prison conditions as recommended by the International Committee of the Red Cross, which had particularly stressed the issue of overcrowding. Although Mr Levi, at the meeting referred to above, gave details of plans to expand prisons, to Amnesty International's knowledge no improvements in prison conditions have yet been made.
In June and July 1976 Amnesty International's Secretary General wrote to Professor Barak about the cases of nine Arab prisoners about which the organization was concerned for various reasons,
304
including detention without trial, ill health and what appeared to be an excessively long sentence. In October 1976 the Secretary General v^Tote to Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, referring to previous Amnesty International inquiries into allegations of ill-treatment of Arab prisoners by the Israeli security forces, suggesting there should be an independent investigation of them. He said that this time the organization was concerned at reports in the Israeli press that Jewish common law detainees had been tortured, and asked again for "an independent inquiry into all aspects of this problem, in accordance with the United Nations Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Torture and Other Cruel Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment".
Further letters were sent to Professor Barak in October and December 1976 expressing concern about the imprisonment or treatment of individual prisoners and in April and May 1977 Amnesty International sent Professor Barak the names of 13 Arab prisoners and one Jewish prisoner, who had been charged with espionage, and asked for an investigation into allegations that they had been tortured.
Throughout the year there were frequent demonstrations against Israeli occupation by the Arab inhabitants of the West Bank, many of the participants being in their early youth. Three Arabs were killed at different times during clashes with the Israeli security forces, including a youth of 15. Amnesty International was told that youths who were arrested during demonstrations were beaten before being released.
In April 1977, Amnesty International received an eye witness account of the injuries inflicted on Arab teacher trainees by members of the Israeli security forces during an incident on the West Bank. Amnesty International v\Tote to Professor Barak welcoming the news that an inquiry into the incident had been ordered.
Reports that two West German citizens, alleged to be terrorists, had been tortured during interrogation were the subject of a letter sent by Amnesty International's Secretary General to the Israeli Minister of Justice, Mr Haim Zadok, on 17 May 1977. The letter pointed out that the prisoners concerned had been held in solitary confinement for many months, and that 14 months had passed before their families or the West German authorities were informed of their imprisonment. This gave added weight to the allegations.
In September and December 1976, amnesties of Arab prisoners were declared to mark the Islamic festivals of Eid al-Fitr and Eid al-Adha. On each occasion 22 prisoners were reported to have been released in the Gaza strip. It is not known whether any West Bank prisoners were also released, but before the September amnesty
305
Israeli radio reported that some West Bank prisoners would benefit from it.
Amnesty International groups are working on behalf of 18 prisoners in Israel and the occupied territories.
