Chile (Republic of)
In November 1976, the Chilean Government freed some 300 pohtical detainees. Shortly afterwards, 17 more were expelled from the country, one of them Luis Corvalan Lepe, under a well-publicized "exchange" agreement. These measures, following the release of several hundred prisoners in May-June and September 1976, prompted the Chilean authorities to claim on several occasions that only one political prisoner still remained in detention: the former Senator Jorge Montes Moraga, whom they offered in exchange for the Cuban prisoner, Huber Matos. The Cubans did not follow up this proposal and finally, in June 1977, Señor Montes was released into exile. This release coincided with that of 11 prisoners from the German Democratic Republic and, according to press reports, an "exchange" appears to have been negotiated although this is not confirmed by GDR sources. Subsequently, General Heman Bejares Gonzalez, Secretary General of the Government, felt able to declare that there were no more political prisoners in Chile.
131
This claim, however, is not consistent with facts available to Amnesty Intemational. The current terminology used both officially and unofficially in Chile makes it possible to distinguish three categories of political prisoner:
1.	Detenidos por el estado de sitio-. those detained under the State of Siege legislation, without trial and without any formal charges having been brought against them. The vast majority of these prisoners, grouped together during the last months of their detention in the officially acknowledged camps at Très Alamos and Melinka Puchuncavi, were released in 1976.
2.	Procesados y condenados: those detained awaiting trial, pending trial, or serving sentence. The authorities now refuse to consider these political prisoners, even in cases where both charges and court proceedings were of a purely political nature. In May 1977 there were still several hundred prisoners in this category. A decree passed in May 1975 makes them eligible for commutation of their prison sentence to enforced exile.
At the time of writing, roughly 1,000 individuals had benefitted from this measure. However, amongst those left, there remains an important category (about 100) whose plea for exile has been refused.
3.	Detenidos desaparecidos: "disappeared" prisoners whose detention the authorities refuse to aclmowledge. In a large number of these cases, incontrovertible evidence is available (some of it from official documents) which leaves no doubt as to their arrest. After a painstaking examination of the many lists of missing prisoners received by the Intemational Secretariat since the coup d'état of 11 September 1973, Amnesty Intemational estimates their number at over 1,500.
In 1976, information reaching the Intemational Secretariat showed that there were fewer poli^tical prisoners in Chile than during the previous year, but it also indicated a relative increase in "disappearances": by May 1977, over 100 people arrested during 1976 (representing more than 20% of all reported arrests in that year) had not subsequently been heard of.
In view of the gravity of this situation. Amnesty Intemational published in March 1977 a detailed 85-page dossier on the missing prisoners, and launched a worldwide publicity campaign in March, April and May. The aims were to arouse intemational opinion, to get from the Chilean authorities precise details about what had happened to these people and to demand an end to the "disappearan-
132
ees" for which the DINA {Dirección Nacional de Inteligencia) is held to be primarily responsible. The Amnesty International dossier puts the matter in its historical and legal perspective, and includes detailed case histories, photographs of 218 missing people, appeals by relatives and a breakdown by profession of those concerned. In sum, there are over 400 cases about which Amnesty International has precise and detailed information.
During 1976, it was mainly Communist Party members and leading trade unionists who were arrested and subsequently disappeared. Amongst them were a number of political leaders: José Arturo Weibel Navarrete, Victor Manuel Diaz López, Jorge Onofre Muñoz Poutays and Mario Jaime Zamorano Donoso; the former Parliamentary Deputies Vicente Atencio Cortes and Bernardo Araya Zuleta; two doctors, Carlos Enrique Godoy Lagarrigue and Iván Insunza Bascuñan; Marcelo Concha Bascuñan, an engineer; Alejandro Rodriguez Urzua and Juan Fernando Ortiz Letelier, both university professors;Hector Contreras Rojas and Guillermo Galvez Rivadeneira, journalists; Raul Guillermo Cornejo Campos and José Emilio Flores Garrido, students; Rosa Elena Morales, secretary. But workers' families have been the worst affected, several members of the same family often disappearing—for example, Manuel Recabarpen Rojas, his two sons and daughter-in-law.
During the first four months of 1977, Amnesty International received no reports about any alleged disappearances. However, during May and June, there was a new wave of arrests for political reasons. At the time of writing, there is still no news of Israel Vicente Garcfa Ramirez, arrested in Santiago on 30 April.
In short, during the period covered by this report (May 1976-June 1977), serious and systematic violations of human rights continued in Chile. In addition to the numerous "disappearances", torture is still a systematic practice: bodies showing signs of severe torture have been discovered in various parts of the country. The officially acknowledged concentration camps have been closed down, but new secret and changing interrogation centers are in use. The relatives, friends and lawyers of prisoners and missing persons, as well as a number of former prisoners, have been subjected to varying degrees of intimidation. The lawyer Hernán Montealegre, for example, was detained for seven months and then released, without any formal charges being brought against him; two legal experts, Eugenio Velasco and Jaime Castillo, both political moderates, were expelled from the country during 1976.
There have been numerous violations of the Decrees promulgated in early 1976 to regulate arrest and detention, and of the "Constitu-
133
tional Acts" of September 1976; these sought to guarantee basic rights for Chileans while introducing new provisions in anticipation of a new legal system. In March 1977, the Government decided to extend for a further six months the State of Siege legislation (in force continuously since the 1973 coup d'etat), and to formally dissolve the political parties which, until then, had simply been suspended from all public activity. The parties most affected by this measure are the Christian Democrat and National Parties. The Popular Unity coalition and the MIR [Movimiento de la Izquierda Revolucionaria) were dissolved in September 1973.
In addition to the above mentioned campaign on behalf of prisoners who have "disappeared". Amnesty International undertook a more limited campaign for the rechazados (those refused exile as an alternative to imprisonment), and in December 1976, a campaign to inform the governments represented on the governing body of the World Bank about the situation of political prisoners in Chile. Amnesty International has also kept up its systematic work for Chilean prisoners (getting information about them, adopting them and intervening on their behalf). Since the last Amnesty International report, a considerable number of adopted prisoners have been released, but, in spite of this, in June 1977, 145 cases were still under adoption or investigation by Amnesty International groups. Special attention has been paid to those categories of prisoners who do not usually attract international attention: workers, peasants and agricultural labourers, often imprisoned in distant provinces. Amnesty International has continued its program of Urgent Actions: 54 individuals and three large groups benefitted from 21 such Actions between May 1976 and May 1977. Five press releases were put out by the International Secretariat and two detailed reports submitted to the UN Human Rights Commission.
As for the prisoner "exchanges" proposed on several occasions by the Chilean authorities, Amnesty International has stated publicly that it categorically rejects such procedures and insists on the unconditional release of all Prisoners of Conscience.
Amnesty International continues to administer a substantial relief program in Chile, providing legal aid and money for prisoners and their families.
