Tanzania (United Republic of)
The human rights situation in Tanzania continued to cause great anxiety to Amnesty International during the period under review. In February 1977, the Secretary General visited Tanzania with the hope of discussing the organization's concerns with President Julius Nyerere and Vice-President Aboud Jumbe, but was unable to obtain meetings with either. In June 1977, during the Commonwealth Conference in London, Amnesty International again failed in its attempts to meet the Tanzanian delegate, Vice-President Aboud Jumbe. The organization wrote to President Nyerere on 12 November 1976 and 28 April 1977 and to Vice-President Jumbe on 4 February 1977 and 21 March 1977 explaining its concern about the Zanzibar treason
105
trial, and detention, torture and prison conditions on the mainland.
Amnesty International groups continued to work on the cases of those imprisoned as a result of the Zanzibar treason trial—37 people sentenced in Zanzibar for treason in connection with the assassination in 1972 of Sheikh Abeid Karume, President of the Zanzibar Revolutionary Council. Thirteen others in the same case are still detained without trial on the mainland (though tried in absentia on Zanzibar). Defendants' appeals against death penalties and long prison terms were made to the Supreme Council of the Afro-Shirazi Party (ASP), functioning as an appeal court, beginning on 11 October 1976. Eight defendants who had originally made confessions of guilt (on which the case against the others was based) attempted to retract their guilty pleas and claimed they had made false confessions under torture and death threats. In an Urgent Action campaign. Amnesty International requested the Tanzanian authorities to investigate these claims fully, since the allegations of torture were consistent with other information received by the organization about interrogation practices on Zanzibar. On 7 December 1976, the Attorney General of Zanzibar, Wolfgang Dourado, acting as both prosecutor and defence counsel in accordance with the Zanzibar judicial system, requested in his final submission that all death penalties be commuted, that "excessive" prison sentences be reduced, and that seven defendants be acquitted as the evidence against them was "hearsay". The ASP Supreme Council delivered its judgement on 7 February 1977, confirming the death penalties on seven people (including four detained on the mainland), commuting 17 other death penalties to 30-35 years' imprisonment, confirming six prison sentences, reducing 13 others, acquitting one person and ordering the release of five others because their sentences had been served. One other defendant was released during the trial. There remains a further stage of appeal to Aboud Jumbe, President of the Zanzibar Revolutionary Council, but it is not known how or when this appeal will take place. Amnesty International called President Jumbe on lOFebruary 1977 expressing shock at the confirmation of death penalties and urging their commutation on humanitarian grounds.
Amnesty International is concerned about the Zanzibar treason trial for several other reasons—the lack of medical treatment for prisoners (some of whom were very ill in court), the probability that torture took place to obtain false confessions, and the Government's refusal to allow family visits to prisoners. The organization deplores the system of judicial procedure whereby the only defence counsel permitted to the accused is the state prosecutor and where the appeal court is a political party council. Finally, there appears to have been
106
a constitutional irregularity inasmuch as the ASP Council gave its judgement four days after the ASP had been dissolved and replaced by the new Chama Cha Mapinduzi (Revolutionary Party).
Amnesty International is also gravely disturbed by recent reports of torture used on the Tanzania mainland by the security police, the widespread use of the Preventive Detention Act, and the conditions under which detainees are held. In January 1977, President Nyerere accepted the resignations of the Minister of State in the President's Office, Peter Siyovelwa, the Minister for Home Affairs, Ali Hassan Mwinyi and the Regional Commissioners of Mwanza and Shinyanga, because of killings and torture committed by police and security officers over whom they had responsibility. Amnesty International was disturbed to hear reports of torture still being canied out by security officers on the mainland since then and the Chief Justice of Tanzania warned that mass murder was still continuing in the Mwanza region. A former victim has also described to Amnesty International his experience of torture which was corroborated by a medical report of his condition. Amnesty International urged President Nyerere to investigate torture allegations and ensure that those implicated be brought to trial.
Amnesty International received new information about detainees during 1976-1977, from letters smuggled out of Ukonga Prison in Dar es Salaam, and from a released detainee, Amirali Ramji. This evidence, which is considered reliable, describes the appalling conditions of detainees—their poor diet, lack of qualified medical treatment, lack of exercise, restrictions on relatives' visits and all correspondence, extremely brutal punishment for offences such as receiving letters from outside and the total solitary confinement of two Zanzibari detainees, former Tanzanian Minister of Economic Affairs Abdulrahman Mohamed Babu and former Colonel Ali Mafudh. All detainees suffer from hypertension, stomach disorders and eye trouble, especially Babu, who was reported to have become almost totally blind in February 1977. The number of detainees on mainland Tanzania is estimated to be between 1,000 and 1,500. They include several members of different southern African liberation movements such as the South West Africa People's Organization, Pan African Congress, Zimbabwe African National Union and others, some of them held since 1971, others transferred from detention in Zambia in 1976.
One former Amnesty International adoptee. Gray Mattaka, was re-detained in December 1976 after 11 months of freedom following detention since 1971. Other recent detainees include veteran politician
107
and former adopted prisoner Joseph Kasella Bantu, a stateless prohibited immigrant, a Kenyan Asian, and many Tanzanians, some of whom were arrested for "economic crimes" such as fraud, embezzlement, etcetera. Some of them were even acquitted in court yet still detained. One such person, James Magoti, is a bank manager accused of fraud; he was tortured, together with his Mdfe and brother, and detained without trial despite his protestations of innocence and the arrest of most of those who committed the fraud.
On 3 February 1977, a new joint political party, Chama Cha Mapinduzi (CCM—"Revolutionary Party" in Swahili) was formed out of the separate mainland (TANU) and island (ASP) parties. Elections to CCM posts will be held during 1977, and the new draft constitution for Tanzania (to replace the Provisional Independence Constitution of 1962) established the new governmental institutions of the Republic. Zanzibar will retain certain separate features such as the perpetuation of the non-elective Zanzibar Revolutionary Council and the judicial system, but the new constitution is an attempt to bring mainland and island closer together. The 10th Anniversary of the Arusha Declaration did not result in any amnesty for political or other prisoners, despite Amnesty International appeals. The tone of government messages on this occasion implied that many socialist goals had not been achieved. President Nyerere made a renewed call to "increase our discipline, our efficiency and our self-reliance".
