Peru (Republic of)
Sixty-four trade unionists were adopted as Prisoners of Conscience by Amnesty Intemational groups in the course of the year; 30 of them remain imprisoned without trial at the time of writing. A total of more than 1,000 trade unionists were detained during the same period, largely members and leaders of unions in economic sectors dominated by state corporations: the steel and mining industries and the, until recently, state-owned fishing industry, which in July 1976 was turned over to private investors. Other sectors of organized labour opposing government policy include the teachers, especially those organized in the union Sindicato Unico de los Trabajadores de la Educación del Peru (SUTEP), and the unions of agricul-
155
tural workers in conflict with the Government over the interpretation of Peru's agrarian reform laws.
There were mass arrests of trade unionists and left-wing political activists after the July 1976 dismissal from the cabinet and from other positions of importance of many of the military officers most closely identified with the Government of General Juan Velasco Alvarado (1968-1975). Some of the officers were also briefly imprisoned and forcibly exiled; most were prematurely retired from the armed forces.
Some of the restrictive measures of the Velasco Government were revised: certain banned political journals were permitted to publish again (with the exception of critical left-wing journals, notably the weekly Marka). Exiled leaders of the traditional political parties were allowed to return to Peru, and so were certain left-wing politicians, such as Sr Hugo Blanco. He, however, was briefly detained in July 1976 and then summarily exiled.
In the past year, revision of legislation governing labour relations, and the participation of labour in management through "industrial communities" has led to considerable discontent among organized labour, especially in the manufacturing sectors. A Decree Law of July 1976 reversed the 1973 expropriation and nationalization of the fishing industry, providing for the fleet to be sold to private enter-prize and for the annulment of labour contracts with the state corporation PESCAPERU.
A general strike of fishermen in November 1976 led to numerous arrests, not only of members and leaders of the fishermen's union, but also of trade unionists from other industries who sympathized with the strike. Workers at the steel complex of the state corporation SIDER-PERU in Chimbóte, the major fishing port, planned a strike in sympathy for 4 November 1976, but on 3 November, 30 of their leaders were detained (they were subsequently adopted by Amnesty International and have since all been released). Although, to Amnesty International's knowledge, none of the prisoners detained in relation to the fishermen's strike has been brought to trial, some have been formally charged with "sabotage of the Peruvian revolution" {sabotaje de la Revolución Peruana).
Twenty trade unionists in the state mining company CENTROMIN were detained in August 1976 while negotiating wage agreements. The arrests were not precipitated by strike action. Following a hunger-strike in Lurigancho Prison from 18 October to 28 November, in support of a demand for medical attention, release and reinstatement in their jobs, 11 of the prisoners were formally charged before the Second Judicial Pohce Court, and accused of "Ultraje a los sim-
156
bolos de la Patria" {"Outrage to the patriotic symbols"), and "de atentar contra el orden publico y contra las medidas de emergencia" ("conspiracy against public order and the emergency measures"). Peru was under a State of Emergency at the time of the arrests. At the time of writing, all but two of the miners have been released.
Since June 1976 at least 20 members of the teachers' union SUTEP throughout the country have been detained on unspecified charges. Some are still, at the time of vmting, in the Amazon penal colony El Sepa, a maximum security prison accessible only by military aircraft. SUTEP prisoners taken up as Prisoners of Conscience by Amnesty International include the General Secretaries of SUTEP in six provinces. None has, to our knowledge, been tried.
Amnesty International is currently (June 1977) investigating reported mass arrests of workers in the petroleum industry engaged in exploration in the Amazon region, as well as arrests of trade union and political activists in the Amazon town of Iquitos, center of the petroleum exploration and extraction industries.
Five labour lawyers adopted by Amnesty International early in 1976 were released in a presidential amnesty on 30 April 1976; but on 6 June, one of the lawyers, Dr Ricardo Díaz Chavez, was rearrested and arbitrarily expelled from Peru. Another of the five, Dr José Oña Meoño, was rearrested on 2 November 1976. Following a month-long hunger strike, he too was summarily expelled from Peru in late December. Although he was never given any kind of judicial hearing, he was charged with "Sabotaje de la producción" ("Sabotage of production") at a Lima sewing machine factory where he had given legal advice to trade unionists.
In November 1976 Amnesty International appealed for clemency for Raymundo Zanabria, a peasant leader and university student accused of killing a policeman. The organization appealed against the death sentence, which could be passed under decree laws establishing a summary procedure for trials and application of the death sentence in cases involving the death or injury of members of security forces. (The appeal was made in accordance with Amnesty International's obligation to oppose by all appropriate means the imposition and carrying out of the death penalty under any circumstances.)
A number of serious allegations of torture—including two deaths in police custody—were the object of appeals and inquiries by Amnesty International. After the arrest in September 1976 of 151 students at the National University of Engineering in Lima (12 of whom remain in detention untried), serious allegations of torture were made by some of the detainees. Amnesty International wrote
157
to the Peruvian Minister of the Interior, General Luis Cisneros Vizquerra on 15 October 1976, to welcome official announcements that there would be an inquiry into the allegations, but also to express concern over the threatening nature of the Minister's statement that the students would have to present evidence to support their allegations, as it was "too easy to make allegations and blame the police'* and that "nobody had the right to play with the names of institutions and individucils". Amnesty International made the point that it was often impossible for the victim to present conclusive physical evidence of torture and stressed that the serious nature of the allegations warranted thorough and impartial investigation by the state.
Amnesty International also made requests for high-level investigations into the deaths of two 22-year-old students in police custody believed to have been tortured. Fernando Lozano Menendez, a law student at the Catholic University in Lima was detained by the Civil Guard on 26 November 1976 after the police had found left-wing literature in the car in which he was travelling; he died the next day at the police station. On 2 December the Ministry of the Interior issued a statement declaring that he had suffered from a "sudden illness" while in police custody and died of a "lung attack" [infarto pulmonar). The statement also said that the father of the victim admitted that his son suffered from bronchial asthma. Members of the family now pursuing the case in the courts deny this, claiming that he was in perfect health when detained, and that he had no history of lung ailments. It has also been claimed that his body was bruised and his clothes wet.
Walter Bravo Trinidad, at the University Enrique Guzman y Valle studying to be a teacher, was arrested with many others when police raided the University on 20 February 1977. He died three days later, and the explanation given by police spokesmen to the press was that he "was ill". To Amnesty International's knowledge, no investigation has been made into his death.
