The Philippines (Republic of)
Political imprisonment in The Philippines still takes the form of detention without trial. Torture is frequently used during interrogation of suspects.
In mid-1977, declarations made by President Ferdinand E. Marcos suggested that The Philippines Government was adopting some of the recommendations made by an Amnesty International mission and submitted to the Government in May 1976.
The delegates, Thomas C. Jones and Huang Wen-hsien, went to Manila in November-December 1975. They discussed questions relating to imprisonment under martial law with President Marcos and leading officials, also interviewed 107 prisoners held without trial in detention centers in Luzon. Through the interviews, the mission leamt that torture was widely used during interrogation, especially in the period immediately following arrest when prisoners were taken to secret interrogation centers called "safe houses". Prisoners' families were not told about their arrests for quite a long time and the prisoners had extremely restricted access to their lawyers. In a number of cases, they were held secretly for very long periods: one such case reported by the mission was that of Ninita Evangelista-Luneta and her child, who have been "missing" for two years since her arrest on 30 June 1975. Another case was that of Eugenio Flores, also arrested on 30 June 1975, and, according to eyewitness accounts, tortured by the 5th Constabulary Security Unit (5CSU). He is still "missing".
Accounts of torture recorded by the Amnesty International mission included prolonged punching, kicks and karate blow^, beatings with a variety of contusive instruments—including rifle butts, heavy wooden clubs and glass bottles—pounding of heads against walls or furniture, burning of genitals and pubic hair, falanga (beating of the soles of the
209
feet) and the so-called "lying-on air" torture (in which the victims were forced to stay suspended between two beds, being beaten and kicked when their bodies sagged or fell). Some prisoners were treated with extreme brutality, being subjected to electric shocks on the genitals and vicious beatings. The mission's general conclusion was that The Philippines martial law officers used torture in order to intimidate.
The mission made 15 detailed recommendations, which were submitted to the Government in May 1976 as part of the mission report. The Government informed Amnesty International on 5 August 1976 that they would send detailed comments on the mission report for publication. Because the Government required at least 60 days from 5 August to prepare the detailed comments, it was agreed with the Solicitor General of The Philippines, Mr Estelito P. Mendoza, that Amnesty International might publish the report beforehand, zind this was done in September 1976. Subsequently, the Government's revised comments were received on 25 October 1976. They were incorporated in the 2nd edition of the Report of an Amnesty International Mission to The Philippines, which was published in March 1977.
The Government's comments, signed by the Solicitor General, were severely critical of the report. The main criticisms were that the mission had interviewed an inadequate sample of political detainees, that the detainees interviewed were extreme subversives who gave fabricated and false accounts of torture, that, as a consequence of this and other errors, the delegates reached general conclusions which were based on partial, incorrect evidence and that therefore the conclusions were invalid.
In the Preface to the 2nd edition. Amnesty International affirmed the general conclusion—based on all available evidence, including statements by President Marcos—that torture was widely inflicted on political prisoners in The Philippines, and that despite Government leaders' declarations that they strongly disapproved of the use of torture, nonetheless it has been and still is inflicted. Amnesty International reiterated that the practice of torture could only be eradicated if there were effective procedures and disciplinary measures to prevent the possibility of prisoners being maltreated and to deter those using brutal interrogation methods. The Government was again urged to implement the mission's 15 recommendations on reducing the incidence of torture.
There are indications that The Philippines Government may have accepted some of the 15 recommendations. It was not clear for some time how the Government viewed them. The first Government reac-
210
tion to the report was received on 5 August 1976 and the final version of the Government's comments was received on 25 October 1976. In September 1976, four members of the armed forces, three of whom were identified in the mission report, were charged with having tortured prisoners; but on 23 October their trial was postponed indefinitely. Meanwhile, President Marcos had said that he had ordered all prisoners with cases pending before a military tribunal to be brought to trial by the first week of August 1976. According to further reports. President Marcos said he had ordered the speeding up of trials after receiving the Amnesty Intemational mission report. It was not until 19 June 1977 that it was reported from Manila that President Marcos had instmcted the army to hand over to civilian courts all prisoners detained without trial under martial law. He also announced that the military tribunals would be phased out; and it was further reported that the Solicitor General was drawing up the procedure for transfer of prisoners to civilian courts.
Although these declarations have yet to be implemented, they amount to partial acceptance of the mission's 15 recommendations; but as the newly-announced Govemment measures go no further than this, they fail to prevent violations of human rights or to abolish torture entirely. Amnesty Intemational recommendations yet to be implemented include the abolition of "safe houses", the release of political prisoners on bail pending trial and the restoration of habeas corpus.
There have been recent Govemment statements about the number of political prisoners held under martial law. In an interview with New York Times correspondent Henry Kamm on 18 Febmary 1977, Secretary of National Defense Juan Ponce Enrile said that 1,441 people were detained in The Philippines for what we called "crimes against national security". Mr Kamm reported: "During the course of an interview at the Secretary's office, Mr Enrile himself guessed at 'a little less than 200' until an aide going to official records brought him the number more than seven times as high". But President Marcos said in a speech to the Foreign Correspondents' Association in Manila on 3 June 1977 that only 598 such prisoners were being held. Although there is a continuing pattern of arrest and release. Amnesty International estimates that there are at least 2,000 political prisoners held on suspicion of subversion.
The Secretary of National Defense was asked in an interview by a BBC correspondent {Everyman program, 15 May 1977) what was me<int by "subversion". He replied: "Anybody who goes against the Govemment or who tries to convince the people to go against the Government, that is subversion."
211
One of the Amnesty International mission's conclusions (no.3) was:
"None of the prisoners interviewed had been convicted, although trial proceedings have begun for some of them. The mission asked the Judge Advocate General for transcripts of all proceedings against political offenders which had been concluded in the period of martial law since September 1972. None was made available to the mission. From this and other evidence, it appears probable to Amnesty International that not a single political prisoner detained under martial law had a trial which had been concluded."
This was the basis for the Amnesty International recommendation that all the prisoners listed in the report should be released immediately on baU, pending trial (to date, more than 60 of the 107 prisoners interviewed have been released). The mission's conclusion was confirmed when the Defense Secretary disclosed in his interview with the New York Times of 18 February 1977 that "none of these [subversion] cases have been brought to judicial conclusion and that he could remember no convictions or acquittals in the nearly 4^2 years of martial law".
The Government continues to arrest people on suspicion of subversion and, although many are released after a short period of imprisonment, others are held without charge or trial. Reports of torture are still received. Families are unable to trace the whereabouts of arrested relatives.
From November 1976 to May 1977, Amnesty Intemationeil conducted a seven-month international campaign to draw attention to human rights violations in The Philippines and 205 investigation and adoption cases were taken up. Now, following releases, 90 cases are being handled.
