Singapore (Republic of)
The past year, during which Amnesty International groups have continued to work on behalf of more than 40 political prisoners in Singapore, has been marked by a series of Singapore Government actions involving serious violations of human rights. Arrests of political suspects have continued—of men and women whom the Government says are members or sympathizers of some branch or supporting organization of the illegal Communist Party of Malaya. But no formal charges have been brought against them and there is no chance of testing the Government's allegations in a court of law.
212
Such people can be imprisoned indefinitely without charge or trial by Government order made under the Internal Security Act. Those arrested in 1976-1977 include people who have been outspoken in their criticism of the Singapore Government.
Former political detainees, some of whom spent up to 10 years in prison without trial in the 1960s, have been arbitrarily re-arrested and once again face indefinite detention without trial. At least one political detainee's wife has been arrested, apparently partly in order to try to induce her husband to make a "confession" and political recantation.
During the year there has been a proliferation of such "confessions" by political detainees on state-run Singapore television and in the government-supervised press. These "confessions", which are required from most detainees as a pre-condition for release, include statements relating to supposed illegal and subversive activities which are not tested in open court according to generally accepted legal practice. The "confessions" often implicate detainees' friends and associates, and are used by the Singapore Government as a pretext to arrest these people. There is grov^dng concern, both within Singapore and abroad, about the increasing use of the public "confession" as a justification for arresting and imprisoning people without following normal judicial procedure. Concern deepens with the increasing number of reports by ex-detainees and detainees' families that political detainees are subjected to immense pressure by Singapore's Internal Security Department to get them to "confess" to communist or pro-communist activities or sympathies. Amnesty International has not been in a position to investigate these allegations, but noted in its Briefing Paper on Singapore (published in February 1976) that there has been a pattern of consistent accusations of ill-treatment by ex-detainees and detainees' families. In particular, it is consistently alleged that political suspects are stripped and doused with cold water during interrogation in extremely cold air-conditioned rooms.
Three men have already spent more than 14 years in detention without trial. They appear to have no prospect of release except by making public "confessions" to crimes which have never been defined in formal charges and which they vigorously deny having committed. All are Amnesty International adoptees. Another adopted detainee, Lee Tze Tong, a former Opposition Member of Parliament has already spent more than 13 years in detention without trial. He has been deprived of his citizenship by the Government, which means he can be imprisoned indefinitely "awaiting deportation to the country of his choice". He has refused deportation to the People's Republic of China, where he would be permanently separated from
213
his family, and consequently is still in prison with no prospect of release. Other political prisoners have been detained without trial for periods of 10 years or more; some also having been deprived of their citizenship for political reasons. Political suspects are still being arrested. Not all these arrests are publicly announced by the Government, nor are the families of those arrested always informed.
In an interview with The Times of London on 25 May 1977, the Prime Minister of Singapore, Lee Kuan Yew, said that 61 men and women were detained without trial under the Internal Security Act. However, this figure does not include at least six political prisoners who have been deprived of their citizenship by government order and who are imprisoned "awaiting deportation" under the Banishment Act. Nor does the figure take into account people who have been detained initially for questioning, who may later be served with formal detention orders permitting their indefinite imprisonment. There are an unknown number of people in this latter category whose arrest has not been announced publicly by the Government. All this indicates that at any one time more people are detained for political reasons than 61 as claimed by the Prime Minister.
Over the past year, Amnesty International groups have continued to appeal for the immediate, unconditional release of poet and journalist Said Zahari, Dr Lim Hock Siew and former trade unionist Ho Piao, all of whom have been detained without trial since February 1963.
Groups have also appealed on behalf of those arrested during the year in connection with international protests against the Singapore Government's policy of detaining political suspects without trial. In May 1976, the Singapore Government announced that 50 men and women, whom it stated were communist suspects, had been arrested since January of that year. This announcement coincided with a "confession" of involvement in alleged underground communist activities made on state-run Singapore television by Madam Goh Lay Kuan, a 36-year-old classical ballet teacher. The "confession" by Madam Goh was used by the Singapore Government,to support its assertion that there is a dangerous communist presence in Singapore. The announcement of the arrests was made a few days before the Socialist International (to which Singapore's ruling People's Action Party [PAP] belongs) met in London to discuss accusations from other member parties that Singapore was violating human rights and civil liberties by detaining political prisoners without trial. The PAP withdrew from the Socialist International after the Dutch Labour Party had refused to retract its demand for the expulsion of the Singapore party.
214
The withdrawal of the PAP from the Socialist International was immediately followed by the beginning of a further series of arrests in Singapore. Among those detained was Dr Poh Soo Kai, a medical practitioner and former Assistant Secretary General of the Barisan Sosialis (Socialist Front) opposition party. Dr Poh had been detained without trial for 10 years from 1963 until 1973, during which time he was adopted by Amnesty International as a Prisoner of Conscience. Following his release in December 1973, he returned to medical practice. He also continued his outspoken criticism of the Singapore Government for restricting the rule of law and detaining political prisoners without trial. Dr Poh was arbitrarily re-arrested under the Internal Security Act in June 1976, a few days after the PAP's withdrawal from the Socialist International. He was subjected to such continuous interrogation by the Internal Security Department that he was reported to be in a state of exhaustion. The Singapore Government now says that from the time he was released in 1973 Dr Poh had been "directing activities from behind the scenes to get hard core detainees released and to establish a new (communist) united front group". The Government also claims that he advised "student agitators", and that he gave medicines to a communist activist allegedly injured by his own bomb while trying to assassinate a local factory manager. The second allegation is based on a former political detainee's "confession". It has been given full publicity in the Government controlled press, but has never been examined in a fair, open trial conducted according to generally accepted legal practice. This is because no formal charges have been brought by the Government and, like all Singapore's political prisoners, Dr Poh is denied any recourse to the courts. He remains in detention untried.
Dr Poh's wife Grace was arrested early in March 1977. Her arrest was not publicly announced by the Government. One apparent reason for it was to get her to persuade her husband to make a "confession" and political recantation. Amnesty International has urged that she be immediately cind unconditionally released.
Arrests of political suspects went on throughout the year. Those arrested included an Opposition parliamentary candidate, Shamsuddin Tung (detained under the Internal Security Act the day after the December 1976 general elections), five leaders of the Singapore Polytechnic Students' Union, journalists, construction and factory workers, national servicemen and others. They were accused by the Government of subversion and supporting the illegal Communist Party of Malaya. None was brought to trial.
In February 1977, the Government announced the arrest of 10 people under the Internal Security Act. Most of them were former
215
political detainees who had spent many years in detention without trial in the 1960s. One of the arrested, Mr G. Raman, is well-known as one of the few Singapore lawyers willing to defend political prisoners. He had also been an outspoken critic of the Government, particularly on the subject of detention without trial. He is still, at the time of writing, in detention without having been tried.
The Singapore Government said the February 1977 arrests were linked directly with the international criticism of the People's Action Party at the Socialist International in May 1976. The Government claimed that Mr Raman and a "group" of associates were the source of "distorted" information about Singapore which was used by "Euro-Communists" aiming to discredit the PAP and justify its expulsion from the Socialist International.
Within a few days of his arrest, Mr Raman made a written "confession", which was given wide publicity in the government controlled press, in which he implicated many of those arrested with him. Among other things, he stated that his "group" had supplied "distorted" information to communists in Western Europe because they wished international pressure to be brought to bear on the Singapore Government to force it to release "hard core communist detainees" in time to contest Singapore's general elections in December 1976. Mr Raman's heindwritten "confessions" were followed by a televised "confession" relayed on 12 March at a press conference called by the Government at which Mr Raman appeared together with Arun Senkuttuvan, Singapore correspondent of the London Financial Times and The Economist and former correspondent of the Far Eastern Economic Review, who had been arrested on 15 February. In his "confession", Arun Senkuttuvan, among other things, implicated the editor of the Far Eastern Economic Review in what he described as an intricate plot, involving confidential tape-recordings, which was allegedly designed to damage relations between Singapore and its neighbour, Malaysia. Arun Senkuttuvan said that he was not a communist himself, but implied that such a plot was designed to assist communist attempts to undermine the Singapore Government. His allegations were denied by the Far Eastern Economic Review, but no formal charges were brought and no evidence could be tested in a court of law. Arun Senkuttuvan has since been released from detention, although his citizenship has been annulled by the Singapore Government.
A number of other detainees arrested in February also made "confessions", which the Government has used to support its repeated assertions that Singapore is in grave danger from communist subversion. However, informed observers point out that none of these
216
"confessions", including those of Mr Raman and Arun Senkuttuvan, contained any concrete evidence of a "communist conspiracy", particularly as no evidence had been presented in court. For example, two of those in detention, Michael Fernandez and Ong Bock Chuan, mentioned in their "confessions" the proposed activities of a Human Rights Committee in Singapore. Mr Raman had also referred to this proposed committee in his "confession". According to their "confessions", the committee was to appear to be a civil liberties group opposed to detention without trial and other arbitrary restrictions of freedom. But, according to the three men, the real purpose of the committee was to discredit the Singapore Government and force it to release "hard core communist detainees", thus assisting the activities of the "communist united front" in Singapore. Two men named in these "confessions" as being connected with the proposed Human Rights Committee, Dr Gwee Ah Leng and Father Patrick Gob, later refuted the allegations and stressed their belief in the legitimacy of Singapore citizens being concerned about safeguarding human rights and civil liberties.
Amnesty International questions the admissibility of "confessions", particularly in view of the consistent allegations that great pressure is brought to bear on political suspects to get them to admit they are involved in communist or pro-communist activities. Amnesty International believes that the responsibility for proving any guUt of an individual lies with the Singapore Government, in accordance with generally accepted legal practice. Amnesty International groups have continued to urge the Singapore Government to bring all political detainees to trial or to release them immediately and unconditionally.
On 17 May 1977, Prime Minister of Singapore, Lee Kuan Yew, instructed Singapore's Ambassador to the UN to sign the international petition calling for the release of all Prisoners of Conscience drawn up by Amnesty International as one of its initiatives for the 1977 Prisoner of Conscience Year and the organization has welcomed the Prime Minister's support. Amnesty International groups, however, are still urging the Singapore Government to release all Prisoners of Conscience who are held without trial in Singapore, including those who have already spent more than 14 years in prison without trial.
As the organization opposes the death penalty in all cases, it has made appeals during the past year on behalf of people sentenced to death in Singapore for criminal offences. On 14 July 1976, it cabled President of Singapore Dr Benjamin Henry Sheares appealing to him on humanitarian grounds to reprieve Teo Hock Seng, a stevedore from Malaysia convicted of drug trafficking. (Drug trafficking was
217
added to the list of capital offences by an amendment to the Misuse of Drugs Act in 1975.)
