Nicaragua (Republic of)
Repeated interventions were made during the period covered by this Report on behalf of people detained in Nicaragua by uniformed members of the single security force—the National Guard—who were subsequently denied by authorities to be in custody.
The cases of 127 people including men, women and teenage children, were taken up by Amnesty International groups following confirmation of reports of their detention in Nicaragua's remote, rural northeastern departments. Although some of the prisoners were detained in early 1976, none have officially been acknowledged to be in custody, nor have authorities supplied any other information on their status. Although the prisoners may be held in inaccessible rural detention camps, such as those in Rio Blanco, Dii Du or Waslala in Matagalpa and Zelaya departments, there is considerable concern that they may have been summarily and illegally executed-
In June 1977, Amnesty International published and sent to the Government of Nicaragua a report on human rights in that country, based on extensive investigations dating from the 28 December 1974 suspension of constitutional guarantees and the imposition of martial law. The report focuses on political imprisonment and Prisoners of Conscience, on denial of due process of law, on the use of torture and the death penalty (imposed extrajudicially, since there is no provision for it in Nicaraguan penal law). Information contained in the report was compiled by Amnesty International's Research Department, and included the findings of a mission sent to Nicaragua by the organization in May 1976 {sec Amnesty International Report 1975-1976).
The report examines the legal basis of the extraordinary measures which were imposed in December 1974—and remain in force at the time of writing—and the structure and procedure of the military court system. Since the suspension of guarantees these courts exercise jurisdiction over civilians in matters of internal security. The report concludes that in accordance with constitutional limitations on the prolongation of a suspension of guarantees, there should be an immediate return to normal constitutional government, and that both the
151
structure and procedure of the military courts offer no guarantee of due process and fair trial. A further section deals with prisoners indicted by the military courts, and includes a number of case studies.
A major chapter deals with the wholesale killing or unacknowledged detention—"disappearance"—of campesinos (peasant farmers) in the course of counter-insurgency operations by the National Guard. The report documents the detention of 303 campesinos in the northeast between May 1975 and January 1977, none of whom have been accounted for since their arrest. It further notes that while over 200 campesinos were detained in Zelaya Department alone in that period, none from that area, to the knowledge of Amnesty International, have appeared before the Military Court or otherwise been acknowledged to be in custody. It also documents the shootings in cold blood of campesinos by National Guardsmen, including, in one case, the entire population of a village: a total of four men, 11 women and 29 children in the village of Varilla on the Matagalpa-Zelaya border at the end of January 1977.
Another aspect of political imprisonment dealt with is the system of the police courts, a part of the executive branch of government which provides for administrative rather than judicial imposition of sanctions of up to 180 days' imprisonment. The Amnesty International report details the legal basis of the system and its procedures; it then documents a number of cases involving trade unionists and activists of legal political parties who suffered repeated imprisonment, including two or more almost consecutive 180-day prison terms, in some cases aggravated by severe maltreatment, for crimes of conscience. Five cases of this nature, of low-level political or trade union activists summarily sentenced by police courts, are being investigated by Amnesty International groups at the time of writing; they include one of the prisoners—a trade unionist, Gonzalo Navarro Marin—whose previous periods of imprisonment were described in the Amnesty International report.
Its final section deals with torture and includes case studies incorporating material from the Nicaraguan and Central American press, material deleted from the Nicaraguan press, written statements from prisoners and ex-prisoners and interviews with lawyers, ex-prisoners, and relatives of prisoners, as well as members of the Roman Catholic clergy. The report concludes that it is "highly probable that the majority of prisoners consigned to the custody of the military tribunals had in fact been tortured", a conclusion reinforced by the refusal of authorities to permit the 1976 Amnesty International mission to conduct interviews with or carry out physical examinations of priso-
152
ners, and by a total lack of evidence that the authorities have taken measures against the practice of torture. No investigations into allegations of torture in Nicaragua by the authorities have been reported, nor have members of the National Guard been prosecuted for the use of torture.
Two subjects of Amnesty International interventions during the past year, one of them Costa Rican Liana Benavides Grutter, were both indicted by the Military Court for crimes against internal security. Both were released in early 1977. Liana Benavides Grutter, whose testimony regarding torture, together with supporting evidence, is included in the Amnesty International report, was released (and returned to Costa Rica) a few weeks after her conviction by a military court for alleged crimes against internal security. Her sentence—18 months' imprisonment—very nearly equalled the period already spent in pre-trial detention.
At the time of writing Amnesty International groups are working on behalf of 99 Nicaraguaii prisoners and group prisoner cases, five of them held in the custody of the police courts. The remaining 94 cases, a total of 127 people, are campesinos detained in the northeast whose present situation is unknown, and who may have been murdered while in the custody of the National Guard.
