Hungary (People's Republic of)
During the past year Amnesty International has known of relatively few individual cases of Prisoners of Conscience in Hungary. Section 127 of the Hungarian Penal Code prescribes sentences of up to eight years' imprisonment for acts liable to "incite others (in words or the press) to hatred directed against the state and international relations of Hungary". Preparatory acts of "incitement" are punishable by imprisonment for up to three years. According to official Hungarian statistics published in 1976 covering the previous year, 193 adults had been convicted of incitement (including incitement to violence), 48 of whom received sentences of from 30 days to six months, 71 from six to 12 months, 54 from one to two years and 20 from two to five years.
Amnesty International is investigating the case of Maria Dombovari-Lorincz, a medical doctor from Budapest. Unofficial reports allege that Dr Dombovari was charged in late 1976 or early 1977 under Article 127/6 of the Hungarian Penal Code, which makes persons liable to imprisonment for from six months to five years who "incite hatred against alliance and friendship between Hungary and other countries". On the basis of the information available to Amnesty International it appears that Dr Dombovari had publicly denounced the presence of Soviet troops stationed in Hungary since the events of 1956. Her trial reportedly took place in March, but Amnesty International does not as yet know the sentence.
On the other hand, none of the 34 intellectuals who in late 1976 sent an open letter of solidarity to the signatories of Charter 77 in Czechoslovakia (see Czechoslovak Socialist Republic) has, as far as Amnesty International knows, been arrested at the time of writing.
Section 203/1 of the Penal Code prescribes sentences of from six months' to five years' imprisonment for attempts to cross the border without official permission. Amnesty International has adopted
255
Sandor Rudovics, a 27-year-old shoe factory worker from Szom-bathely, who with his wife left Hungary in 1973 for Austria, leaving their baby daughter behind. The authorities refused to grant permission for their baby daughter to leave Hungary to join her parents. On 10 October 1974, Sandor Rudovics returned to Hungary and tried to leave the country with his daughter without official permission. He was arrested and sentenced to two years' imprisonment on charges of crossing the frontier illegally. After spending two years in prison, Sandor Rudovics made another attempt to cross the frontier in August 1976. He was rearrested. Amnesty International does not yet know the date of the more recent trial, nor his sentence.
In early 1977, the Hungarian authorities amnestied Father Odon Lenard. Father Lenard was serving a sentence of 18 years' imprisonment for "illegal" pastoral activities. According to a Vatican statement, Father Lenard was the last clergyman imprisoned in Hungary.
In November 1976, according to the Chief Prosecutor of Budapest, K. Csok, 500 former residents of Budapest living in exile were granted a government amnesty according to which none of them would be prosecuted if they were to return before the end of 1976. The amnesty excluded people who had "disclosed state secrets" or "defamed the Hungarian socio-poHtical system".
In October 1976, an amended bill of public complaints became law—an amendment to procedural laws of 1957, 1959 and 1965. This amendment apparently considerably reinforces legal safeguards of the human and civil rights of the individual and envisages more legal protection from prolonged and unjustified administrative procedures on the part of the authorities.
In November 1976, Amnesty International appealed to First Secretary of the Hungarian Workers' Party Janos Kadar to intervene on behalf of an Ethiopian student in Budapest, allegedly under threat of extradition for his political activities against the current régime in Ethiopia. Amnesty International feared that he would face a heavy prison sentence or possibly death if extradited to Ethiopia. Eventually he was expelled from Hungary, but allowed to go to Berlin rather than Ethiopia.
Amnesty International appealed to Mr Kadar in January 1977 to commute the death sentence passed on Imre Miskei, who had been convicted of premeditated homicide. His death sentence was confirmed by the Supreme Court and he was executed on 29 March 1977.
At present Amnesty International has one adoption and one investigation case in Hungary.
256 Ireland
Developments in the Irish Republic during the past year have required Amnesty International investigation of several areas v^here the organization has not previously taken an active concern except as regards isolated individual cases. During this period, the Irish Government strengthened existing anti-terrorist legislation. Under the Offences Against the State Act, 1939 and 1972, the police had already been granted extended powers to arrest and detain people suspected of involvement in terrorist activity, trial in special non-jury courts had been provided for and the rules of evidence changed in relation to certain offences. The additional measures introduced in 1976 include the Emergency Powers Act, which enables the police to detain suspects for up to seven days without charge, and which necessitated the Irish Government's declaring a State of Emergency in order to derogate from certain guarantees given in the Constitution. Another additional measure was the Criminal Law Act which, among other things, greatly increases maximum penalties for most offences under the Offences Against the State Act.
During 1976-1977, there has been a marked increase in allegations of maltreatment of those detained by the police on suspicion of involvement in terrorism. Complaints have been made by people subsequently charged with serious crimes, also by a number held for questioning but later released without being charged. Some of the measures introduced appear to have reduced safeguards against maltreatment of suspects.
In June 1977, Amnesty International sent a research mission to Dublin to investigate allegations of brutality to suspects detained under the emergency legislation. The delegates found that previous allegations of maltreatment of suspects in police stations were borne out by the evidence obtained from those detained in 1976 or early 1977. They also found that there had been more cases of alleged maltreatment during the months immediately following the introduction of the Emergency Powers Act in September 1976 (the victims were usually people held for longer than 48 hours) but that there were also a number of cases of alleged maltreatment before the introduction of that legislation, including those of suspects arrested under the Offences Against the State Act who had been detained for longer than the then legal limit of 48 hours. Amnesty International is concerned that those arrested on suspicion of involvement in politically motivated crimes seem to have been systematically ill-treated; and that in most of the cases studied by the delegates this maltreatment was said to have been committed by detectives from central units
257
in Dublin who travelled to police stations throughout the country expressly in order to extract information and statements from suspects. Amnesty International has submitted its concerns to the Irish Government about the laws relating to police detention and the rights of detainees.
In 1976-1977 Amnesty International thoroughly investigated allegations that Republican prisoners in the maximum security prison of Portlaoise had been ill-treated. In March 1977, 23 prisoners went on hunger-strike in protest about alleged poor conditions in the prison. Amnesty International investigated their complaints by collecting information from prisoners' relatives, lawyers and others. Amnesty International was particularly concerned about allegations that there were "strip" searches and solitary confinement. In April 1977, it urged the Irish Government to initiate an independent public inquiry into treatment of prisoners in Portlaoise. Subsequently the Amnesty International mission to Dublin in June 1977 interviewed a number of recently released inmates of Portlaoise Prison, groups of prisoners' relatives and some lawyers who had clients in the prison. The information obtained corroborated prisoners' complaints of ill-treatment. Following the mission Amnesty International sent details of its findings to the Prime Minister of the Irish Government newly elected in June 1977, again urging that there be a full inquiry into conditions in the prison.
In June 1976 two Irish citizens, Marie and Noel Murray, were sentenced to death for the murder of an off-duty police officer during a bank robbery. They were sentenced under the Criminal Justice Act, 1964, which retains the death penalty for a number of different types of murder, including murder of a police officer acting in the course of duty. There has been no official execution in the Irish Republic for 22 years, and Amnesty International, concerned by what would amount to the re-introduction of the death penalty, organized several National Section campaigns appealing for commutation of the death sentence. After interventions by the membership. Amnesty International's Secretary General went to Dublin in October 1976 to present the movement's arguments against imposition of the death penalty to the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Garrett Fitzgerald.
In December 1976 a member of Amnesty International's Research Department went to Dublin to study the case. That month Noel Murray's death sentence was commuted to life imprisonment by the Supreme Court which also ordered that Marie Murray, convicted of actually firing the shot that killed the police officer, be retried on the charge of capital murder. She was subsequently convicted of ordinary murder and sentenced to life imprisonment in May 1977. Although
258
there have been no other convictions for capital murder in recent years, Amnesty International remains concerned about the legislation that permits the death penalty. Amnesty International is further concerned because, although the legislation retaining the death penalty provides for trial in an ordinary criminal court, special provisions under other legislation mean that most people charged with capital offences would be tried, as were the Murrays, in a special non-jury court.
Amnesty International has no adopted prisoners in the Republic of Ireland.
