Malawi (Republic of)
Amnesty International's concern about persistent violations of human rights in Malawi, where detention without trial and persecution of the Jehovah's Witnesses' religious sect have become characteristic of government repression in recent years, was reflected by the publication, in August 1976, of an Amnesty International Briefing on Malawi.
This Briefing Paper criticized the Government of Life President Dr Hastings Kamuzu Banda for using Malawi's detention laws as a means of political control and to punish suspected dissidents. At the time of publication, Amnesty International estimated that the total
80
number of political detainees in Malawi was more than 1,000. They included many people held under detention orders, which, according to the Public Security Regulations, are valid only for 28 days but which, in practice, are indefinitely extended. Such detainees are neither charged nor brought to trial. They remain in prison until such time as the executive power, not the judiciary, decides they shall be released. Several detainees are known to have been held without charge or trial for more than 10 years.
Amnesty International also criticized conditions at Mikuyu Detention Center near Zomba, where most of the country's long-term political detainees are held, and other detention prisons. Several detainees were reported to have become seriously ill or to have died cis a result of prolonged exposure to harsh, overcrowded and insanitary prison conditions.
A significant improvement in the human rights situation in Malawi had occurred by the end of 1976 following the arrest, in October, of former cabinet minister Albert Muwalo Nqumayo and the head of Malawi's security police, Focus Martin Gwede. Muwalo Nqumayo, until his arrest the most powerful figure in Malawi politics after Dr Banda, and Gwede were generally considered responsible for many of the detentions which took place in 1975-1976, particularly those of members of the University of Malawi's academic staff. This appeared to be confirmed when, following the arrest of the two men. President Banda publicly disclaimed all knowledge of the extent to which the detention laws had been invoked.
In early 1977, Amnesty International leamt that more than 1,000 detainees had been released from Zomba Prison and Mikuyu Detention Center. These included several prisoners whose cases had been taken up by Amnesty International, former government officials and most of the university staff members detained in the first months of 1976. Several journalists who had been in detention since 1973 are believed to have been released into some form of restriction. Detainees held at Lilongwe Prison and Chichiri Prison in Blantyre were also freed.
A further group of long-term detainees was reported to have been released from Mikuyu following an "amnesty" granted by President Banda on Kamuzu Day—the 14 May annual holiday.
Muwalo Nqumayo and Gwede were charged with treason and brought to trial before a so-called traditional c6urt in January 1977, only weeks after traditional courts had been empowered to hear treason cases. They were both convicted of plotting the assassination of President Banda and the violent overthrow of the Malawi Government and, on 14 February 1977, were sentenced to death. Their
81
appeals against conviction and sentence were rejected by the National Traditional Court of Appeal in April 1977.
In accordance with its policy of opposing the use of the death penalty in all circumstances, Amnesty International appealed to President Banda on 15 February urging him to commute the death sentences imposed on Muwalo and Gwede. It is not known whether they have been executed.
In June 1977, Amnesty International was informed that many Jehovah's Witnesses had been released from restriction on specific orders from President Banda and sent home for re-integration into their village communities.
