Kuwait (State of)
In August and October 1976 Amnesty International wrote to the Amir of Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah Al-Salem Al-Sabah, about claims that criminal prisoners in Kuwait's Central Prison were invariably ill-treated and often subjected to torture. The letters contained detailed accounts of the alleged torture and the names of some of the supposed victims. One alleged torturer was also named. On 14 December 1976, a reply to the October letter was received from Mr Saud Nasir Al-Sabah, the Kuwaiti Ambassador in London, in which he stated: "I have been instructed by His Highness the Amir and by my Government to refute categorically those ill-founded allegations". In a letter of 25 March 1977 addressed to the Amir, Amnesty International welcomed the assurance contained in this letter of Kuwait's observance of the principles embodied in the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights, but referred to further allegations of ill-treatment which Amnesty International had received, and appealed for an investigation in order to establish "whether incidents have occurred which contravene Kuwait's policies on human rights".
Amnesty International knows of no political prisoners in Kuwait.
Lebanon
The 19 months of civil war in Lebanon, which began in April 1975,
307
created a situation in which no normal Amnesty International initiatives were possible. Following the ceasefire in October 1976, which brought the fighting virtually to a halt, an Arab peacekeeping force, composed primarily of Syrians, maintained security in the country. From November Amnesty International received reports that many Lebanese and Palestinians were being arrested by the peacekeeping force, and imprisoned in Syria, because of their supposed opposition to the Syrian Government rather than because they constituted a threat to security in Lebanon. Some were arrested for a few days only, others were held for much longer periods. Those arrested included members or associates of the Lebanese branch of the Iraqi Baath Party. Amnesty International learnt the names of five of them. It is not known whether they are still being detained. Another was Rifaat A1 Nimr, a member of the Palestinian National Council who was arrested on 17 April and reported released in early May. He is said to have been critical of the Syrian Government's role in Lebanon.
In February 1977 Amnesty International's Secretary General visited Beirut in order to tell the new Government about the organization, and to discuss the security measures designed to restore order in the country. The Secretary General met the Minister of Justice, Farid Raphael, and Minister of the Interior, Saleh Salmane. Neither would confirm the reported arrests, but explained that security was of overriding importance and took precedence over individual civil liberties in such abnormal times when there was strict press censorship, no courts of law, prisons or police force.
Amnesty International's Secretary General also took this matter up with the Syrian authorities (see Syria).
