Nigeria (Federal Republic of)
The human rights situation in Nigeria has greatly improved since 1975-1976, wdth a return to normality following the 1976 abortive coup d'etat in which Murtala Mohammed, Head of State, was assassinated. Despite the continuation of the Emergency Regulations, there was considerable free public discussion on the draft of the new Constitution for the planned return to civihan rule in October 1979. Elections to local district councils were held in December 1976 (without serious incident), as the second part of the five-stage transition period. The formation of political parties to contest federal elections will later be allowed.
Amnesty International has no adopted prisoners in Nigeria and powers of detention do not appear to be used by the Government to any significant degree. There is a large measure of press freedom in Nigeria and the judiciary retains a considerable degree of independence, although provision for trial by military tribunal still exists. The relative independence of the judiciary was demonstrated in the case of a musician, Fela Anikulapo-Kuti, who was freed on bail by the High Court in March 1977 after being detained for about three weeks. He and 43 members of his Africa 70 company had been
90
arrested by soldiers with considerable brutality. He is an outspoken critic of the military Government.
However, there is a disturbing trend towards increasing severity in certain judicial areas, as shown in 1976-1977 by the introduction of the mandatory death penalty for attacks on customs officials, and by the removal of the right of appeal to the Supreme Court for people convicted of armed robbery, an offence which is tried by military tribunal and which has carried the mandatory death penalty since 1970. In 1976-1977, a large number of people were executed in public after being tried and convicted of armed robbery.
The Nigerian Government has continued to play an important role in international and African affairs, especially over the question of human rights in southern Africa and the peaceful resolution of conflict through the offices of the Organization of African Unity. During the Second World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture 1977 (FESTAC) in Lagos, the Union of Writers of the African Peoples made a statement calling on all African governments to end torture, arbitrary imprisonment and "other forms of dehumanization". The Union appealed on behalf of writers imprisoned in Egypt and Niger and subsequently in Uganda, and gave active support to the struggle for the liberation of southern Africa.
