Kenya (Republic of)
Amnesty International continued, during 1976-1977, to work for Prisoners of Conscience in Kenya and to monitor as far as possible the use of preventive detention. On 6 January 1977, Attorney-
77
General Charles Njonjo told a visiting Austrian parliamentary delegation his views on the need for detention—"in the interests of defence, public safety and public order. . . although it causes concern to Amnesty International and the Intemational Commission of Jurists". Amnesty Intemational has four adopted Prisoners of Conscience in Kenya, all of them Members of Parliament. Wasonga Sijeyo was detained in 1969, John Marie Seroney (the Deputy Speaker) and Martin Shikuku were arrested in the parliament building itself and subsequently detained in October 1975 and George Anyona was detained on 4 May 1977.
Several questions have been asked in Parliament about the rights and health of detainees, and Amnesty Intemational received disturbing information three times in 1976-1977 coneeming Martin Shikuku's health. The organization wrote to President Jomo Kenyatta in December 1976, and to Vice-President Daniel Arap Moi two months later, urging that Martin Shikuku be given adequate medical treatment, and that the reasons for his detention be reviewed. George Anyona, a prominent parliamentary critic, who had asked questions in Parliament about Martin Shikuku's health was arrested in the parliament building and subsequently detained. He had also alleged cor-mption by senior government officials, and queried the indefinite postponement of the Kenya African National Union (KANU) national elections due to be held in April 1977. On 6 May 1977, Amnesty Intemational cabled President Kenyatta expressing concem that George Anyona had been detained and requesting an immediate review of the circumstances of his detention.
The total number of detainees in Kenya is probably less than 10. Amnesty Intemational is investigating the circumstances of the continued detention without trial since 1971 of Larry Mwanzia, an air-force officer, and Michael Koigi Wamwere, a politician detained in September 1975. Philip Ochieng, a journalist, was detained very briefly in July 1976 because of a newspaper article he wrote. The organization is also concerned about the political aspects of the imprisonment on criminal charges of two other parliamentary critics: Mark Mwithaga's sentence of two years' imprisonment for a minor assault on his wife was described by the East African Court of Appeal as "out of proportion to the crime committed" and the 20 months' delay in charging him for the offence was also criticized. However, the Court upheld the sentence on 22 October 1976. Chelagat Mutai also lost her appeals to the High Court in October 1976, and to the East African Court of Appeal in April 1977 against two-and-a-half years' imprisonment for "incitement to violence and disturbance of the law".
78
On 6 December 1976, Amnesty International wrote to President Kenyatta appealing for the release of all political detainees, but the Independence Day anniversary amnesty of 10,000 prisoners did not include any political prisoners. Amnesty International also urged clemency in the cases of those condemned to death under the "Hanging Bill" concerning robbery with violence. Several death penalties are believed to have been carried out in 1976-1977 under this Act. On 6 October 1976, the Attorney General announced that the death penalty would also be mandatory for any person who "compasses, imagines, devises or intends the death or deposition of the President". This followed renewed speculation about the presidential succession and attempts to prevent the automatic succession for 90 days of the Vice-President, but the decree has not been implemented.
In February 1977, Amnesty International's Secretary General attended a preliminary meeting organized by the All Africa Conference of Churches in Nairobi which was concerned with the situation of refugees in Africa. The Head of Amnesty International's Research Department made a similar visit to Nairobi in November 1976 to attend the UNESCO General Conference there.
