Rhodesia (Zimbabwe)
The upsurge of political violence reached alarming proportions in 1976-1977 despite renewed attempts by the British and American Governments, and the five African "front-line" states, to bring about a negotiated settlement in Rhodesia. The consequent effect upon human rights was disastrous, and was felt not only in Rhodesia itself but also in the neighbouring countries to which many people fled either to take refuge or to train as African nationalist guerrillas. Throughout the year, the Rhodesian Front regime launched military attacks into Botswana and Mozambique, ostensibly against African nationalist guerrilla bases. However, one such raid in August 1976 resulted in the deaths of more than 700 refugees at Nyadzonha Camp in Mozambique.
Within Rhodesia, the. régime adopted increasingly harsh measures in an attempt to contain the guerrilla threat. The system of so-called "protected villages", whereby rural Africans are removed forcibly into concentrated settlements commonly known as "keeps", was extended to the tribal trust lands of south-eastern Rhodesia. There, as in other areas containing protected villages, the inhabitants were
91
forced to live under curfew and under conditions of considerable insecurity. During the year, many African civilians were arrested and subjected to torture during interrogation by Rhodesian security police seeking information on the movements of nationalist guerrillas. Many others were brought to trial and sentenced to long tenns of imprisonment on charges either of assisting, or failing to report to Rhodesian security forces the presence of, nationalist guerrillas in their locality.
Similar charges were brought against the Roman Catholic Bishop of Umtali in September 1976. Bishop Donal Lamont, for long an outspoken critic of the racialist policies of the Rhodesian regime, was alleged to have failed to report the presence of guerrillas on two occasions and to have advised a Roman Catholic nun to do the same. He was charged shortly after the publication, in August, of an open letter which he addressed to the Rhodesian Government. In his letter, he claimed that it was the "racist and oppressive policies" of the regime and its "stubborn refusal to change" which was largely responsible for the situation of unrest in Rhodesia. He denounced the bombing and destruction of African villages and the obstacles placed in the way of those who sought legal redress for killings and acts of torture committed by Rhodesian security forces. He said that in Rhodesia, a state which claimed to be democratic, people were restricted or imprisoned without trial, tortured or tried in camera and put to death by secret hangings, all in the name of preserving Christianity and the standards of western civilization. This, Bishop Lamont commented, was the "final absurdity".
At his trial, attended by American judge Bruce W. Sumner as Amnesty International observer. Bishop Lamont pleaded guilty to the charges against him and made it clear that he had purposely defied the law in order to focus international attention on the dilemma facing priests and civilians living in the Rhodesian war zone. They had been placed in the position where they had either to report guerrillas and face nationalist recriminations or remain silent and risk criminal prosecution by the Rhodesian authorities. Bishop Lamont was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment with hard labour on 1 October. However, in February 1977, the Rhodesian Appeal Court described the original sentence as "manifestly excessive" and effectively reduced the term of imprisonment to a year. Shortly afterwards, the Bishop was stripped of his Rhodesian citizenship by the regime and deported.
Welcoming the reduction of Bishop Lamont's sentence, Amnesty International made a public appeal to Justice Minister Hilary Squires on 25 February 1977, urging him to free on humanitarian grounds all
92
African civilians prosecuted for failing to report the presence of nationalist guerrillas. Citing the case of 70-year-old Mapfuku Chikum-ba, sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment with hard labour for this offence in 1976, Amnesty Intemational said that African civilians living in the war zone were in as perilous a position as missionaries. The Rhodesian authorities did not respond to this appeal.
Following the prosecution of Bishop Lamont, several other priests were convicted and jailed for failing to report guerrillas. They included Father Paul Egli whose five year sentence was also reduced effectively to one year by the Rhodesian Appeal Court in April 1977.
A further tragic indication of the exposed position in which missionaries now live in Rhodesia was the murder, in early 1977, of three Roman Catholic missionaries near Lupane, and of seven others at Musami Mission, east of Salisbury. Rhodesian Front claims that the killings were committed by African nationalist guerrillas were refuted by nationalist leaders in Mozambique, who allege that Rhodesian security forces were in fact responsible for the deaths.
The dangers facing African civilians in the war zone were also amply illustrated in 1977 when Prime Minister Ian Smith stated that a total of 692 curfew breakers had been killed by security forces since the intensification of guerrilla warfare in 1972. All those killed were Africans.
The deteriorating situation was not only reflected by the growing list of civilian, casualties. The total number of long-term detainees held without charge had increased from 700 to more than 1,000 by May 1977. They included several people detained without charge or trial for more than 10 years.
Political trials also increased in number to the extent that, in May 1976, a system of "Special Courts" was introduced so as to cut down the delay in bringing people to trial for alleged security offences. The Special Courts were designed to operate on a mobile basis so that they could preside in the same areas in which political offences were alleged to have been committed. They were empowered to impose the death penalty, and had done so on 29 occasions by the end of 1976. The right of an accused person to remain silent was removed simultaneously with the introduction of the Special Courts.
During the year, many political trials in the High Court and Special Court were conducted partially or totally in camera. However, it is clear that many defendants alleged torture by security police and were convicted largely on the basis of contested "confession" statements.
Executions, too, were still carried out in secret despite protests from Amnesty International. In April 1977, two years after the Ministry of Justice announced that all future executions would take
93
place in secret, Amnesty International groups appealed to the régime to stop using the death penalty and urged the British Government to re-affirm the illegality of all executions carried out in Rhodesia. The organization also asked British Foreign Secretary Dr David Owen to make the cessation of execution a precondition for further Rhodesia settlement negotiations.
Earlier, in January 1977, Amnesty International protested against the execution in Salisbury of eight nationalist supporters sentenced to death for a series of bombings which had in fact resulted in no deaths. This protest, like the appeal made in April, elicited no response from the Rhodesian authorities.
At the end of June, Amnesty International once again appealed to the Rhodesian authorities to exercise clemency on behalf of prisoners awaiting execution, following reports that the Appeal Court had confirmed a sentence of death imposed in March against former Amnesty International Prisoner of Conscience Robert Mangaliso Bhebe. The organization also asked the British and United States Governments to intercede with the Rhodesian authorities on behalf of Mr Bhebe and other prisoners under sentence of death. Despite these appeals, Mr Bhebe was hanged on 13 July.
Groups made further representations to the Smith regime in June 1977 concerning the use of torture in Rhodesia. Expressing profound disquiet at continued allegations of torture by Rhodesian security forces. Amnesty International called for the establishment of an independent inquiry to investigate such allegations and urged the repeal of the Indemnity and Compensation Act. This Act, introduced in 1975, effectively indemnifies all members of the security forces against prosecution for acts committed "in good faith" during the course of counter-insurgency operations. Amnesty International also suggested that relatives and legal representatives should be permitted access to short-term detainees, who may be held for up to 30 or 60 days for interrogation purposes and who are the category of prisoners most liable to torture.
Amnesty International groups were working on behalf of more than 460 adopted prisoners at the end of May 1977. This was the largest prisoner adoption scheme operated by Amnesty International anywhere in the world. Throughout the year, groups provided substantial relief assistance through the Bulawayo and Salisbury-based Christian Care organization to prisoners, former prisoners and their families. Amnesty International also made sizeable grants to various relief, rehabilitation and legal assistance projects in the country.
94
