China (People's Republic of)
Political events in the People's Republic of China were marked in 1976-1977 by the most important leadership changes in the country since 1949. After the death of Chairman Mao Tse-tung in September 1976, the arrest of the four "radical" Party leaders—officially named the "gang of four"—was followed by purges in the Party and administration throughout the country. At the same time, many official reports revealed a situation of extreme tension in several provinces where strikes and riots had broken out.
Severe measures were taken by the Govemment, as is evident from the number of executions reported to have taken place at the beginning of 1977. Although detailed information was not available, reports in the official press indicated that many arrests were made, some of them of people suspected of having been followers of the four purged Party leaders.
During the past year Amnesty International made enquiries and appeals to the Govemment of the People's Republic of China about cases of arrest, political imprisonment and the death penalty. In January 1977, the organization cabled Chairman Hua Kuo-feng urging the release of people arrested in connection with the April 1976 demonstrations in Peking's Tian An Men square. In May 1976, it had enquired about these arrests, said to have been made on and after 5 April 1976 (see Amnesty International Report 1975-1976).
175
Wreaths in homage to the late Premier Chou En-lai and poems supporting his policy had been brought to the square by tens of thousands of people at the beginning of April. They were removed during the night of 4 to 5 April and demonstrators started protesting about this on the following day. Violent clashes occurred in the evening of 5 April when police, the militia and soldiers moved into the square to disperse the few thousand remaining demonstrators. The total number of those arrested is not known. According to some reports, several thousand had been arrested during and after the demonstrations. On 18 March \^ll,Agence France-Presse (AFP) in Peking reported that wall-posters seen around the two main universities in the capital welcomed the "return of the people arrested in the Square of Heavenly Peace", but no indication was given of the number of those released. The AFP report further stated that according to semi-official sources the number of arrested demonstrators was estimated at between 300 and 600.
In the Spring of 1977, Amnesty International made several urgent appeals to Chairman Hua Kuo-feng to reprieve death sentences said to have been passed in February, March and April in several provincial cities, and expressed deep concern at reports that immediate execution was ordered for some of those sentenced. The organization stated that it was opposed to the death penalty in all cases and urged that death sentences be commuted on humanitarian grounds.
Foreign correspondents in Peking reported on 17 March 1977 that the High People's Court of Shanghai had pronounced death sentences on 53 convicted criminals, 26 of whom were ord-ered to be executed immediately. The 26 reportedly included 24 criminal offenders charged with "murder, stealing mail and looting grain stores" and two people charged with "political crimes". One of the latter was said to have hampered criticism of the "gang of four" and the other to have opposed the official policy of sending "educated youths" (urban high school graduates) to work in the countryside. More than 40 other death sentences and executions were also reported in February, March and April in the cities of Wuhan, Hangchow and Canton, and in Fukien province. Some of the victims were political offenders.
In May 1977, eight young men were reported to have been sentenced to death in the northern city of Shenyang, in one case with suspension of execution for two years, and a ninth offender was said to have been sentenced to life imprisonment. Those sentenced to death included a 24-year-old man accused of having founded his own political movement, listened to foreign radio broadcasts and attempted to reach the Soviet border. One of the nine was
176
reportedly accused of writing "counter-revolutionary" poems and slogans. Amnesty International expressed deep concern at these reports and urged again that death sentences be commuted. No further information was available about these particular cases, but it is believed that more executions were carried out throughout the country at that time. An official confirmation that executions were taking place was given by Vice-Premier Li Hsien-nien in an interview published in the British newspaper the Sunday Times of 25 March 1977.
During the past year, more information has been available about human rights in the People's Republic of China, obtained from various sources inside China and elsewhere. One example was the letter from a "resident of Shanghai" published by the Far Eastern Economic Review of Hong Kong at the end of March 1977. The letter, which the review believed to be authentic, listed 24 prisons, detention centers and labour-reform camps in the Shanghai area. The author said he was speaking for the "yoiing intellectuals of all of Shanghai" and strongly criticized the "labour-reform" system and the policy of sending educated youth and intellectuals to work in remote rural areas. He stated: "everyone has to struggle against selfishness and criticize revisionism", to "show their real attitudes" in order to survive the continuous purges. "If you fail you'll be imprisoned or sent down to a labour-reform farm. If you make one wrong statement, while you won't be beheaded, you can be locked up for many years."
Available information indicates that vsddespread arbitrary arrests have been made during important political campaigns in the past 10 years; many of those arrested were political offenders. While most were apparently released after a period of detention varying from several days to several months, others are reported to have been detained for several years "for investigation", whilst a minority were apparently sentenced to various terms of imprisonment or to "reform-through-labour".
An account of one such arrest was given on 5 May 1977 in the American newspaper the Washington Post, whose correspondent was able to interview the victim, Mrs Yuan Hsueh-fen, in Shanghai. According to the report Mrs Yuan, a Shanghai opera actress and singer who was a friend of the late Premier Chou En-lai, had been arrested during the Cultural Revolution in 1967 and was branded "a bourgeois element, a rightist and a counter-revolutionary". She was isolated in one room for four years, prevented from seeing her family, and had to undergo about 500 "accusation meetings". In 1972 she was sent to work on a farm and was finally released in 1973, but prevented from carrying on her profession. She was not
Ill
arrested on any particular charges although she was later accused of belonging to a "certain Kuomintang organization". She blamed her arrest on Chiang Ching, Mao Tse-tung's widow, and on the other "radical" leaders from Shanghai who were purged in October 1976.
Although it is obvious that Mrs Yuan attributes her arbitrary treatment to the "gang of four", it is worth noting that dissent from the official policy has always been liable to be punishable by sanctions ranging from various forms of "work under supervision of the masses" to a formal sentence of imprisonment or of labour-reform in a camp. Moreover, since the cultural revolution, long-term detention without trial and judgement passed without legal protection for the accused have been reported to have become the prevailing practice. Equally, appeal against the sentence is guaranteed by law, but is reported to be often considered in practice a sign that the accused do not recognize their "crimes" and therefore show no "willingness to reform", which may lead to further punishment. What the Chinese describe as the "flexibility" of the system therefore apparently allows for both harsh or relatively mild punishment being inflicted upon political offenders, depending on the case, the place and the situation in which a person is arrested.
In May 1977, it was reported that three young men, authors of a poster displayed in Canton in 1974, had been labelled "counterrevolutionaries" and sent to a labour-reform camp. Amnesty International wrote to Chairman Hua Kuo-feng on 27 May urging that an enquiry be made into their case and that, if they were still detained or restricted, they be released and allowed to return to their original unit in Canton.
The poster displayed in the streets of Canton in November 1974 was signed with the pseudonym Li Yi-che, which was a combination of the three authors' names, Li Cheng-tien, Chen Yi-yang and Huang Hsi-che. The poster was entitled "Concerning Socialist Democracy and Legal System", and was unusual in its length and contents. It criticized the repression which took place under Lin Piao, former Vice-Chairman of the Party, who fell from power in 1971 and was held responsible for numerous arbitrary arrests. It raised, in a very outspoken way, the issues of repression, democracy and the legal system in China from a general point of view. It contained strongly worded criticisms of the faults of the system, of the kind that had appeared on posters and in Red Guard journals during the Cultural Revolution. Such criticisms, however, had become rather unusual by 1974. The following extracts concern the "rights of the people":
. . among the revolutionaries who put up real fights to oppose
the Lin Piao System, not a few had their heads chopped off and so
178
they are headless; those who were imprisoned are still in prison; and those who were dismissed from office are still suspended."
"The masses of the people . . . demand democracy; they demand a socialist legal system and they demand the revolutionary rights which protect the masses of the people."
"Are the people's democratic rights not written in our Constitution and Party constitution and Central documents? Yes, they have been written down. Not only that, but there also are the stipulations of 'protecting the people's democracy', 'not allowing malicious attacks and revenge' and 'forbidding extracting a confession by torture and interrogation'. But these protections have been, in fact, always unavailable; while, on the contrary, Fascist dictatorship has been 'allowed' to be practised over the revolutionary cadres and masses—some of them were imprisoned, some executed, and some framed in fabricated cases; even the unlimited practice of savage corporal punishments cannot be 'strictly forbidden'."
The poster, which immediately attracted an enormous amount of attention, was soon criticized by the authorities as "reactionary" and representing "bourgeois thoughts". In December 1974, Li Cheng-tien, Chen Yi-yang and Huang Hgi-che were taken to "mass metings" around Canton for criticism. It is reported that Chen and Huang, under pressure at the meetings, admitted their "guilt" and were sent to farms in the countryside to work under surveillance. Li reportedly defended his position during the meetings. He was said to have been sent, at the beginning of 1975, to work under "political supervision" in a mine north of Kwangtung province, where he still was in early 1977. From available information, the punishment known as "work under supervision" may last as long as the accused do not recognize their misdeeds and may become a formal sentence if they do not "reform" by changing their opinions. In June 1977, no further information was available on these three cases. They are being followed up by Amnesty Intemational groups.
Apart from the work on these recent cases. Amnesty Intemational is also adopting cases of persons arrested in earlier years. One concerns a protestant pastor, Wang Ming-tao, who was arrested in 1955 and later sentenced to life imprisonment. Wang, who was born in 1900 in Peking, was the leader of a religious congregation in the capital, the Christian Tabernacle. He was arrested on charges of "opposing the government", "preaching anti-government statements" and "collaborating with American imperialists". It appears, in fact, that the charges were mainly based on Wang's relationship with some American friends before 1949, and on his refusal to join an officially
179
inspired religious movement, the "Three Self-Reform Movement" founded in 1951, which advocated severance of relationships between the Chinese churches and churches abroad. Wang Ming-tao was reported to be detained in Peking in 1966 and to have been transferred to Shensi province in 1970. Although very little has been heard about him in the past few years, there were indications that he was still alive and detained in 1974. It is known that some members of religious communities were arrested in the 1950s, but there has been no news of them for more than 10 years.
Amnesty International is also concerned about the fate of students, intellectuals and others arrested during^ the 1957 "anti-rightists'" campaign. Very little has been heard about several famous writers known to have been sent to "re form-through-lab our" at that time. The organization is adopting Lin Hsi-ling, a university student arrested in 1957 on charges of being a "rightist". It is reported that she was later given a 20-year sentence with deprivation of civil rights for life, and that she was still being detained at the time of the Cultural Revolution. She was 21 and a student at the China People's University in Peking in 1957. She had previously been a member of an art group in the People's Liberation Army. When the "Hundred Flowers" movement was in progress, she wrote articles critical of the Party, on the basis of which she was labelled a "rightist" and arrested. The movement had been launched in 1957 on the initiative of Chairman Mao as an invitation, particularly to intellectuals and members of the former parties, to voice their grievances against the cadres and bureaucratic practices. However, the movement was soon stopped and was followed by a campaign against "rightists" throughout the country, in which those who had been outspoken in their criticism of the Party were in turn criticized or arrested.
There is little information available as yet about individual cases of people arrested recently, although the official press has, on many occasions during the past year, mentioned the discovery of cases involving "counter-revolutionary" activities. These may be cases of violent as well as non-violent political "crimes". Research is continuing on these arrests as well as on the general issue of imprisonment.
