Venezuela (Republic of)
Amnesty International virote to President Carlos Andrés Pérez on 28 July 1976, welcoming a high-level investigation into the death in police custody of the head of the political party Liga Socialista, Lic. Jorge Rodriguez. Lic. Rodriguez was found dead in his cell at the headquarters of the Dirección de Seguridad e Inteligencia Politica (DISIP) on 24 July after being interrogated throughout the night. He had been detained by DISIP agents with eight others in connection with the kidnapping of businessman William Niehous in early 1976. The forensic medical report and the death certificate said that he died of severe internal injuries. Following a congressional debate in which the DISIP was accused of torturing three others detained with Lie. Rodriguez, Attorney General José Ramón Medina ordered an undisclosed number of arrests of DISIP agents. Congress called for the dismissal of the head of DISIP, Aristides Lander Flores—who subsequently resigned—and a full investigation into the workings of the secret police organization. Amnesty International learned with
165
satisfaction of the detention of four DISIP agents who had reportedly carried out the interrogation leading to the death of Lie. Rodriguez, and recalled that two of the four had been named in a confidential submission concerning alleged torturers made by Amnesty International to Attorney General Medina in April 1976.
In February 1977 Amnesty International wrote to President Pérez, expressing appreciation for support from the Government of Venezuela for the resolution against torture adopted by the UN General Assembly on 13 December 1976.
ASIA
During the past year, tens of thousands of Prisoners of Conscience have been released in India. From January 1977 the Government had issued instructions for the release of political prisoners, but it was not until after the March 1977 general elections that the State of Emergency (in force since 1971) was revoked and the Janata Party Government released the remaining political prisoners. At the same time, the Janata Government announced its intention to release the so-called "Naxalite" prisoners held without trial, and there have been subsequent reports that several hundred of these were freed.
Whereas the new developments in India led to the release of numerous political prisoners, mass ^detention in Indonesia has remained without significant change. In December 1976 the Indonesian Government announced a program for settling the problem of political prisoners. This program, which will not be completed for three years, and involves the forced transportation of many prisoners to permanent penal settlements, would mean that many prisoners will in fact not be released promptly and unconditionally. There are still more than 55,000 political prisoners held without trial in Indonesia, perhaps as many as 100,000 altogether, many of them held for more than 12 years.
In China, there have been reports of large-scale arrests following demonstrations in April 1976. In addition, Amnesty International has been deeply concerned by the frequent use of the death penalty reportedly both for criminal offenders and those charged with "political crimes". Evidently the use of the death penalty has been widespread throughout the country, and some prisoners have been summarily executed.
More than 3,000 students and others were arrested in Thailand in October 1976, when military rule returned after three years of civilian-elected government. Most of those arrested, mainly students, have been released—many on bail—and about 100 students have been put on trial. The military Government has introduced decrees which entail serious erosion of civil liberty. The new Constitution gives the Prime Minister wide powers which he has used in sentencing to death without trial; so far five people have been summarily executed in this way.
167
Refugees arriving in Thailand from Democratic Kampuchea (Cambodia) last year have stated that summary executions and maltreatment of prisoners continue to occur in their home country. The refugees' allegations give rise to deep concern, and although the Foreign Minister of Cambodia has denied that there have been widespread killings, reports remain unverifiable because foreign journalists are not allowed to visit and information leaving the country is severely restricted.
It has been estimated that several hundred thousand people are still in "re-education" camps set up in 1975 in Vietnam. There appear to be wide variations in the conditions in these camps. The people detained without trial include many different categories of prisoner, including some who are Prisoners of Conscience.
In the past year, there has been a progressive erosion of fundamental liberties in a number of Asian countries, including the Republic of Korea (South Korea), Malaysia and Singapore. In May 1976, the mass trial began of 18 of the most prominent public persons in South Korea. They were charged with infringing a draconian emergency presidential decree forbidding all criticism of the President and his administration. The 18 defendants were accused of endorsing a public statement calling for the release of political prisoners and the restoration of basic liberties. In March 1977 the Supreme Court confirmed long prison sentences passed by the lower courts. Then, in April 1977, there was a wave of arrests of Roman Catholic priests, Protestant ministers, journalists, students and the wives and relatives of those already imprisoned because they had reaffirmed support for the March 1976 public declaration.
In Malaysia, prominent political figures, including former government ministers and members of opposition political parties, were arrested in 1976. There has been a disturbing trend towards the use of public "confessions" by prisoners as a means to justify arrests of others.
In Singapore too there have been continuing arrests of political suspects alleged to be members of, or sympathizers with, the proscribed Communist Party of Malaya. As in Malaysia, there has been a proliferation of "confessions", required from some detainees as a precondition for release, containing allegations about activities which are then used by the Government to implicate and justify the arrest of the detainees' associates.
In addition to Cambodia (already mentioned), a number of Asian governments severely restrict the amount of information available about violations of human rights. These include in particular the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (North Korea) and Burma.
Amnesty International has conducted a number of international
168
campaigns in the last year focusing on particular aspects of violations of human rights in a number of countries. There was a major campaign regarding Indian political prisoners held under the emergency. A major campaign was conducted also regarding the Indonesian Government policy of transportation of untried political prisoners to permanent penal settlements, and the holding of vast numbers of prisoners without trial. There was a campaign regarding political prisoners held wathout trial under martial law in The Philippines. There were a number of smaller campaigns on other countries.
In the past year, an Amnesty International mission was sent to Bangladesh. Moreover, the reports of a number of missions which took place in the preceding year were published in the past year. These included the report of an Amnesty International mission to The Philippines. A second edition was subsequently published incorporating the Government's 8,000-word comment, also a report based on the findings of a mission to Pakistan. In addition, reports were published of the findings of two missions which took place in 1975, on Sri Lanka and South Korea. A Briefing Paper was published on Taiwan.
In its work for political prisoners in Asian countries. Amnesty International's central concern is the adoption of individual Prisoners of Conscience, and the taking up also of cases which, prima facie, are of individuals unjustifiably detained without trial. This adoption casework is supplemented by campaigns and publications.
