Libya (Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)
During the first half of 1977, the most grave development as regards human rights since Colonel Gaddafi came to power in 1969 occurred: the first executions for 23 years were carried out on 22 military personnel and 4 civilians. In addition, all but seven of the 80 or so untried political detainees whose cases Amnesty International had taken up-some of whom had been held without trial since 1973—were brought to court during the year, but the procedures were such that the trials were anything but fair and impartial: the defendants were deprived of their basic legal rights.
Earlier, in October-November 1976, two Amnesty International delegates. Professor Jan Brugman of the Department of Arabic
308
Studies at Leiden University in tlie Netherlands and Katrina Mortimer from the International Secretariat visited Libya. They met Colonel Mu'ammar A1 Gaddafi (whose official title since March 1977 has been Secretary General of the General People's Congress)—as well as other officials in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and of the Interior, including the Directors of Police and Military Intelligence, and the Director of Prisons. The delegates discussed Amnesty International's concern at the increasing number of political arrests in Libya, and the serious issue of detention without trial. The delegates also made specific inquiries about the political prisoners Amnesty International had adopted including:
—	23 of the students arrested during university demonstrations in Benghazi in April 1976. In a letter dated 13 October, the Under-Secretary of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs assured Amnesty International that they were being detained and cross-examined according to Libyan legislation, and that those found guilty of any act affecting state security and violating public order would be brought to trial. Amnesty International's delegates were told that all the students had by then been released, but it was never made clear whether this was conditional;
—	six Libyan diplomats held without charge or trial. They had been arrested at various times between 1974 and 1976;
—	eight Libyans, Occidental Petroleum Company employees, detained without trial since September 1975. Neither they nor their families had been told the reasons for their arrest;
—	a group of 40 Libyans arrested in April 1973 accused of being Marxists, Trotskyists or members of the Muslim Liberation Movement. Special inquiries were made about this group because of the length and nature of their detention: they had been acquitted by a criminal court in December 1974 but rearrested by administrative decree on the day of their release. Since then they had been held without trial. Government authorities claimed that they had acted against the principles of the Libyan revolution and were being held lawfully "at the wishes of the people". Their release was conditional on their renouncing their beliefs;
—	22 young Libyans (government employees, teachers, students etcetera) who had been arrested in August-September 1975. Their trial, by a criminal court, was taking place during the delegates' visit, one of whom attended part of the defence hearing. The defendants were charged with belonging to an illegal political organization which aimed to overthrow the Government. This is a
309
capital offence under Article 206 of the penal code, as amended in August 1975. During the adjournment of the hearing the Amnesty International observer was able to talk openly and at length with the defendants. Later Amnesty International learnt that while 12 had been acquitted, 10 had been sentenced to life imprisonment. Amnesty International groups are working on their behalf.
The Amnesty International delegation requested permission to visit prisons (Tripoli and Benghazi Central prisons, and Jdeida Prison outside Tripoli) in order to interview certain specific detainees privately. Although this request was granted by Colonel Gaddafi and the Ministry of the Interior—and all maintained that prison conditions were good—the visits were unfortunately never arranged.
Since the mission to Libya, all but one of these groups of detainees have been tried, but the nature of the trials, and the unexpectedly severe penalties, including a number of death sentences, have increased Amnesty International's concern about the state of affairs in Libya.
First, a group of 75 military personnel (not Amnesty International adoptees) were tried in camera by a military court in December 1976 on charges of planning a coup d'état in August 1975. On 25 December, 23 were sentenced to death (one in absentia) and others to varying terms of imprisonment. Amnesty International cabled Colonel Gaddafi on 18 January urging commutation of these sentences. It later leamt that a second military (appeals) court had increased the number of death sentences. (The total number is not known for sure; some sources claim 33, others 45.)
In January, in accordance with the Protection of the Revolution Law of 1969, the Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) set up a People's Court to try political detainees. The tribunal of such a court, which in this instance was composed entirely of government representatives, is in no way bound by normal trial procedures; all sentences have to be approved of by the RCC, and there is no appeals machinery.
The group of 40 were the first to be tried by the newly-constituted People's Court. Amnesty International tried to obtain permission from the Libyan Ministries of Foreign Affairs and Justice, to send an observer to the trial, but permission was not granted. On 16 February, sentences of between four and 15 years' imprisonment were passed. In March Amnesty International learnt that the RCC had, on 24 February, amended all these sentences: two detainees, Abdul Mabruk Abdul Mawla A1 Zoul and Abdul Ghani Muhammad Khanfar, were sentenced to death and all the others to life imprisonment. These were the first death sentences to have been passed for a purely political offence during Colonel Gaddafi's presidency.
310
Amnesty International cabled Colonel Gaddafi on 21 March expressing serious alarm at this overruling of a court decision by administrative decree, adding that "such disregard of the rule of law constitutes a danger to fundamental liberties and invalidates human and legal rights as guaranteed by the Libyan constitution". This cable was also the subject of a press release, and Amnesty International groups were asked to urge the Libyan Government to commute the two death sentences.
The first executions while Colonel Gaddafi was president were carried out on 2 April; 22 military personnel were the victims. And on 7 April, four civilians convicted of "terrorist sabotage" were publicly hanged in Benghazi. Amnesty International expressed deep shock at these executions in a cable to the Libyan Government on 12 April saying "these mass executions represent a complete departure from practice of the last 23 years without the death penalty being carried out". This too was the subject of a press release and Amnesty International group action.
Although the executions were officially publicized, the trials of the civilians were not. The four civilians were:
—	two of the students arrested after the April 1976 university demonstrations, during which a government building was burnt down. One of them had been adopted by Amnesty International. All the students were believed to have been released late in 1976, but between 20 and 30 were rearrested in early 1977 and tried by the People's Court. The others had been sentenced to between eight years and life imprisormient;
—	a Libyan and an Egyptian arrested in September 1976 after allegedly planting a bomb in Benghazi port. One or two others were tried with them;
—	a fifth man was reported to have had his death sentence commuted. He was one of 11 arrested in 1973 after anti-govemment demonstrations in Benghazi during which a statue of President Nasser was damaged. The demonstrations took place after the bodies of those killed in a Libyan airliner, shot down by Israel over Sinai, were being brought back to Benghazi.
All 11 cases have now been adopted by Amnesty International.
At the time of writing, none of the other death sentences have been carried out. In an Urgent Action campaign. National Sections and Amnesty International groups were asked to write to the Libyan Government urging commutation of all pending death sentences (believed to be 15).
311
A report based on the findings of the mission to Libya in October, and on subsequent developments in the country, is being sent to the Libyan Government. In it Amnesty International draws attention to the increase in cases of political imprisonment and detention without trial, and to the inadequacy of legal safeguards. It expresses Amnesty International's concern about accounts of maltreatment of certain political detainees (particularly students and military personnel), some of whom are said to have been subjected t<5 long periods of solitary confinement. The report also expresses grave disquiet about the use of the death penalty during the past year. Recommendations include a request that the Government consider declaring a general amnesty for all political prisoners in Libya during 1977—Amnesty International's Prisoner of Conscience Year—that all those detained should be held in accordance with the Penal Code and Constitution, that they should have immediate access to lawyer and family, be charged and tried soon and that trials should be public and in ordinary courts. As regards the torture allegations, the report recommends the setting up of an independent commission of inquiry into all such allegations, that the results be made public, that those responsible be punished and adequate compensation be made by the Government to the victims. Finally, Amnesty International urges the Government to abolish the death penalty in Libya, or at least reduce the number of offences punishable by death, including that of forming or belonging to illegal political parties.
Amnesty International had 82 cases of adoption in June 1977.
