Namibia
Mass arrests, detentions and the torture of Namibian civilians, on a systematic basis, characterized South African rule in Namibia in 1976-1977. In August 1976, a former national serviceman in the
85
South African army alleged publicly that he had seen many civilians tortured and killed by South African troops during military operations in northern Namibia between November 1975 and June 1976. Former soldier, Bill Anderson, who served in a South African infantry battalion during that period, said that he had taken part in one security sweep in Ovamboland called "Operation Cobra", the aim of which was to carry out a thorough search over an area of some 200 square kilometers. He reported:
"Orders were given that every single male adult be brought in for interrogation. Orders for the whole operation were that we should shoot anyone who ran away. Every single male adult was brought in. And when I say 'adult', I should explain that some of those brought in were as young as thirteen."
Anderson said that African villagers were brought in for interrogation and ill-treated as a matter of routine:
"Right from the beginning I saw suspects very badly treated in front of senior officers, and the senior officers didn't say anything about it. They were beaten with fists and rifle butts. They were burnt with cigarettes, their mouths were filled with sand, and they were generally very roughly treated from the moment they were captured until they were cleared at Ondongwa. They were blindfolded the whole time. As far as I know, they were given very little food.
"In the first couple of weeks there was a group of South African police attached to our battalion who were responsible for the interrogation. But afterwards the senior officers joined in, and later any troops who wanted to go and watch what was going on were welcome to do so. They carried on their own side-shows in taunting the prisoners who had just been interrogated or were waiting for interrogation. They were involved in the maltreatment in a very positive way, if not actually doing the hard stuff.
"My tent was within fifty yards of the interrogation tent. They used shock treatment to get these people to talk, using the wires of a field telephone to apply electric shocks to ear lobes and the genitals. I went to bed almost every night to the screams of people being tortured. Usually the torturing would start at about 9 or 10 in the evening after the camp bar had closed. Usually all the officers involved had had quite a bit to drink. It was very much an entertainment for them.
"I saw water torture being used on various prisoners, where their heads were dunked into buckets of water until they were almost drowned, and this repeated a number of times. One case
86
that 1 didn't see—but I was told about it immediately after it had happened—was that one of the prisoners was hung up on a tree, his hands were hooked up round a branch with handcuffs so that his feet were about two or three feet off the ground, and a fire was lit under him. He was continually beaten while he was being burnt from beneath. Every single one of the men brought in for interrogation was treated, if not in as bad a manner as that, in a very rough way.
"As far as I know, our battalion went through interrogating at least 200, and I assume that the other four battalions were doing the same. This means that in this short period over 1,000 people were treated in such a fashion. We were never told any official figures, but at the end of the operation I heard that from all those held, forty people were being sent to court to face terrorism trials.
"I don't know how many guerrillas were shot in the whole operation, but our battalion shot four. I can remember an occasion when two dead men had been brought in. They were left to lie in the middle of the camp, which was a pretty busy thoroughfare for troops. And troops were explicitly welcomed to come and have a good look at what a dead guerrilla looks like. Their bodies were abused by the troops."
Following Anderson's revelations, Amnesty International publicly called upon the South African Government to conduct an independent inquiry into allegations of systematic torture by members of the South African Defence Force. The South African Government, which refutes Anderson's allegations, has so far declined to establish such a commission of inquiry.
Further information about the use of torture in Namibia was supplied in May 1977byIeadersof the Lutheran, Roman Catholic and Anglican churches in Namibia. In a Joint Statement on Torture in Namibia, the church leaders alleged that the use of torture had reached "horrifying proportions" and had become "standard practice" in the interrogation of detainees. They claimed that torture was particularly prevalent in northern Namibia, where Ovamboland has been under a State of Emergency since 1972 and the Kavango and Eastern Caprivi areas since May 1976. All three areas remain under full military occupation by the South African Defence Force.
The church leaders alleged that the methods of torture most commonly used by South African security police included electric shocks, prolonged solitary confinement, sleep deprivation, burning with cigarettes, beating with fists or rifle butts and being hung up by the arms, sometimes with a weight added, for long periods.
In an attempt to increase international awareness of the use of
87
torture and other violations of human rights in Namibia, an Amnesty International Briefing on Namibia was published in April 1977. During the same month. Amnesty International groups participated in a campaign designed to focus attention on the conditions prevailing in northern Namibia. The groups appealed to the South African Government to lift the State of Emergency in Ovamboland, publish full details about everyone subjected to detention without charge or trial, and establish a full and independent inquiry into allegations of torture by South African security police and defence forces in Namibia.
The Briefing Paper particularly criticized the widespread use of detention without trial to suppress political opposition and intimidate opponents of continued South African rule in Namibia, and the torture of political detainees. It also condemned the application to Namibia of various South African security laws such as the Terrorism Act, the Internal Security Act and the so-called Sabotage Act, also the imprisonment in South African—rather than in Namibian— prisons of Namibians convicted of political offences. At the time of publication in April 1977, more than 40 Namibians convicted of political offences were imprisoned on Robben Island, South Africa's main political prison. Amnesty International said it was impossible to provide accurate estimates of the total number of uncharged political detainees held in Namibia at any one time. Most detainees are held either under Section 6 of the Terrorism Act or Proclamation R.17 of 1972—the Ovambolan.d emergency regulations—both of which provide for the incommunicado detention of any person for an indefinite period.
The Briefing Paper also expressed Amnesty International's concern at the use of the death penalty for certain political and criminal offences in Namibia. In May 1976, death sentences were imposed on two Namibians—Hendrik Shikongo and Aaron Muchimba—convicted on charges under the Terrorism Act. Following their trial, which was held at Swakopmund, it became known that confidential documents relating to the defence case had been leaked to the South African security police by individuals employed by the defence attorneys. As a result, defence lawyers made an official complaint to the Supreme Court and succeeded in getting a special entry relating to this irregularity written into the court record. The case was then taken to the South African Appeal Court in Bloemfontein where, in March 1977, Chief Justice Rumpff acquitted and discharged Hendrik Shikongo and Aaron Muchimba on the grounds that their trial had not complied with normal judicial standards. The Chief Justice indicated that security police interference with defence arrangements
88
during thie trial constituted a "gross irregularity" in court procedure and a serious breach of the privilege which existed between attorney and client.
Acquitted with Hendrik Shikongo and Aaron Muchimba were Rauna Nambinga and Anna Nghihondjwa, who had been jailed for seven and five years respectively following the Swakopmund Terrorism Act trial and whose cases had also been taken up by Amnesty International. However, two other Namibians who had been jailed in connection with the same political trial were not freed. Axel Johannes and Victor Nkandi were each jailed for a year for contempt of court following their refusal to testify as state witnesses during the course of the Swakopmund trial. Before being called to give evidence, both men had been detained without charge for more than five months. Victor Nkandi alleged that he had been tortured during interrogation by South African security police.
After completing a year's imprisonment at Windhoek Prison, Victor Nkandi and Axel Johannes were due to be released on 28 February 1977. However, on that date they were immediately re-detained under Section 6 of the Terrorism Act and transferred to the main Oshakati interrogation center in Ovamboland. No charges had been brought against them by the end of May 1977, when they were both reported to be in poor physical condition. Their cases have been taken up by Amnesty International.
In September 1976, Filemon Nangolo, a Namibian who had allegedly trained as a SWAPO guerrilla in Angola, was sentenced to death, having been convicted on charges of participating in four murders. After the sentence had been confirmed. Amnesty International cabled South African Minister of Justice James Kruger in May 1977 to appeal for clemency on behalf of Filemon Nangolo. However, despite this and other appeals, and the fact that Filemon Nangolo had been severely paralyzed as a result of a shooting incident at the time of his arrest, he was hanged at the end of May.
Amnesty International groups were working on the cases of six Prisoners of Conscience at the end of May 1977. The small number of adoption cases reflected both the difficulties of obtaining information quickly from northern Namibia, where most arrests and detentions take place, and the trend towards armed struggle as the means of achieving majority rule. The organization also provided rehef assistance to Prisoners of Conscience and their families.
89
