Uruguay (Eastern Republic of)
During the spring of 1976 Amnesty International concentrated upon drawing attention to the widespread use of torture in Uruguay by conducting an international publicity campaign. All of the organization's National Sections took an active part in the campaign, through press conferences, letters to Uruguayan government and military officers, and the collection of signatures throughout the world for a petition calling on the Uruguayan authorities to allow an independent investigation into the many and persistent allegations of torture in their country.
The 350,000 signatories to the petition, representing 70 countries, included government ministers, judges, three Nobel Peace Prize winners, religious leaders and members of legislatures. The petition was presented to the permanent Uruguayan delegation to the UN in New York on 16 June 1976, to be sent on to the acting President of Uruguay, Alberto Demichelli; copies were sent to the UN Secretary General Kurt Waldheim and M. Gaston Thorn, President of the 1975 session of the UN General Assembly. At the same time, a press conference was held in New York, addressed by Wilson Ferreira Aldunate, Uruguayan Senator and ex-presidential candidate, who had narrowly escaped being kidnapped and murdered by death squads in the Argentinian capital, Buenos Aires. Two of his parliamentary colleagues also living in exile in Argentina, Senator Zelmar Michelini and the Speaker of the Chamber of Deputies, Hector Gutierrez Ruiz, were found dead with bullet wounds and showing signs of torture, two days after being kidnapped in May 1976 by para-police death squads composed of Uruguayans and Argentinians.
The signatures of 40 prominent defenders of human rights in the Soviet Union, including Academician Andrei Sakharov, were sent to the Uruguayan President, Juan Maria Bordaberry, and released to the press in May 1976.
The campaign achieved its aim of creating international awareness of Uruguay as one of the worst offenders against human rights. Its effectiveness, at least in the short term, in actually stopping or reducing torture and obtaining the release of prisoners, is more doubtful. There is no doubt, however, that the campaign gave great moral support to the actual victims of ill-treatment, and to their families and friends, Amnesty International received numerous assurances from them about the value of the campaign.
During the past year the governments and legislative bodies of many countries have shown an increasing interest in and sensitivity to the issue of the relationship between human rights and trade and
159
aid. Amnesty International research findings have often provided a basis for debate and decisions on these questions.
The US Congress voted for the suspension of military aid to Uruguay in September 1976. This decision followed hearings on Uruguay organized by a subcommittee of the Committee on International Relations of the House of Representatives. Amnesty International was invited to testify before this subcommittee injuly 1976. In his testimony Amnesty International researcher Edy Kaufman reported on the lack of legal guarantees for anyone detained in Uruguay and on the 29 deaths under torture to date documented by the organization.
The reports on violations of human rights influenced trade relations between Uruguay and the member states of the European Economic Community. In a debate in May 1976 in the European Parliament, the EEC Commission representative declared that the European Community would not consider making any preferential trade agreement with Uruguay.
Despite increasing international awareness of the human rights situation in Uruguay, and the expression of this concern to the Uruguayan authorities, Amnesty International has not been able to see any improvement over the past year.
Arrest procedures in violation of legal guarantees continue to be the key problem. The number of Prisoners of Conscience is also constantly increasing; this is inevitable since most political parties and the main trade union organization are banned, all political activity suspended, trade union activity seriously restricted and the press closed down or under heavy censorship—and all this in a country whose citizens are accustomed to freedom in all these fields.
The 255 cases currently allocated to Amnesty International groups represent all walks of life: workers, teachers, journalists, lawyers, doctors, members of parliament, many of them active in trade union work. Because of prominence in their profession or in politics, some have aroused widespread international attention. Scientists and their organizations all over the world have been acting on behalf of Professor José Luis Massera, an ex-Member of Parliament and a mathematiciain of international repute; governments and legislatures have shown concern at the continued detention of General Liber Seregni, the ex-presidential candidate for the Broad Front coalition in the 1971 elections.
In a press release on 26 January 1977, Amnesty International reported on a wave of arrests in the provinces, mainly of teachers, during which a student, Raul Facio, and a teacher, Dante Porta, died as a result of torture.
160
While recognizing that the period of interrogation following arrest, which can extend to several months, is when maltreatment and torture most often occur. Amnesty International has noted with concern the increasing tendency for prisoners who have already been charged and committed for trial to be taken out of the prison establishment and transferred to a military barracks or other interrogation center for confinement incommunicado. In the press statement of 26 January 1977 Amnesty International drew attention to the situation of the Communist Party leader Jaime Pérez, who was taken from prison to a military barracks in September 1976. He is reported to have become mentally disturbed as a result of his ill-treatment. Also, the lack of space in the prisons means that a large number of political prisoners are kept in military barracks throughout the country while undergoing trial.
On 27 June 1977, four years after the dissolution of Parliament, Amnesty International cabled the Uruguayan Government, expressing regret that it was not using its authority to safeguard the most fundamental legal rights of its citizens. The telegram and the press release which accompanied it referred to several cases of the illegal transfer to secret places of detention of prisoners already undergoing trial.
During the past year Amnesty International has carried out 11 Urgent Actions on behalf of victims of illegal arrest procedures and transfers with subsequent torture.
The organization is currently studying reports of other alarming aspects of the situation of Uruguayan prisoners, such as trial judges meting out sentences which are considerably higher than those requested by the prosecution, and the increased severity of the charges for political offences. This is likely to lengthen the period of detention for people who have already served comparatively short sentences passed before 1972, when those accused of political offéhces were still tried by civilian judges.
Amnesty International has continued and increased its cooperation with the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (Organization of American States) during the past year. A report outlining the major problems of human rights in Uruguay and including 19 detailed affidavits of torture was submitted to the lACHR in September 1976. Amnesty International also asked the lACHR to intervene on behalf of a number of Uruguayans who had been kidnapped in Argentina in mid-1976, including the daughter of the murdered Senator Michelini and the Rodriguez Larreta family. Fourteen of these "disappeared" people were later discovered to be in detention in Uruguay, where they were forced to take part in a staged police
161
operation intended to explain the 'Voluntary" presence on Uruguayan territory of individuals known to have been abducted in Argentina. One of the few to be released, Sr Enrique Rodriguez Larreta, reported on their abduction and torture and on the cooperation of Uruguayan and Argentinian security forces at an Amnesty International press conference in London in March 1977 (see also Argentina).
The case of Alvaro Balbi, who died after two days in detention incommunicado in July 1975 has been pursued during the past year. Invited to comment on the explanation of his death given by the Uruguayan Government to the lACHR, Amnesty International noted that there was no reference in the official autopsy to the bruises and other signs of physical violence found on his body, nor was there any explanation of the possible cause of the "stress" that brought about the "heart and lung insufficiency" claimed to have caused his death. It also noted the inordinate speed with which the investigation had been closed, and drew attention to the situation of the 10 people arrested with Sr Balbi who declared to the judge that they had aU been subjected to torture. The judge committed them all for trial under military justice and failed to carry out an investigation into their treatment in custody.
The international community's concern at the infringements of human rights in Uruguay has regrettably not brought about any positive response from the civilian-military rulers of the country. They attribute these alleged or documented abuses of authority to an "international Marxist conspiracy", present a distorted image of Amnesty International in the censored Uruguayan press and fail to answer requests for information. Although not sharing the opinion that "subversion and terrorism are a common feature of life in democratic countries" as the Uruguayan Government stated in Institutional Act No 5, Amnesty International, in a letter to President Aparicio Méndez dated 17 November 1976, expressed interest in receiving further information and establishing a dialogue concerning the Uruguayan Government's proposal in the Act for an international tribunal to protect human rights.
This Institutional Act and the Bill of Law of the State of Dangerous-ness (September 1976) are seen as attempts to meet or pre-empt international criticism of military justice applied to civilians and of long-term preventive detention by order of the Executive. In November 1976, Amnesty International released to the press an analysis of the Bill, and requested its National Sections to inform lawyers in their countries of the law, which provides for up to six years' detention with forced labour for the "inclination to commit crime" al-
162
though "no offence has been committed". The bill uses measures for dealing with vagrancy, drug addiction and similar social problems, to deal also with suspected political opponents who, due to the vague wording of the law, could be practically all the citizens of Uruguay. Having met with intense national and international opposition, this BilJ has so far not been made law, but neither has it been shelved.
Opposition to the law of the State of Dangerousness came mainly from Uruguayan jurists. There have been signs during the past year that concern over violations of human rights and the suspension of all political activity is also growing among military circles. This internal dissent is reported to have led to restrictions of movement and arres!-s of members of the armed forces.
Amnesty International estimates that at least 2,500 political prisoners are held in penal institutions awaiting the exceedingly slow trial proceedings. The number of prisoners held in military barracks or other interrogation and torture centers is more difficult to assess, but is likely to reach between 2,000-2,500 at times of intensified repression. This figure includes people rounded up for interrogation and torture as well as prisoners whose trial proceedings have begun.
Uruguay continues to have the highest per capita ratio of political prisoners in Latin America.
United States of America (USA)
President Jimmy Carter's pardon for draft resisters, which was declared in January 1977, brought about the release of Amnesty International's last adopted Conscientious Objectors in the United States. For the first time, all cases either under adoption or being investigated are of Blacks or American Indians. The difficulty in identifying Prisoners of Conscience in the United States, which was referred to in the Amnesty International Report 1975-1976 means that the number of adopted prisoners at any one time is unlikely to be large, but Amnesty International's Research Department follows alleged cases of political imprisonment in the United States very closely and the number of adopted prisoners does not reflect the amount of time or the degree of attention given to this country.
In an attempt to solve the problems involved in identifying Prisoners of Conscience in a country where there is no overt political imprisonment, but where it is suspected that many people may be "framed" on criminal charges because of their political activities or ethnic origin. Amnesty International has, during the past year, tried to arrange for observers to attend trials in the United States
163
whenever there is a possibility of imprisonment for poUtical reasons. In April 1977 a Bangladesh lawyer, Mr Shamsul Bari, attended, on behalf of the organization, the trial in Fargo, North Dakota, of Leonard Peltier, an American Indian, who had been extradited from Canada to stand trial for the alleged murder of two agents of the United States Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) on the Pine Ridge reservation in South Dakota. Mr Peltier was convicted, but at the time of writing his sentence has not been pronounced. His lawyers have announced his intention of appealing against the conviction (see also section on Canada).
In May 1977, a Bolivian lawyer, Dr Luis Reque, acted as Amnesty International's observer at a post-conviction hearing for nine of the organization's adopted prisoners, known as the "Wilmington 10" (one had been released on parole). Although three of the prosecution witnesses from the original trial testified that they had committed perjury and that their testimony had been the result of pressure and inducements offered by the prosecution, the judge rejected a motion for a new trial.
In April 1977 jury selection began for the trial in Los Angeles of two American Indians, Paul Skyhorse and Richard Mohawk, who have been charged with the murder of a cabdriver, George Aird, in October 1974. There are, however, reasons to believe that the two men may have been falsely implicated because of their participation in the American Indian Movement. A Chilean lawyer, Dr Eugenio Velasco, is observing the trial on behalf of Amnesty International. Jury selection was expected to continue until early May and the trial itself to last for several months.
In addition to the work of Amnesty International groups on individual adoption and investigation cases throughout the year, appeals were made by the Secretary General and International Executive Committee to various officials in the United States in connection with particular issues or prisoners. These included a telegram addressed to President Gerald Ford on 28 June 1976 to mark the occasion of the bicentenary of American Independence, in which President Ford was asked to grant an unconditional amnesty to "all those men who are unable to return to the United States because of their refusal to participate in the Vietnam war" and a further telegram to President-Elect Jimmy Carter on 18 January 1977, again appealing for a universal unconditional amnesty "for all who suffer exile, imprisonment or penalty because of past opposition to the Vietnam War".
Another issue which has concerned Amnesty International has been the use of the death penalty. In July 1976 the United States
164
Supreme Court ruled that the death penalty was not unconstitutional, thus opening the way to the execution of between 300 and 400 people under sentence of death. No executions had taken place in the United States since 1967 because of consideration of the issue by the Supreme Court, but in January 1977 Gary Gilmore, a convicted murderer, was executed by a firing squad in Utah. Amnesty International appealed to Governor Calvin Rampton of Utah, to President Ford and to President-Elect Jimmy Carter to intervene to prevent the execution, pointing out that Amnesty International "rigorously opposes the death penalty". An Urgent Action campaign was also mounted in an attempt to prevent the execution. After the death of Gary Gilmore, Amnesty International, in a press statement of 18 January 1977, expressed concern that his execution should not open the way to further deaths and hoped that the issue would not be confused by Gilmore's own insistence upon being executed.
On 30 August 1976 Amnesty International sent a letter to all US state governors, together with a copy of an amicus curiae brief which the organization had submitted to the US Supreme Court (see Amnesty International Report 1975-1976), and appealed to them to give careful consideration to the arguments against the death penalty contained in the brief.
Amnesty International groups were working on 14 adoption or investigation cases in the United States in June 1977.
