Brazil (Federative Republic of)
There have been markedly fewer detentions for political reasons in the past 18 months in Brazil, and Amnesty International has received fewer reports of the torture and disappearance of suspected political activists than it did in 1975. At present there are between 200 and 300 political prisoners, some 213 of them adopted by Amnesty International at the time of writing.
In September 1976, Amnesty International welcomed the release of two prisoners, Ivan Askelrud de Seixas and Cesar Queiroz Benjamin. Special campaigns had been conducted on their behalf, for both had been arrested when minors, and kept in detention on the grounds that they were "potentially dangerous", despite reports to the contrary from psychiatrists.
Amnesty International has continued to work on behalf of prisoners arrested in late 1975 during a purge of alleged members and sympathizers of the illegal Brazilian Communist Party. Many of them have recently been brought to trial. In Bahía, 10 Amnesty International adopted prisoners had their convictions quashed on appeal by the Supreme Military Court and have subsequently been released. In Sao Paulo, three prisoners had their sentences reduced from five years to three and in Curitiba only 18 prisoners out of a group of 30 are still in preventive detention awaiting trial.
In April 1977, in Florianopolis, three prisoners, Roberto Cologni, Marcos Cardoso and Alercio Verzola, charged v^dth membership of the Brazilian Communist Party, went on hunger strike in protest against their conditions: all three claim that they were badly tortured after their arrest and that they have been subject to legal irregularities and delays as regards their trials. All had to be admitted to hospital, but ended their hunger strike once an official inquiry into their complaints was opened.
The most serious incident in the past year was the arrest and shooting of members of the Brazilian Maoist Party, the Partido Comunista do Brasil, in Sao Paulo in December 1976. In an armed military operation, a house in Sáo Paulo was surrounded and several arrests were made. During the attack, three people died in dubious circumstances: Angelo Arroyo, leader of the Metalworkers' Union, and Pedro Ventura de Araujo Pomar, a former Federal Deputy for Sáo Paulo, were shot whilst trying to escape, and a third, Joao Batista Drumond, was officially reported as having been knocked down by a car and killed. Marks on the body, however, were not consistent with this explanation and it is believed that he died under torture. At least six people were arrested and two others, José Nováis and Jover Telles,
128
have since disappeared. Shortly after the incident, the arrested people were handed into the custody of Sergio Fleury, frequently cited by ex-prisoners and lawyers as a torturer and member of the death squad.
Following reports from reliable sources that some of those arrested were being tortured. Amnesty International launched Urgent Actions on their behalf. In February 1977, the International Movement of Catholic Lav^ers sent two lawyers, Louis Joinet of France and Mario Stasi of Italy, to Brazil to investigate the situation of the prisoners. The mission was financed in part by contributions from the French and German National Sections of Amnesty International. The findings of the lawyers were published in their report. La Sitmtion des Droits de l'Homme au Brésil (May 1977). The mission found that at least one prisoner, Aldo Arantes, a former President of the Brazilian Students' Union, had been tortured. This conclusion was strongly supported by testimony from his mother and his lawyers, who had seen wounds, bruises and other signs of torture when they visited him in Destacamento de Operaqôes e Investiga(^6es/Comando de Operand es de Defesa Interna (DOI/CODI) in Slo Paulo. The lawyers expressed grave concern about the other prisoners who had been incommunicado and who had also, it was claimed, been tortured. At the time of writing the trial of those arrested was thought to be imminent.
Although brutal and violent arrests of political prisoners have diminished. Amnesty International is concerned at increasing reports of the torture and ill-treatment of people—adults and minors—suspected of ordinary crimes. Church, legal and newspaper sources maintain that electric shock treatment and other methods of torture are inflicted as a matter of routine on petty criminals and delinquents. The purpose of such treatment is often to force suspects to confess to crimes they have not committed. In October 1976, for example, in the remote province of Mato Grosso, in the small township of Riberao Bonito, a priest, Father Joao Bosco Peindo Burnier, was shot by police when he went to protest about the torture of two women in the local police station. It is difficult to estimate how common such practices are since the victims, naturally, rarely file complaints. However, some idea of the extent can be got from an examination of the police figures for the number of people detained on suspicion alone in Sao Paulo in the first two months of 1977. There were 28,000 of them.
Death squads still operate, although they too concentrate chiefly on petty criminals and the marginais (vagrants). One of their main centers of activity is the poor district of Baixada Fluminense in Rio de Janeiro. In early March 1977, newspapers reported that, since the
129
beginning of the year, 41 death squad assassinations had been carried out in the Nova Igua^u region alone; many of the bodies showed signs of torture.
In February 1977, the Roman Catholic bishops issued a statement calling for greater political freedom and stressing that "security, as the good of the nation, is incompatible with a permanent insecurity of the people; this is shown in arbitrary measures of repression without possibility of defence, in humiliating trials and investigation".
In March 1977, Brazil categorically rejected a report by the US State Department, criticizing its civil rights situation, and cancelled its 25-year-oId program of US military assistance. It also refused an offer of military aid worth $50 million in credits because this was tied to the human rights report.
Despite the bishops' call for political freedom, in April 1977 President Geisel used his exceptional powers, enshrined in the Institutional Act No 5, to close Congress and force through major constitutional changes. They rule out any possibility of a civilian president succeeding Geisel when his term of office expires in 1979. Furthermore, constitutional amendments can now be passed through Congress with a simple majority (formerly it had to be a two-thirds majority). The closure of Congress was brought about when the Movimento Democratica Brasileira (MDB) blocked a government proposal for judicial reforms that would have undermined the state judiciaries and did not re-establish habeas corpus for political crimes. The constitutional reforms mean that elections for state governorships will be indirect, which will effectively ensure a permanent majority for the government-backed party.
The new measures provoked strong criticism from political, professional and business sectors, and, despite a government ban, student demonstrations (the first since 1968) took place throughout the country. This led to several arrests, notably in Sao Paulo, and to the suspension of at least 19 students from the University of Brasilia.
Amnesty International has sent a substantial amount of money to Brazil during the past year for the relief of families of Prisoners of Conscience, or of people who have disappeared, and to cover legal fees.
