Congo (People's Republic of)
At the time of writing, there was no indication that Kondho Anatole, the Secretary-General of the Congolese Labour Confederation, and his deputy, who were arrested in March 1976, had been tried or released.
Throughout most of the year, the human rights situation in Congo appeared to be relatively calm. However, on 18 March 1977, President Marien Ngouabi was assassinated in Brazzaville, allegedly by some elements in the Congolese army; and five days later on 23 March, Cardinal Emile Biayenda, the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Brazzaville, was assassinated, allegedly by members of President Ngouabi's family.
Following the assassinations, seven people were executed on 26 March 1977, including a former Congolese Head of State, Alphonse Massemba-Debat; several others, all allegedly implicated in the assassination of President Ngouabi, were convicted, seven of them being sentenced to life imprisonment, including Professor Pascal Lissouba; others were reportedly being detained without trial.
On 29 March 1977, Amnesty International cabled the Military Committee to express sympathy at the assassinations and, at the same time, to deplore the executions and appeal to the new Head of State, Colonel Joachim Yhombi-Opango, not to allow further executions.
In April 1977, Amnesty International learnt that Professor Lissouba, alone of the political prisoners convicted in March, had been transferred from Brazzaville to Ouesso, a remote detention center in the north of the Congo where it was feared that his life might be in
69
danger. Amnesty International again cabled the Head of State, on 4 May, urging him to safeguard Professor Lissouba's life and to consider transferring him back to Brazzaville, and to allow family visits to him and the other prisoners.
On 4 May 1977, the organization also cabled the International Committee of the Red Cross requesting it to try to get permission for the prisoners to receive family visits. Two days later, Amnesty International initiated an Urgent Action on the case of Professor Lissouba.
The establishment of a new govemmerit in the Congo following the assassination of President Ngouabi, who had received Amnesty International's Deputy Secretary General in January 1976, made it necessary to re-introduce the organization to the Congolese Government. In May 1977, therefore, Amnesty International wrote to the Government explaining the organization's work and expressing its wish to re-establish the relationship broken off by President Ngouabi's assassination.
