Greece (Hellenic Republic of)
All except one of Amnesty International's adopted prisoners in Greece during the past year have been Jehovah's Witnesses, imprisoned because of their refusal to perform military service.
The only adopted prisoner who was not a Jehovah's Witness was Nicholas Psaroudakis, publisher of the weekly paper, Christianiki. He was sentenced to 16 months' imprisonment in March 1976 on a charge of "insulting the authorities" in an article criticizing a Supreme Court decision which exonerated ministers who had served under the former military dictatorship. The sentence was reduced to four months in June 1976, and Nicholas Psaroudakis was released after serving the full sentence.
The average sentence passed on Conscientious Objectors in Greece, all of whom are Jehovah's Witnesses, is four-and-a-half years. In December 1976, however, Andreas Dedotsis, who has already served one sentence for refusing to perform military service, was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment. He was one of the prisoners featured in Amnesty International's Prisoners of the Month campaign in January 1977 because of his exceptionally long sentence and because he suffers from arthritis of the toes. His sentence was subsequently reduced to 20 months on appeal.
In June 1976, Amnesty International appealed to Minister of Justice Constantine Stephanakis to do everything possible to ensure a retrial for Nicholas Moundis, who was convicted of murdering an English freelance journalist, Ann Chapman, during the military régime. Ann Chapman's parents believe their daughter was killed for political reasons and that Nicholas Moundis was implicated only because he was a chance witness. He is alleged to have made a confession only as a result of torture and new evidence which has come to light has led to an official investigation of the case.
In December 1976, Amnesty International wrote to Minister of
254
National Defence, Evangelos Averoff-Tositsas about the reported deterioration of conditions at loannina Military Prison, where most Jehovah's Witnesses are held.
In April 1977 Amnesty International published the report Torture in Greece. The First Torturers' Trial 1975.
Amnesty International groups are working for the release of 33 Jehovah's Witnesses in Greece.
