Pakistan (Islamic Republic of)
On 5 July 1977, the army, headed by General Mohammad Zia-ul Haq, the Army Chief of Staff, seized power from the civilian Government, headed by Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, in a bloodless takeover. General
203
Haq imposed martial law and became the Chief Martial Law Administrator. The Prime Minister and leading members of his government and the Pakistan People's Party (PPP), as well as most of the opposition leaders of the Pakistan National Alliance (PNA) were taken into "protective custody". The Martial Law Proclamation suspended the Constitution, but the military administration declared in a martial law order that it would follow the Constitution as closely as possible. A four-member military council was appointed to administer the country until the new general elections, scheduled to be held on 6 and 8 October 1977. Political activities were banned.
The military takeover followed four months of widespread agitation in Pakistan about the manner in which the 7 March 1977 general elections had been conducted. This resulted in Mr Bhutto's Government announcing that new general elections would be held in October 1977. However, the Government and the Opposition had failed to reach accord on the terms of the agreement under which the new general elections were to be held. In the general elections of 7 March 1977, the ruling Pakistan People's Party was returned to power with a large majority. However, after the election results, there were numerous, widespread accusations by the nine-party Opposition coalition, the Pakistan National Alliance (PNA), that the elections had, to a large extent, been rigged. Opposition calls for fresh elections and the resignation of the Prime Minister were accompanied by large demonstrations in all the major cities, leading to the wholesale imprisonment of Opposition members for breaking emergency laws and defying a ban on processions. After announcing a large-scale civil disobedience movement in support of their demands. Opposition leaders were arrested and detained in late March—a move which affected the entire PNA leadership. The arrests were followed by more demonstrations, some resulting in violence. On 21 April 1977, the Bhutto Government declared martial law in three major cities-Karachi, Lahore and Hyderabad—and, at the time of writing (at the beginning of June 1977), at least 340 people, according to reliable reports, have been killed during processions or in confrontations between various political groups and the police and army.
Many thousands were arrested after the election results were published, the Opposition—at the beginning of June 1977—claimed that as many as 50,000 people had been arrested, although so far these reports have not been confirmed. Among those arrested were a few women, wives ofOpposition leaders previously arrested. Amnesty International has also noted with great concern that, in the province of Punjab alone, 84 lawyers, presidents of provincial bar associations, have been detained during the campaign. Although full details about
204
the reasons for their imprisonment are not yet available, Amnesty International knows that Aamer Raza Khan, President of the Lahore High Court Bar Association, was arrested on 25 March 1977 after conveying a resolution to the Government protesting against the "curbs on civil liberties" and the "rigging of elections". The various bar associations in Karachi, Lahore and Multan have also passed resolutions calling for the revocation of constitutional amendments, the release of political prisoners and the repeal of laws providing for preventive detention. The President and Vice-President of the Karachi Bar Association are among the lawyers arrested for organizing meetings criticizing the imposition of martial law. If it is confirmed that any lawyers arrested for demanding the maintenance of constitutional guarantees and the rule of law in Pakistan are still being detained. Amnesty International will adopt them.
Martial law courts started functioning after the declaration of martial law and they have tried an unknown number of civilians. The courts are reported to have handed down heavy prison sentences. But, on 2 June 1977, the Lahore High Court ruled that the imposition of martial law had been unconstitutional and that the trial of civilians by martial law courts was illegal. On 8 June, the Government lifted martial law and, shortly afterwards, released the nine leaders of the Pakistan National Alliance who had been detained during the last three months. It also announced the release of political workers arrested for participating in demonstrations and, on 17 June 1977, said it had released "all but a few hundred" of the 13,000 persons it detained during the post-election campcdgn. The Opposition, however, claimed that 10,000 were still being held and Amnesty International is following closely the process of release of political workers arrested after the election results were announced.
However, many political prisoners arrested prior to the March events remain in jail and the details of some of the 16 adoption cases and 30 investigation cases taken up by Amnesty International are described in a report on Pakistan published by the organization on 16 May 1977. The report, based on the findings of a mission to Pakistan from 23 April to 12 May 1976 (the delegates were Professor Miimtaz Soysal of Turkey, constitutional lawyer and Vice-Chairman of the International Executive Committee, and Yvonne Terlingen, a Dutch lawyer from the International Secretariat), was presented to the Prime Minister of Pakistan on 31 March 1977, with a request for comments, and published on 16 May, no comments having been received.
On that date. Amnesty International appealed to the Pakistan Government to "review the cases of all members of the opposition,
205
whether in detention, or on trial under special legislation, and to consider the early release, at least on bail, of all those against whom no charges under the ordinary procedure can be brought".
In the report, which reviews the pre-election period. Amnesty International expresses deep concern about the detention, trial procedures and treatment of government opponents in Pakistan. The report describes the serious erosion of fundamental rights in Pakistan reflected in the post-election events.
Amnesty International estimated that, before March 1977, there were already at least several thousand political prisoners in Pakistan, the vast majority held without trial. This estimate differs from the latest official figure of nine political prisoners quoted by Pakistan's Attorney General on 28 October 1976. Amnesty International points out that this number relates to only the very few political prisoners held in preventive detention for reasons of state security who have filed habeas corpus petititions. There are numerous political prisoners who are unable or forbidden to file such petitions. Many are detained throughout Pakistan, in particular in Baluchistan and the North West Frontier Province. The official figure does not take into account the many political prisoners tried by special tribunals and courts under special legislation but Amnesty International reckons there are about 1,000 of these.
The report describes various constitutional and legal changes made since the Emergency was declared on 23 November 1971. It pays particular attention to the Fourth and Fifth Constitutional Amendments, which have seriously curtailed the powers of Pakistan's higher judiciary: withdrawing their power to grant bail or interim orders to political prisoners on trial under the special provisions, or to issue writs of habeas cprpus petitions under the ordinary Criminal Code procedure. The Fifth Constitutional Amendment also limits the independence of the judiciary; and the report says the Amendment has removed any conceivable judicial control of legislative and executive action which infringes human rights during the Emergency. It concludes: "Political prisoners are thus deprived of a fundamental safeguard against arbitrary imprisonment, namely the right to challenge in a court the constitutionality of laws, rules and orders pertaining to their arrest, detention and imprisonment".
The various ways in which lawyers have been intimidated are listed. These practices were subsequently borne out by the many arrests of lawyers protesting about curtailments of civil liberties after the elections. The important part played by members of the legal profession in safeguarding human rights in Pakistan is recorded.
Each year many people are detained under preventive detention
206
laws (particulars about those who are not well known rarely reach Amnesty International). Political prisoners have to wait months to be brought to court and then, if no evidence is produced, their cases may be dropped but they may be re-arrested under various new charges, often under the Defence of Pakistan Rules. Political prisoners are usually tried by special tribunals (which may sit in camera and conduct hearings in prison). Included in the report are descriptions of cases of Prisoners of Conscience taken up by Amnesty International after their trial by such tribunals on charges which often appear to amount to no more than exercising the right of free speech and expression; it describes the procedures of the special courts, set up under the Suppression of Terrorist Activities (Special Courts) Act 1975, to try those suspected of sabotage and violence. The burden of proof has been changed: defendants' normal rights, such as bail and appeal, have been abridged. All this constitutes a serious deviation from the legal safeguards of ordinary law.
Particular attention is given to the trial of the leaders of the former National Awami Party (NAP). Among the accused are five Members of Parliament, including^ party leader Abdul Wali Khan and five members of the Senate. The 55 accused, charged vwth conspiracy, have been on trial for more than a year by a special court sitting inside Hyderabad Central Jail. According to the latest press reports received at the time of writing (beginning of June 1977), the trial cannot proceed because of the "absence of senior defence counsel". The leading defence counsel in the case was prevented from appearing as he himself was in preventive detention, after having taken part in Opposition demonstrations.
The trial followed a Government declaration of 10 February 1975 dissolving the NAP, which was upheld in October 1975 by the Supreme Court of Pakistan in the "Reference Case No 1 of 1975". It is Amnesty International's opinion that the rules of evidence used did not strictly conform with the formal procedure normally applicable. The evidence received by the Supreme Court did not "invariably point to the NAP acting in a manner contrary to the security and integrity of Pakistan", as was claimed.
One of the Amnesty International mission delegates attended the conspiracy trial in Hyderabad, on 10 May 1976. In Amnesty International's view the NAP members' trial inside Hyderabad Jail was held in "far from satisfactory" circumstances. Amnesty International expressed concern because the Supreme Court's findings as regards the party as a whole could be used as evidence against the individual Opposition leaders on trial. The report argues that, to ensure a fair trial, the Government should have ordered that individual NAP leaders be brought to court before making an order dissolving the
207
party, confiscating its property and referring the case to the Supreme Court of Pakistan. The trial should have been conducted in open court, in accordance with normal penal law.
During the mission, Amnesty International's delegates were handed signed statements by seven people charged by special courts (most of them charged under the Explosive Substances Act), alleging ill-treatment after arrest. The allegations include severe beatings and threats of execution. According to the mission report, they "appear to reveal a pattern of police intimidation in order to extract 'confessions' from suspects after arrest'-*. Similar allegations reached Amnesty International after the mission left Pakistan.
Amnesty International made several recommendations that the Government consider immediately abolishing the special trial procedures applied to political prisoners; restoring full constitutional powers to the higher judiciary (as formerly existed under the amended Articles 179, 180,192 and 195 of the Constitution) and repealing all provisions for preventive detention. Other recommendations, along lines of the United Nations Declaration on Torture, include the establishing of legal safeguards to prevent the ill-treatment of political prisoners after arrest.
Amnesty International noted with concern the cases of three former members of the Pakistan People's Party, two of them members of the Punjab Provincial Assembly, .who have been reported missing since October 1975, but whom Amnesty International believes are detained in Dalai Camp, Muzzafarabad, Azad Kashmir. They were among 33 political prisoners later released from detention in that camp. Amnesty International calls on the Government to institute a full-scale public inquiry into well-substantiated reports that politicians and their families have been harassed and that politicians have disappeared.
Amnesty International's disturbing account of the tendency to curtail the powers of the higher judiciary in cases where the protection of fundamental rights is at stake, was borne out when the National Assembly and the Senate passed the Seventh Constitutional Amendment on 16 May 1977. This made constitutional provisions for a referendum but also removed all power from Pakistan's High Courts to rule on the legality of any action taken by the authorities in areas where martial law applies. Moreover, the Amendment retroactively cancels any court action challenging the imposition of martial law (a case like this was being heard in the Sind High Court). The President of the Lahore High Court Bar Association has said that this latest Amendment "altered the very basic structure of the constitution". And, in its judgement of 2 June 1977, the Lahore High Court ruled that the Seventh Constitutional Amendment,
208
taking away the powers from the High Court, referred to above, was invalid.
During the past year, many Amnesty International members have appealed to the Government to release Abdul Gaffar Khan and Mirza Jawad Baig, both Prisoners of Conscience who featured in a Prisoners of the Month Campaign. They were released in the course of the year. Mr Baig was released pending appeal on 15 September 1976 by order of the Supreme Court of Pakistan. He had been serving a 12-year prison sentence for advocating a form of metropolitan government for Karachi.
