Kampuchea, (Democratic) [Cambodia]
In 1976-1977, Cambodian refugees arriving in Thailand continued to claim that summary executions and maltreatment were taking place in Democratic Kampuchea. The number of alleged executions, however, was fewer than during the preceding year. According to the Far Eastern Economic Review of 29 October 1976, "large-scale executions have apparently stopped, although sporadic killings continue".
During 1976-1977, foreign journalists were not allowed to visit the country, and the main sources of information remained refugees' reports and the official press and radio. In an interview published by the German magazine Der Spiegel in May 1977, the Foreign Minister of Kampuchea, leng Sary, denied that "hundreds of thousands of people" had been executed and added "we only condemn the worst criminals". However, the Government has not answered any of the particular allegations made in refugees' reports.
Most of the information available from refugees concerns the western provinces of Cambodia and little is known about other parts of the country. It is reported that isolated groups are still carrying out armed resistance in the western provinces and that some of the reported killings are due to this fighting. However, refugees describe various types of repression. They claim that many former administration officials were "taken away" by the authorities and either executed or never heard of again. They also allege that whoever opposes official policy subsequently disappears, and that there are camps in various places where people have to work under supervision, living on poor rations and receiving little or no medical care.
Amnesty International wrote to President Khieu Samphan on 28 February 1977, expressing concern about these reports and about allegations that in some areas civilians were threatened or maltreated by the local authorities. The organization asked about one report which claimed that 1,200 families had been collected together in a camp in the Phnom Thipadei area, east of Battambang city, because some of their members were accused of having committed various crimes. It urged the Government to comment on these allegations .and to allow representatives of international organizations to visit Kampuchea.
The Government was also asked to explain what had happened to 26 people reported executed in November 1976. On 23 November, a group of 26 Cambodian refugees in Thailand were forcibly repatriated by the Thai authorities. The group came from a village in Battambang province, near the Thai border, and had fled the
191
country in October 1976. They were mostly farmers, but included five former soldiers and officials, also a child of 11. In early 1977, Amnesty International heard that the 26 refugees had been executed after their forcible return to Kampuchea. One report in particular alleged that the whole group had been executed after staying in Mongkolborey for three days.
The organization also made a separate appeal to the Prime Minister of Thailand urging that refugees should not be compelled to return to their country of origin when there was a possibility of reprisals.
As with previous inquiries made by Amnesty International to the Goverrmient of Democratic Kampuchea, the letter has remained unanswered. In May 1977, the organization stated its concern about the Government's lack of response to its past appeals and inquiries, and said it was particularly disquieted by the following allegations made by refugees:
—	the reported disappearances of officials of the former administration and of others and allegations that some of those who have disappeared have either been executed or despatched to special work camps, either because of their position under the previous administration or because of their political beliefs,
—	reports that in some areas relatives of those considered "traitors" or "enemies", or of those who have fled the country, have been maltreated or executed;
—	reports that in some areas acts considered "disobedient" or hostile to the new authorities are likely to be punished at the discretion of the local authorities, without any apparent legal process or safeguards.
In May 1977, Amnesty International received the testimony of a refugee who had arrived in Thailand in March 1977 and had worked for nearly two years as an agricultural worker near Chhouk, in Kampot province. According to his report, four people had been executed in Prey Pen village at the beginning of 1977. Three, accused of having relations with "enemies" opposing the Government, were supposedly executed in January 1977. They were a former sailor from Ream called Chak Chea, a merchant called Tan Phok, and a former inspector from Kampot called Moul Sambok. The fourth person was an ex-soldier called Than. The report alleged that Mr Than had reprimanded his daughter, aged six, when she was singing a revolutionary song. For this he was arrested on the orders of the head of the village and executed. Amnesty International urged the Government to investigate this report and to publicize what had happened to the four people concerned.
192
