Czechoslovakia (Socialist Republic of)
In 1976-1977 there were more known violations of human rights in Czechoslovakia which were of concern to Amnesty International than in the preceding year.
241
The Amnesty International Report 1975-1976 reported the arrest of 19 young people who were members of, or associated with, two rock music groups. A number of them were brought to trial in 1976 on charges of "arousing public disturbance" (Article 202 of the CSSR Penal Code). The specific charges related to their cultural activities and lifestyle, and Amnesty International believes that they were arrested and subsequently convicted for the legitimate exercise of their right to artistic expression.
At the first trial held on 5 and 6 July 1976 in Plzen three of the people arrested, Karel Havelka, Miroslav Skalicky and Frantisek Starek were given prison sentences of from eight to 30 months, which were later halved on appeal. At the second trial on 21 and 23 September 1976 in Prague, four defendants received prison sentences ranging from eight to 18 months: Ivan Jirous, an art historian and the artistic director of one of the groups, got 18 months; Pavel Zajicek, a lyricist, got 12 months; Svatopluk Karasek, a former Protestant pastor and singer, got eight months and Vratislav Brabenec, a saxophonist, got eight months, on 11 November 1976, the Appeal Court upheld the sentences. The remaining musicians were freed but Amnesty International learned in early January 1977 that police investigations of six more musicians had been completed and that they were expected to be brought to trial.
Amnesty International German Section published and distributed a comprehensive account of the persecution of these non-conformist artists {CSSR 1976—Junge Kulture unter Anklage) and nominated two Austrian lawyers, Mr Henry Goldman and Dr Wolfgang Aigner, to observe their trial on 21-23 September 1976 and the appeal hearing on 11 November 1976. Although Czechoslovak law provides for open trials both Amnesty International delegates were prevented from attending either hearing.
On 26 October 1976, the Czechoslovak Communist Party newspaper Rude Pravo published an article accusing a prisoner of conscience (an Amnesty International adoptee) Jiri Müller of having engaged in terrorist acts in 1971. Amnesty International prepared and distributed a statement to the effect that thorough examination of this case had established that at no time had he used or advocated violence. On 1 November 1976, Amnesty International adoptee Dr Milan Hubl went on a six-day hunger-strike in protest about prison conditions and the deliberate official restriction of his children's education opportunities.
On 10 December 1976 four prominent supporters of Alexander Dubcek's 1968 reform policies who had been sent to prison for from five to six-and-a-half years were released before their sentences had expired and put on three years' probation. These were the historian
242
Dr Milan Hubl; student leader, Jiri Müller, economist, Dr Ing Antonin Rusek and Professor Jaroslav Sabata, a sociologist. On 13 December 1976, Amnesty International wrote to the President of the CSSR, Dr Gustav Husak, welcoming the release of these Amnesty International-adopted Prisoners of Conscience.
On 7 January 1977 several Western newspapers published the text of a human rights manifesto called Charter 77. It calls on the Czechoslovak Government to implement the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights which came into force in Czechoslovakia on 23 March 1976 and became part of the Czechoslovak Legal Code on 13 October 1976. Following the publication of the manifesto abroad the Czechoslovak authorities resorted to repressive measures on a scale not experienced since 1972.
During the first part of 1977, eight people were arrested for alleged criminal activities against the state. They were: Jiri Lederer, journalist; Dr Vaclav Havel, playwright; Dr Frantisek Pavlicek, writer and theatre-director; Ota Omest, theatre-director; Ing Vladimir Lastuvka, nuclear physicist; Ing Ales Machacek, agronomist. The first named three persons had signed Charter 77. Two of the detained were subsequently released conditionally: Frantisek Pavhcek on 14 March 1977 for health reasons and Vaclav Havel on 20 May 1977 after sending a letter to the Prosecutor General pledging to refrain from any activities that pending his trial might be misused abroad. Detailed charges against the first named four have not been officially announced, but Vladimir Lastuvka and Ales Machacek, who had distributed Charter 77, were accused of incitement (Article 100). Amnesty International wrote to the President and Prime Minister of Czechoslovakia on 21 March 1977 expressing its concern about the deterioration of the human rights situation in the country and the detention of people whom it regards as Prisoners of Conscience.
More recently Amnesty International has taken up the cases of two more people detained in connection with Charter 77: Ales Brezina, a former theology student and signatory of Charter 77 who was sentenced on 14 June 1977 to a half years' imprisonment for refusing to do military service (Article 269) and Frantisek Pitor, an electrician and a former political prisoner, who was arrested on 9 June and charged with incitement (Article 100) for distributing Charter 77.
By mid-February the flats of 41 signatories had been searched and house searches are still being conducted. Among the confiscated objects were personal possessions not apparently relevant to the investigation.
243
Almost all signatories have been interrogated by the State Security police, many of them several times, and interrogations are still going on. The writer Karol Sidon was held for more than 100 hours despite Article 75 of the Criminal Procedure Code which states that charges must be brought within 48 hours. Professor Jan Patocka, spokesman for Charter 77, was interrogated several times following his conversation on 1 March with Dutch Foreign Minister Max van der Stoel. After an interrogation lasting 11 hours he suffered a heart attack, was admitted to hospital and, on 13 March, died of a cerebral haemorrhage. During the week before his funeral, some 30 people were held for questioning and six houses were searched. A number of people were stopped on their way to the funeral, several prominent signatories were put under surveillance and many who attended the funeral were photographed. On 15 March 1977 the police broke up a seminar of psychologists and held several participants for up to 48 hours on suspicion that they were discussing matters connected with the death of Professor Patocka.
Many people taken for interrogation were allegedly treated roughly, some so badly that their health was endangered. On 18 February 1977 State Security officials raided the home of Jiri and Nasta Vanek, both workers, who were entertaining 20 friends at a family celebration. During their transfer and later at the police station several of them were beaten. The house was searched during their absence. Among the confiscated items were several copies of Charter 77 plus new signatures to the document. In another incident Jelena Masinova, wife of the writer Pavel Kohout and a signatory of the Charter, had her knee injured by the police. Ivana Hyblerova, a psychologist, was questioned on 31 January by her employer about her motives for signing Charter 77. She was six months pregnant, and had had a threatened miscarriage. She was admitted the same day to a gynaecological clinic where she was given a certificate stating she was incapable of work. On instructions from her employer she was sent home from the chnic and the certificate changed to one classifying her fit for work. Another signatory, Zina Kocova, a student, was detained on 20 January. From 21 January to 2 February she was subjected to examinations and treatment at a clinic for venereal disease. This was evidently an attempt by the authorities to discredit her rather than for authentic medical reasons.
Eighty-one people are known to have been dismissed from their employment during the first four months of 1977 in connection with Charter 77, most without being given notice, for "gross violation of working discipline" (Article 53b of the Labour Code) or for "endangering the security of the state" (Article 53c of the Labour
244
Code). Among those so dismissed were people who had not signed the manifesto, but had come out in support of Charter 77 or refused publicly to condemn it. Most of those affected appealed against their dismissals, but none are known to have been reinstated in their former jobs and only very few were able to find other (usually lower qualified and less well paid) employment.
Several signatories were put under police surveillance and had their driving licences confiscated and their telephones cut off.
Restrictions on religious freedom and on the right to leave the country have continued and are illustrated by the following cases taken up by Amnesty International.
Stefan Javorsky, a Slovak Roman Catholic priest, was arrested on 26 November 1975 for "misuse of religious functions". On 31 March 1976, the District Court in Roznava charged him with influencing young people to become religious. The trial was adjourned but on 26 January 1977 it was officially announced that Father Javorsky had been sentenced by the Regional Court in Kosice to 2 years' imprisonment.
Josef Martinek, a non-commissioned officer and member of a Czechoslovak national basketball team, received official permission in early August 1968 to take part in a competition in Belgium. Subsequently he applied for an extension of his stay abroad. At first this request was granted, but he was subsequently prosecuted. On 4 May 1972, the District Court in Plzen sentenced him in absentia (Article 109 Section 2) to 2 years' imprisonment for staying abroad without permission. He was arrested en route to Turkey in December 1976 at the Bulgarian border and extradited to Czechoslovakia where he is being held in Bory-Plzen prison awaiting another trial.
In March 1977 Amnesty International published a Briefing Paper on Czechoslovakia which described Amnesty International's main concerns about the country—namely the existence and application of laws which prescribe imprisonment for the non-violent exercise of certain rights of conscience, the inadequacy of legal safeguards and abuse of legal provisions relating to house searches and pre-trial detention and poor treatment and prison conditions for political prisoners.
At the end of June 1977, Amnesty International had 15 adoption and 14 investigation cases in Czechoslovakia.
