Sudan (Democratic Republic of)
The major crisis in Sudan during 1976-1977 was the unsuccessful attempt to assassinate President Jaafar al-Nimeiri and overthrow the Government on 2 July 1976. Eighty-two Sudanese troops and more than 700 rebels were reported killed in two days of fighting in the capital Khartoum. The Government described the incident as an "invasion" by soldiers trained in Libya and organized by Sadiq el-Mahdi, leader of the Mahdist sect and the banned Sudanese National Front coalition.
The first trials of those arrested during and after the disturbances
103
started at the end of July 1976, when it was reported that some 340 prisoners would stand trial. On 3 August, 81 people were executed after being sentenced to death by a special court martial, and a further 17 were executed the following day. Amnesty International cabled President Nimeiri to express deep concern at the sequence of events in Sudan, and the deaths of many Sudanese loyal to the President, but also to make clear the organization's "profound disquiet" at the execution of the captured rebels. Amnesty International urged the President to ensure that no further executions took place.
Twenty-six other people allegedly involved in the attempt, including Sadiq el-Mahdi, were tried in absentia during August and September. A further 79 prisoners stood trial in Khartoum between August and October, of whom 54 were sentenced to prison terms and the remainder acquitted. The Government stated that a further 18 had yet to be tried, but provided no information on the situation of 163 people still believed to be in custody. Persistent allegations that a total of 232 people were summarily killed while in custody after the coup attempt have been denied by the Sudanese Government.
On 19 October 1976, two soldiers were executed for their part in the army mutiny in the South in February 1976. Three others were sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment. At that time three members of the South Sudan People's Assembly, Benjamin Bol, Joseph Oduho and Malath Joseph, were detained and publicly accused of conspiring to commit sabotage and assassinations and to split up the South in conjunction with opposition elements. On 3 February 1977, eight soldiers and one foreigner were killed in an attempt by a section of the air force to capture Juba airport. This was three days after 28 leading Southern politicians had been arrested for what the Government called a "criminal plot aimed at committing chaos in South Sudan". The February incident, the fourth such incident in the South since 1975, was quickly dealt with and led to many arrests. In April 1977, it was announced that 105 people, including a number of civilians, would stand trial by court martial in connection with this incident. Amnesty International wrote to President Nimeiri at the beginning of May requesting permission to send an observer to the trial, since there were fears of a further summary trial and additional executions. No reply had been received by the end of June when the trial was due to commence.
During 1977, the ruling Sudanese Socialist Union held its second anniversary congress, after which there were major changes in the Government. In a referendum President Nimeiri was elected to a second six-year presidential term of office, with a 99.1% vote. In 1977, he visited the USA and France to request military assistance
104
in view of the dangers of the July 1976 coup attempt and the conflict with Ethiopia. Sudan accused Ethiopia of harbouring Sudanese rebels, and Sudan began openly to assist the Eritrean Liberation Front and the Ethiopian Democratic Union (see Ethiopia) in their armed struggle against the Ethiopian military Government. USSR military advisers and some diplomats were expelled from Sudan.
In January 1977, President Nimeiri was instrumental in securing the release of the British Tyler family, who had been held in Ethiopia by the Tigre People's Liberation Front for eight months. The President also released three women political detainees for whom Amnesty International made a special appeal on 8 March—International Women's Day.
Amnesty International planned to send a mission to Sudan in the second half of 1976, taking up an invitation originally made by the Sudanese Government in July 1976, in order to discuss problems relating to the persistent use of detention without trial, torture and the imposition of the death penalty. However, subsequent negotiations about the details of the mission were inconclusive and, at the time of writing, the mission has yet to take place.
