El Salvador (Republic of)
Arrests followed by "disappearance" and probable murder of people in custody by security forces were the fundamental Amnesty International concerns in El Salvador in the past year. Dr Carlos Madriz, a doctor of medicine trained in Cuba, and considered a probable left-wing candidate for Parliament in March 1976, was detained on 14 July 1976 by plain-clothes men who identified themselves as members of security forces when they broke into his home. Although there were many witnesses of the arrest, the authorities later denied that the doctor was in custody. Although released prisoners who had been held in the General Headquarters [Cuartel General) of the National Guard in San Salvador told Amnesty International sources that he was alive in custody some weeks after his arrest, others later cited semi-official information that Dr Madriz had died or been murdered in custody. Despite repeated appeals for information about his situation, no response was received from the Salvadorian authorities.
Another detainee who "disappeared" after detention and was the subject of Amnesty International appeals was Professor Manuel Alberto Rivera, leader of the teachers' trade union, ANDES. He was detained by security forces on 26 November in the town of Sansonate but was never acknowledged to be in custody, despite repeated v^rits of habeas corpus on his behalf. No official statement was received as to his situation and it is alleged that he too was murdered in police custody.
The Secretary General of Amnesty International cabled President Arturo Armando Molina on 4 March, following the 20 February 1977 presidential elections. The message was one of concern and inquiry about reports of numerous arrests, "disappearances" and killings of members of the opposition coalition. Union Nacional Opositora (UNO), .following government claims of overwhelming victory for General Carlos Romero, candidate of the official party. Spokesmen for UNO protested about the arrests of hundreds of supporters before the elections, and of poll-watchers during the election itself. Claiming massive electoral fraud, UNO supporters, led by the presidential candidate. Colonel Ernesto Claramount of the UNO, occupied the main plaza of San Salvador, demanding a reexamination of election results.
On 28 February troops moved in to clear the plaza forcibly. The number of people killed in the ensuing violence was said by President Molina to total five, but eyewitnesses of the scene on the night of the 28th and on the following two days claimed that as many as 600 UNO supporters were shot down by troops in the plaza or in the
141
neighbouring streets of down-town San Salvador. The dead were reportedly removed in army trucks and ambulances and buried secretly in mass graves.
On 19 April the Chancellor of El Salvador, Dr Mauricio Borgonovo, was kidnapped by guerrillas of the Marxist-Leninist group Frente Popular de Liberación Farabundo Marti Following the publication of threats to execute Dr Borgonovo if 37 political prisoners—largely campesinos—were not immediately released, the Amnesty International Secretary General cabled President Arturo Armando Molina to express the concern of the organization for the wellbeing of Dr Borgonovo, in a message that could "be made public at [his] discretion". The message, dated 2 May 1977, said that "Amnesty International in all cases supports the right to life, as consecrated in Article 3 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and consequently condemns the carrying out of executions under any circumstances, be they judicially or extrajudicially determined, by recognized governments, or by revolutionary forces of any kind."
After Government claims that only three of the 37 prisoners were, in fact, in custody, and that there would be no negotiation with the kidnappers, Dr Borgonovo was executed by his captors on 10 May.
On the same day the Mexican newspaper Excelsior reported the inability of the Government of El Salvador to accede to the demands of the guerrillas because most of the 37 prisoners "no longer exist"; among the 37 were Dr Carlos Madriz and Professor Manuel Alberto Rivera (see above). At the same time. Excelsior published a list of 32 other political prisoners held in Salvadorian jails, and gave the names of nine persons detained in recent weeks by security forces, but considered to have "disappeared". Amnesty International is currently investigating the legal situation of people spoken of in the Excelsior article, whose detention has been corroborated by Amnesty International sources in El Salvador.
