India (Republic of)
Massive imprisonment of Prisoners of Conscience in India ended as a result of political developments in early 1977. At least 40,000, and perhaps as many as 100,000, political detainees were released following imprisonment without trial under emergency provisions. An
180
emergency had been declared on 26 June 1975 by the Government of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, on the grounds of the threat of internal disturbances {stt Amnesty International Report 1975-1976).
The release program started when, on 20 January 1977, the Government announced that general elections—postponed indefinitely on 30 October 1976—were to be held in two months' time and that emergency regulations were being relaxed. The Government issued instructions at the same time to all 22 states to start releasing detainees and to allow public meetings in preparation for the elections. Prominent opposition leaders were indeed released shortly after this announcement, but the Government retained the Maintenance of Internal Security Act (MISA), whose scope had been widened during the Emergency to permit indefinite detention without trial without even the right to be told of the grounds for arrest (Article 16-A, MISA). The MISA and the Defence of India Rules in particular had been used extensively to detain peaceful opponents of the Government after the declaration of a national State of Emergency on 26 June 1975. The Government also said that leaders of recognized opposition parties might remain in prison and announced that members of the parties banned during the Emergency—such as the Communist Party of India (Marxist-Leninist), the Ananda Marg and the Jamaat-e-Islami-e-Hind—and those with "leanings towards such parties" would remain in detention. On 20 February 1977, Defence Minister Bansi Lai stated that "no political prisoners were in jail"; but in early March, the Janata Party (then in opposition) claimed that as many as 30,000 political prisoners were still being held in various parts of the country. The weeks preceding the 17 March 1977 general elections saw further releases of hundreds of political prisoners in the various states, but official government statistics published after the new Government took over showed that, on 19 March 1977, 17,754 political detainees were still being held under the preventive detention provisions of the MISA alone. (As of 19 March 1977, 10,903 persons were being held under Article 16-A of the MISA and, on 25 March 1977, 6,851 were being held without trial under the ordinary provisions of the Act, the grounds for detention having been communicated to the detainees.) These figures exclude an unknown but large number of political prisoners then held under the Defence of India Rules.
The Government was defeated in the elections by the coalition Janata Party—many of whose leaders and party workers had earlier been adopted as Prisoners of Conscience by Amnesty International— and, shortly before resigning. Prime Minister Indira Gandhi announced on 21 March 1977 the revocation of the national State of
181
Emergency, which had been in force since 1975. This meant that the Constitution's fundamental rights provisions and the right of habeas corpus were again enforceable.
The huge curtailment of the fundamental freedoms of Indian citizens during the Emergency—the suspension of constitutionally guaranteed fundamental rights and the right of habeas corpus, and large scale arbitrary imprisonment of peaceful government opponents —was described in The Amnesty International Report 1975-1976. The disturbing pattern continued throughout 1976, and a most significant development was the passing of the Constitution (44th Amendment) Bill by the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha (the Lower and Upper House, respectively) in November 1976, at a time when at least 38 members of both Houses of Parliament were in detention. The Amendment met with widespread criticism from eminent jurists throughout the country. (It should be noted that, throughout the whole period of the Emergency, the Indian Bar distinguished itself by organizing peaceful protests against the drastic curtailment of fundamental rights and readily gave assistance to many Prisoners of Conscience arrested under the Emergency provisions'.) Amnesty International was particularly concerned about those of the 59 clauses in the Amendment Bill which directly curtailed even further the fundamental rights guaranteed in the Constitution, and the independence of India's judiciary. Article 31-C of the Bill amends the Constitution in such a way that almost all laws and government actions are made unchallengeable in court on the grounds of violating fundamental rights provisions.
On 4 October 1976, Amnesty International wrote to Mr H.R. Gokhale, Minister of Law and Justice, explaining the organization's concern: "The amendments provide for new federal legislation to outlaw ' an ti-national activities' and * anti-national associations', both describing a wide range of activities in terms that are so vaguely worded as to invoke the abuses of arbitrary interpretation and application, particularly with respect to the legitimate expression of political views. Indeed, the amendments specify that this legislation cannot be examined by the courts to assess its compatibility with Articles 14, 19 and 31 of the constitution, which guarantee the rights to equality before the law, freedom of speech and expression and the freedom of association." (The new Government is committed to an early repeal of the constitutional amendments passed during the Emergency.)
Work for the release of the thousands of Prisoners of Conscience and for the improvement of their treatment after arrest had throughout 1975-1976 assumed highest priority in the organization's work
182
in Asia. The program of adoption of Prisoners of Conscience was expanded and, as of early January 1977, Amnesty International was working for 206 adoption and seven investigation cases.
On 26 June 1976, the first anniversary of the declaration of the State of Emergency, Amnesty International made a public appeal to the Indian Government to mark the occasion by declaring a general amnesty for the at least 40,000 political prisoners who, the organization estimated, were being held without trial. Amnesty International also urged the Government to restore constitutional safeguards and implement the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The organization also repeated its unanswered request that an Amnesty International delegation be allowed to visit India and meet government officials. It also asked the Government to initiate an independent inquiry into a considerable number of reports alleging ill-treatment of prisoners after arrest.
On 27 January 1977, the organization wrote to Indira Gandhi welcoming the Government's decision to release political prisoners and asking it to speed up its release program. It also urged the Government to consider revoking the MISA and the Defence of India Rules in the near future, and to review the cases of political prisoners still detained under the Emergency provisions. It urged the Government to publish numbers and names of prisoners it released.
More and more reports that political prisoners were being ill-treated in detention or tortured after arrest reached Amnesty International from all over India during 1976, but were often very difficult to verify.
The organization received a signed statement about treatment after arrest from Jasbir Singh, one of three students from New Delhi who was arrested on 23 June 1976 and said he had been beaten for five days after arrest, in order to force him to confess to having engaged in subversive activities. He had been made to swing hanging from a pole, to which his hands and feet were tied, as a result of which he started vomiting blood. Another well-documented case reported was that of Lawrence Fernandes (brother of Socialist Party leader George Femandes) who was seriously beaten for several days, threatened with being killed and deprived of food for three days if he would not disclose the whereabouts of his brother George, who was in hiding. According to his mother's signed statement, she found him on 26 May "looking dead, unable to move as a result of beatings by the police. His left side is without use as if crippled and both his left leg and hand are still swollen". When George Femandes was arrested on 10 June 1976, Amnesty International members cabled the Government requesting that he be given immediate access to a lawyer and that his physical protection be guaranteed.
183
After the new Government came to power on 24 March 1977, a series of reports were pubHshed in the Indian press which appear to estabhsh a pattern of police brutality to extract confessions of "conspiracies" during the State of Emergency occurring in most Indian states. According to these reports, during the Emergency prisoners were hung upside down and beaten, ht candles were placed under the soles of their feet and rats were tied inside their trousers. In the State of Kerala, the "roller treatment" is reported to have been frequently used. (This consisted of rolling a heavy wooden or steel roller, weighed down by a number of police, over the prisoner's legs.) This treatment killed at least one person—engineering student P. Rajan—who was arrested on 1 March 1976 when 300 young people were arrested throughout the state, accused of involvement in "Naxa-lite activity". The "Naxalites"are officially known as the Communist Party of India (Marxist-Leninist); some factions are committed to violent revolutionary methods. The state Government first denied knowledge of his arrest and that of three other students, but after a habeas corpus petition had been filed, the High Court of Kerala issued orders to the state's Chief Minister to produce P. Rajan in court. This led to the resignation of the Chief Minister and four police officials, who confirmed on 23 May 1977 that P. Rajan died "while in unlawful custody at Kakayam Camp on 2 March 1976, as a result of continuous torture with iron and wooden rollers".
Other disturbing reports of deaths as a result of police torture during the Emergency were confirmed by a committee established after the Emergency was revoked. The Committee of Inquiry set up by Jaya Prakash Narayan, President of Citizens for Democracy, and headed by V.M. Tarkunde, lawyer and President of the Supreme Court Bar Association, to investigate the death of left-wing political activitists in Andhra Pradesh in so-called encounters with the police, has confirmed the deaths as a result of police torture, on 24 July 1975, of four young men suspected of "Naxalite" activity. The Committee also found that four other "Naxalites", who, according to official reports, were said to have died in "encounters" with the police, were in fact arrested by the police on 31 October 1976 and shot dead the same day.
Throughout the State of Emergency, Amnesty International received a number of reports of political prisoners not receiving adequate medical treatment in jail, or of those on hunger strike in protest against their conditions being beaten. On 17 May 1976, the organization cabled the Minister of Home Affairs and the Chief Minister of West Bengal calling for a restoration of all rights existing under the jail code for political prisoners held in Presidency Jail, Calcutta. The appeal was made after reliable reports had been received
184
that six political prisoners, belonging to various opposition parties, had gone on a hunger strike, protesting against the withdrawal of the provisions relating to political prisoners.
In October 1976, Amnesty International members expressed concern to the Government about the health of G.G. Parikh, a socialist leader from Maharashtra, whose heart condition seriously deteriorated during imprisonment. On 1 December 1976, the organization wrote to the Minister of Home Affairs about the conditions in which prisoners were reportedly being held, drawing the Government's attention to reports that many families of prisoners detained under Emergency laws were not receiving any family allowance during their relatives' long period of imprisonment.
Precisely how many political prisoners have been detained without trial during the Emergency is not yet known. However, official statistics published by the new Government showed that 34,630 people had been detained under the MISA during the State of Emergency. (This figure excludes the thousands of political prisoners detained and charged under the Defence and Internal Security of India Rules.) Of these, 6,244 were held under the ordinary provisions of the Act, but the vast majority, that is, 28,386, were held under the Emergency provisions of the MISA, Article 16-A, which permitted poHtical detainees to be held without even being informed of the grounds for arrest. The states holding by far the largest number of detainees during the Emergency were Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and West Bengal. The majority were held under the provisions of the MISA, around 8 January 1977, when the total was 20,446. Some 17,000 of these were still in detention at the time of the elections, 17 March 1977. When the State of Emergency, imposed by Indira Gandhi for reasons of "internal security", was revoked on 21 March 1977, the 10,903 prisoners held under the Emergency provisions of Article 16-A of the MISA were automatically released.
The new Janata Party Government, headed by Prime Minister Morarji Desai, assumed office on 25 March 1977 and promised to restore fundamental rights and to review, and possibly repeal, the provisions of the MISA, under which the vast majority of political prisoners had been detained. Shortly before, Surendra Mohan, a General Secretary of the Janata Party, stated that "All political detainees will be released and if any court proceedings are in progress, they will be reviewed".
The new Government's first act was to revoke the State of Emergency, declared for external reasons on 3 December 1971. Emergency legislation, like the Defence and Internal Security of India Rules, under which political prisoners had been charged for taking
185
part in processions, lapsed as a result, as did Presidential orders passed during the Emergency suspending constitutionally guaranteed fundamental rights. Furthermore, the new Government reiterated its determination to protect the independence of the Indian judiciary. It cancelled the transfer of at least 21 judges, which had taken place during the Emergency against the judges' wishes, following their rulings unfavourable to the government then in power.
On 25 March, Amnesty International sent a cable to Prime Minister Desai, congratulating him on assuming office and wishing the Government all success with implementing the restoration of fundamental rights of Indian citizens. The organization received a cable from Prime Minister Desai on 30 March with the text: "I am grateful to you and Amnesty International for your message of congratulations on my assumption of office as Prime Minister of India. My colleagues and I warmly recall the efforts made by Amnesty International for the restoration of fundamental freedoms and civil liberties."
Secretary General Martin Ennals wrote to the Prime Minister on 1 April, thanking him for his reply and expressing Amnesty International's appreciation for the steps taken by the Government, particularly its decision to release pohtical prisoners held under the Emergency provisions. It also asked the Government to review, as a matter of priority, the cases of a number of left-wing political prisoners, alleged members of the Communist Party of India (Marxist) and Communist Party of India (Marxist-Leninist)—("Naxalites"), about whose prison conditions the organization had published a report in September 1974 (see Amnesty International Annual Report 1974-1975). The majority have not been held under Emergency laws, but have been in prison for long periods, charged with a number of specific offences, often, however, without being tried.
When the new Government took over, there were still 6,851 people in detention under the ordinary provisions of the MISA. On 5 April, Minister of Home Affairs, Charan Singh, stated that he hoped that at least 5,500 of them would be set free in the coming weeks. He had advised state governments to release all political prisoners still in detention "except where the interest of the security of the country were clearly involved or where persons had been detained on account of their violent activities". The first category, which, according to him, amounted to several thousand, included "spies, foreign agents, those indulging in espionage activities and rebels working underground". They also included the "Naxalites" whose release might prejudice the security of the state. The second category were those found guilty of violence in February and March 1977. The Government said that all these cases would be reviewed.
186
The Minister of Home Affairs stated that, as of 25 March, there were still 645 "Naxalites" in detention in the states of West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala and Tamil Nadu. According to later official statistics, the figure may actually be higher.
On 10 April 1977, General Secretary of the Communist Party of India (Marxist-Leninst), Satyanarain Singh, claimed there were as many as 12,000 "Naxalites" detained all over India, 6,000 of whom were held under the MISA. The other 6,000 were held on specific charges (such as the Defence of India Rules, the Arms Act and the Indian Penal Code). And, on 15 May, the Communist Party of India (Marxist) submitted alist of 293 of its imprisoned members, including people sentenced and people detained without trial.
Since then, official reports have been received that more prisoners held in preventive detention have been released (on 25 May 1977, 550 MISA detainees, "Naxalites", were released, according to the West Bengal Home Ministry, leaving 400 "extremists" in detention) and that prison conditions, already criticized in th.c Amnesty International Report on Prison Conditions in West Bengal Jails, have been improved. (The state Government also reported that it would no longer use iron fetters on "Naxalite" prisoners.) On 7 April 1977, Amnesty International released a public appeal to the Government, urging it "to release promptly all prisoners who are not to be tried. The others should be given prompt trials, with the possibility of being released before trial".
