Togo (Republic of)
While Amnesty International groups continued to handle the cases of two political prisoners, (one of whom, Frank Tsogbe, has been detained without charge or trial since 1973), the Research Department received further information about 37 political prisoners in September 1976, including Amnesty International adoptee Frank Tsogbe, and the names of 20 political detainees who had reportedly died as a result of torture and other forms of ill-treatment while in detention. During the year, the organization attempted to gain additional information on these cases with a view to possible adoption or other action.
In February 1977, the Togolese Minister of Information, Johnson Kwaovi-Benyi, stated in a letter to the London newspaper The Times that there were no political prisoners in Togo and declared the Government was willing to open Togolese prisons to "foreign journalists and genuine representatives of Amnesty International" for inspection. The Minister was replying to a previous article in The Times about political oppression in Togo.
108
Amnesty International wrote to the Minister concerning the invitation, but no reply was received and the International Secretariat continued to receive reports of arrests and of people detained on political grounds.
In May 1977, it was reported that during the nights of 4 and 5 April 1977, 27 prisoners were released unannounced in Lomé, the capital, without having been tried. They were 27 of the 47 political prisoners known to be detained by the source of the information. Among the prisoners reportedly released was Amnesty International adoptee Frank Tsogbe, and others who had been detained for over three years.
Also in May 19 77, it was reported that 20 people had been arrested on 13 April 1977 in connection with anti-govemment leaflets said to have been prepared by a group of Togolese students in Paris and found with a Togolese student who was arrested at Lomé airport.
At the time of writing, Amnesty International was trying to get confirmation of the news of the releases and to investigate the reported arrests and earlier detentions.
