Guatemala (Republic of)
On 12 December 1976, Amnesty International published a 17-page Briefing Paper on Guatemala. This outlined the phenomenon of extrajudicial executions and "disappearances" carried out by para-military "death squads" which has dominated the human rights situation there since 1966. The report gives evidence (including previously published statements by members of past and present governments) that these groups operated with the knowledge and, at times, close cooperation of government authorities, and also cites a number of
142
cases in which uniformed security forces, including paratroops, have carried out "death squad" activities.
Over 20,000 people are believed to have suffered extrajudicial detention and execution since the use of massive illegal detentions and summary executions developed as a routine political measure to counter left-wing guerrillas active in the late 1960s. The Paper traces the development of the largely civilian death squads such as Mano Blanca (the White Hand) in which, for the first time, civilians were systematically integrated into a counter-subversion organization on a semi-permanent basis.
Another section discusses the legal basis for the para-military death squads, the structures of security forces and Ae lack of checjis on their actions, especially in the countryside. It notes that, under the present system, over 4,000 large private farms are individual governmental districts with the consequent right to form and direct their own security forces which can then operate outside the effective supervision of central or even regional governmental authorities.
The report also cites recent developments, including cabinet changes, that suggest President Kjell Laugerud Garcia is moving to check the routine deaths and disappearances. Since the publication of the report, other improvements have been observed, including the arrest of a number of members of security forces implicated in death squad activity, and a drop in disappearances and in death squad killings in urban areas.
One of the Army lieutenants named in police statements as a leader of the death squad guUty of the murder of Lt Waldemar Orozco de Leon and others—a case discussed in the Guatemala Briefing Paper—was brought to trial in November 1976 and sentenced to four years' imprisonment for his activities in the group. The conviction of a member of the armed forces on active duty, for participation in a para-military group which carried out extrajudicial executions is an encouraging sign. To Amnesty International's knowledge, this is the first time a member of a right-wing para-military death squad has been detained and formally consigned to the courts and, furthermore, been convicted of violent crimes. Lieutenant Fernando Morales Pineda was accused of being one of businessman Jorge Zimeri Saffie's main supporters in command of the group. In his statement to a mihtary court {auditoria de guerra), Lt Morales said that the group was involved in the murders of "an engineer employed in the Camino Real Hotel, a detective of the national police named Napoleon, a North American negro, an officer of the Marines, Waldemar Orozco, and of a lawyer, among others".
However, warrants for the arrest of Sr Elias Zimeri Nassar, a busi-
143
ness partner of former President Carlos Arana Osorio, and his son, Jorge Zimeri Saffie, have not been served, although the two men were said to have been the organizers and directors of the group and are the owners of various properties on which arms and ammunition have been found by police, including the factory where the body of Lt Orozco was discovered. The 8th Criminal Court of Preliminary Hearings in Guatemala City in February 1977 acquitted four employees of the factory, but left the case against Sr Elias Zimeri Nassar and his son open.
There has been a considerable drop in urban gureas in the political violence of the death squads—torture, killings and simple "disappearances" after abduction by governmental or para-govemmental armed groups—since January 1977. But there are still many reports of the abduction of campesinos by unidentified but heavily armed men, said by local sources to be linked with rural authorities. In El Quiche Department abuses continue to be attributed to uniformed army troops. The national press in Guatemala City reported in the first three months of 1977 the "disappearance" of at least 48 campesinos after abduction, or the discovery of the bodies of the abducted campesinos, most of them with the marks of severe torture and/or mutilation. This indicated that while the national authorities may have recently taken steps to control the operation of the right-wing death squads in the cities, the poor rural population remains outside the protection of the law and continues to suffer abuse both from official and semi-official armed groups.
The Guatemala Briefing Paper discussed the geographical distribution of deaths and disappearances attributable to the right-wing death squads, and by means of a chart analyzed by location 1,105 cases occurring between January 1972 and April 1976. The most interesting finding was that while deaths and "disappearances" in Guatemala City averaged 28% throughout the period (not surprising since it is the center of the political and economic life of the nation, and the home of more than one-sixth of the population), deaths in the sparsely populated northern areas—El Quiche and El Peten Departments—represented only 6% in 1972 while in 1976 they represented approximately 28%. The increase in death-squad violence in this almost entirely rural area, especially in El Quiche Department, has been attributed to the discovery of vast deposits of petroleum, and to the building of a highway in the area with a consequent sudden rise in the value of the land, and conflicts over land tenure. Unlike deaths and disappearances in other areas of Guatemala, those reported in El Quiche Department are said to involve uniformed troops-including paratroops—of the Guatemalan Army, and to be related to
144
measures against left-wing guerrillas known to be operating in the area. Despite official statements regarding counter-insurgency measures, no left-wing guerrillas detained in the area have, to the knowledge of Amnesty International, been committed for trial.
Seventeen Indian peasants of the area of San Fernando Cotzal, in El Quiche Department, were the subject of Amnesty International inquiries after their arrest over a dispute over land tenure went unacknowledged by authorities. The 17 were later reported by reliable sources to have been released, but trade union, church and press sources alleged that over 60 other peasant farmers from the region have been detained and have "disappeared" since the beginning of 1977.
Amnesty International groups are currently investigating a total of 29 cases of prisoners and people who have disappeared in Guatemala. Another 20 cases, in which official security forces were believed to have been directly involved in illegal detentions and disappearances, have been investigated.
One of the appeal cases, a university student, José Fernando Lobo Dubon, disappeared after capture by the National Police and was then released 33 days later. Although the police throughout the 33 days denied that Sr Lobo Dubon was in custody, and habeas corpus pleas determined that he was in no legal place of detention, the Chancellor of Guatemala, Don Adolfo Molina Orantes subsequently confirmed that he had, in fact, been detained by detectives of the National Police and taken to police headquarters. The then Minister of Government, General Leonel Vassaux Martinez (who resigned shortly afterwards), and the Director of the National Police, Colonel Mario Cardona Maldonado, had repeatedly and publicly denied that Sr Lobo Dubon was in detention. When he was released, Sr Lobo Dubon immediately sought asylum in the El Salvador Embassy and was personally accompanied by the Ambassador to San Salvador.
