Syria (Arab Republic of)
Widespread internal opposition to the Syrian military intervention in the Lebanon in June 1976 was the main issue pertinent to Amnesty Intemational's work in Syria during the past year. The serious unrest has been exploited by extremist groups, known as "rejection-ists", who are opposed to any form of Middle East settlement. There has been continuous political violence, in Damascus and in other major cities such as Hama, Homs and Aleppo. Some of the deaths and many of the injuries, of both civilian and military, are reported to have been caused by bomb explosions and assassination attempts.
This violence, much of it officially attributed to the Iraqi Government, has led to widescale arrests of extremist elements and other suspected opponents, particularly suspected members or supporters of the Iraqi Baath Party. Amnesty International's Secretary General wrote to President Hafez Assad on 6 October 1976 urging that 33
313
people arrested on charges of sabotage receive a fair and open trial. Numerous reports of abductions from Lebanon by the Syrian armed forces of both Lebanese and Palestinians have been a source of concem to Amnesty Intemational (see Lebanon) and this matter was raised by the Secretary General during a visit to Damascus. Greatly tightened security measures are, at the time of writing, preventing Amnesty Intemational from accurately estimating the number of those arrested since June 1976. However, reliable sources put the total number of political prisoners at 1,000 to 1,500.
The wave of political violence has led to increased use of the death penalty. Twelve executions and six death sentences on counts of sabotage have been reported over the past year. On 6 October 1976 Amnesty Intemational wrote to President Hafez Assad deploring the 27 September public execution of three people, without an open or fair trial, the day after a violent attack on the Semiramis Hotel in Damascus. There were three more public hangings on 6 January 1977 in Damascus and Aleppo, and 10 others were sentenced to varying terms of imprisonment for sabotage. On 5 May 1977, Amnesty Intemational asked President Assad for verification of the reported execution of four men by firing squad on 24 April 1977 following the killing of two members of the Syrian armed forces outside Beirut.
Following Amnesty Intemational's letter of 8 June 1977 asking President Assad to commute six death sentences for sabotage. Amnesty Intemational learned that two of those were carried out by public hanging on 13 June. One sentence was commuted on grounds of the prisoner being under age and three sentences were passed in absentia. Amnesty International wrote to President Assad on 17 June expressing its grave concern. One public hanging for assault and murder was reported to have occurred in Damascus on 24 March 1977. On 20 May Amnesty Intemational asked Minister of Justice Adib Nahawi if the report was true. On each occasion Amnesty International asked to be informed of trial procedures.
Long term detention without trial continues to cause Amnesty Intemational considerable concem. At the end of June 1977, 59 cases were under adoption or investigation by Amnesty International. Only one of these, lawyer ZouheirAl Shulak, abducted from Lebanon in April 1970, has been tried; his sentence was completed in 1975. Last year 32 new cases were taken up, nine as full adoptions. These were of people arrested between 1971 and 1975; the majority were supporters of the previous government in power from 1966 to 1970. The 23 investigation cases consist of right-wing Muslim Brethren, Iraqi Kurds and others arrested on suspicion of collusion with Iraq.
314
Amnesty International has learned that five of its adopted prisoners have been released, one of whom is Ahmad Sheikh Qassem, former member of the Baath Party Regional Command. He was freed at the beginning of November when Amnesty International launched an Urgent Action campaign calling for his release because of his severe heart condition. Minister of Health Madani A1 Khiyami subsequently confirmed the release in a letter to Amnesty International dated 23 November. It was reported that some 50 political prisoners were set free then, and a further 150 in April, but Amnesty International does not consider these releases indicate a reduction in the number of political prisoners.
Amnesty International has received news about the adopted former government members still detained without trial in A1 Mezze Prison after six years. Amnesty International has been told that family visits are allowed once a month on average. Correspondence and reading material—other than that provided in the prison library-are not permitted. Although there is a prison doctor, sick prisoners are no longer permitted treatment in the adjacent military hospital since the escape of a political prisoner in November 1974. No news has been received of the Amnesty International adopted former head of the Jewish community in Lebanon, Albert Elia. The organization has recently learned that the eight adopted Syrian Kurds, imprisoned without trial since 1973, have been transferred to A1 Qalaa civilian prison in Damascus, despite continuous official denials of their imprisonment. Amnesty International is increasing its efforts to obtain their release.
Amnesty International remains most disturbed by allegations of torture from numerous sources. The Secretary General wrote to President Hafez Assad on 20 August 1976 urging him to conduct a personal inquiry into reports received of three deaths as a result of torture. Adel Kayali, a 35-year-old lawyer from Aleppo, is believed to have died on 25 July 10 days after his arrest; Tarik Haidari, also a lawyer from Aleppo, detained with eight other lawyers without trial since early 1975 in A1 Mezze, reportedly died in Aleppo in July. Marwan Hadid, a holy man from Hama, imprisoned without trial in A1 Mezze since March 1975, is alleged to have died on 23 July. In September Amnesty International Urgent Action and Campaign for the Abohtion of Torture groups appealed to the Government for an independent inquiry into seven reported deaths due to torture in 1975 and 1976. In June Amnesty International received two first-hand accounts of torture from released prisoners said to have included electric shocks, beatings with sticks and rubber truncheons and dousing with cold water. The number and consistency of torture
315
allegations suggests that torture is regularly used as a routine method of interrogation.
On 27 February Amnesty International's Secretary General visited Damascus where he discussed with Dr Haissam Kelani of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs the organization's wish to send a legal delegation to Syria in 1977.
