Thailand (Kingdom of)
After three years of civilian elected govemment, a military regime was reinstated in Thailand on 6 October 1976. On 5 October, several thousand students at Thammasat University in Bangkok took part in
224
a demonstration led by the National Student Center of Thailand (NSCT) against the return to the country of Field Marshal Thanom, a leader of the former military Government. The demonstration was in protest against the hanging a few days before of two workers in Nakhon Pathon who had stuck up anti-Thanom posters. During the rally at Thammasat, the NSCT staged a play about the two lynched workers.
Early on 6 October, severed thousand right-wing students and other militants, police and para-military groups besieged Thammasat University using firearms. Official reports stated that more than 40 people were killed, but others said the total number of deaths was much higher. Over 3,000 students and others were arrested. Conditions in the prisons were inadequate and extreriiely overcrowded. On the evening of 6 October, the military imposed martial law.
On 14 October 1976, Amnesty International cabled the new Prime Minister, Thanin Kraivichien, calling for the release of the students and asking for an investigation into reports of police brutality towards them.
The 24-strong National Administrative Reform Council (NARC) was formed shortly after the coup and on 22 October King Phumiphon Adundet introduced the new constitution. The NARC introduced wide powers of arrest and detention, banned strikes, declared all meetings of more than five people illegal and maintained strict censorship of the press. The maximum period of detention wdthout trial was extended from 84 to 180 days. The NARC also announced the establishment of "re-education" centers for individuals considered to be a "danger to national security".
On 29 October, Amnesty International again wrote to the Prime Minister, calling for all those detained during and after the 6 October events to be released on bail.
Although about half the students arrested at Thammasat University were released on bail a few days after the coup, many other people were arrested on the grounds that they were a "danger to national security". Members of political parties, trade unionists, journalists, students and teachers were among the victims of the second wave of arrests after the 6 October events. The total number of these detainees has not been established, but it is estimated that several thousand were arrested and detained throughout the country.
The students arrested at Thammasat were charged with offences relating to rioting and communist activities. Secretary General of the NSCT Sutham Saengprathum and five other student leaders faced additional charges oi lèse-majesté.
On 12 March 1977, nine detainees charged with being a "danger
225
to national security" were released. Eight of these cases had been taken up by Amnesty Intemational. Immediately after the releases, three were re-arrested and charged with participating in the riots at Thammasat University.
By early 1977, most of the students arrested at Thammasat University had been released on bail. In March, it was announced that criminal charges had been brought against 143 students, many of whom had been released on bail, and that charges had been dropped against all the others who had been released on bail because there was insufficient evidence against them. Later in March, it was reported that the charges would be dropped against about 40 of the 143, who were under 18.
The Department of Public Prosecutions further recommended that charges be dropped against 36 other people, again because of insufficient evidence. However, in April, the Police Department insisted on charging them and bringing them to trial. The outcome of this dispute between the Prosecution and Police Departments is not yet known. At the time of writing, charges had been upheld against about 100 students.
There is no indication as yet as to when the students are due to be tried. Their trial will be before an emergency military tribunal and they will not be allowed defence counsel nor have the right to appeal.
On 5 April 1977, Amnesty Intemational cabled Prime Minister Thanin Kraivichien expressing concem about the continued detention of political prisoners and calling for an amnesty for all those held without trial. The organization urged the Govemment to grant bail to all those whom it intended to try. In June 1977, it again cabled the Prime Minister, recommending that all trials be fair and open, and requesting him not to sentence prisoners without bringing them to trial, as he is empowered to do by Article 21 of the Constitution.
Amnesty Intemational has also taken up for investigation the cases of two students and five workers arrested by the former civilian Government of Prime Minister Kukrit Pramoj. Seven men and two women were arrested on 30 March 1976 in various factories in the Nakhon Pathon region. The students were involved in trade union activities among textile workers. Police raided several factories on 30 March and claim to have found communist literature and an illegal shotgun.
For several weeks the nine people were held in a provincial detention center and in June 1976 they were transferred to Laadyao Prison in Bangkok. In August, the two girls were granted bail. The
226
nine were charged in August 1976 under the Criminal Code and the Anti-Communist Act. Since they were arrested before the declaration of martial law, their case is being heard in a civilian court and they are allowed legal representation. The prosecution has brought forward 64 witnesses, including special branch men and police officers. By April 1977, only five of these witnesses had given evidence. The trial is likely to last several months.
Amnesty International has also been deeply concerned with the situation of Indo-Chinese refugees in Thailand. By the end of 1976, there were reckoned to be over 70,000 refugees in Thailand, many of whom are still living in camps. In August 1976, it was reported that there were anti-Vietnamese demonstrations in parts of north-east Thailand. Students and right-wing elements were said to have taken part in the stoning of Vietnamese property, and 26 students were held on charges of causing disturbances.
In November 1976, the Bangkok Metropolitan Police Commissioner Lieutenant General Wichian Saengkaeo was reported to have ordered the police to arrest, after 6 October, any aliens who had illegally entered the country. The police claimed that 123 illegal immigrants had so far been arrested in Bangkok. Such arrests also took place in many border regions of Thailand.
Also in November 1976, it was reported that 26 Cambodian refugees who had been handed over by the Thai to the Cambodian authorities at the frontier post of Aranya Prathet, were summarily killed in Cambodia. Amnesty International wrote to Prime Minister Thanin on 16 February 1977 urging that the Thai Government refrain from compelling refugees to return to their country of origin, especially when there was a real possibility of reprisals being taken against them. At the same time, the organization expressed grave concern to the Cambodian Government about the reported killings.
The Vietncimese Government has several times condemned the way the Thai authorities have treated Vietnamese refugees. In October 1976, the Vietnamese Government accused Thailand of sending some 7,000 refugees to "concentration camps" in the north. The Vietnamese Foreign Ministry was said to have claimed that they had been rounded up on charges of subversion.
In April 1977, the Vietnamese Government protested against the arrest of more than 60 refugees on charges of involvement in clandestine political activities and endangering national security.
The new Thai Constitution gives the Prime Minister special powers to deal with cases affecting national security. He used these powers in April 1977, when he ordered the execution of two untried men:
227
Thavom Udomnueduj, a Lao-Chinese narcotics agent, who was executed on 15 April and a senior Thai general. General Chalard Hiranyasiri, executed on 21 April for his part in an abortive coup in late March 1977. Several police and civilians, including two senior government officials and four journalists, were held for questioning in connection with the attempted coup. On 2 May, Amnesty International wrote to Prime Minister Thanin Kraivichien urging him to stop using the death penalty and sentencing people without trial.
