Poland (Polish People's Republic)
During the past year Amnesty International attention regarding Poland was focussed on the complex of allegations and reports of human rights violations which followed workers' strikes and disturbances in the towns of Radom and Ursus, and peaceful assemblies in Lodz and Plock on 25 June 1976 in response to the official announcement of intention to raise food prices.
After the strikes and disturbances more than 2,000 people were arrested, according to unofficial sources. Most were soon released, but by October 1976 over 150 were still imprisoned. The majority (especially in Radom) were convicted of damaging pubhc property, theft and assaulting pohce officers. Sentences ranged from a few months to 10 years' imprisonment. They were imposed mainly in trials of groups of workers.
Amnesty International was concerned by the numerous allegations that the trial procedures and standards of evidence had, in many cases, been very questionable.
On 22 June 1976, two days prior to the official announcement of the proposed increase in food prices, the Government issued a directive, No.24/76, valid until 30 September 1976. This directive (based on Article 56 of the Local Government Act and Article 70/2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure) simplified procedures of the "people's courts" in the cases of participants in the 25 June disturbances who were subsequently tried.
In more than 20 of these cases investigated by Amnesty International in 1977 convictions were based on "collective responsibility".
260
rather than identified and proven individual offences. In many cases, witnesses were absent from the trial and their testimonies were read by other people. In some cases, witnesses who were in court, most of them members of the police, submitted testimonies concerning offences allegedly committed by the same individuals simultaneously, yet in different places. Some defendants were charged with acts which in fact were committed hours after they had been detained. Some of the detained workers were allegedly driven in a car around Radom, made to pick up various objects, then charged with theft. (All those charged with theft were released on appeal within a few months, although many of them were fined up to 2,000 zlotys.) From all cases reviewed by Amnesty Intemational it appears that defendants with previous convictions were particularly liable to receive heavy sentences, even when the evidence against them was contradictory. Self-incriminating statements used as evidence by the court were allegedly extracted from numerous workers under severe maltreatment. The right of defence was limited—for example it is alleged that the witnesses chosen by the defence were generally not allowed to appear in court, and that the testimony of those who did was belittled by the court. Although the trials were in theory open to the public, in many cases even the defendants' closest relatives were excluded.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about reports that some strikers and demonstrators may have been convicted solely for having exercised the right of assembly.
Amnesty Intemational has information on more than 80 workers who were severely beaten at the time of their arrest and during interrogations at police headquarters and their subsequent detention. There have been frequent and detailed allegations that some arrested workers were made to run a gauntlet (the "health path") between lines of police armed with tmncheons and keys. These and other reports that suspects were badly beaten are supported by details of cases in which individuals sustained serious injuries, including fractures, head injuries and mental disorders.
The workers arrested after the riots and strikes on 25 June 1976 were detained in the prisons of Grojec, Pinczow, Bialystok and Radom. According to numerous reports it appears that many, while in pre-trial detention, were kept for several weeks in overcrowded cells (up to three times normal capacity), sleeping on the floor and fed with bread, jam and coffee.
On 12 January 1977, Amnesty Intemational appealed to the Ministry of Justice to allow the imprisoned workers a fair trial and appeal hearing, also to initiate a thorough pubUc inquiry into the
261
allegations of maltreatment. However, the Prosecutor General, Lucjan Czubinski, stated that the allegations of maltreatment were false and that persons who submitted complaints were either paid to do so or were criminals. After First Secretary of the Polish United Workers' Party Edward Gierek had formally requested a pardon for the sentenced workers on 3 February 1977, most of the workers were released.
Anxiety at police behaviour has mounted as a result of unofficial allegations that, in Radom especially, for several days after 25 June 1976, the police arrested and beat occasional passers-by. Critics of police practices have drawn attention to the death of Jan Brozyna in Radom several days after the disturbances. They claimed he had been beaten by two policemen who found him lying drunk on a pavement. According to the death certificate, he died of a fractured skull, haemorrhages, haematomea and other injuries caused by a long hard instrument. The authorities, on the other hand, said his death was due to injuries received when falling from a window. The Public Prosecutor promised his widow that the body would be handed over to the family, but this permission was later withdrawn. Mrs Brozyna appealed to the authorities for a full public inquiry into her husband's case. Since then she has reportedly been harassed by members of the police. Fourteen purported witnesses were allegedly detained and threatened with imprisonment if they did not withdraw their statements.
Amnesty International took up the cases of participants of the Workers' Defence Committee who had been arrested. This committee was formed in August 1976 by a group of Polish citizens to publicize the treatment said to have been meted out by the police and judges to workers and to provide them with legal, medical and financial aid. The group was harassed because of its activities, questioned by police, searched, briefly detained and fined for illegally collecting money. Finally in mid-May 1977, 10 members and supporters of the Committee were arrested. The arrests took place shortly after these individuals had appealed pubhcly to the PoHsh Government for an independent inquiry into the case of Stanislaw Pyjas from Krakow. He was an active Committee supporter who had died in mysterious circumstances on 7 May 1977. The authorities would not allow an autopsy by an independent group of specialists. However in July the authorities stated that according to an inquiry the death of Pyjas was caused by injuries sustained after falling down a staircase. Committee members arrested were Jacek Kuron, Adam Michnik, the literary critic Jan Josef Lipski, Jan Litynski, Antoni Macierewicz, Piotr Haimski, Miroslaw Chojecki, Seweryn Blumsztajn, Wojciech
262
Ostrovski and Wojciech Arkuszewski. Amnesty International adopted them as Prisoners of Conscience.
According to a statement by the Prosecutor General's Office, all 10 were suspected of having committed offences of "communicating with hostile organizations abroad" or "disseminating hostile literature". Evidently these accusations relate to the "communiques" on human rights violations in Poland issued by the Workers' Defence Committee throughout the year.
At the end of May, Amnesty International appealed to First Secretary of the Polish United Workers' Party, Edward Gierek and Minister of Justice Jerzy Bafia for the immediate release of these people.
In June 1977 Amnesty International sent a French lawyer. Marc Archambault de Montfort, to Poland to investigate legal aspects of the cases of the arrested members of the Workers' Defence Committee and also those of five workers still imprisoned in Radom and Ursus. He visited the office of the Prosecutor General and the Ministry of Justice in Warsaw, lawyers and members of the Workers' Defence Committee who were not detained at that time. In many respects his findings confirmed Amnesty International's concerns.
On 22 July 1977, Polish National Day, the Polish Government released the nine members of the Workers' Defence Committee and the five workers still imprisoned in connection with the disturbances on 25 June 1976 were also released.
Polish criminal law calls for up to five years' imprisonment for trying to leave the country without official permission. The official Polish statistics for 1975 (published in 1976) state that 288 Polish adults and 55 minors (children up to the age of 17) were tried and sentenced for illegal attempts to cross the border (Article 288 of the Polish Criminal Code). Amnesty International did not, however, take up any new cases of persons imprisoned for this offence in 1976-1977.
Amnesty International is investigating a number of cases in which Polish emigrants who returned to the country for holidays or private visits were imprisoned for committing espionage for a NATO country. In the cases Amnesty International is reviewing, those convicted of espionage were not formally exempted from Polish citizenship when they became citizens of another country; consequently the Polish authorities still considered them Polish citizens. Evidently at least some such persons have been charged with espionage because while still officially regarded as Polish citizens, they had given routine information to the immigration authorities of western European countries —not because of any hard evidence that they had committed espionage
263
in the usual sense of the word. Amnesty International is investigating the cases of Marian Blotny, a citizen of the Federal Republic of Germany, sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment in 1975 {he had also attempted to help his wife illegally cross the frontier in East Berlin); Wieslaw Smolarz, a Danish citizen, sentenced to six years' imprisonment in July 1975; Eugeniusz Rasakowski, a citizen of the Federal Republic of Germany, sentenced to six years' imprisonment in August 1975; Herbert and Margaret Preiss, citizens of the Federal Republic of Germany, arrested in April 1977. Most of the defendants known to Amnesty International are of German ethnic origin from Poland. Amnesty international fears that their imprisonment may be the result of their having exercised their right (proclaimed in international human rights instruments) to leave their own country. Ludwik Cendrzak, a Warsaw lawyer, who had defended a number of individuals tried for espionage was himself tried for espionage on 3 April 1977 and sentenced to 11 years' imprisonment. Amnesty International is investigating his case.
During the past year Amnesty International has investigated 30 cases and adopted 10 Prisoners of Conscience.
