Czechoslovakia (the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic) (CSSR)
Amnesty International's major concerns during the past year have been the existence and application of laws which prescribe imprisonment for non-violent exercise of certain human rights; the imprisonment of persons for expressing views disapproved of by the authorities; the denial of a fair trial to persons charged with political offences; the retention of the death penalty and the poor treatment and conditions of detention for individuals convicted of political offences.
The Czechoslovak constitution (1960) guarantees freedom of expression only insofar as its exercise is consistent with the interests of the working people. The Czechoslovak Penal Code (1973) contains provisions which prescribe imprisonment for non-violent exercise of certain rights of conscience. Two articles which have been applied in many cases of political prisoners, article 98 (subversion of the Republic) and article 100 (incitement), state "anyone acting out of hostility to the existing socialist, social and governmental system of the Republic. . . shall be punished. . . ". The formulation of these provisions is so general that practically any political or public activity which does not conform to the current official political line can be qualified as criminal.
In April 1978, the unofficial Czechoslovak human rights movement. Charter 77, set up the Committee for the Defence of the Unjustly Persecuted (VONS), which has issued over 100 statements providing valuable information on violations of human rights in Czechoslovakia.
Most cases taken up by Amnesty International continued to be of people charged with "incitement" (Penal Code article 100) for writing, disseminating or merely possessing texts critical of the policies of the Czechoslovak authorities.
Ivan Manasek, a student, and Milan Kobal, a worker, were sentenced in August 1978 in Prague to 18 months' and 12 months' imprisonment respectively for distributing previously unpublished information about conditions in the Communist Party. Jiri Chmel, a geophysicist, was sentenced in October 1978 in Most to 18 months' imprisonment for allowing several people to sign Charter 77 in his flat and for playing a tape-recording of the text of the Charter 77 manifesto in public. The latter charge was withdrawn by the prosecutor as not proven. Zdenek Kastak, a worker, was sentenced in November 1978 in Trutnov to 10 months' imprisonment to be followed by psychiatric treatment for sending suggestions and complaints to the party authorities and newspapers. Josef Brychta, an official, and Pavel Novak, an engineer, were sentenced in November 1978 in Jihlava to 8 months' imprisonment for possessing, duplicating and distributing texts "inimical to the socialist state order". In December 1978, following an appeal by the prosecutor, the Regional Court in Brno increased their sentences to 13 months. Petr Cibulka, a worker, Libor Chloupek, a librarian, and Petr Pospichal, a printing apprentice, were sentenced in November 1978 in Brno to 2 years', 20 months' and 11 months' imprisonment respectively for organizing private performances by musicians and other nonconformist individuals and groups and for duplicating and disseminating typewritten and tape-recorded "anti-state" works.
Frantisek Hrabal, a worker, and Jiri Volf, a driver, were convicted of subversion in October Î978 in Prague and sentenced to 3 years' imprisonment for distributing
126
Charter 77 documents and other "anti-state", "anti-Party" and "anti-social" texts. Jan Simsa, a Protestant pastor, was sentenced in August 1978 in Brno to 8 months' imprisonment for "assaulting a public functionary". He is said to have defended his wife when a police officer tried to take a letter from her by force during a search of their home. Professor Jaroslav Sabata, a psychologist and spokesman for Charter 77, was sentenced in January 1979 to 9 months' imprisonment for "insulting a police officer". Eyewitnesses have reported that he was beaten up by the police. Dr Sabata had been arrested on 1 October 1978 near the Polish border, after the police had broken up a meeting of members of the Polish Committee for Social Self-Defence (KOR) and Czechoslovak human rights activists.
Among those awaiting trial is Vojtech Srna, a Catholic priest who was charged with obstructing control of church and religious activities. He was accused of allowing a mass to be held without official permission at an Esperanto camp in July 1977. Miroslav Svacek, a civil engineer and leader of the camp, was charged with assisting Vojtech Srna. Pavel Buchler, a graphic artist, was arrested in December 1978 in Budapest when attempting to continue his journey to Vienna on a forged passport. He had previously been harassed by the Czechoslovak authorities for his dissenting views and had had his applications for permission to travel to Western Europe repeatedly refused. He was handed over to the Czechoslovak authorities in February 1979. During 1978 and 1979 Jan Zmatlik, a sociologist, Dr Jaromir Savrda, a writer, and Jiri Vesely, a former teacher, have been in detention without trial for 8, 9 and 13 months respectively. Jan Zmatlik was charged with "making preparations for subversion of the Republic by producing, duplicating and attempting to disseminate written materials hostile to the social order of the CSSR". The details of Dr Savrda's indictment are not known but it is beUeved that he is being prosecutcd for his dissenting views. Jiri Vesely was charged with sending letters to the authorities in which he criticized political and social conditions in the country.
In October 1978, Amnesty International appealed to the President, DrGustav Husak, for an amnesty for all prisoners of conscience to mark the 60th anniversary of the founding of the Czechoslovak Republic. Amnesty International groups also appealed to the President for the release of their individual prisoners, but no amnesty was announced.
Amnesty International groups were working on 55 adoption and investigation cases in the CSSR in April 1979.
Article 103 of the constitution (1960) and article 199 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (1973) state that trials should be open to the general public. In practice, however, almost without exception, political trials are closed to the public, only one or two family members and occasionally a close friend of the accused being admitted. Foreign correspondents and other foreign observers are normally excluded. In a press release of 5 October 1978 Amnesty International announced that its observer at the trial of the above-mentioned Petr Cibulka, Libor Chloupek and Petr Pospichal had been detained and questioned by the police for five hours. At the trial of Jiri Chmel, prosecution witnesses Josef Klier, Petr Ouda, Josef Hegr and Ivana Holotova retracted their previous testimony which they said they had given under duress. They were arrested and in January 1979 sentenced to prison terms ranging from 14 to 24 months for "giving false evidence".
127
Under the Penal Code (1973), a number of crimes are punishable by the discretionary death sentence. The Regional Court in Brno in September 1978 sentenced Robert Bares, aged 22, to death for "endangering public safety, robbery, attempted abduction abroad and theft". In May 1978, after stealing guns and ammunition, he and two associates seized a school bus and tried to use the occupants as hostages in an attempt to force their way into the Federal Republic of Germany. After all the students had alighted, shots were exchanged between hijackers and border guards, and the dtiver and one of Robert Bares's associates were killed. Amnesty International appealed to the President to commute Robert Bares's death sentence, but it was upheld by the Supreme Court in December 1978. Miroslav Somer, a 32-year-old lorry driver who had been sentenced to death in January 1978 by the court in Banska Bystrica for murdering two women hitchhikers, was executed in February 1979.
According to information in Charter 77 document No. 16 of 22 May 1978, translated and distributed internationally by Amnesty International, prison conditions fall far short of the United Nations Minimum Standard Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. Reports of inadequate medical attention provoked urgent actions on behalf of three seriously ill prisoners of conscience, Jan Simsa, Jiri Lederer and Professor Jaroslav Sabata.
