South Africa (the Republic of)
Growing international criticism of racial and human rights policies during 1978-79, International Anti-Apartheid Year, was accompanied by a serious internal dispute within the ruling Nationalist Party over the activities of the Department of Information. This dispute, termed the "Muldergate" scandal by the press, led to the disbanding of the Information Department and the resignation from the Cabinet of Dr Connie Mulder by November 1978.
32
To some extent, the revelations about the Information Department indicated the government's sensitivity to international criticism of apartheid and human rights violations. The South African press and the Mostert and Erasmus Commissions of Inquiry disclosed that gross irregularities had occurred in the use of secret funds made available to the Information Department for propaganda purposes. In March 1979, the former Secretary for Information, Dr Eschel Rhoodie, alleged that attempts had been made to bribe or otherwise unfairly influence not only politicians, trade-union leaders and others in Africa, Europe and North America but also the international press to take a more sympathetic position towards South Africa.
This controversy within the ranks of the Nationalist Party weakened the position of the government, but appears to have had no appreciable effect on human rights. Even though the "Muldergate" scandal had shown the lengths to which the government felt obliged to go in order to defend its policies in the face of international criticism, it did not respond by re-examining those policies or initiating measures to permit the black majority an effective voice in government. Instead, as in previous years, the government resorted to detention without trial, political imprisonment and restriction under banning orders to suppress effective black political opposition.
Waves of detentions continued. In May 1978, the leaders of the newly formed Azania People's Organization (AZAPO) were detained in Johannesburg under section 6 of the Terrorism Act. They included Lybon Mabasa and Ishmael Mhkabela, both of whom were held without charge until August 1978 when they were transferred to preventive detention under section 10 of the Internal Security Act. They were eventually released on 1 December 1978, but were immediately served with 5-year banning orders. At least 30 members of the Young Christian Workers (YCW), a Church youth organization, were also detained without trial between May and July 1978. Four of them were subsequently prosecuted under the Sabotage Act, but the majority were released uncharged several months later. Others were held for longer periods and made to give evidence as state witnesses in the trials of YCW members.
In early August, the provisions authorizing preventive detention under section 10 of the Internal Security Act were renewed for a further year. Most of the 80 or more detainees held since the banning of the Black Consciousness movement in October 1977 were released by the end of July 1978, but at least 15 detainees arrested in 1977 remained in detention and were served with renewed detention orders in August. They included Peter Jones, who was detained on 18 August 1977 together with Steve Biko, the Black Consciousness leader who died in security police custody on 12 September 1977. Mr. Jones was held for interrogation under section 6 of the Terrorism Act until February 1978, then transferred to preventive detention. He was released in February 1979 and restricted under a 5-year banning order.
Another series of arrests was made in early September shortly before the first anniversary of Steve Biko's death in detention. Those detained included friends and relatives of Mr Biko and leading members of the Black Consciousness movement; most of them were released after a few weeks.
Detention without trial was used extensively in a number of African "homelands," particularly in Vendaland and the Ciskei. More than 50 supporters of the
33
Venda Independence Party (VIP) were arrested in August and September 1978 under the provisions of proclamation R.276 of 1977, which permits detention without trial for up to 90 days. This followed the defeat of Chief Patrick Mphephu's Venda National Party (VNP) by the VIP in an election held in July. As a result of the detentions, the VIP boycotted the first session of the Legislative Assembly in September and Chief Mphephu was able to remain as Chief Minister of Vendaland despite his overwhelming election defeat. Most of the VIP supporters were believed to have been released by the end of 1978. Amnesty International protested to Chief Mphephu and to the South African government minister then responsible for African affairs, Dr Connie Mulder, in early October and called for the release of all detainees and the repeal of the Vendaland emergency regulations.
Detentions were also reported throughout the year in the Ciskei under the provisions of proclamation R.252 of 1977, which also provides for detention without trial for up to 90 days. Those arrested included several political opponents of Ciskei's Chief Minister, Lennox Sebe. In the Transkei, a number of former political prisoners who had served sentences on Robben Island were among at least 50 political opponents of Chief Kaiser Matanzima's administration detained in 1978-79. Amnesty International made representations about some of these detentions to the Transkei Justice Minister, Digby Koyana, in March 1979.
One of the principal concerns in the past year has been the detention of state witnesses in poUtical trials. During the 1978 parliamentary session, the Criminal Procedures Matters Amendment Act was introduced to increase security police powers to detain potential state witnesses in Terrorism Act trials. Even before the introduction of this amendment, the poHce were empowered to hold potential state witnesses incommunicado for a maximum period of 180 days. The new Act removes this limit and witnesses may be held incommunicado until the completion of the trials in which they are expected to give evidence. Consequently, uncharged detainees may be held incommunicado for very long periods, particularly if they are expected to give evidence at major political trials which take many months to complete. At the trial of 18 alleged Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC) members in Bethal, it was expected that more than 160 people would be called as state witnesses, many of whom were detained. Most of the defendants, and no doubt many of the witnesses, who may not be named, were arrested in late 1976 or early 1977. The trial was still in progress in April 1979.
Apart from the PAC trial, probably the most important of the many other political trials was that involving 11 Soweto student leaders which began in September at Kempton Park near Johannesburg. The students, all members of the South African Students' Movement (SASM) or the Soweto Students' Representative Council (SSRC), were detained in June 1977 shortly before the first anniversary of the Soweto disturbances. They were detained incommunicado for more than one year before being charged with sedition and offences under the Terrorism Act. The charges all relate to the student leaders' activities during the Soweto disturbances, including the organization of demonstrations calling for the release of detainees, boycotts and worker stay-at-homes. During the course of the proceedings, several state witnesses alleged that they had been tortured and ill-treated under interrogation, but these claims were denied by the security police. Similar allegations of torture were made by defendants and detained state
34
witnesses at a number of other trials. At the Bethal PAC trial, for example, one of the defendants, Johnson Nyathi, stated that he had been repeatedly assaulted by the security poUce and then seriously injured by being thrown bodily from a fourth-floor window.
Although there is little doubt that torture is still used systematically, the international protests which followed Steve Biko's death appear to have resulted in precautions being taken to ensure that further deaths in detention do not occur. During the year one poUtical detainee is known to have died in custody: in July 1978, 19-year-old Lungile Tabalaza was killed when he fell to his death from the fifth storey of Port Elizabeth's security police headquarters, the same building where another political detainee, George Botha, died in custody in December 1976 and where Steve Biko received his fatal injuries. In October 1978, the inquest decided that no one was to blame for Mr Tabalaza's death and the presiding magistrate concluded that assaults on Mr Tabalaza by members of the security police had not been proved. Although the South African authorities did not accept responsibility for Mr Tabalaza's death, or indeed for the deaths of Mr Biko and other poHtical detainees, in March 1979 the Department of Justice agreed an out-of-court settlement with the widow of Joseph Mdluli, who had died in detention in March 1976. Four security pohce officers accused of culpable homicide as a result of his death were acquitted for lack of evidence in October 1976.
Throughout the year, Minister of Justice James Kruger has continued to use his authority to impose banning on those who most effectively articulate opposition to the government's policies. In the past it has been common for convicted political prisoners to be restricted under banning orders immediately they complete their sentences and are released from prison. This trend continued during 1978 but took on a new dimension at the end of the year when the Minister of Justice banned at least 21 people released after long periods in detention without charge. Five-year banning orders were imposed on such people as Ms Asha Rambally, who was first detained for interrogation under section 6 of the Terrorism Act in August 1977 and then transferred to preventive detention under section 10 of the Internal Security Act in early 1978. She was released on 2 December and immediately banned. Other well-known Black Consciousness leaders such as Aubrey Mokoena, Director of the Black Community Programme until it was banned with 17 other Black Consciousness organizations in October 1977, and Hlaku Kenneth Rachidi, former President of the Black People's Convention, were banned at the same time. Mr Mokoena and Mr Rachidi, with several others, were detained without trial for more than a year before being released and banned. At no time have the authorities brought charges against them, let alone secured their conviction in the courts.
Another new feature of the past year has been the use of banning orders effectively to "banish" individuals to isolated parts of South Africa. Phindile Mfethi, for example, a prominent trade unionist who was served with a 5-year banning order in May 1977 which restricted him to the Germiston area near Johannesburg, was "deported" to the Transkei in July 1978, after the Minister of Justice varied the provisions of his banning order to provide for his restriction to Butterworth in the Transkei.
Changes were made to a number of other people's banning orders to make
35
their lives more difficult. Chris Mokoditoa, for example, was specifically prohibited from continuing his employment as an articled clerk for the lawyer Shun Chetty when he was banned for a second period in July 1978. He has been banned since 1973 and spent four months in detention without charge in 1976. Dr Mamphela Ramphele's banning order was recently amended to prevent her from serving medical clinics in the Naphumo district, northern Transvaal, which she had established shortly after her restriction to the area in April 1977.
A new and ominous precedent was set on 6 April 1979 when the government executed 22-year-old Solomon Mahlangu, despite many international appeals for clemency. Mr Mahlangu was the first political prisoner to be hanged in South Africa since the 1960s. He was convicted in March 1978 of offences under the Terrorism Act and complicity in the killing of two whites in Johannesburg the previous June. Mr Mahlangu was one of five people executed on 6 April 1979. There has been a great increase in the number of executions. Figures released by the Department of Justice in early 1979 showed that 132 people were hanged during 1978, all but one of them black. At least 32 people convicted of criminal offences are beUeved to have been hanged during the first three months of 1979.
