Albania (the People's Socialist Republic of)
Although Albania is a member of the United Nations, it has not signed the 1966 International Covenants on Human Rights, nor has it signed the 1975 Final Act of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. Amnesty International's major problem is to obtain reliable and detailed evidence of individual cases of violation of human rights. Occasional reports of such violations give ground for concern as do certain provisions of the Penal Code (1977), which make individuals liable to long terms of imprisonment for exercising their basic human rights.
Article 1 of the Penal Code proclaims that "an important duty of the penal legislation of the People's Socialist Republic of Albania is the struggle against bureaucratism and liberalism, which are most dangerous to the state of dictatorship of the proletariat". Article 2 supports the provisions of article 37 of the 1976 constitution which says that the state does not recognize any religion but supports and develops "atheist" propaganda. Although article 53 of the constitution guarantees freedom of speech, press, organization, assembly and public demonstration, article 55 of the Penal Code, concerning "anti-state agitation and propaganda", severely limits these rights: "fascist, anti-democratic, religious, war-mongering or anti-socialist agitation and propaganda, as well as the preparation, dissemination or the keeping for dissemination of literature with such a content as to weaken or undermine the state of the dictatorship of the proletariat are punished by deprivation of liberty for from three to ten years".
In 1967, the Secretary of the Communist Party, Enver Hoxha, proclaimed Albania the first atheist state in the world. Churches and mosques were closed; information reaching Amnesty International suggests that former leaders of the Roman Catholic, Orthodox and Muslim Churches in Albania have been sentenced to long terms of imprisonment and banishment for exercising their right to freedom of conscience. During 1977, Amnesty International appealed to the authorities on behalf of three Roman Catholic titular bishops who disappeared in the mid-1970s after conducting religious ceremonies in private. Their appeals remained unanswered, as have all other requests to the government for information concerning individual cases. Recent reports alleged that the three bishops were sent to forced labour on collective farms.
The right to freedom of movement is severely restricted under Albanian law. Under Penal Code article 47K, "flight from the state and refusal to return to the fatherland on the part of a person sent on service or allowed to leave the state is an offence punishable with imprisonment for not less than 10 years or by death". In one recent case, an Albanian national released from prison camp in 1977 attempted to leave the country illegally in 1978, together with his wife and daughter. At the Yugoslav border, Albanian frontier guards opened fire, killing his small daughter whom he was carrying on his back. In the ensuing confusion, his wife disappeared, and has not been heard of since. Another man allegedly served 6 years' imprisonment in the 1970s, in Bulqize Prison, as a result of having spoken in the presence of others of the possibility of leaving Albania.
Amnesty International continued to receive reports alleging that members of ethnic minorities, in particular the Greek minority in southern Albania, were
122
persecuted as a result of their allegiance to the Greek Orthodox Church and their attempts to assert and maintain their Greek ethnic identity. There is no reliable information to verify these reports.
Conditions of trial and imprisonment also gave ground for serious concern. "Staged" trials with summary convictions on the basis of confessions extracted by torture have been alleged. Political prisoners have reportedly been subjected to long periods of solitary confinement in cells without daylight and humiliated and beaten by guards.
Reports suggest that food and medical care are well below internationally accepted standards, that prisoners receive only rare visits from their families and that some political prisoners are sent to labour camps — including Selenica and the copper-mining camp of Spaci — and to irrigation work in the marshes of Kakirriq.
Several reports have reached Amnesty International of people sentenced to up to 6 years' imprisonment for having listened to foreign radio stations.
