Poland (the Polish People's Republic)
Amnesty International's major concern during the past year has been official victimization of members and supporters of unofficial groups established to protect human and civil rights. The number of these groups has grown steadily since the emergence in autumn 1976 of the Workers' Self-Defence Committee (KOR) set up by a group of intellectuals in Warsaw to provide legal and financial assistance to workers imprisoned or prosecuted following the strikes and disturbance in Radom and Ursus in June 1976. Of these groups, the most prominent are the Committee for Social Self-Defence (formerly the Workers' Self-Defence Committee), the Movement for the Defence of Human and Civil Rights, the Student Sohdarity Committee, the Society for Educational Courses, the Farmers' Self-Defence Committees in the regions of Lublin, Radom and Grojec and the Free Trade Unions based in Gdansk and Katowice. Many of these groups produce unofficial publications, the best known being Spotkania, Robotnik, Opinio and Bratniak, which regularly document cases of human rights violations.
While few of the members or supporters of these groups have been sentenced to imprisonment, in the past two years an increasing number have been detained briefly by the police for questioning and been subjected to other forms of harassment. A number of persons have been detained repeatedly. Amnesty International has received many allegations that detainees have been beaten by police, who have on occasion attempted to persuade them to collaborate. Human rights activists have also reported that their homes have been searched by the police without warrant and that they have been insulted by the police and their property damaged in the course of searches.
In the past year. Amnesty International adopted as a prisoner of conscience Kazimierz Switon, a Catholic activist and one of the founders, in February 1978, of the Committee of the Free Workers' Union in Katowice. Mr Switon is also a member of the editorial board of Robotnik, an unofficial periodical which
136
documents cases of harassment or prosecution of workers in Poland. As a result of these activities, Mr Switon was arrested and detained for up to 48 hours 12 times between January and October 1978. In April 1978, he was sentenced to 5 weeks' imprisonment on charges of illegal possession of weapons. The charges referred to an airgun belonging to one of his children which police found during a search of his flat. On 14 October 1978, Mr Switon was leaving a local church with his wife when he was attacked by four plain-clothes policemen, severely beaten and dragged into a police car. Although he did not resist arrest, he was summarily sentenced by a local magistrates court to 2 months' imprisonment on charges of causing a public disturbance. His lawyer and wife, but no other friends or relatives, were allowed to attend the trial, and no defence witnesses were allowed to appear. When his wife appealed against this sentence, the district procurator imposed criminal charges of "assaulting police officers" under article 234 of the Polish Penal Code. On 2 March 1979, Mr Switon was sentenced to 1 year's imprisonment and a fine of 12,000 zloties but was released pending appeal.
Amnesty International has also adopted as a prisoner of conscience Henryk Jagiello, a Polish naval officer. Mr Jagiello was tried on 30 November 1978 by the military court in Gdynia and sentenced to 1 year's imprisonment on charges of "dissemination of false information" after copies of two dissident papers, Opinia, published by the Human Rights Defence Movement, and Bratniak (The Hostel), a student magazine published by the Student Solidarity Committee, were found in his flat. The hearing took place in camera, and defence counsel was appointed by the miUtary authorities although Mr Jagiello had asked to be defended by a lawyer of his choice. The sentence has been suspended on appeal.
Amnesty International continued to investigate a number of cases in which emigrants returning to Poland on holiday or private visits were imprisoned on "espionage" charges. In the cases which Amnesty International is reviewing, those convicted of espionage were not formally exempted from Polish citizenship when they became citizens of another country. It seems likely that in at least some of these cases charges of espionage were brought because they had given routine information to immigration authorities in Western Europe, rather than because there was hard evidence that they had committed espionage. Amnesty International is concerned that it appears to be the rule in such cases that the trial is heard in camera and that defendants are denied access to a lawyer of their choice.
The present Polish Penal Code, enacted in 1970, lists six crimes against the state, and one military crime, that carry a discretionary death penalty. The death penalty may also be imposed for aggravated cases of murder. In the past year. Amnesty International learned of three death sentences.
