Jordan (the Hashemite Kingdom of)
Amnesty International worked on behalf of seven political prisoners, all charged with membership of the Communist Party, which is prohibited by law No. 91 of 1953. It took up five of them as new cases during the year. One was a prominent trade-unionist, Muhammad Abu Sham'a, a member of the executive council of the Bank Employees' Union, who was arrested in Amman on 7 August 1978. Following a house search, when books obtainable on the open market were allegedly confiscated, Muhammad Abu Sham'a was detained, first at Abdeli Intelligence Service Prison and later in Mahatta Central Prison, Amman, reportedly charged with Communist Party membership. He was tried by military court in January 1979 but the sentence is not known.
A second was Hashim Gharaibeh, a 30-year-old student at Yarmuk University, reportedly arrested on the same charge in March 1978 and sentenced by mihtary court to 10 years' imprisonment. Although left-wing papers were said to be found in his possession, he is not believed to be a member of the Communist Party. He is reportedly imprisoned in Irbid Prison.
Amnesty International appealed in August 1978 for the release of Adnan al Asmar, a 25-year-old student arrested eariy in 1978 on charges of belonging to the Communist Party. It learned that he was in danger of losing his sight, reportedly as a result of a beating in Abdeli Intelligence Service Prison. After unsuccessful surgery to treat a torn retina, he was returned to prison. His condition is said to be unchanged. He is not beheved to have been tried.
Amnesty International learned of the release in mid-1978 of adopted prisoner Feisal al Za'mi. His 10-year prison sentence for communist activity was reduced by the Prime Minister to 2 years.
On 15 August 1978, some 200 political detainees in Jordan broadcast a statement on a Palestinian radio station claiming that 126 of them were detained in Mahatta Central Prison, Amman, and that another 90 were held without trial in detention in Abdeh Intelligence Service Prison. Some had been there for several years and many had suffered prolonged sohtary confinement. Most are believed to be Palestinians engaged in political or resistance activities. The detainees' message was broadcast in response to a statement by Prime Minister MudarBudran on 24 July 1978 which denied the existence of any political detainees in Jordan other than 45 detained for subversive activities. Thirty-five Palestinians, some convicted, were reportedly released on 17 March 1979. About 50 people had been previously released in June 1978.
The government responded to Amnesty International's request for an inquiry into the reported death m detention on 5 June 1978 of a 21-year-old student, Omar Musa Khahl Ajoury, whom it believed to be a prisoner ot conscience. Fhe government affirmed that he was arrested on charges of sabotage and that his death took place in the intensive-care unit of the Central Military Hospital, where he had been transferred after declaring a hunger and thirst strike. The government further stated that, according to his family, Ajoury had been suffering from a chronic kidney ailment. Sources considered reliable challenge the government's claims and maintain that Omar was mistakenly arrested in place of his uncle, who later gave himself up to the police at his family's request. Omar is said to have started a hunger strike to protest at his continued detention and died in
166
Abdeli Intelligence Service Prison 13 days later.
Amnesty International received reports of six death sentences passed in absentia for the sale of property in territory now occupied by Israel during the past year. The government repHed to inquiries in May and June 1978 about these reports.
