Argentina (the Republic of)
There was no significant improvement in human rights in Argentina: thousands of people are in preventive detention without charge or trial and thousands more remain unaccounted for. There were no indications that the military government intends to return the country to constitutional rule or that it will relax the emergency legislation introduced in the last five years, despite calls from politicians and the Argentinian Federation of Bar Associations ^Federac/ó« Argentina de los Colegios de Abogados) for a return to democratic government and the restoration of the rule of law (estado de derecho). The state of siege, which has now been in
47
force since November 1974, would not appear to be justifiable, for the government itself frequently asserts that it has won a military victory against "subversion". On 20 September 1978, the Minister of the Economy, Sr Martinez de Hoz, declared. "Wars are never fought with white gloves; we have used the same drastic methods against the terrorists as they themselves have employed." This is one of the most exphcit admissions by a high-ranking member of the government that it has itself engaged in.acts of terrorism.
During the 1978 football World Cup, Argentina became the focus of international attention and greater concern was voiced abroad about its violations of human rights. The total absence of left-wing violence during the period of the World Cup tended to confirm the claim of the government that it was so much in control of the country that subversion had been eliminated, but this has only heightened the anomalous fact that right-wing violence ~ abduction and murder — has continued to flourish unchecked.
Since the cowp í/Víflí of March 1976 the most horrifying aspect of the repression has been the number of los desaparecidos — the disappeared. In February 1979 the Buenos Aires Herald estimated that, over the previous three years, there had been an average of between three and 10 kidnappings a day. Tlie government denies all knowledge of the disappeared or that they have ever been detained. Three times in 1978 the government published lists of people who, it claimed, were thought to be missing but had since been found (12 April — 232, 7 August — 201,14 December --159). No names on these lists corresponded with those known to Amnesty International.
The disappeared fall into four categories: those released after a short time (from one to 30 days) — the largest category; those murdered; those who are transferred to official prisons (in October 1978 a journalist, Enrique Esteban, was said to have been found by the army 69 days after he had been kidnapped in Neuquen; he is now detained "at the disposal of the military authorities" in a local miUtary garrison); those who remain indefinitely fuera de la sociedad ("outside of society") and whose place of detention is unknown.
During the year there was a growing campaign inside Argentina to press the authorities to give details of the fate of the disappeared. In May 1978 the Asamblea Permanente por los Derechos Humanos published in La Prensa a list of 2,500 missing persons whose cases had been presented to the Supreme Court. In November 1978 another petition denouncing the disappearance of 1,542 people signed by 1,221 of their relatives was presented to the Supreme Court. TTie signatories stated they were appealing to the Court because all other means of establishing the whereabouts of the disappeared had failed. The petition emphasized that the disappeared had been arrested with a great show of uniformed men, firearms and vehicles, and with every appearance of a legal operation carried out by the authorities. This petition, like all previous requests and complaints, elicited no information from the government. On 3 March 1979, the Supreme Court, which not long before had complained that in its attempts to trace missing persons it had received almost no co-operation from the authorities, accepted for the first time an appeal from a relative of a missing person, the father of Alfredo Antonio Giorgi, a 33-year-old scientist who was taken from the National Institute of Industrial Technology on 27 November 1978. The Supreme Court had, until then, declared the problem of the disappeared to be outside its competence. In the
48
Giorgi case, however, it said that even though it had no formal jurisdiction, it would order an appeals court to investigate.
The "Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo", who are seeking information about missing relatives, continue to hold a silent vigil every Thursday in the square outside Government House. They are regularly harassed by the authorities. On 18 January 1979, 43 women were detained for several hours and on a number of occasions since the mothers have been prevented by the police from entering the square.
In April 1979 Amnesty International launched a major action on behalf of the disappeared. An initial list of 2,500 persons reported missing since the coup was pubHshed with a special report about missing children.
Over the past year Amnesty International has intervened on behalf of 100 persons who have been abducted. But a total of more than 200 such cases has been reported for this period.
There are approximately 3,000-4,000 held at the disposal of the executive power (PEN), that is to say by a decree signed by the President which does not specify the reason for imprisonment. Most of the PEN prisoners have been held for two to three years, but there are some prisoners who have been in preventive detention for more than four. The government repeatedly denies the existence of any political prisoners, asserting that all 2,700 prisoners it admits to holding have been detained for committing crimes of subversion. It is difficult to accept this, because the great majority of prisoners have not been tried or charged, and some have not even been interrogated.
Prisoners held at the disposal of the executive power are entitled to leave the country under the terms of article 23 of the constitution: this is known as the "right of option". Despite the willingness of many foreign governments to offer visas to the "opcionados", very few applications have been granted since this right was estabUshed, with severe limitations, at the end of 1977. In the past year only a hundred or so persons have benefited.
At the end of 1978, a court of appeal upheld applications oi habeas corpus on behalf of 100 persons who had been held at the disposal of the executive power for between 1 and 2 years, and ordered their release on the grounds that the executive's reasons for keeping them in detention were not justified. The court of appeal also stated that prolonged and indefinite detention amounted to a punishment and contravened article 23 of the constitution. This decision was overruled by the Supreme Court.
Although on 20 April 1979 the Minister of Justice announced that improvements would be made, prison conditions throughout the country are poor. Amnesty International continued to receive reports of beatings of political prisoners and of arbitrary punishments for real or imagined infringements of the severe prison regulations. In many establishments the prisoners are permitted to read only the New Testament. They are forbidden to work. Some detention centres are permanently barred to visitors and in most medical and dental attention is deficient.
Amnesty International urgently intervened for medical reasons on behalf of Flavio Koutzii, a Brazilian national and adopted prisoner of conscience, who suffers from a serious heart ailment. He had been suddenly transferred to Coronda in Sante Fe, one of the harshest prisons. Although there have been fewer reports of deaths or disappearances of political prisoners, the policy of frequent transfer
49
from one prison to another resulted in great insecurity for the prisoners and their families. During the World Cup about 30 prisoners were transferred to a penitentiary in Córdoba, where it is alleged they were kept as hostages to prevent any outbreak of violence. According to reports from released prisoners some of them were subjected to ill-treatment.
Since the last months of 1978 there has been a conflict between Argentina and Chile about the Beagle Channel. As a result of this conflict, which almost led to warfare, a number of Chileans living in Argentina have been harassed and placed in detention. On 23 April, more than 20 trade-union leaders of the "Commission of Twenty-Five" — an important trade-union group — were arrested in Buenos Aires after calling for a national strike in protest against low wages and political repression. Eight of them remain in detention.
Amnesty International learned of comparatively few releases of political prisoners. Of 380 releases reported, only 50 concerned prisoners of conscience who had been adopted, though further releases are expected. A Christmas amnesty affected only 192 prisoners, some of whom were simply moved from prison to arresto domiciliario (house arrest) or libertad vigilada (restricted liberty). In November 1978, King Juan Carlos of Spain visited Argentina and obtained the release of several prisoners of Spanish nationality. Amnesty International has 275 cases of political prisoners under adoption or investigation.
In September 1978, Argentinian lawyers estimated that there were approximately 800 prosecutions under way for crimes of "subversion"; 500 of these were to be heard before the federal civil courts, and 300 before the special military courts. Many prisoners tried in the federal courts have been acquitted but not released: they remain in prison at the disposal of the executive power. Amnesty International is particularly concerned about trials in the Consejos de Guerra — military courts are always held in camera. In most cases all that is published about the proceedings is the sentence, which is usually long. Defendants may not choose a lawyer: they are represented by a military officer.
Although the death penalty was reintroduced in 1976, it was not applied until March 1979, when a court sentenced to death by firing squad a man accused of a double murder (there was no political element). An appeal has been lodged.
There were a number of political killings of supporters of the present regime which may suggest divisions within the armed forces rather than a resurgence of violence by the Montoneros or the People's Revolutionary Army, both of which have been crushed. In July 1978, the 15-year-old daughter of a new member of the junta, Admiral Armando Lambruschini, was killed by a bomb apparently intended for her father. A few days later the bodies of several alleged terrorists were found near the town of Mar del Plata and it is believed they were killed in reprisal. In August 1978, the right-wing editor of Confirmado, Hector Aguila, was shot and killed in Buenos Aires. On 20 December 1978 a diplomat, Elena Holmberg, was kidnapped. Her corpse was found two weeks later.
In September 1978 Amnesty International protested about the shooting of a poUtical prisoner, Osvaldo Sigfrido de Benedetti, who had been in detention for several years. On 27 July 1978 his family was informed that he had been "shot while trying to escape" from a prison in Tucumán. According to Amnesty International's information the body had a bullet-wound in the chest and a smaller one in the neck. Sr de Benedetti is at least the tenth prisoner to have died in these
50
circumstances over the past three years.
The appearance of 12 bodies which were washed ashore in December 1978 at the seaside resort of Santa Teresita revived fears that many disappeared prisoners are murdered. The prominent lawyer Guillermo Dfaz Lestren, detained at the disposal of the executive power in 1976 but later released, was kidnapped in Buenos Aires in October 1978 and his dead body was found a month later. He had filed a writ of preventive habeas corpus after learning that a group of security agents had been looking for him. The authorities are said to be investigating his murder.
Amnesty International is conducting a survey among Argentinian exiles in Europe to establish a torture syndrome and to bring adequate medical treatment to the victims. Many of the exiles have sustained permanent injury, for example deafness or scars, allegedly as a result of torture. The survey of the medical commission should be completed by the middle of 1979.
At the beginning of September 1979, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States is to visit Argentina.
