Central African Empire (the)
The major political event was rioting between 18 and 21 January 1979 by students, schoolchildren and workers in Bangui, the capital. The army, reportedly with Zairean units brought in at the request of Emperor Bokassa, is said to have killed at least 400. The riots appear to have been caused by an imperial ruling that all schoolchildren should buy uniforms. Mismanagement of the economy, official corruption and lavish expenditure on luxuries, which are said to have left most
13
state employees unpaid for several months, caused widespread discontent.
As a result of the riots, perhaps as many as 100 students and schoolchildren and 12 teachers were arrested in Bangui. A number of civil servants were dismissed and the Ministers of Education, Higher Education and Social Affairs were arrested. Recent reports suggest that a few have been released.
Following its appeal in March 1979, Emperor Bokassa told Amnesty International that he had granted an amnesty for political detainees on 22 February 1979; however it is still not cl^ar whether any of them have been released. In April 1979, there was further unrest in Bangui, following reports that an attempt had been made to assassinate Emperor Bokassa. Although the authorities denied these reports, a number of suspected opposition figures were detained.
There are persistent reports that several people convicted by military tribunals and sentenced to terms of imprisonment for state security offences have died in prison. General Lingoupou, formerly ambassador to Romania, has not been seen or heard of by his relatives since his arrest in 1974. Two trade unionists adopted by Amnesty International, J.B. Malikanga and J.R. Sandos, are reportedly still in prison. In 1974 they were charged with political activities and embezzlement.
Prison conditions are reportedly very poor, particularly in the porte rouge, the political wing of Bangui Central Prison (Ngaragba), where detainees are severely undernourished and cells overcrowded ; some prisoners are said to have died from starvation. Prisoners held there and at the Imperial Compound at Berengo and the former presidential residence in Bangui are subject to torture.
