Italy (the Italian Republic)
The rising level of political violence in Italy has been met with an emphatic response by the Italian Government. The operation of special powers of detention described in the Amnesty International Report 1978 continue to cause concern. In addition it appears that increasing resort is made by the authorities to legal powers which, because of their sweeping and vague definition, can be used against a widening circle of people who hold minority political views and are allegedly involved through association with people who have committed terrorist actions. Special powers of search, surveillance and short-term detention for interrogation are used frequently against these individuals. In many cases
135
they are never brouglit to trial because charges are dropped.
Amnesty International continued to receive allegations of ill-treatment of inmates of prisons and violence against prisoners in police stations. On April 5 1979, Amnesty International wrote to Signor Virginio Rognoni, the Minister of the Interior, welcoming an official inquiry into allegations of torture made by nine men detained following the murder of a jeweller in Milan. In its letter Amnesty International expressed concern over the lack of positive results from the inquiry. Amnesty International is now preparing a research mission to Italy to investigate such allegations.
Military tribunals started to prosecute conscientious objectors who refused to perform alternative civil service of longer duration than the 1 year of compulsory military service. For example, Sandro Gozzo served 12 months' alternative service in an agrarian community for the mentally-handicapped and then went home. He notified the Ministry of Defence that he considered the law on extended alternative service was designed to punish conscientious objectors. In January 1979 he was sentenced to 7 months' imprisonment by the military tribunal in Palermo for refusal to complete his full period of alternative service.
Amnesty International groups worked for six adopted prisoners during the year. All were conscientious objectors to military service.
