Philippines (the Republic of the)
The Republic of the Philippines is entering its seventh year of martial law, imposed by President Ferdinand Marcos in 1972. The interim National Assembly was elected in April 1978, amidst widespread protests against alleged fraud and abuses at the polls. Of the 600 people arrested when they took part in a march of protest in Manila against polling violations, the majority were released after short periods. More than 30 opposition leaders and party campaigners were adopted by Amnesty International. They were released in June 1978 and the charges of illegal assembly dropped before any trial.
The martial law authorities continued their arbitrary arrests. Many prisoners are held without charge or trial, and the few trials of political prisoners are heard by military tribunals. A number of appeals for habeas corpus have been considered by the Supreme Court, but it has not ordered the release of a single prisoner convicted under martial law by a military tribunal. The government has continued to announce amnesties of martial law detainees. This has been presented as part of a pohcy of fostering "national unity and reconciliation". Large amnesties were announced in June and September 1978. Altogether more than 3,000 people were named as having benefited from amnesties, the majority of which seem to have been criminals convicted under martial law. Of the political cases, some of those listed had been released previously.
There are frequent reports of arbitrary arrests for political reasons in the southern Philippines. Many of those arrested in the south are held for quite short periods without charge or trial. However, an increasing number are held for longer periods, on charges triable before a mihtary tribunal, whose proceedings are
109
protracted. Because in parts of the southern Philippines there are insurgencies led by the Muslim Moro National Liberation Front and by the communist New People's Army, those arrested by the martial law authorities tend to be described as having supported the insurgents. But Amnesty International has not received substantial evidence to support such charges in many of these cases.
There have been reports of bombing and burning of villages and the killing of harmless captives. For example, in the province of Bukidnon, in the southern island of Mindanao, the 57th Philippines Constabulary Ranger battalion was accused by local people "of conducting a private campaign against the people they are assigned to protect".
The Far Eastern Economic Review reported on 16 March 1979 that the President and his chief aide in administering martial law, Secretary of National Defence Juan Ponce Enrile, were alarmed and angry about the growing incidence of military abuses against civilians. Mr Enrile's Deputy, Mr Carmelo Barbero, said that there had been 4,552 allegations of brutality by military personnel since the declaration of martial law. He said that martial law had led to "a lot of unnecessary cruelty", and he added: "We are aware that killing is not going to unite this nation." He said that many reports of abuses committed by the 57th Philippines Constabulary Ranger battalion had been proved true, but the battahon was not to be withdrawn although its commander had been replaced. The report continued: "Barbero said he had ordered investigations into two more killings of civilians by the 57th battalion personnel, and had expressed his disappointment about discipline to the new commander. It was unfortunate that civilians suffered in any area designated as a 'combat zone', he added, pointing out that most complaints in Bukidnon came from 'areas of unrest'. He disputed the general belief that the province was supposed to be untouched by any insurgency but would not say from where the alleged insurgency threat came."
Amnesty International continued to receive credible reports of torture, abductions and killings of dissidents by military units. Although the incidence of such reports has declined in the northern island of Luzon, there have been frequent reports in the south. A number are fully documented, one example being the case of Mario and Melvin Cayabyab, who were detained in 1978. Mrs Cayabyab is the daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Wilfredo Mendez, a retired officer of the Philippines air force. Both husband and wife submitted affidavits in the presence of Lieutenant-Colonel Mendez to the military authorities, describing the brutal treatment, including beatings and electric shock, to which they had been subjected by the military officers who interrogated them in May 1978. The case of the Cayabyabs became well known, whereas those prisoners subjected to torture who were less influential tended to receive little attention. Amnesty International also has the names of people reported to have been arrested/ by the military since the imposition of martial law about whom no information has been given by the government. Some are alleged to have been killed after arrest. On 18 January 1979, three soldiers, two of them officers, were convicted of military ill-treatment of the Cayabyabs and sentenced to 4 months' imprisonment with hard labour, dismissal and forfeiture of pay and allowances.
Amnesty International continued to work on more than 60 adoption and investigation cases.
110
