India (the Republic of)
On 10 April 1979, the Indian government ratified the International Covenant on Civil and PoUtical Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. India is the second Asian country (after Japan) to ratify the two covenants. On 20 April 1979, Amnesty International cabled the Foreign Minister, Mr A.B. Vajpayee; it wamiiy welcomed the government's decision and said this was an "important step towards ensuring the long-term protection of fundamental rights in India". In a letter of 27 February 1979 to Mr Shanti Bushan, the Law Minister, it also had urged the government to sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
On 21 September 1978, Amnesty International sent to the Prime Minister the report of its January 1978 mission to India {s^t Amnesty International Report 1978), in which it expressed the hope that the report and its recommendations would contribute to the discussion in India about the long-term structural changes needed if human rights are to be effectively protected and enforced in that country. The government responded to the report's recommendations in a letter from the Prime Minister's secretariat on 17 November 1978. The mission report and the government's response were published on 10 January 1979 and created considerable discussion in the Indian press: several editorials in the leading papers supported its main recommendations. During January, February and March, Amnesty International's national sections also urged the Indian government to implement the recommendations.
The main recommendation was to remove provisions for preventive detention from the constitution and repeal immediately preventive detention laws in force in the states of Andhra Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Jammu and Kashmir. Amnesty International's recommendation stems from its
90
experience that, in India, preventive detention laws enacted for deahng with "antisocial elements" or "economic offenders" have eventually been used against pohtical opponents. On 12 November 1978, the Home Minister was reported to have stated that "the Centre (Central Government) will not legislate preventive detention, but the states can do so if they desire".
In its reply to Amnesty International's report, the government said that all 86 prisoners held in preventive detention under the Maintenance of Internal Security Act, whom Amnesty International had described in the report as prisoners of conscience, had been released. They were 13 Indians and 73 prisoners described as "foreigners". But another group of political prisoners, alleged to be members or sympathizers of left-wing groups known as "Naxalites", remain imprisoned. The mission report estimated that there were between 500 and 1,000 such political prisoners in January 1978 and urged the government to release immediately those of them who had not been tried within a reasonable period. Some had been held for more than six years without trial. The government's reply said there were 373 "Naxalite" prisoners on 1 August 1978: 211 had been tried and 162 of them were still awaiting trial. Amnesty International took up the cases of 50 of those untried prisoners for investigation, and 26 of them still remain detained in the states of Kerala, Andhra Pradesh and Bihar. Of those who were released, seven were acquitted when finally tried.
The plight of untried prisoners in India was highlighted in a series of judgements of the Supreme Court which followed the publication of two articles in the Indian Express of 8 and 9 January 1979 about prison conditions in the state of Bihar, written by a member of the National Police Commission set up by the government. The articles pointed out that the vast majority of India's prisoners were held without trial, in some cases for periods of more than 10 years, and that prisoners included women and children held for long periods on trivial charges. Some prisoners could not even remember when and why they had been arrested, nor, in some cases, was there official information available about the reason for their imprisonment. The articles also cited the cases of two pohtical prisoners who were held for more than seven years without trial.
The Supreme Court, on 5 February 1979, ordered the release of 42 untried prisoners mentioned in the articles and also ordered the Bihar state government to produce a hst of all prisoners held in the state for more than 18 months without trial. On 12 February 1979, the Supreme Court ruled that "a speedy trial is of the essence of criminal justice", and that the right to a speedy trial "was an integral and essential part of the fundamental rights guaranteed in article 21 of the constitution". Those who had already been in prison for longer than the maximum sentence for the crime with which they were charged should be immediately released.
In response, on 20 February 1979, the Bihar government ordered the release of 10,000 of the 20,000 prisoners awaiting trial in the state, and the Uttar Pradesh state government decided to appoint 300 special magistrates to speed up trial proceedings on 21,000 prisoners who were held without trial in the state.
On 27 February 1979, Amnesty International wrote to the newly appointed Home Minister, Mr H.M. Patel, inquiring whether the two political prisoners whose cases it had taken up in Bihar — Ramjeet Gonjhu and Binod Kumar Sharma —had now been released, and urging the government to encourage all other Indian states
91
to take similar steps for the immediate release of all untried political prisoners held for more than a reasonable period. It also wrote to the Law Minister, Mr Shanti Bushan, drawing his attention to the steps for speeding up trial procedures by concentrating on principal charges which it had recommended in its report.
In its mission report Amnesty International concluded that there was a "pattern of police intimidation of suspects after arrest already in existence long before the 1975 emergency declaration". Although there were no allegations of torture of pohtical prisoners after the emergency was hfted in February 1977, the report noted that "allegations of serious police brutaUty continued to be made, even after the lifting of the emergency". The report also concluded that political prisoners alleged to hold extreme left-wing views were killed in incidents officially described as "encounters" or "while trying to escape from prison" in the period up to 1977. These conclusions were confirmed in a judicial report on police practices in West Bengal, the conclusions of which appeared in the London Observer on 8 April 1979. The report, by Justice Sarma Sharkar, confirms that Sankar Chatterjee was tortured and subsequently killed by prison officers, who claim he had died in a jail-break. The incident occurred in the early 1970s. In a foreword to its mission report, Amnesty International expressed concern that the government instituted investigations and departmental disciplinary action in only two cases of the many pohtical prisoners tortured before and during the emergency. It is not aware that any steps have yet been taken by the government to implement its detailed recommendations for the prevention of torture and illegal killings, despite the assurances received from the Law Minister in January 1978 that the government would "take all possible steps to prevent its recurrence". The report recommended that all arrested persons be allowed access to their lawyers or family within 48 hours of the time of arrest, that an independent body be estabhshed to investigate complaints of torture and allegations of illegal killings of prisoners and that a code of conduct be established for police officials of the kind suggested in the report.
On 19 December 1978, Mrs Gandhi, the former Prime Minister, was imprisoned for one week by a parliamentary privileges committee which had found her guilty of contempt and breach of privilege for harassing and intimidating four officials in 1975. Many, often violent, demonstrations of protest followed her arrest, and at least 19 people were killed and 40,000 arrested during the week. They were released in the days following her arrest. On 21 March 1979, the Rajya Sabha (Upper House) passed a Bill for the estabhshment of special courts to try former government officials speedily on charges relating to excesses they allegedly committed during, and before, the 1975-77 emergency period. On 12 April 1979, Amnesty International asked the Law Minister for a copy, so that it could study the Bill which would allow special courts to try Mrs Gandhi and officials of her former government.
On 13 February 1979, Amnesty International cabled the President of India, Mr Neelam Sanjiva Reddy, asking him to reconsider his rejection of an appeal for clemency for Maqbool Butt, who had been sentenced to death on a charge of murder under section 3 of the Enemy Agents Ordinance. Further appeals to save his life were made during March.
In the mission report. Amnesty International noted that the government had made available 40,000 milhon rupees to the states as an incentive for the
92
improvement of prison conditions, saying it hoped the funds would be used to improve prison conditions according to the recommendations of the report and pointing out that iron fetters were still used on prisoners.
