Greece (the Hellenic Republic)
Amnesty International's only adopted prisoners are Jehovah's Witnesses, imprisoned because of their refusal on religious grounds to perform military service. Until October 1977 there was no provision for conscientious objection to military service, which is compulsory for all Greek men between 18 and 45 years-of-age. In time of war conscription may include men up to the age of 50. Law 731/77, which came into force in October 1977, amended the law to allow religious objectors the alternative of performing unarmed military service for AVi years, a period twice as long as that of regular military service. Jehovah's Witnesses will not accept unarmed service or any form of alternative service and the authorities therefore continued to imprison them.
Amnesty International was informed in November 1978 by Mr N. Athanassiou, Minister Plenipotentiary at the Greek Embassy in London, that: . . in the case of conscientious objectors, courts have been careful not to pronounce sentences exceeding AVz years". Yet in February 1979 Vassilis Spanoyiannis was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment by the loannina Military Tribunal because of his refusal to perform unarmed military service, and in March 1979 Emmanuel Gazis was sentenced to 18 years' imprisonment in Kozani for the same reason. Amnesty International expressed its concern in a letter on 14 March 1979 to His Excellency Mr Stavros G. Roussos, Greek ambassador in London, and in telegrams to Prime Minister Constantine Karamanlis and Minister of Defence Evangelos Averoff. The only improvement in the position of Jehovah's Witnesses under the new law appears to be that they will no longer have to serve repeated sentences as in the past, when they were released from prison only to be called up again and re-imprisoned if they again refused to perform military service.
In April 1979, Amnesty International was working for the release of 86 imprisoned Jehovah's Witnesses in Greece.
On 23 March 1979, Amnesty International appealed again to the leaders of all political parties in Greece and to all independent members of parliament for their support for the enactment of domestic legislation against torture.
