Korea (Republic of) [South Korea]
The administration of President Park Chung-hee has continued to exercise the emergency powers provided by the constitution which was introduced under martial law in 1972. Wide ranging powers to curtail freedom of expression and suppress political opposition are embodied in Emergency Regulation No. 9 of 13 May 1975, which prohibits all criticism of the 1972 constitution of members of the government, bans all political meetings and demonstrations, and enables the authorities to remove people from their jobs and deny them the right to practise their profession.
During the past year the government has released some prisoners held under this decree. These included political prisoners arrested and imprisoned because of their peaceful criticism of government restrictions on human rights and the continuing use of Emergency Regulation No. 9. All political prisoners in South Korea are released conditionally and are liable to arbitrary re-arrest and imprisonment without a new trial.
On 27 December 1978, to mark President Park's new six-year term of office, the government released opposition leader Kim Dae-jung. Mr Kim was officially said to have been released together with 105 other political prisoners. However, although on several occasions Amnesty International sought from the government details concerning the other prisoners whose sentences reportedly had been suspended, it has been given no information and cannot confirm their release.
Kim Dae-jung was an adopted prisoner of conscience. He was illegally abducted from Japan by agents of the South Korean government in August 1973 and was forcibly returned to South Korea. In 1976 he was sentenced to 5 years' imprisonment for endorsing the "Myong Dong declaration", a document which called for the restoration of basic freedoms in South Korea. His case was widely pubhcized by Amnesty International.
At the time of the amnesty of 27 December 1978, the government declared that the life sentence of the well known Korean poet Kim Chi-ha had been changed to a term of 20 years. Amnesty International cabled President Park to urge his immediate release. The poet's hfe sentence was itself the result of the
98
commutation of a death sentence pronounced against him in 1974. Additionally, in 1976 he had been sentenced to a term of 7 years' imprisonment after being convicted of publishing works which the government alleged were likely to benefit North Korea.
Other prisoners adopted by Amnesty International for many years were not affected by the declared amnesty. These included political prisoners convicted in 1974 on the grounds of their alleged connection with the so-called People's Revolutionary Party, eight of whom had been sentenced to death and executed in April 1975. The remaining prisoners are serving very long sentences. Amnesty International has continued to urge their prompt release, because their confessions had been extracted under torture and they had been unjustly convicted in an unfair trial involving grave legal abuses (see Report of an Amnesty International Mission to the Republic of Korea, 27 March - 9 April 1975).
For the purposes of curtailing freedom of speech and suppressing non-violent expressions of political opposition, the South Korean authorities have used the full range of powers at their disposal. Not only have they brought men and women to trial under Emergency Regulation No. 9 and other legislation such as the Anti-Communist Law, but they have also summoned people for interrogation lasting several hours, detained some overnight or for a few days, and held others for longer periods of several weeks or more.
For example, Kim Dae-jung has been called for questioning by the Seoul district prosecutor at least three times since his conditional release in December 1978. On one of these occasions, 7 May 1979, Mr Kim was questioned for four hours, together with former President Yun Po Sun and the greatly respected Quaker leader Hahm Suk Hon, in connection with a statement they had made demanding the repeal of Emergency Regulation No. 9.
Amnesty International received reports throughout the year of people held in detention for relatively short periods. These included people arrested at prayer meetings, such as the one held on 22 September 1978 at the Christian Building in Seoul when a group of textile workers enacted a play. A large number of police violently interrupted the performance, beating men and women alike. Of the 600 present, 31 were detained and another 12 were arrested later: 19 were given summary court sentences of imprisonment ranging from 15 to 29 days; seven were released after two or three days; four others were held for two weeks. The last group included a South Korean Methodist minister, Mrs Cho Wha-soon, who was director of the Inchon Urban Industrial Mission (although released on 7 October, on 15 November Mrs Cho was once again arrested and was subsequently sentenced to 5 years' imprisonment for alleged violations of Emergency Regulation No. 9: she has been adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience).
Those who took part in demonstrations protesting against the denial of civil Uberties in South Korea met with similar treatment. At one demonstration in Seoul on 26 June 1978, attended by an estimated 10,000 people, 76 were detained, including six Roman Catholic priests; 22 were given summary court sentences of 20 days' imprisonment. On 14 September 1978, more than 2,000 students of Korea University held a demonstration on their campus in Seoul lasting approximately two hours. Many of the students were severely beaten by riot police and 51 were detained. Although 23 were later released, five were given prison sentences
99
ranging from 1 to Vh years, with loss of civil rights to follow for equivalent periods.
The official practice of arresting people and holding them for varying periods of time, with or without court sentences, is seen by opposition leaders as intended to suppress all demands for the reduction of the sweeping powers of the government and the restoration of basic liberties. Although at any one time the total number of political prisoners in South Korea probably does not exceed 300, nevertheless there is a clear pattern of frequent arrests and releases involving a large turnover of "suspects", some of whom are brought to trial and given long prison sentences.
Amnesty International worked for the release of more than 100 adopted prisoners. The organization continued to urge the release of Lee Yong-hui, a former journalist and assistant professor of Hanyang University, now serving a 2 year prison sentence for translating and editing a collection of essays written by foreign authors who had visited the People's Republic of China. Amnesty International has continued to press for the immediate release of Soh Joon-shik, who completed a 7 year sentence on 27 May 1978. Instead of being released on that date, Mr Soh was transferred to another prison where he is still held in detention under the Public Security Law! This law empowers the government arbitrarily to continue the detention of former political prisoners, a provision first invoked in the case of Soh Joon-shik. Mr Soh was adopted by Amnesty International in 1971 when he and others, including his elder brother, were arrested after large-scale demonstrations in connection with the presidential elections of that year. The Soh brothers were charged with spying for North Korea, but information available to Amnesty International indicated that they were convicted on the evidence of confessions extracted under torture and that the real purpose of the trial was to suppress and discourage all criticism of the government by university students.
Amnesty International made further appeals on behalf of six prisoners under sentence of death in South Korea. The six men, of Korean origin but formerly resident in Japan, were arrested while visiting South Korea in connection "with business or academic activities. They were convicted of spying for North Korea and sentenced to death, in spite of the fact that their lawyers and families submitted evidence that the accused were in Japan at the time of the alleged visits to North Korea. Amnesty International, which opposes the death penalty in all cases, appealed for presidential reprieve of the sentences and, in addition, urged re-trials for the six men in order that evidence of alibi could be fairly considered.
