Uruguay (the Eastern Republic of)
Uruguay continues under de facto military rule with miUtary appointees in the courts, state corporations, the university and other important institutions. The only three political parties which were not banned following the military takeover in 1973 are still "in recess". In the past year, the commanders of the armed forces announced that presidential elections will be held in 1981 with one candidate, jointly selected by the two traditional parties, the Partido Nacional (or Blanco party) and the Colorado party, subject to the approval of the armed forces. Excluded from the presidential election are all other parties and every one of the several thousand Uruguayans previously active in politics who were deprived of their political rights in 1976 by Institutional Act No. 4. A new constitution is under preparation and will be submitted to a referendum in 1980. It is expected to incorporate the de facto changes to the 1967 constitution which have been introduced through the eight Institutional Acts and numerous decrees passed in recent years.
In the past decade the Uruguay government has ceased to be a promoter of international norms and safeguards for human rights and become an object of criticism fornon-govemmental and inter-govemmental bodies, as well as individual governments, because of the flagrant violations of legal safeguards and other human rights enshrined in the constitution and the international instruments to which Uruguay is a party.
A highly critical report on Uruguay prepared by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (lACHR) was adopted by the General Assembly of the Organization of American States (OAS) in June 1978 with only one negative vote (Uruguay). Substantial parts of the report and other OAS resólutions emanate from information submitted by Amnesty International to the lACHR.
The Uruguayan government has refused to allow the lACHR to conduct an investigation on the spot. Because of this and other human rights issues, the OAS would not accept Uruguay as a host country for its General Assembly. Amnesty International's delegation to the OAS in Washington in June 1978 voiced its concerns to the then Foreign Minister of Uruguay, Sr A. Rovira, and the commander-in-chief of the army. General Luis Queirolo.
While the United Nations Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR) was continuing its examination of Uruguay at its confidential session in February 1979, Amnesty International made public several testimonies on torture in Uruguay. The speakers at the press conference were a woman who in 1978 had been the victim of rape, electric shocks and other torture methods involving the participation of a medical doctor; and a man who had been abducted in 1976 in Argentina by the joint efforts of Argentinian and Uruguayan security forces and illegally transported to Uruguay, where he was subjected to further torture and irregular trial proceedings. He also reported on the abduction in November 1978 of one of the
76
group who had been abducted with him in Argentina in 1976, Ana Maria Salvo, who is still held incommunicado by the Uruguayan armed forces in a secret place of detention, and on the abduction in Brazil of two Uruguayan refugees, Universindo Rodriguez and Lilian Celiberti (and initially the latter's two young children), their forced transfer to Uruguay and continued secret detention incommunicado. The third witness, a former first lieutenant of the Uruguayan armed forces, confirmed from his and fellow officers' own experience that political prisoners in their custody were tortured: such information previously was received mainly from the victims themselves. In his testimony he stated that "90 per cent of the Uruguayan armed forces are involved directly or indirectly in torture"; that "no one has been punished for participating in the application of torture"; that refusal to torture leads to harassment and persecution; and that false explanations and false death certificates are fabricated when a prisoner dies as a result of torture. Amnesty International has submitted to the United Nations Secretary General, Kurt Waldheim, further testimonies of unlawful detention and torture during 1978 and 1979 as illustrations of a "persistent pattern of gross violations of human rights" in Uruguay. Amnesty International also gave advice to individuals who complained to the United Nations Committee on Human Rights about torture or other violations of their human rights.
Other inter-governmental and non-govemmental bodies continued to be concerned with the defence of human rights in Uruguay. The Inter-Parhamentary Union pursued its work for imprisoned parliamentarians, who are all adopted prisoners of conscience: José Luís Massera Lerena, Jaime Gerschuni Pérez, Vladimir Ihtch Turiansky, Alberto Altesor Gonzales, Gerardo Cuesta Villa and Rosario Pietrarroia Zapala. In May 1978, the International Labour Organization (ILO) called the Uruguayan Minister of Labour to Geneva to report to the Committee on Freedom of Association on the situation of imprisoned trade-unionists, the restriction of trade-union freedom and the new trade-union legislation which the government has announced is forthcoming. Amnesty International groups are currently working for the release of a considerable number of the trade-unionists of concern to the ILO, among them journalist Hector Rodriguez, teacher Didaskó Pérez Baccino and medical doctor Juan José Ormaechea.
Amnesty International has in the past year provided information on the continuing violations of human rights in Uruguay to the general public and to governments. One of a series of chapters on various aspects of the situation in Uruguay dealt with individual cases of prisoners of conscience, detained for their writings, opposition to the military rule, trade-union activities, or present or past support of political parties that have been declared illegal. It also described the cases of four imprisoned military officers who opposed the military coup d'état and the torture of pohtical prisoners. A second chapter dealt with the application of military justice to civilians; the subordination of the generally unqualified judges to the military hierarchy; the consequent ineffectiveness of legal safeguards, which leads to long detention incommunicado, ill-treatment and torture; and the persecution of defence lawyers, some of whom have been imprisoned, have sought exile, or have given up legal defence work, either for their own safety or for the benefit of their clients, who may get even less justice if they decline the services of the military, state-appointed and untrained defence counsel. A third chapter examined the conditions of detention of political prisoners in military barracks, in
77
special sections of common law prisons and in military high-security prisons. The first category is used for interrogation and torture in the pre-trial period of detention, as well as for prisoners already on trial. The prisoners are often kept hooded, and in the hangar used for long-term detention at the naval unit, Fusileros Navales, even many of the guards wear hoods (with slits for their eyes). One of the main complaints against the military high-security prisons is the constant feeling of insecurity at the possibility of being taken away to be tortured in some military barracks, either without the judge's knowledge or with his connivance.
Amnesty International has also been concerned with a special aspect of military justice: payment of "prison costs", equal to one third of the money earned by an ordinary prisoner, is rigorously demanded from political prisoners, who are not paid in prison. The prison costs have increased from 1.50 new pesos per day in 1972 to 15 new pesos per day in 1978. A receipt issued in June 1978 was for the equivalent of SUS 1,700 for the period 1973-1978. It seems that in practice payment has never been demanded of ordinary prisoners.
Amnesty International estimates that there are 2,500 to 2,800 prisoners in Uruguay (one per 1,000 inhabitants), not including those arrested, interrogated, tortured and released without being brought before a court.
Over 300 cases have been allocated to groups for adoption or further investigation. Thirty-six adoptees have been released in the past year, among them teacher and trade-union leader Ricardo Vilaró. The judge signed his release and he was set free in April 1978. On the steps of the police headquarters he was abducted by the Fusileros Navales. Following international pressure he was released in June 1978 and allowed to join his family in the Netherlands. Other adopted prisoners had served their sentence or been granted conditional release towards the end of 1978, among them several medical doctors. Like many other prisoners, they had been kept in administrative detention under the Medidas Prontas de Seguridad for several months or indefinitely. They were held in insanitary conditions in military barracks, sometimes even in disused railway carriages. The continuing arrests without warrant, prolonged detention incommunicado in a secret place, and ill-treatment and torture have necessitated urgent interventions by Amnesty International, which organized urgent actions on behalf of 38 people during the year, among them Luis Barrios Rodriguez, who was arrested on 24 August 1978. His family were denied information on his whereabouts although after two months they were allowed to deliver clean clothes. At the end of January 1979 he was still being held incommunicado in a secret place of detention. Other urgent actions have been made on behalf of prisoners who have been removed from prison for renewed torture: Omar Rodríguez, Pedro Varela Esponda, Adolfo Drescher Caldas, and Maria Mercedes Espinóla.
In February and March 1979 there was a new wave of arrests of several hundred people, some sources putting the total as high as 1,500. According to official sources, at least 47 were committed for trial, mainly bank and transport trade-union activists. Many were reported to be held incommunicado in secret places of detention and tortured. Amnesty International sent telegrams to the authorities urging them to guarantee the physical integrity of those detained.
Despite the widespread international concern, the authorities have taken no measures to investigate or halt the unconstitutional abuses committed by their law-enforcement agencies. The military high command has instead created an
78
«
extensive apparatus, the Central Office for Information on Persons, for answering questions from abroad regarding poUtical prisoners and for disseminating its own propaganda. It attributes reports of violations of human rights to "a constant and strongly organized campaign by fugitive or exiled agents of communism and a few false patriots", the cost of which is partly borne by "institutions supposedly working for the defence of human rights" (El Pais, 31 January 1979).
With a view to stimulating thought and debate among the Uruguayan law-enforcement agencies themselves, Amnesty International has in the past year provided officers of the armed forces and police, local governors and press with copies of the Code of Police Ethics and its report Torture in Greece: The First Torturers' Trial 1975.
Venezuela
During the year. Amnesty International received further information about civilians charged before miUtary courts with crimes against the security of the state. At the end of February 1979, there were about 180 civiUan prisoners held under miUtary justice; in some cases they had been held for ten years without being sentenced in Cuartel San Carlos, Cárcel de la Pica, Cárcel Modelo, Marcaibo, Tocuyito and Cárcel de Valera. They are charged with guerrilla activities.
There were new allegations of torture and ill-treatment of poUtical detainees, particularly those arrested in rural areas. On 27 and 28 November 1978 miUtary forces arbitrarily arrested and severely tortured several peasants from the municipality of San José de Guaribe in the departamento of Monagas. In December 1978, Amnesty International made an appeal on behalf of three peasants who had disappeared. They reappeared severd weeks later in the Cuartel de San Carlos.
In March 1979, the new President, Luis Herrera Campins, took office. It is hoped that he wiU decree an amnesty for poUtical prisoners. Many political prisoners have already been released, among them Doris Francia, who was mentioned in the Amnesty International Report 1978. Salom Mesa and David Nieves, who were elected to pariiament while in detention, were released after a long legal battle against the military authorities who were holding them. However, even if there is a general amnesty, an important problem remains: the Prosecutor General (Fiscal General) of the republic is not competent to control the legality of military trials.
Another serious concern has been information about the kiUing of Colombian immigrant workers by some members of the Venezuelan army in Venezuelan territory near the frontier with Colombia. The reasons for those killings are not clear. Amnesty International welcomes the decision of the Venezuelan government to investigate these allegations and hopes that the results wiU be made pubUc.
In February 1979, an Amnesty International delegate paid a visit to Venezuela. He met the Fiscal General of the Republic, the Legal Adviser to the President (Consultorio Júridica de la Presidencia) and visited the department of MiUtary Justice (Dirección de Justicia Militar). He conveyed to them the concerns of Amnesty International.
