Taiwan (The Republic of China)
There have now been 30 years of martial law under which suspected political
113
opponents continue to be detained and sentenced on charges of sedition for any act considered contrary to the official anti-communist policy. The total number of people currently detained on pohtical grounds is not known. In the past three years, estimates have varied from 250 according to official sources to several thousands according to exile sources.
Amnesty International continued to work for more than 100 political prisoners and to be concerned by new arrests and by treatment of some detainees during investigation.
In June 1978, Amnesty International appealed for the release of Ms Chen Chu, an editor and human rights activist arrested on 22 June. Ms Chen Chu was released on bail on 6 July 1978, after spending 13 days being interrogated in detention incommunicado.
In October 1978, Amnesty International campaigned for political prisoners in Taiwan, appealing in particular for the release of prisoners detained since the early 1950s. Most of them are held in an isolated prison camp on Green Island off the south-east coast of Taiwan. Amnesty International has the names of more than 40 people who have been in prison since the early 1950s. They were arrested for suspected pro-communist activities or sympathies. In many cases it is not known whether they were ever tried. A typical case is Li Chin-mu, an agricultural worker now over 50 years' old who has spent 28 years in prison. Mr Li was one of a group of 30 people arrested around 1950 for alleged connections with the now defunct Taiwan Communist Party. He is said to have been tried in August 1950 but his sentence is not known. He was last reported to be held on Green Island.
Appeals were also renewed for prisoners arrested more recently. They include: Pai Ya-tsan, a Taiwanese in his mid-thirties who was sentenced to life imprisonment in November 1975 for pubUshing a leaflet for his election campaign which consisted of 29 questions addressed to the Prime y[\mstQv (Amnesty International Report 1975-76); Huang Hua, who is serving his second term of imprisonment for "propagating rebellious thought" through his articles (Amnesty International Report 1977); Yen Ming-sheng, a 41-year-old candidate in the 1975 partial elections to the legislature, who was sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment in July 1976 for "conspiracy to carry out sabotage and subversion".
In early 1979, further appeals were made about the case and health of Tseng Cheng-chin, a wealthy watch dealer from Taipei (Amnesty International Report 1978). During his first trial by military court in 1977 he was found guilty of "joining the Communist Party" in 1965 and sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment and confiscation of all his property. In November 1977 the Ministry of National Defence ordered a retrial because "some evidence" against Mr Tseng "needed corroboration". The verdict was upheld at the second trial, although his sentence was reduced to 8 years. Amnesty International learned later that Mr Tseng suffered from pains in his back (reportedly due to ill-treatment during interrogation) and appealed for his immediate release and full medical treatment. Further appeals were made in March 1979 after reports were received that his health continued to deteriorate and that a third appeal for a review of his case had been denied.
In early March 1979, Amnesty International sent a delegate to Taiwan to observe a politically significant trial. The accused were a prominent opposition politician aged 77, Yu Teng-fa, and his son, Yu Jui-yen. The two had been arrested on 21 January in Kaohsiung for suspected connections with an alleged "communist
114
spy" named Wu Tai-an. Yu Teng-fa's arrest is believed to have been in fact an attempt to silence the opposition to the ruling Kuomintang party. He is the former magistrate of Kaohsiung. Before his arrest he had been involved in trying to organize a gathering of opposition politicians at his home in Kaohsiung, but he was arrested before the planned meeting.
On 2 March 1979, the Taiwan Garrison Command (TGC) announced that Yu and his son had been indicted, the father for "failing to report a communist agent" and "spreading propaganda beneficial to the Chinese communists", the son on the first charge only. They were brought to trial by military court on 9 March 1979. Despite earlier announcements by the TGC that the trial would be public, Amnesty International's representative was prevented from attending most of the proceedings.
Amnesty International cabled President Chiang Ching-kuo on 29 March saying that, according to all information it had received, there appeared to be no evidence that Yu Teng-fa and his son had been involved in any violent or criminal activities, and urged that Yu Teng-fa be released and that the charges against him and his son be withdrawn, saying that they would be regarded as prisoners of conscience if convicted.
Amnesty International also expressed concern at the conditions in which Yu Teng-fa had been detained since the trial. According to reports he was held in a cell under constant closed-circuit television surveillance and prevented from receiving visitors or leaving his cell. According to normal procedures, the verdict should be announced within seven days after a trial but this was delayed, in his case, by more than one month.
On 16 April 1979, Yu Teng-fa was sentenced to 8 years' imprisonment, and his son received a 2-year suspended sentence. Thirteen others were sentenced at the same time, including Wu Tai-an, the alleged spy who appeared as prosecution witness in Yu Teng-fa's trial. Wu Tai-an had been arrested in summer or early autumn 1978 (the date of his arrest has not been revealed by the authorities). Other people were arrested in September and October on accusations of being part of his conspiracy. They include local opposition members, such as Chen Wen-hsiung, the Chairman of Taitung Co-operative Association, his wife Kao Chin-tse, and others. On 16 April 1979, Wu Tai-an was sentenced to death and the 12 others to terms ranging from 8 years to life imprisonment.
