Kenya (the Republic of)
The most significant event of the year was the death of President Jomo Kenyatta on 22 August 1978. Former Vice-President Daniel arap Moi was elected to replace him and assumed office on 14 October 1978.
One of President Moi's first actions was to release all political detainees on 12 December 1978, the 15th anniversary of Kenya's independence. Among the 26 detainees freed were prisoners whose cases had been taken up by Amnesty International. They included four members of parliament detained for periods from
23
1 to 9 years because of their outspoken criticism of the government, and the distinguished novelist and Professor of Literature at Nairobi University, Ngugi wa Thiong'o. Professor Thiong'o was detained in December 1977 after he co-authored a Kikuyu-language play which contained a radical critique of contemporary Kenyan society and political affairs. He was an Amnesty International Prisoner of the Month in July 1978.
Amnesty International cabled President Moi on 13 December 1978 to commend the releases as a timely gesture which should serve as an example to other countries in Africa and throughout the world.
Following their release, Ngugi wa Thiong'o, Koigi wa Wamwere and other detainees gave press interviews in which thay called for the end of detention without trial and described the circumstances and conditions of their detention. They complained of delays in obtaining medical treatment, the ineffectiveness of the secret detention review tribunal, denial of contact with relatives except for rare visits, and in most cases the denial of all reading material except the Bible.
One detainee, Martin Shikuku, suffered severe intestinal disorders and lost the use of his legs while in detention. He left prison on crutches which he obtained only after going on hunger strike. Altogether, during his three years in detention he went on hunger strike 13 times in an attempt to get improved conditions.
Before the releases a number of questions had been asked in parliament about the treatment of detainees, but they appear to have had little effect and were generally met by government assurances that detainees were not ill-treated. Eventually, in June 1978, Attorney General Charles Njonjo warned members that they should not ask any further questions about detainees.
One other former parliamentarian released during the year was Chelagat Mutai. She was freed in August 1978 after completing the full IVi-year prison term imposed for incitement to violence and disobedience of the law. She was alleged to have encouraged agricultural workers to occupy a sisal plantation which they were buying. Amnesty International investigated her case and concluded that the reason for her imprisonment was her criticism of government policies.
