Yugoslavia (the Socialist Federal Republic of)
Despite considerable changes to the Yugoslav legislative system and legislation in 1977 (Amnesty International Report 1978), the current Penal Code retains provisions which make the non-violent exercise of human rights — in particular those of freedom of expression and association - punishable by imprisonment.
Amnesty International adopted as prisoners of conscience a number of people sentenced and imprisoned under article 133 (article 118 in the previous Penal Code) which makes "hostile propaganda" an offence punishable by from 1 to 10 years' imprisonment. Some have been convicted under this article for expressing criticism of Yugoslavia's political leadership and policies; even private conversations have been classed as "hostile propaganda" and punished by heavy sentences of imprisonment.
Among those adopted is Dr Veselin Masic, a 56-year-old gynaecologist from Brcko, who, in December 1978, was tried by the District Court of Tuzla on charges of "hostile propaganda". According to official Yugoslav reports, he was accused of having "damaged the prestige" of Yugoslavia in conversations held in his own home and the homes of friends. He had allegedly falsely depicted social and political conditions in Yugoslavia and spoken in derogatory terms of its political system and non-alignment policy in international relations. Dr Masic reportedly denied these charges but was found guilty and sentenced to 6 years' imprisonment.
Two similar cases concern a lawyer, Nenad Vasic, and a high-school teacher, Mirko Kovacevic, both of whom are Amnesty International adoptees. In 1977, Nenad Vasic was sentenced by the District Court of Sarajevo to 10 years' im-
150
prisonment — which he is currently serving in Foca Prison — for "hostile propaganda" on the basis of private conversations in which he had criticized the Yugoslav Communist Party and ridiculed a prominent Bosnian politician. Mirko Kovacevic — on similar charges — was sentenced by the District Court of Sarajevo in 1977 to 8 years' imprisonment. He was found guilty of having openly criticized Yugoslavia's political system, policies and leadership while working as a teacher in Sarajevo over two years previously. It was alleged that his criticism stemmed from a nationalist position "inimical to the brotherhood and unity of the peoples of Yugoslavia".
Amnesty International works for a number of people imprisoned as a result of non-violent activities while living abroad or their contacts with Yugoslav émigrés or émigré organizations. During 1978, it adopted as a prisoner of conscience Vjenceslav Cizek, a Croatian nationalist who in August 1978 was sentenced by the district court of Sarajevo to 15 years' imprisonment on charges of having "acted from counter-revolutionary positions subversive to the Yugoslav social system". He was accused of collaboration with leading members of the Croatian émigré movement and of having "illegally entered" Yugoslavia. Mr Cizek had sought political asylum in the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG) in 1971. While in the FRG, Mr Cizek joined the Croatian Republic Party, a Croatian émigré organization, and regularly contributed articles and pohtical cartoons to Croatian émigré journals in which he criticized the present Yugoslav political system, called for the establishment of an independent Croatian state and caricatured leading Yugoslav politicians.
In November 1977, Mr Cizek disappeared while on a trip to Milan. He next appeared at his trial in August 1978. Information received by Amnesty International strongly indicates that Mr Cizek did not voluntarily enter Yugoslavia, but was kidnapped by members of the Yugoslav state security police. In recent years Amnesty International has received a number of allegations involving the kidnapping of Yugoslav émigrés — opponents of the present Yugoslav government - among them the "Cominformists" Alexander Opojevic, Colonel Vladimir Dapcevic, Djoka Stojanovic and Mileta Perovic.
Mr Cizek is at present serving his sentence in Zenica Prison, where according to the most recent information, he is employed using heavy machinery, despite severe ill-health. Amnesty International believes that Mr Cizek has neither advocated nor used violence.
Among other Amnesty International adopted prisoners of conscience imprisoned for alleged activities abroad or in association with émigrés are Lazar Arezina, a Serb from Bosansko Grahovo, and five students from Zagreb — Mirko Rajcic, Marko Juranovic, Fabijan Dumancic, Jakoslav Rojnica and Ante Rakic. Amnesty International is also investigating the case of Dragan Bogdanovski, a Macedonian émigré, sentenced in February 1979 by the district court of Skopje to 13 years' imprisonment on charges of having conspired against the Yugoslav state while living abroad, and having illegally entered Yugoslavia.
In the past year Amnesty International has taken up the cases of three Yugoslav citizens sentenced to terms of imprisonment ranging from 18 months to 31/2 years for possessing or circulating copies of émigré journals, critical of the present Yugoslav government.
As in previous years, an amnesty was enacted on 29 November 1978,
151
Yugoslavia's National Day. Whereas the amnesty of 1977 affected 574 people, the amnesty of 1978 affected only 94 people, including both political and criminal prisoners: 39 prisoners were released and 55 had their sentences reduced: five whose cases had been taken up by Amnesty International were released and 13 had their sentences reduced, in general by one year. Of these, the majority were members of a group of ethnic Albanians from Kosovo Autonomous Province who in 1976 were tried in Pristina on charges of irredentist and anti-state activities. Adem Demaci, Skender Kastrati and Redzep Malja — other members of this group adopted by Amnesty International - were not included in the amnesty of 1978. Amnesty International is particularly concerned about the fate of Adem Demaci (Amnesty International Report 1978), who is in Zenica Prison serving a 15-year sentence and reported to be in poor health.
Certain aspects of prison conditions in Yugoslavia and the health of a number of prisoners of conscience are also a matter of concern. Amnesty International continues to receive allegations of the ill-treatment of prisoners by guards, in particular in Zenica Prison in Bosnia-Hercegovina. Prisoners in Stara Gradiska Prison, in Croatia, are reportedly held in insanitary conditions in overcrowded, damp, unheated cells. According to a report published in the Yugoslav press in 1978, the pariiament of the Republic of Croatia issued a statement that certain sections of Stara Gradiska are beyond repair and would have to be demolished. The same statement declared that the majority of prison buildings (in Croatia) were old and outdated. In February 1979, Amnesty International renewed an appeal of May 1978 for the release of Professor Davor Aras, an Amnesty International adoptee, on health grounds. Professor Aras was serving a 6y2-year sentence in the prison of Lepoglava for "criminal offences against the state" (Amnesty International Report 1978). In March 1979, Amnesty International learned that Professor Aras had been granted a 3-month suspension of sentence to permit him to receive medical treatment for a serious heart condition. Amnesty International is also concerned about the health of Manda Parie, an Amnesty International adoptee who is reported to be receiving treatment in the Zagreb Prison hospital.
On a number of occasions, Amnesty International has received allegations that people have been beaten, ill-treated or threatened during pre-trial detention. In at least one recent case - the retrial in January 1979 of five Croatian nationaUsts accused of planting bombs in 1975 - the court, while confirming the guilt of three of tjie accused, conceded that "physical and psychological pressure" may have been used to obtain self-incriminating evidence from them. Moreover, in a number of cases known to Amnesty International, persons accused of pohtical offences have not had access to lawyers of their choice, and, in others, lawyers have been excluded from or refused a transcript of investigation hearings. It is also reported that lawyers have not always even received a copy of the indictment before the trial and that threats have been used to dissuade a lawyer from taking a case. A positive aspect, however, is that these and pther judicial and legislative issues have in the past year been raised in public discussion. In February 1979, the press and television gave considerable coverage to debate about the abohtion of capital punishment, which is retained in the Yugoslav Penal Code for particularly grave murder cases, certain "crimes against the state" and acts of poUtical terrorism, although in the majority of cases the death penalty is commuted to a sentence of 20 years' imprisonment. During the year Amnesty International learned of three death sentences, of which one is known to have been carried out.
