Congo (the People's Republic of)
Political events were dominated by tensions and divisions within the ruling military committee of the Parti Congolais du Travail (PCX). This committee was founded in March 1977 following the assassination of President Ngouabi. It was dissolved in February 1979 and President Joachim Yhombi Opango was replaced as Head of State by Colonel Denis Sassou-Nguessou, former Vice-President and Minister of Defence. At the end of March 1979, the PCT's Extraordinary Congress elected Colonel Sassou-Nguessou Chairman of the Central Committee, confirmed him as Head of State and called for former President Yhombi Opango's trial on charges of treason.
In August 1978 several months before his replacement, President Yhombi Opango announced that a major plot against the government had been uncovered, resulting in a number of arrests. The President declared that the alleged conspirators, whom he characterized as "incorrigibles, hungry for blood and power, deeply rooted in evil", would receive "neither pardon nor classical trial". Following this announcement, Amnesty International made strong representations to the government, requesting information and expressing concern that fair legal procedure be used.
None of the detainees, known to number at least 25, had been charged or tried by December 1978, at which time Amnesty International again appealed for them to be charged or released, and protested against the use of torture during interrogation which reportedly led to the death of one detainee, Joseph Milongo. In January 1979, Amnesty International was informed that, following investigative proceedings by a mihtary tribunal held in camera, 15 of the detainees had been released. A further appeal for the release of the detainees arrested in August
1978	and four others reported detained in January 1979 was made in February
1979	to the new government.
16
Throughout the year, Amnesty International continued to press for the release of 12 prisoners tried and sentenced in 1977 in connection with the assassination of President Ngouabi in March 1977. Particular attention was given to the case of Professor Pascal Lissouba, geneticist and former Prime Minister, who is reported to be in poor health.
Amnesty International is concerned at the continued use of detention without charge or trial for long periods. Judicial procedures, as used in the 1977 trial and the "Exceptional Revolutionary Court" of 1978, fall short of internationally recognized standards. Defence lawyers were not allowed to conduct a proper defence of the accused or to cross-examine witnesses for the prosecution. Appeals against conviction were not allowed. By decree, state security offences are tried before military tribunals, from which there is no right of appeal.
Prison conditions are reportedly harsh, with poor food and medical care. No visits are allowed to those detained for offences against state security. Beatings and torture are known to be used in the Brazzaville prisons.
