Cuba (the Republic of)
Two important legal texts were approved by the National Assembly of People's Power in December 1978: a new Penal Code to replace the 1938 Code of Social Defence and a Code of Military Justice.
The summary of offences against the security of the state in the new code are similar to those previously defined by the Code of Social Defence — the fundamental legal code for political and criminal offenders. Among the articles which could perhaps be interpreted ambiguously are article 115 which imposes a penalty of 4 to 10 years' imprisonment on anyone who jeopardizes Cuba's friendly relations with anotherstate, and article 121 which makes illegal the "dissemination of false information against international peace".
Article 237 of the Fourth Section of the code, which deals with offences against pubhc order, provides a continuing legal basis for the imprisonment of conscientious objectors, although penalties would be less: "anyone who, in abuse of the religious freedom guaranteed by the constitution, opposes his faith or religious behef to the revolution, or to the exercise of his duty to work, to defend the country with arms, to revere the symbols and carry out other constitutional duties, incurs a penalty of between 3 to 9 months' imprisonment".
60
Some penalties would be reduced under the new code, which now provides for a maximum term of 20 years' imprisonment except in cases where the death penalty has been passed but not carried out, in which case a 30-year term may be served. The death penalty is considered exceptional, but can nevertheless be passed for a wide range of offences including terrorism, piracy, rape and pederasty, hijacking and robbery with violence.
The Cuban National Assembly decided that the new Penal Code will come into force in August 1979.
Following an agreement with Cuban exiles in November 1978, President Fidel Castro announced in a press conference that the Cuban government would free 3,000 prisoners convicted for offences against the security of the state and a further 600 prisoners held for trying to leave the island illegally, at the rate of 400 a month beginning in December 1978. President Castro told foreign journalists that 3,328 were imprisoned for "offences against the revolution", and a further 425 for "offences committed during the Batista dictatorship". In addition, approximately 600 people were then imprisoned for attempting to leave Cuba illegally.
On 27 December 1978 the Gaceta Oficial published a list of 400 political prisoners who had been total y definitivamente indultados (totally and definitively pardoned) by the Council of Stale. At the end of January 1979, another list was published of 500 names. At the time of writing, 900 of the 3,600 have been released, of whom approximately 400 wanted to go to the USA.
At the end of November 1978, the United States Attorney General, Griffin Bell, said that the United States government would accelerate its screening procedures to permit the entry of 400 Cuban poUtical prisoners per month, but in practice the procedures have been very slow and apparently the Cuban government has delayed the programme of releases accordingly. This seems to be a breach of the agreed number of 400 releases a month. In the view of Amnesty International the release of prisoners should not be conditional on the immigration procedures of a receiving government.
Amnesty International welcomed the releases, but is still concerned by the lack of precise information about the prisoners accused of "terrorist activities" or having committed crimes under the Batista regime. This concern was repeated in a memorandum sent to the authorities in August 1978, following an Amnesty International mission to Cuba.
Foreign observers reported that, while in general trials of Batista supporters were conducted fairly, there were other examples of unfair trials in the early years of the present regime by the tribunales revolucionarios.
One ex-prisoner, for example, who had been accused of sabotage in Oriente province and had been taken to Santiago de Cuba for trial, stated that he was given a court-appointed lawyer whom he had no opportunity to consult before the trial and was sentenced after proceedings lasting only 10 minutes. Amnesty International in its memorandum pubhshed in November 1978, urged the government, to give serious consideration to the revision of judgements of the tribunales revolucionarios.
Amnesty International welcomes the decision of the Cuban government to free all women political prisoners, including Dra Marta Frayde. Very few of the plantado category of political prisoners — only five or six — had been released under the programme of releases at the time of writing. The plantados are those
61
political prisoners who have refused prison discipline as a protest against their treatment as common criminals.
A further Amnesty International mission to Cuba was envisaged in the discussions which took place in Havana in 1977 and referred to in the memorandum published in August 1978. No date has yet been agreed with the Cuban government.
