Nicaragua (the Republic of)
There are long-term problems of political imprisonment and murder of peasants by the National Guard, the country's only military force, which acts virtually as a private army for President Anastasio Somoza. Growing opposition to the regime coalesced following the "death-squad" murder in January 1978 of opposition leader Pedro Joaquin Chamorro, when businessmen, trade-union organizations and student groups joined in a broad front calling for the resignation of the President. The succeeding months saw increasing violence by both sides. After the seizure in August 1978 of the National Palace by the Sandinista National Liberation Front^(FSLN) and the release of a number of political prisoners, another strike was called by the Broad Opposition Front (FAO), a coalition of movements drawn from businessmen's organizations to "Los Doce", a group which maintains links with the FSLN. The government responded with widespread arrests, and on 7 September 1978 Amnesty International issued an urgent action on behalf of more than 700 people detained on suspicion of organizing the strike.
The following day, as the strike gathered momentum, the Sandinistas called for a general uprising. On 12 September, the government reinstated martial law which had been lifted since 1977, thereby suspending many constitutional guarantees and basic civil liberties. By early October, after National Guard retaliation, including the bombing of civilian populations from the air, the revolt was largely crushed. Acting under international pressure, President Somoza released 350 prisoners at the end of December and entered into negotiations with a mediation team from three countries.
Meanwhile, evidence mounted regarding the abuses perpetrated by the National Guard during and after the insurrection. The Red Cross reported that some 5,000 people had died, 10,000 were injured, 25,000 had lost their homes and 57,000 were believed to have fled into exile in neighbouring Honduras and Costa Rica. Between 21 October and 6 November 1978, an Amnesty International researcher visited refugee camps in Honduras and collected information about almost 600 individual cases of political imprisonment in Nicaragua since 6 September 1978. His report showed that documentation was available about many other prisoners detained by the National Guard and summarily executed, often after torture, rape or mutilation; in just one such case, Dr Uriel Morales gave evidence concerning the murder of his wife Paula Ubeda de Morales. Señora Morales was murdered by the National Guard, along with an elderly servant and the young son of a friend, on 18 September 1978 as she walked, carrying a white flag, to buy powdered milk for 23 young children who had taken refuge in her Esteh home. On the day of her funeral, the National Guard forced their way into the garden of the Morales home and killed five of the six mourners. The sixth, Humberto Lacavo, was later pulled alive from the bodies heaped in the grave which had originally been dug to receive the body of Señora Morales.
Following its visit in October 1978, the Inter-American Commission on Human
70
Rights of the Organization of American States reported that during and after the September civil war the Nicaraguan National Guard had "violated human rights in a grave, persistent and widespread manner", and that "there were serious violations of the right to personal security by means of torture and other physical pressures which were inflicted on numerous detainees". The Commission detailed "generalized repression" against males between 14 and 21 years of age.
On 20 September 1978, Amnesty International released a statement condemning the political killings, torture and arbitrary detentions still being carried out by the National Guard which contained a necessarily incomplete list of 519 Nicaraguans known to be detained by the government.
In response to opposition preconditions for entering into direct discussion with the government, martial law was lifted on 7 December, and an amnesty for all prior political offences decreed on 16 December 1978. A limited number of people were released, but the Nicaraguan Commission for Human Rights published a list of some 1,600 still unaccounted for. In January 1979, its records showed that an estimated 275 people had been killed by the National Guard in that month alone. Fresh arrests are continually reported and guerrilla attacks continue with casualties on both sides.
In March 1979, the United Nations Commission on Human Rights adopted a draft resolution on Nicaragua which condemned violations of human rights and resolved to investigate.
During 1978, the National Guard arrested more than 1,000 people for anti-government activities. Some arrested in August and September were freed by military tribunals for lack of evidence while martial law was still in effect.
The vast scale of recent arrests and disappearances and the limited information have made individual casework difficult. Amnesty International issued a number of calls for immediate protest and inquiry concerning large-scale arrests, disappearances and deaths, as well as approximately 62 individual cases, including Orlando Matus del Carmen and Julio César Aviles, members of the Jinotepe division of the Nicaraguan Permanent Commission for Human Rights, who were arrested in April 1979.
