Chile (the Republic of)
Serious violations of human rights continued. Amnesty International was concerned by reports of great numbers of arbitrary arrests, short-term disappearances and cases of torture.
Ill-treatment and torture usually take place before the detained person is brought before the courts. Reports indicate that detainees are subjected to beatings and other types of physical abuse, such as being hung by the arms or legs, and that electric shocks are frequently used. The security services arrest without warrant, using unidentified armed civilians. The detainees are not informed of the reasons for the arrest and their famihes are not informed within the 48 hours stipulated by the law. The following is an extract from testimony received:
"I was arrested on Tuesday 7 November at 19.30 when I was walking down the street ... by a man dressed in plain clothes who threatened to shoot me 'if I tried anything' .... This person took me away forcibly by my wrists to the General Investigation Barracks. There I stayed in a waiting room, then they took me to another room where they blindfolded me and I was interrogated about supposed political activities and was asked if I distributed pamphlets. They hit me on the ears with the palms of their hands which made me feel sick; they applied electric current to my chest and penis".
On 10 March 1978, the state of siege which had been in force in Chile since 1973 was replaced by a state of emergency. Nevertheless on 2 September 1978
54
the government declared a state of siege in the province of El Loa in response to a peaceful protest in support of wage claims by workers of the Chuquicamata copper mine. The protfest included a boycott by workers of the company canteen. About 70 people, mostly workers, were arrested and taken to remote areas. The health of many of these people was affected because of the harsh climate. Other workers were forced to leave the province and forbidden to return for the six months that the state of siege was in force.
Decree 2346 of 17 October 1978 declared seven trade-union federations illegal. This applied to all affiUated unions. Article 1 gives special cause for concern because it makes it an offence against the security of the state to be a member of "any associations or groups of persons which, without possessing legal capacity to do so under labour legislation or ordinary law, undertake the representation of sectors of workers". More than 500 unions which existed de facto were thus dissolved.
Since the coup d'état in 1973, Amnesty International has been trying to dis-cover the fate and whereabouts of people who disappeared following their detention by security agencies. After a number of unsuccessful submissions of cases of disappeared prisoners to the judiciary, the episcopal vicars of the archdiocese of Santiago petitioned the Supreme Court on 3 November 1978 requesting the appointment of a special investigating judge (Ministro en Visita) in each of 11 jurisdictions of the Court of Appeals to investigate the circumstances surrounding the arrest and current situation of 651 missing persons.
On 21 November 1978, Amnesty International presented a partial hst of disappeared prisoners containing over 600 names to the government on the occasion of the Secretary General's attendance at the Symposium on Human Rights organized by the Vicaría de la Solidaridad (the human rights organization of the CathoHc Church in Chile) and urged the government to create an independent commission of inquiry to look into the problem of disappeared prisoners.
On 30 November 1978, corpses were found in an abandoned mine at Lonquén, about 50 kilometres from Santiago, by a group of investigators which included members of the Church hierarchy and editors of two Chilean magazines. Responding to a request from the Vicaría de la Solidaridad, the Supreme Court appointed Judge Adolfo Bañados of the Court of Appeals in Santiago to head an investigation. First reports indicated that several bodies had bullet marks in the skulls; spent cartridges were also found in soil covering the bodies. Fifteen bodies were identified, all from the Isla de Maipo, a small agricultural community in the Talagante district of the province of Santiago. They had been arrested and subsequently "disappeared" in September and October 1973. All their names appeared in lists of disappeared prisoners produced by Amnesty International, which had adopted 11 of them who were arrested on 7 October 1973 by five uniformed police from the Isla de Maipo. The arrests were witnessed by their families. No warrants were produced. The prisoners were never seen or heard of again, although proof exists that a lieutenant from the carabineros (uniformed police), Lautaro Castro, signed papers on 8 October 1973 authorizing their transfer to the National Stadium in Santiago. The government has never given a satisfactory answer to questions regarding their whereabouts. On 7 December 1978, shortly after the discovery of the bodies, Amnesty International sent telegrams to the Minister of Justice and the President of the Supreme Court expressing concern and asking for an inde-
55
pendent inquiry to identify them. When news of the identifications was received, another telegram was sent on 23 February 1979 asking that an independent commission look into the situation of the hundreds of disappeared prisoners, in view of the incontrovertible evidence that those identified had been arrested by a government agency.
In April 1979 following the public commotion created by the discovery of the bodies at Lonquén the Supreme Court agreed to appoint Tiyt Ministros en Visita. Amnesty International is still concerned because they will deal only with the cases which remain open and not with those provisionally closed. Many cases brought before the Chilean courts have been adjourned as a result of the amnesty law of April 1978 or for lack of evidence. Moreover, the Supreme Court has requested that only 67 cases should be investigated. Of these, only 41 appear on submissions made by the Vicaría de la Solidaridad. The remainder are apparently not related to the problem of disappearances and may be used to confuse public opinion. Judge Bañados, appointed to investigate the discovery of the bodies at Lonquén, declared himself incompetent. The investigation will now be carried out by military courts.
The United Nations Ad Hoc Working Group on Chile was established on 27 February 1975. A visit to inquire into human rights was planned for July 1975 but the government postponed it every year until July 1978. The Group found and provided enough evidence about violations of human rights for the United Nations General Assembly to approve on 20 December 1978 a resolution:
1.	expressing "its continued indignation that violations of human rights, often of a grave nature, continue to take place in Chile, as has been convincingly established by the report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Situation of Human
Rights in Chile":
2.	expressing "its particular concern and dismay at refusal of the Chilean authorities to accept responsibility or account for the large number of persons reported to have disappeared for political reasons, or to undertake an adequate investigation of cases drawn to their attention";
3.	calling "upon the Chilean authorities to restore and safeguard, without delay, basic human rights and fundamental freedoms and fully to respect the provisions. of the relevant international instruments to which Chile is a party, including the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, as well as to heed the concerns expressed by the international community."
Amnesty International continued its programme of adoptions of disappeared prisoners and prisoners of conscience; launched urgent actions on behalf of people subjected to torture or arbitrary short-term arrest or short-term disappearance; at the invitation of the Commission on Population and Refugees of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, made a statement on disappeared prisoners at the meeting of the Commission on 1 February 1979; and sent information to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, the United Nations Commission on Human Rights, the Inter-Parliamentary Union and other inter-governmental and non-govemmental organizations.
56
