Syria {the Syrian Arab Republic)
Amnesty International estimates the number of political prisoners presently detained at several hundred, although numbers are known to fluctuate considerably according to the internal situation. Fewer abductions from Lebanon of alleged supporters of opposing parties to the internal Lebanese conflict have been reported.
Despite President Hafez Assad's public announcement in March 1978 that misuse of emergency legislation would, in future, be prevented, almost all political prisoners known to Amnesty International continued to be detained without trial under that legislation.
Amnesty International worked on behalf of 157 political detainees, 50 as adoption cases. Among cases taken up during the year is that of a prominent trade-unionist, 57-year-old Omar Kashash from Aleppo. He was arrested on 14 June 1978 for membership of the political bureau of the prohibited wing of the Communist Party led by Riyad Turk. He was Secretary General of the Printers' Union and had been elected several times to the executive committee of the Syrian Trades Unions' Federation, where he was active in promoting workers' rights. At the time of writing he is reportedly detained in cell 8 of Sheikh Hassan Prison, Damascus—untried and held incommunicado since his arrest. His nervous system is alleged to have been affected as a result of blows to his vertebral column inflicted in detention.
Amnesty International also adopted Yusuf Abdul Kay, a 28-year-old graphic designer from Qamishli in northern Syria who has been detained without trial since May 1978 for alleged membership of a Marxist organization.
Still under adoption are a group of nine Syrian Kurds, members of the Kurdish Democratic Party (KDP), who have been detained without trial since 1973 for protesting against the displacement of Syrian Kurds from their homelands under the Arab Belt Plan. In January 1979, the leader of the Syrian KDP, Daham Miro, and four others were detained in the civilian prison of A1 Hasakeh, while Kanaan Agid and Amin Gulin were detained in Aleppo Prison.
Amnesty International continued to work for some 18 members and associates of the former government detained without trial for eight years in A1 Mezze prison. It urged the release of two seriously ill detainees, former Head of State Dr Nureddin Atassi and former Prime Minister Dr Yusuf Zu'ayyin, who are reportedly suffering from diabetes and tuberculosis respectively.
Four adopted prisoners, all of whom were arrested in Lebanon in 1976 for their support of the Iraqi wing of the Ba'ath Party, were released in 1978: Dr Adnan Sino, a surgeon; Dr Nabil Qulaylat, a physician; Dr Fuad Adhami, a Lebanese government official; and Dr Omar Abdul Hayy, a university professor.
Amnesty International has not been informed whether any of the 74 cases which its representatives brought to the attention of Syrian Minister of Justice Adib Nahawi in March 1978 have been released.
During the year. Amnesty International took up the cases of 66 people reported
170
to have been detained witftout trial since 1977 or 1978 for alleged support of prohibited Marxist movements and is seeking to discover their place of detention and further details. The governing coalition, the National Progressive Front, mainly composed of the Ba'ath Party, includes the Communist Party and three socialist parties. All other political parties are prohibited, giving rise to a proliferation of small opposition splinter groups, many of which are locally based and not politically organized. Arrests of members of such movements—Marxist and socialist, as well as fundamentalist religious movements such as the Mushm Brotherhood and its offshoots—are beHeved to account for a large percentage of political detentions. The restrictions on open political activity as well as the absence of legal safeguards make political detentions throughout Syria hard to document, which accounts for the high number of investigation cases.
In June 1978, the Damascus Bar Association called for the lifting of the state of emergency and changes in the emergency legislation, and for the release or fair and open trial of all political detainees by civilian courts with proper rights of defence. A new commission for human rights was formed to work for these objects.
In March 1979 Amnesty International received reports of detention and harassment of members of the Jewish community following a number of unauthorized emigrations. Restrictions previously imposed on the Jewish community had reportedly been lifted in 1976 and 1977, although emigration is still restricted. The reports are being investigated.
Five executions were reported. Amnesty International asked the government to confirm reports of two pubhc hangings of men convicted of murder in May 1978 and three further reported executions in February and March 1979, one by public hanging in Damascus for murder and two in northern Syria.
Amnesty International asked the government to make known the findings of a promised inquiry into matters of concern raised with Minister of Justice Adib Nahawi during its mission in March 1978, and expressed a wish to send a further high-level mission.
