Israel (the State of) and the Occupied Territories
Although a clear distinction must be drawn between Israel itself where a parliamentary system operates, and the Occupied Territories, to which military rule is applied, Amnesty International is concerned that serious human rights violations are occurring in both regions, both to residents of the territories and to Israeli citizens. These violations fall under each of Amnesty International's statute provisions and include the arrest and conviction of prisoners of conscience, the denial of fair trials to a number of prisoners, and the lack of effective safeguards to ensure that the basic rights of those in custody are protected.
During the year. Amnesty International worked on behalf of 29 prisoners who had been tried and convicted of security offences. Of these, four were adopted as prisoners of conscience and 25 were taken up as investigation cases.
162
Security offences cover a wide range of acts, such as membership of a hostile or illegal organization (Defence Emergency Regulations of 1945(DER), article 85), incitement and hostile propaganda (Security Order 101, 1968) and training in weapons (DER article 63 and Security Order 284, 1967), which might in certain instances place the prisoner outside AmnestyJjitemational's concerns. However, in a number of cases, and particularly in those involving the charge of membership, this legislation has been interpreted very broadly by military courts so that individuals have been sentenced to prison terms for acts which are of a purely pohtical nature.
Amnesty International is also concerned that, in convicting individuals for security offences, Israeli military tribunals often rely for evidence on nothing more than accused's confession (although the technical requirement exists that independent supporting evidence be adduced for a confession to be ruled admissible). In Amnesty International's experience, exclusive reliance on confessions tends to encourage improper interrogation procedures.
Amnesty International also expressed its concern in several letters addressed to Attorney General Yitshak Zamir, at the treatment accorded to conscientious objectors under Israeli law, and referred particularly to Jehovah's Witnesses and Druze who were refusing to serve in the Israeli Defence Forces. In a reply on 20 December 1978, the Attorney General stated that Jehovah's Witnesses are given renewable one-year deferments, but that all Druze are still bound by a decision, taken by Druze community leaders over 20 years ago, that male Druze who are of age would serve in the Israeh Defence Forces. Resistance to the draft among the Druze (often leading to imprisonment) has reached substantial numbers.
In February 1979, Amnesty International started work on behalf of six Israeli Arab students at the Hebrew University in Jerusalem who were confined by an administrative -order to their home villages for a period of three months, because of their part in producing a document which supported the Palestine Liberation Organization as the sole representative of the Palestinian people. This punishment was in accord with the rarely used DER article 110. It also protested against the threatened deportation under DER article 112 of another student also suspected of producing the same document.
Amnesty International continued to work on behalf of all individuals under administrative detention (any person specified by a region's military command may be detained for renewable six-month periods without ever being formally charged or brought to trial). This practice is in clear violation of articles 9 and 10 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
The original legal basis for administrative detention is in DER article 111, but this has now been replaced for the Occupied Territories by article 87 of the 1967 Security Provisions Order and for Israel proper by a new law passed by the Knesset in March 1979. Although the new law introduces the principle of judicial and ministerial controls on the practice of administrative detention, it is not yet clear how effective this control will be in practice. Also, the new law does not apply to the Occupied Territories, where all cases of administrative detention in recent years have occurred.
During the past year Amnesty International worked for 48 administrative detainees, of whom 22 are still in prison. The 48 included a group of 14 people captured in an IsraeU raid into Lebanon in March 1978 and held in detention"
163
in Israeli prisons until February 1979. In February 1979, they were released and returned to Lebanon under the auspices of the International Committee of the Red Cross. The longest held administrative detainee is Ali Awwad Jamal, who has been detained since May 1975.
In early 1978, Amnesty International launched a general appeal for the release of all administrative detainees on the occasion of the 30th anniversary of the State of Israel in June 1978. In August 1978, the Attorney General wrote to Amnesty International that the special committees set up to consider an amnesty would not consider cases of administrative detention, but would deal only with persons who had been tried and sentenced by civilian courts.
Amnesty International is also concerned by the ways in which the system of military justice deviates from fair trial practices. In particular, there are no rights of judicial appeal for those tried before mihtary tribunals in the West Bank, although a military appeals court exists for residents of East Jerusalem and Israel proper. Furthermore, although appeal to the Supreme Court is in principle possible for residents of both Israel and the Occupied Territories, many suspects from the Territories are represented by West Bank lawyers who are not members of the Israeli Bar and who are thus not able to appeal cases to the Supreme Court.
Allegations of ill-treatment of prisoners continued to reach Amnesty International, both directly through former prisoners and through published reports. The most serious public accusations were those made in early 1979 by Alexandra Johnson, a former United States consular official in Jerusalem, who, on the basis of interviews with 29 Palestinian former prisoners applying for visas to the United States, concluded that ill-treatment of prisoners was not limited to the practice of a few over-zealous officials, but was systematic and required at least the tacit approval of higher authorities. Credible testimony recently received by Amnesty International from other former prisoners is consistent with Alexandra Johnson's conclusions.
In January 1979, Amnesty International launched urgent actions on behalf of two prisoners, Nader Fayiz el-Afouri and Youssef el Jou'beh, who were reported to have suffered ill-treatment while in prison in Israel. In March 1979, Amnesty International received letters from the Attorney General denying that any ill-treatment had occurred.
In addition to the alleged ill-treatment of Palestinian prisoners, there is disturbing evidence that similar practices are occurring within Israel proper, to both Israeli Arabs and Jews. A number of reports to this effect have appeared in Israeli newspapers such as Yediot Ahronot, Haolam Hazeh, Zu Haderech and Ma'ariv. These reports include evidence of ill-treatment under interrogation and of brutality committed by the Border Guards, Civil Guards and the Police, all alleged to have occurred during the year.
The government has consistently denied all allegations of systematic torture and has emphasized that any isolated instances which are brought to its attention are fully investigated, with appropriate disciplinary measures taken in situations that warrant them. To support their case, the authorities argue that the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) has access to prisoners under interrogation, which is when torture is usually alleged to take place, no later than 14 days after arrest. In only six per cent of ICRC visits to approximately 1,300 prisoners, within the past year, were complaints of ill-treatment registered. But
164
Amnesty International has received reliable reports that, although the formal rights given the ICRC in the Occupied Territories are among the most favourable that have been granted anywhere, these do not permit the conclusive refutation of torture allegations, as the authorities claim they do. In particular, the ICRC is rarely able to visit prisoners much before the 14th day after arrest and, since torture allegations focus on the first few days of detention, the ICRC visits are often too late to provide convincing medical evidence to support or contradict the allegations. In addition, the ICRC is often unable to locate the whereabouts of particular prisoners within the 14-day limit, and their surveillance of the prisoner's state of health during interrogation is frequently inadequate on these grounds alone.
Amnesty International is particularly concerned with the lack of procedural safeguards protecting prisoners' rights once they are in custody. Suspects in the Occupied Territories may be held incommunicado for long periods of time, with no notification of arrest given to the prisoner's family or legal counsel. Several months may pass before a lawyer's first interview with his or her client, and the medical examinations provided for prisoners are cursory and do not furnish the solid evidence needed to protect the prisoner. These elements, taken together, create a situation in which ill-treatment can very easily occur.
Amnesty International has repeatedly called for an impartial, independent commission of inquiry into allegations of torture and ill-treatment but the authorities have so far not responded.
On 29 April 1979, in the aftermath of several violent incidents which followed the signing of the Israel-Egypt peace treaty, the cabinet sanctioned the use of the death penalty for acts of inhuman cruelty. This overturned a 1967 labour government decision that the death penalty would no longer be carried out, despite remaining in force under several provisions of the DER; the Nazi and Nazi Collaboration Law 1950, the Crime of Genocide Law 1950, and for the crime of treason under the Penal Law 1957. Since then the death penalty has been carried out only once, in the case of Adolf Eichmann in 1962; other death sentences have automatically been commuted to life imprisonment.
In November 1978, on the occasion of the award of the Nobel Peace Prize to Prime Minister Menachem Begin of Israel and President Anwar Sadat of Egypt, Amnesty International (the 1977 winner of the award) wrote a similar letter to both leaders. In its letter to Prime Minister Begin, it suggested that "commitment to peace and human rights, both internationally and nationally, would best be reflected by a warm and humane gesture of respect for the fundamental freedom of all peoples. We urge you, on this remarkable occasion, to declare unconditionally a general amnesty for all political prisoners held under the authority of your government." In a reply to this letter, the Attorney General affirmed that "no one in Israel. .. has been imprisoned for his [or her] political beliefs, forgiving expression to them or for his lor her] poUtical activity".
In October 1978, Amnesty International sent a research mission to Israel for several weeks. In March 1979, the authorities agreed to receive a high-level mission to discuss all issues of concern to Amnesty International. This mission is scheduled for June 1979.
165
