Cameroun (the United Republic of)
Tensions in the industrial centres of.the south, which led to strikes in 1976, appeared to have diminished, and agitation within the University was less apparent. In May 1978, a number of the students and minor officials detained in 1976 on suspicion of distributing anti-government tracts were reported to have been secretly freed. However, government authorities were unwilling to confirm these releases or to indicate how many of the original group, estimated at 200, remained in detention.
12
More than 100 detainees held since 1976 were taken up for investigation by Amnesty International in 1977. Gradually, as reports of releases were received, the number of cases was reduced to 80 at the end of 1978. Recent rehable reports indicated that approximately 45 of the original group of detainees were still being held without charge or trial, many having been subjected to ill-treatment and torture. Independent inquiries to the authorities failed to reveal any case against the detainees.
In February 1979, shortly before an official visit to Cameroun by President Valéry Giscard d'Estaing of France, Amnesty International drew pubHc attention to the situation of these detainees and other poHtical prisoners, many of whom have been held since the early 1960s. After outlining its major concerns - prolonged detention without charge or trial, ill-treatment and torture, and harsh prison conditions - it emphasized the cases of Gaspard Mouen, Martin Ebelle-Tobo and Rithe Ngalle Ndongo, all held incommunicado and reportedly in poor health. It also appealed to Jean Fochive, director of the Direction de la Documentation (DIRDOC), the internal security poUce directly responsible to the Presidency, to release the remaining detainees held since 1976. Neither action received a response.
Most poUtical detainees are held at two "administrative internment centres" or "re-education camps", at Tcholliré in north Cameroun and at Yoko,near Yaoundé. At Tcholliré, reported to be the harshest, detainees are said to be pooriy fed and many ill-treated by prison guards. Contact with the outside world by letters or visits is very restricted.
The continuing detention without trial of many of the detainees arrested in 1976 illustrates the extent of state power in matters of internal security, against which a detainee has no legal recourse. In the early 1960s, soon after independence, President Ahidjo issued a number of decrees providing sweeping powers for the "repression of subversion". These include indefinitely renewable states of emergency and renewable detention without trial in "administrative detention centres" outside the control of the judiciary or prison authorities. In addition, military courts have been established to try all security offences and impose sentences not subject to appeal. Among other things, they can impose mandatory 5-year prison sentences on "any person who either initiates or spreads any false statement, rumour or report. .. likely to bring any public authority into disrepute, contempt or ridicule" (Ordonnance 62-OF 18 of 12 March 1962, article 3).
Amnesty International remains concerned by the imposition of the death penalty in Cameroun for a wide range of offences, including theft using any weapon or tool, or aiding and abetting a thief. In September 1978, Amnesty International was informed that 48 prisoners were awaiting execution.
