Somalia (the Somali Democratic Republic)
Events during the year were dominated by the continuing conflict in the Ogaden which resulted in large numbers of refugees entering Somalia, and political tensions associated with the abortive April 1978 coup and organized opposition outside the country. In January 1979, the first congress of the Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party was held, a new constitution was drafted, and elections were planned for the presidency and party posts later in 1979.
Large numbers of arrests, among both the military and civilians, followed the failure of the April coup attempt in which 28 people were killed. Most of those arrested were members of the Majarten tribe which had been politically dominant before military rule. Between July and August 1978, 74 men, mostly from the armed forces, were tried by the Mogadishu National Security Court in connection with the coup. Seventeen were convicted of "endangering the unity, freedom and security of the nation" and sentenced to death, 34 were jailed for between 20 and 30 years for failing to report the conspiracy and 21 were acquitted. Two other accused had akeady died, reportedly shot dead while escaping arrest. Defendants had legal representation and close relatives were allowed to attend the trial and
31
visit the prisoners.
When the verdicts were announced on 12 September 1978, Amnesty International cabled President Siyad Barre urging him to commute the death sentences on humanitarian grounds and reiterating its total opposition to the death penalty. Despite a subsequent Urgent Action campaign, the 17 condemned men were executed in public on 26 October 1978. They included the self-confessed coup leader Captain Mohamud Sheikh Osman, Captain Doctor Abdisalam Elmi Warsame, other military officers and one civilian.
Amnesty International continued to work on behalf of several prisoners of conscience. The total number of political prisoners and detainees is impossible to estimate since the information is not published, but there are believed to be at least several hundred. A number of adopted prisoners were released, including former Minister of Justice and Religious Affairs Abdulghani Sheikh Ahmed, former Attorney General Abdi Farah Bashane, Dr Yusuf Hersi and others. One adopted prisoner, Farah Musse Matan, a United Nations Development Project employee, died in detention.
The remaining prisoners of conscience for whom Amnesty International has worked longest include former Prime Minister Mohamed Haji Ibrahim Egal, former Police General Mohamed Abshir Musse, former Secretary General of the now banned Somali Democratic Union Yusuf Omar Samantar, and former General Abdullahi Farah Ali "Holif". Other cases newly taken up for investigation included people arrested after April 1978, such as pharmacist Aden Jama Bihi (later freed), Yusuf Azhari, ambassador to Nigeria, and the head of Radio Somalia, Jamah Khalef.
Most political prisoners are held in Lanta Bur Prison near Afgoi or Labatan Jirow Prison near Baidowa. Conditions of some prisoners reportedly improved for a time during 1978 after Amnesty International's appeal against perpetual solitary confinement and incommunicado detention, but family visits are normally prohibited and correspondence rarely allowed. Food is poor and medical treatment is often inadequate. There is no independent review of detention orders.
On 22 October 1978, the ninth anniversary of the military coup of 1969, President Barre released 2,831 prisoners, including a few political detainees. Amnesty International appealed to him in November to commute a number of death sentences passed by security courts for embezzlement and murder. Those sentenced were executed by firing squad.
On 24 March 1979, the government declared an amnesty allowing exiles to return. No details are known of any specific safeguards in the offer. Amnesty International has urged the government to free all political prisoners in a spirit of reconciliation, and to ensure that refugees can return without fear of persecution.
