Mexico {the United Mexican States)
On 24 September 1978, an amnesty for pohtical prisoners, fugitives and exiles was passed by the Mexican federal parliament, as part of a general programme of political reform instituted by President López Portillo's administration. This was followed by similar legislation in the states where political prisoners were being held. A previous amnesty in 1977 had provided for the release of prisoners held on specific political charges, but there were over 500 prisoners who claimed that
68
they had been detained for their political behefs and activities, although they were formally in prison on criminal charges such as robbery, kidnapping or murder. Amnesty International was concerned about these cases because of the many reports that often the only evidence presented was the defendant's own statement of guilt, allegedly extracted under torture or threat of torture (in contravention of articles 19 and 22 of the Mexican constitution), and because of the many irregularities in their detention and trial.
The 1978 amnesty law provided the legal framework for the release of these prisoners. Article 3 states that "the benefits of the amnesty may be extended to those who committed acts endangering life, or physical integrity, acts of terrorism or kidnapping if, in the opinion of the Attorneys General of the Republic and the Federal district, according to information provided by the Dirección General de Servicios Coordinados de Prevención y Readaptación Social de la Secretaría de Gobernación, they are not highly dangerous".
It is under this provision that most of the prisoners have benefited from the present amnesty law, and so far approximately 250 have reportedly been freed.
Three prisoners under investigation by Amnesty International were released in Cuemavaca, Morelos, under the state amnesty law at the end of 1978. Others held on similar charges did not benefit, however, and throughout the country there appear to have been serious discrepancies in the application of the amnesty: although Mónico Rentería and three prisoners were released from Monterrey, Nuevo León, a further three persons convicted of the same crime were not.
In addition, the safety of prisoners after they have been released has been questioned. Two of them, Abel Piñón Ponce and Abdayán Guzmán Cruz, apparently disappeared immediately after their release. G. Fernández Brito and A. Miranda Ramirez were re-arrested and have allegedly been tortured, b. Hernández Castillo was shot dead by police forces in Jalisco less than a month after his release from prison. Reports were also received that some prisoners were merely transferred from one prison to another, although they were officially announced to have been set free.
Amnesty International has repeatedly requested from the Mexican government rehable information concerning the 300 or more people who have allegedly disappeared in the last six years while in official custody, and various National Sections have carried out actions on this matter throughout the year. On 24 January 1979, the Mexican Attorney General, Oscar Flores Sánchez, gave a press conference dealing with the "disappeared", in which he stated that of the 314 cases known to the authorities, 154 had been killed by the police or army, 89 were in hiding, and a further 58 had died as a result of acts of violence between rival guerrilla factions. Amnesty International wrote to the Attorney General on 13 February 1979 to ask that the families of those allegedly killed be properly informed of the circumstances of their death, that the people in hiding be granted fair trials and the opportunity to prove their innocence of any criminal activities, and that an independent tribunal of inquiry be set up to examine all the evidence about missing persons. It also questioned Mr Sânchez's claim that the use of torture in Mexico was a limited, minor occurrence, since it has received many well-substantiated reports of torture, which is specifically prohibited by the constitution (articles 19 and 22).
Amnesty International was particularly concerned about the continued use of
69
arrest and detention procedures which contravene articles 19, 20, 21 and 22 of the national constitution, and organized urgent actions on behalf of eight of the students, labour leaders and members of peasant organizations who were either arrested in an unconstitutional fashion or abducted while in police custody.
