Malaysia (the Federation of)
The government is invested with sweeping powers of arbitrary arrest and detention under the Internal Security Act 1960 which authorizes the Minister of Home Affairs to detain without trial for two years any pereon he beheves has acted or is likely to act "in a manner prejudicial to the security of Malaysia", and empowers the security authorities to detain a person for up to 60 days for interrogation before the minister decides whether to serve a detention order. Political prisoners detained under the Act are held without trial or any other legal protection. In many cases detention orders are renewed for further two-year periods and at least 89 prisoners have now been detained for more than five years.
The first Amnesty International mission, which took place between 18 and 30 November 1978, was received by the Permanent Secretary to the Ministry of Home Affairs, Tan Sri Osman Cassim, and by Tan Sri D.B.W. Good, the Chairman of the Advisory Board, which reviews cases of detainees held under the Internal Security Act. The Prime Minister, Datuk Hussein Onn, and the Minister of Home Affairs, Tan Sri Ghazali Shafie, were unwilling to meet the delegates and permission to visit detention facilities at Batu Gajah and Taiping was refused.
Amnesty International beheves that at least 1,000 prisoners are held at present under the Internal Security Act. According to government information, in November 1978 there were 883 people detained under the Internal Security Act in special detention camps in West Malaysia, of whom 100 were held at Batu Gajah and 783 at Taiping Kamunting. Amnesty International has learned that a further 50 people are detained under the provisions of the Internal Security Act in Sibu in East Malaysia. Several hundred people are believed to be detained at any given time for the 60-day interrogation period in Special Branch interrogation centres or'in police lock-ups throughout the country.
During the initial 60-day period, detainees are subject to round-the-clock interrogation, sometimes accompanied by severe beatings, and are kept in solitary confinement. They have limited access to family, usually none at all for the first three or four weeks, and no access to a lawyer or doctor.
Conditions for people served with detention orders under the Internal Security Act were highlighted in a memorandum issued by the Malayan Bar Council in March 1979, which points out: "as detainees under the Act should not be regarded as criminals, under no circumstances should the conditions of their detention be made the same as or harsher than those imposed for criminals". Yet the Council found that in many respects treatment of political prisoners was punitive rather than preventive. The practice of holding in sohtary confinement people against whom a detention order has been made is reported to be common. The introduction of amendments to the Internal Security (Detained Persons) Rules in March
102
1977 has allowed the solitary confinement of people held in Batu Gajah camp for as long as 24 hours a day. The memorandum also cites complaints of poorly lit and badly ventilated cells; refusal of access to reading and writing materials denial of the right to a lawyer and to confidentiality between lawyer and chent inadequate medical care; and undefined and arbitrary powers of camp superinten dents to punish detainees. These complaints were corroborated by the findings of the Amnesty International mission in November 1978. The regime at the Batu Gajah camp was particularly harsh.
In very many if not the majority of cases, detention orders are renewed on expiry. For example, 53 of the prisoners held in Batu Gajah have been imprisoned for more than seven years. Kong Hoi, a former Secretary of the Perak Division of the now defunct Labour Party of Malaya, has been detained without trial since November 1964 in Batu Gajah. Tan Hock Hin, who was featured as a Prisoner of the Month in the February 1979 Amnesty International Newsletter, is another prisoner long detained in Batu Gajah. He was arrested under the Internal Security Act in July 1967 for taking part in demonstrations against the involvement of the United States of America in Vietnam and protesting against the government's decision to ban the United Malayan Estate Workers' Union. A former schoolteacher, he had been a Labour Party of Malaya member of the Penang Legislative Council. His activities were held to be "prejudicial to national security" and he was said to have "promoted Communist United Front activities".
Although the government has described detainees in Batu Gajah as "hard-core", the majority were arrested while active in the opposition parties (the Labour Party of Malaya and the Partai Sosialis Rakyat Malaysia) or trade unions. Government officials informed the Amnesty International mission that none of the detainees in Batu Gajah was a terrorist or had committed acts of violence.
Amnesty International continues to be gravely concerned about the case of Samad Ismail, a prominent Malaysian intellectual and a former editor of the country's leading English language newspaper, the New Straits Times. Arrested in June 1976, he has been held at an undisclosed Special Branch centre somewhere in Kuala Lumpur ever since. A purported confession on television of activities in furtherance of the cause of the illegal Malayan Communist Party made in September 1977 was not sufficient to secure his release. He has been held in sohtary confinement, with no access to writing or reading materials other than the Koran, and irregular visits from his family. Throughout this period he has not had access to a lawyer.
In November 1978, detention orders on six prominent political figures arrested in November 1976 came up for renewal for the first time. All but one of these detainees, Tan Ken Sin, formerly Executive Secretary of the Malaysian Chinese Association and editor of a Chinese language newspaper, were served with new detention orders. The other five, who are all Amnesty International adoptees detained in Taiping Kamunting, are: Datuk Abdullah Ahmad, former Deputy Minister of Science, Technology and Environment; Abdullah Majid, former Deputy Minister of Labour and Manpower; Kassim Ahmad, Chairman of the Partai Sosialis Rakyat Malaysia; Chan Kok Kit, Assistant Treasurer of the Democratic Action Party (DAP); and Chian Heng Kai, a member of parliament representing the DAP. Chan Kok Kit and Chian Heng Kai were both re-elected to parliament with large majorities in the general elections of July 1978 although neither was
103
permitted to campaign.
Amnesty International has continued to receive reports of new arrests in the last 12 months. In 1978 and 1979, 75 secondary school pupils were detained for allegedly taking part in underground communist activities. An exceptional series of arrests took place in mid-February 1979 when 23 trade-unionists engaged in a wage dispute with the state airiine, Malaysian Airline System, were held under the "essential services" provisions of the Internal Security Act. Among those arrested was Donald Uren, Asian representative of the International Transport Workers' Federation, who had been advising the Airiine Employees' Union during the dispute. On 21 February 1979, Amnesty International sent a telegram to the Malaysian Prime Minister, Datuk Hussein Onn, expressing its concern at the detention of Uren and urging his immediate release or his release on bail pending trial in open court, and requesting clarification of the position of the other trade-unionists. On 13 April 1979, nine of the trade-unionists were released and 13 others were served with detention orders. Four days later, Donald Uren was released and appeared at a television press conference in which he "confessed" his responsibility for inciting the airiine workers. The remaining 13 trade-unionists were subsequently also released.
In recent years, the government has increased the number of offences hable to the death penalty. Since 1975, the death sentence has been mandatory for persons found possessing firearms in a designated "security area" or in circumstances "which raise a reasonable presumption that he intends or is about to act, or has recently acted, in a manner prejudicial to pubhc security". Moreover, the Essential (Security Cases) Regulations introduced in October 1975 stripped the defendant of basic legal safeguards and abolished the distinction between adults and juveniles. In December 1978, according to the Far Eastern Economic Review, 44 persons were in prison sentenced to death under the 1975 regulations. In the same month, the Privy Council in London granted an appeal against the validity of the regulations based on the contention that they were subsidiary to the Emergency (Essential Powers) Ordinance of 1969 which should have lapsed once parliament reconvened in 1971. In January 1979, pariiament passed the Emergency (Essential Powers) Act enacting the 1969 Ordinance and all subsidiary legislation including the 1975 regulations. The President of the Malayan Bar Council, which had advised its members to refuse to handle cases tried under the 1975 regulations, called the retrospective legislation "ill-advised".
