Mozambique (the People's Republic of)
Sporadic acts of sabotage in Maputo and other towns, apparently committed by members of the Mozambique National Resistance Group, which opposes the government of President Samora Machel, led, in February 1979, to the introduction of the death penalty. Under a new criminal code issued on 28 February 1979
27
crimes such as treason and acts of terrorism or sabotage involving loss of life were made capital offences. Until that time, Mozambique was unique in Africa in having no death penalty. The first executions under the new law were carried out in Maputo on 1 April 1979 when 10 people convicted of espionage and treason before a military revolutionary tribunal were shot by firing squad. Amnesty International, which had earlier appealed to the Mozambique government not to introduce the death penalty, protested against these executions on 3 April 1979. Ten more executions were carried out in mid-April.
Amnesty International's other main concern was the use of detention without trial. Political detainees, who include not only former political opponents of the ruling Frente de Libertacao de Mozambique (FRELIMO), but also a number of Jehovah's Witnesses, are held at Machava Prison in Maputo and at "re-education camps" situated throughout the country. The most notorious of these is Rua Rua Camp, near Mueda in Cabo Delgado Province. A number of "dissident" members of the Zimbabwe African National Union (ZANU) — the Rhodesian nationalist movement which operates from Mozambique — are also detained, although it is not clear whether they are in the custody of ZANU or the Mozambique authorities. In January 1979, their situation was discussed with Mr Robert Mugabe (ZANU's President) by Amnesty International representatives who visited Maputo to attend a meeting of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and to facilitate the release by ZANU of four white prisoners taken from Rhodesia who were unconditionally released to Amnesty International on 2 February 1979.
Namibia
Namibia continued to be the subject of high-level international negotiations as the "contact group" of five Western countries sought a compromise between the South African government and the South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO) which would accord with the basic requirements set by the United Nations Security Council.
The countries concerned — Canada, France, the Federal Republic of Germany, the United Kingdom and the United States of America — were initially successful in obtaining general agreement by South Africa and SWAPO to a general election in 1979 under United Nations' supervision and control. However, by April 1979, major differences were still unresolved and negotiations appeared to have broken down.
Major disputes had already arisen in the course of 1978. In June 1978, South Africa's Administrator General in Namibia, Marthinus Steyn, announced that registration of voters was to begin — without UN supervision — in preparation for an election in December. Under proclamation AG.3 7, it was made an offence punishable by up to 3 years' imprisonment for any person to incite others to boycott registration. A number of SWAPO supporters were subsequently prosecuted.
The election itself was boycotted by the internal wing of SWAPO and by the Namibia National Front (NNF) — a grouping of several small political organizations — because of the lack of UN supervision over the registration of voters and the conduct of the election. Consequently, the only parties which contested the election were the Democratic Tumhalle Alliance (DTA), favoured by the
28
South African government, and four minor parties. According to official South African figures, there was an 80 per cent turnout for the election, with the DTA winning 82 per cent of the votes cast. However, during both the registration process and the election campaign there were widespread and substantial reports alleging official intimidation of the civilian population. According to a report published by the Christian Centre in Windhoek at the end of November, great pressure was applied, particularly in Ovamboland, the most populous area and the one from which SWAPO has traditionally drawn its support, to get people to register and vote. Examples were cited of people told by officials that they would not receive pensions, medical treatment or permission to travel unless they produced a card showing they had registered and of black workers told by white employers that they would lose their jobs if they did not register and vote for the DTA. Many refugees from Angola were also said to have been placed on the electoral roll. The acting director of the Christian Centre, Justin Ellis, was ordered to leave Namibia on 27 November 1978. Administrator General Steyn announced on 5 December 1978 that he had referred alleged irregularities to the police and security forces for investigation but it is not clear whether action has been taken.
Shortly before the election. South African security poUce detained almost the entire internal leadership of SWAPO, allegedly in connection with a bomb explosion in Windhoek on 2 December. Those detained for interrogation under section 6 of the Terrorism Act included SWAPO's Vice-Chairman, Daniel Tjon-garero, Publicity Secretary Mokganedi Tlhabanello, and Administrative Secretary Axel Johannes, who was adopted as a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty International when he was previously detained from 1975 to 1977 and from April to November 1978. Several of these SWAPO officials had been detained for some months earlier in the year, following the assassination in March of the DTA leader. Chief Clemens Kapuuo. Most of them were held under a new law, proclamation AG.26, introduced in April 1978 to provide for indefinite preventive detention. Two of those detained at that time, Festus Naholo and Frans Kamban-gula, were released at the beginning of July 1978 to participate in negotiations in Luanda between SWAPO and representatives of the Western contact group, but they were detained again immediately they returned to Windhoek on 26 July 1978. They remained in detention until late October, by which time most of the other detained SWAPO leaders had been freed.
In early December, Amnesty International cabled Administrator General Steyn and asked him to investigate reports that Daniel Tjongarero and other SWAPO detainees had been subjected to ill-treatment during interrogation by the security police, to make sure thay were not tortured and to charge or release them without delay. He gave an assurance that the detainees would "neither be tortured nor ill-treated by the security police or anybody else". On 8 December 1978, the South African authorities permitted two journalists and an American observer to interview Tjongarero and five others in the presence of security police. The journalists reported that the detainees appeared to be in good health, although one of them, Lucia Hamutenya, complained that she had been slapped in the face and kept awake for three nights. Her claims were denied by the security police. All six detainees were released uncharged at the end of December.
Serious allegations of torture were made in June 1978 when a Catholic priest, Heinz Hunke, alleged that Namibians taken prisoner in May 1978 during the
29
South African attack on Kassinga in Angola were being tortured during interrogation. Hunke said that he had been told by 10 of the 63 people released by the South African authorities three weeks after the Kassinga raid that another 120 prisoners were still held and that some of them had been tortured with electric shocks. Administrator General Steyn, who had declined to take action on earlier cases of torture referred to him by Father Hunke in 1977, denied these claims and said that he had personally inspected the detainees' conditions in May and found them to be satisfactory. However, on 14 July 1978, the day after Administrator General Steyn was empowered to issue deportation orders. Father Hunke was given notice to quit Namibia within 96 hours. At the same time another prominent churchman and critic of South Africa's policies, Anglican Vicar General Ed Morrow, and his wife, were ordered to leave Namibia within seven days.
Detailed allegations of torture were also made in a report in the British newspaper the Observer in July 1978. These stated that Festus Thomas, who had been detained under section 6 of South Africa's Terrorism Act on 10 April 1978 and held without charge until late June, alleged that he had been severely tortured during interrogation by security police. According to the Observer, Thomas claimed that he had been subjected to electric shocks and repeated physical assaults, and had twice been buried alive until he lost consciousness. He said that he had complained three times to a magistrate who visited him in detention, but no action had been taken.
Several political trials took place in Namibia, mainly of people charged with violent poUtical offences. Amnesty International gave details of some of these prisoners, and of other Namibians convicted of political offences who are now held on Robben Island in South Africa, to the United Nations Special Representative for Namibia, Martti Ahtisaari, on 1 September 1978.
