Iraq (the Republic of)
In July 1978 the Ba'ath Party, the ruling party of Iraq, celebrated its 10th anniversary in power, and in January announced that the first general elections were
157
to be held for representatives to a new constitutional decision-making body called the Central Council. However, restrictions on political activity outside the Ba'ath Party have increased with the introduction in mid-1978 of legislation imposing the death penalty for two new pohtical offences. Attempts to strengthen Ba'ath Party membership, particularly among the professional classes, has reportedly led to arrests among lawyers, teachers and students. In addition, there have been wide scale purges among Ba'athists in the administration and in the armed forces. The National Progressive Front, a ruling coahtion set up in 1973 and comprising the Ba'ath Party, the Iraqi Communist Pafty and various Kurdish parties, has now all but collapsed after a year in which communist party members have been intimidated through arrest and torture to leave the party. Other real or potential sources of opposition have also been subjected to arrest. Members of Iraq's Christian community who attended unauthorised religious meetings were arrested in November 1978. And members of illegal Kurdish parties, or of Kurdish militias, who have opposed, politically or militarily the government's economic policies for the Autonomous (Kurdish) region and the continuing deportation of Kurdish villagers away from the border areas have also been arrested and executed.
These developments can be seen to be the result of the government's efforts to strengthen its position internally in the face of major political events in the region - the communist inspired coup in nearby Afghanistan in April 1978; and the growing opposition to, and eventual downfall of the Shah in neighbouring Iran with whom Iraq concluded an agreement in 1975 which helped end the Kurdish war. It may also reflect to some extent the realignment of the government's foreign policies - a lessening of its dependence on the Soviet Union with whom it signed a Treaty of Friendship in 1973, its rapprochement with Syria, for long its ideological rival, and with Saudi Arabia, with whom it signed a security agreement, and its increasing economic links with Western industrialized nations.
A general amnesty for specific categories of both criminal and political prisoners was announced on 16 July 1978. According to a statement issued by Izzat Ibrahim, Minister of the Interior, the following day, 6,835 ordinary prisoners and 266 out of 317 political prisoners were to benefit. Certain categories of prisoners were specifically excluded; spies, Bahais, Freemasons, those imprisoned for sabotage and arms trading in the northern (that is, Kurdish) region and those sentenced to death. It was also implied that those imprisoned on charges of carrying or possessing arms inside the autonomous (Kurdish) region would not be eligible either. The amnesty did include, however, "those who were imprisoned on other charges which are not included in the decision, if these prisoners have changed their basic attitude towards and thinking about the revolution and its pan-Arab and national aims".
On 26 September 1978, Amnesty International sent a memorandum to the Minister of Justice, Munzer A1 Shawi, welcoming the news of the amnesty and requesting the names and details of those political prisoners who had been released and details of the charges against the 91 political prisoners still in detention.
The exclusion of the former Freemasons was of particular concern, since Amnesty International has been working on their behalf since 1975. About 14 of the approximately 200 arrested between February 1973 and March 1974, allegedly for their former activities as Freemasons, remain in Abu Ghraib Prison. They are all elderly professional men, aged between 60 and 75. Five of them were sentenced
158
to death in 1974, but had their sentences commuted to life imprisonment; the remainder were sentenced to up to 15 years' imprisonment. The memorandum expressed regret that Freemasons had been excluded, particularly in view of their age, and asked for reasons for this exclusion. It also pointed out that, in the amnesty declaration, the former Freemasons had been distinguished from spies. Amnesty International had understood from both official and unofficial sources that the former Freemasons had been charged with espionage and therefore requested clarification as to the exact charges against them.
There has been no reply to this memorandum. However, the Iraqi Embassy in the Federal RepubUc of Germany has confirmed to an Amnesty International group that their prisoner benefited from the amnesty. He is Muhammad Bakr Sayyid Muhsin, one of the 15 Shii Mushms arrested in February 1977 and sentenced to life imprisonment following violent disturbances in the holy Shii towns of Najaf and Kerbala. All 15 cases were taken up by Amnesty International because of the inadequacy of the trial procedures. Since then three other releases have been confirmed.
Amnesty International is working on behalf of 106 individual political prisoners. In addition to the former Freemasons and Shiis mentioned above, 85 Iraqi Kurdish prisoners are under investigation. All were arrested, as far as is known, between the end of 1975 and mid-1977. Almost all are held in Abu Ghraib Prison near Baghdad. In most cases the exact charge and length of sentence is not known: while Kurdish sources claim that all have been arrested for membership of an illegal Kurdish organization or party or for other non-violent reasons, Iraqi Embassies who have replied to Amnesty International groups maintain that their Kurdish prisoner has been arrested for "subversive activities endangering the safety of citizens" or similar reasons, but do not specify the legislation under which the prisoner was charged and tried.
Amnesty International also began action on behalf of two other groups subjected to arrest this year: members of the Christian community and members of the Central Committee of the Iraqi Communist Party.
In November 1978, Amnesty International received reports that a number of people who had been attending religious meetings in private houses had been arrested. Most appeared to be Christians, of whom there are about 500,000 in Iraq, a lot of them Assyrian Christians. A number of Christian foreign nationals were also arrested, including a French and a Norwegian priest, two businessmen from the Federal Republic of Germany, a British and a Swiss businessman, an Austrian, an Indian, several Egyptians and a Lebanese citizen. The meetings are reported to have been prayer meetings or Bible study group meetings, mostly in Baghdad, but also in Basra, Kirkuk and Mosul. Jn addition five musicians were arrested for singing Assyrian nationaUst songs at a party but it is not known whether these arrests had any connection with the others.
There is considerable uncertainty as to the numbers involved. Various sources have estimated the number of arrests at between 60 and 600 and it is impossible to give an accurate figure. There is also uncertainty about the reasons for these arrests, but there seem to be three. First, although freedom of worship is guaranteed under article 25 of the Interim Constitution-"Freedom of religion, behefs and exercise of religious ceremonies shall be guaranteed, provided that this freedom shall neither contradict the provisions of the constitution and the law nor violate
159
morality or public order"- permission from the police is required before any meeting, religious or otherwise, can be held in a private house and all the meetings in question appear to have been held without permission. Secondly, the government is sensitive to the possibilities of conspiracy and espionage, and the existence of these irregular meetings, together with the presence of foreigners, undoubtedly aroused suspicion. Thirdly, some or all of these meetings were apparently held by religious groups who are outside the mainstream of the Christian community and the authorities may have doubted whether their meetings were purely religious.
In a letter to the President, Ahmed Hassan al Bakr, dated 16 January 1979, Amnesty International expressed concern over these detentions. According to its information, the Christians had been "practising their right to freedom of worship and freedom of peaceful association" and it requested information about those still detained and the charges against them. The letter also expressed concern over the irregularities in detention procedures and the denial of basic legal rights:
. . access by families, friends or colleagues to detainees was denied until after a prolonged period of investigation and. . . in the case of the foreign nationals, consular access was denied for one month and then permitted only once". Visits were later allowed once a month. ". . . No official explanation was given for these arrests. . . only recently were charges brought against any of the detainees. . . there has been no official clarification as to the legislation under which they were arrested and detained; and in the case of the foreign nationals official confirmation of their imprisonment was in some cases not given until some weeks after their arrest." There were also allegations of torture during investigation. Amnesty International urged the government to make sure that any person arrested had immediate and regular access to a lawyer and family or other appropriate representative and that the reasons for arrest and the charges lodged be officially declared. There has been no reply.
While many of the arrested Christians are known to have been released. Amnesty International learned in March 1979 that some had been tried and sentenced to between 9 months' and 5 years' imprisonment. The charges are still not known.
Since the middle of 1978, the authorities are reported to have been carrying out a consistent campaign of intimidation against members and supporters of the Iraqi Communist Party, whose activities outside the armed forces have been legal since 1973. This campaign began after the execution in May 1978 of 21 military men charged with forming secret communist cells withiii the armed forces and gained momentum towards the end of 1978 and early in 1979. There have been many arrests of Communist Party members and supporters, with periods of detention ranging from a few days to a few weeks or months. None have been charged or tried, as far as is known, but all are reported to have been subjected to severe torture which in some cases has resulted in death. Unofficial sources put the number of arrests at many thousands. Amnesty International has received the names of over 50 men and women reported to be in prison. They include members of the central committee of the party, party officials, trade-unionists, students, doctors, teachers, lawyers, artists and writers. Children are reported to have been arrested and held as hostages for their parents in hiding. Amnesty International has asked the government for confirmation of their detention, their place of imprisonment, the reasons for their arrest, and whether they have access to a lawyer and their families.
160
At the time of writing Amnesty International has the names of 11 Communist Party members still in detention, whose cases are to be taken up with the authorities. Seven of these have been in prison without charge or trial since 21 November 1978, and include Suleiman Yousef Istifan, a member of the central committee of the party, and Chairman of the A1 Rouwad Publishing House. All but one of the group are ex-military men who retired from the armed forces in 1963. The four others are journalists arrested on 30 April 1979, and include Abdul Salam A1 Nasiri, also a member of the Central Committee and on the editorial board of the party's daily paper Tariq Ash Shaab and itsmonthlyjournaM/ ThaqafaAlJadida.
Amnesty International received a considerable number of allegations of torture administered routinely in varying degrees of severity to almost all those arrested for pohtical reasons. This frequently results in permanent damage. Of special concern was the number of reported deaths under torture.
Unofficial sources claim that all members or supporters of the Iraqi Communist Party who are arrested are subjected to severe torture as a means of persuading them either to leave the party or to inform on the party. A list of alleged interrogation techniques includes: beating with rubber truncheons and hoses, electric shocks, sexual assaults or threats of rape of the detainee or female relatives, submersion of the head in water and threats of death. A number of deaths under torture, among which were those of three women, have been reported. They include: Hamid 'Ati, Adnan Abdul Jabbar, Muhammad Waseeni, Jahod Abdulla, Haseeba Karim and Maniha Seewa.
A Campaign for the Abolition of Torture (CAT) appeal in the March 1979 Amnesty International Newsletter on behalf of all Communist Party members in prison called for the unconditional release of all those detained for their nonviolent political beliefs, for assurances that all those detained would be protected from ill-treatment and for an open and impartial investigation into the reported deaths under torture.
Amnesty International also learned of six Iraqi Kurds who are alleged to have died under torture during 1976 and 1977. They were Haji Salim Agho, Zaki Salman Barwari (in Dohuk Prison), Omar Fago (in Abu Ghraib Prison), Yousuf Ahmed Mulla, Fakhri Ramadhan, and Haji Sayyid Ma'ruf. The latter was a 67-year-old father of 12 who was arrested in July 1977 for questioning after his son had left home to join the Kurdish armed forces. Amnesty International campaigns, one in October 1978 on behalf of Haji Sayyid Ma'ruf and one in January 1979 on behalf of the others, urged the government to investigate these allegations.
Another CAT appeal in the November 1978 Amnesty \nitm-‡X\om\ Newsletter featured Ma'ruf Abdullah Fattah, a 29-year-old teacher from the town of Zawita who was arrested on suspicion of setting up a cell of an illegal Kurdish party. He was reported to have gone mad after having his head enveloped in a hood filled with flying ants.
PoUtical activity in the armed forces has for some years been a capital offence. Legislation was passed in mid-1978 making it a capital offence for any serviceman who had retired from or otherwise left the armed forces after 17 July 1978 to join or work in the interest of any party poUtical tendency other than the Ba'ath Party. Those who worked for the inteUigence service are included.
It also became a capital offence for anyone to recruit for another party or
161
political tendency anyone known to have had an organizational relation with the Ba'ath Party. Since 1974, it has been a capital offence for anyone joining the Ba'ath Party to conceal previous party affiliations or to maintain, during his party membership, contacts with any other party or political tendency and since 1976 for anyone who leaves the Ba'ath Party to join or work in the interest of any other party or political tendency.
Political activity within the armed forces was the charge against 21 Iraqis executed in May (Amnesty International Report 1978). While these executions were officially confirmed, unofficial sources claimed that not all of them were military men, that they either had had contact with another party as civilians but had severed those links on enlisting in the army, or that they were persons who, while in the army, had maintained friendly relations with civilian members of another party. All had been under sentence of death since 1974, 1975, 1976 or 1977.
Amnesty International drew the government's attention to these allegations in its memorandum of 26 September 1978 and expressed its concern over the large number of executions, the political nature of the charges, the decisions to carry out the death sentences after 2, 3, 4 or 5 years rather than grant a pardon or commute the sentences, the denials of basic legal rights, a fair and open trial and the right of appeal. It asked the government to consider abolishing the death penalty for this offence, to commute all pending death sentences, to ensure that further trials of persons accused of this offence were open, to allow international observers to attend, and to allow an appeal to a higher court from decisions of revolutionary courts.
In March 1979, Amnesty International received information which indicated that as many as 38 may have been executed in May 1978. So far Amnesty International has the names and details of 33.
On 9 February 1979, it initiated an urgent action campaign on behalf of 24 Iraqis, reported to be members of an illegal Kurdish party, who had been condemned to death on 7 December by the special court in Kirkuk and were awaiting execution in Mosul Prison. Twelve were said to have been executed in February, and Aziz Mahmoud, a teacher from Suleimaniya, on 24 March. A second urgent action campaign was organized in April for the 11 still remaining under sentence of death.
