Kampuchea [Cambodia]
The situation in Kampuchea (formerly Cambodia) during the year was characterized by political upheavals which culminated in January 1979 in the overthrow of the government of Democratic Kampuchea by the forces of the Kampuchean United Front for National Salvation.
On 15 April 1979, the Kampuchea People's Revolutionary Council of the People's Republic of Kampuchea set up by the United Front issued instructions specifying that those who had committed crimes against the people under the previous regime should be tried. The sentence for those who ask "forgiveness" is generally to be a period of "re-education" of 3 to 5 years. On the other hand, "severe punishment" will be imposed on the cadres and soldiers of the former government who opposed the new authorities. In their cases, the judicial procedures are to be more precise. The instructions say: "In their trial, all forms of cruelty of the Pol Pot—leng Sary kind are forbidden. A people's tribunal must be instituted for the trial. Dossiers on them should be opened, with minutes and depositions". Trials will be held before local revolutionary authorities. At the time of writing no account of proceedings or sentences had been reported and little information was available about the human rights situation since the change of government. In some areas fighting was continuing between Khmer Rouge resistance groups and the new authorities.
In July 1978, Amnesty International sent a statement to the United Nations Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities concerning human rights violations in Democratic Kampuchea, for submission to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights which met in early 1979. The statement said that an impartial examination of all available information indicated that fundamental human rights had been violated in Democratic Kampuchea. It drew the Commission's attention to the grave allegations made by refugees who had left Democratic Kampuchea since 1975, including: summary execution of many people because of positions they held in the former administration; arrest and subsequent disappearance of people considered to have committed acts "hostile" to the state or the authorities; use of cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment, in some areas, against people detained or singled out for execution; and discrimination against various groups of the population for their social or religious background.
