Laos (the People's Democratic Republic of)
The major human rights issue remained the large-scale detention in camps of members of the former administration and other people considered in need of "political re-education". Prince Souvanna Phouma, the former Laotian Premier who is now adviser to the new government, said during an interview in March 1979 that 10,000 to 15,000 civilian officials and mihtary officers of the former administration have been detained since 1975 {New York Times, 25 March 1979).
Amnesty International took up more cases of detainees in "re-education" camps and is concerned that they have now been detained for about four years
100
without charge or trial.
Most of the former officials are detained in the north and north-east of the country, particularly in Phongsaly and Sam Neua (Houa Phan) provinces. According to information received by Amnesty International, in 1975-76 two camps and a "special centre" accommodated the detainees in Houa Phan province. Although two of these are said to have been closed in 1976, it is reported that there are still three camps in the province. One of them, camp 06, is located about 110 km from Muong Viengsay and four km from Muong Het, very near to the border with Vietnam. It was first used in 1975 to hold important members of the former administration. In September 1975 it reportedly had a total of 667 detainees, including 85 civilian officials (former director generals of ministries, provincial governors and their deputies), more than 200 police officers and the rest miUtary officers. The number of detainees now in camp 06 is not known. Another camp, 04, is said to have held more than 400 people when it was opened in 1976. This camp has now been closed down and some of the detainees have been transferred to a new camp, 05, which was created in 1976 to hold the highest-ranking civil servants, army and police officers and politicians.
The Far Eastern Economic Review of 9 March 1979 reported the existence of three camps in Houa Phan province which were under army control: one for senior army officers and politicians, and the other two for those of junior level.
Amnesty International has been working for about 100 Laotian detainees, including Ouday Souvannavong, former Secretary of State for Information and Tourism; Khamouane Rattanavong, former Secretary General of the National Bank of Laos, Liem Pravonviengkham, former Ambassador to Peking, Phak Savanh, former Director General of PubUc Works, and Linseng Douangsavanh, former Secretary General of the National Mekong Committee.
In late 1978, Amnesty International launched an appeal for the release of Chansamone Voravong on the occasion of the 30th Anniversary of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Mr Voravong, now aged 49, is the former Director of the National Geographic Institute and of the National Printing Office. He was also the leader of a smaU neutralist-centrist poUtical party before his detention. Like many others, he has been detained since 1975 without charge or trial.
Amnesty International remains concerned about the fate of seven medical students reported to have disappeared in October \ 916 (Amnesty International Report 1978). It has made repeated inquiries to the authorities, but no information has been disclosed. It also appealed publicly for the release of Khamking Souvanlasy, the former Director General of Education who worked for UNESCO in Bangkok in 1966-68. He has been detained since November 1975.
In early March 1979, Amnesty International urged the authorities to look into the case of Bounchanh Savadphaiphane, reported to be in bad health. Mr Savadphaiphane, a formerGeneralofthe Laotian army, was sent to "re-education" in July 1975 and was last known to be held in camp 05 in Houa Phan province. The last direct news from him to his family was in July 1977. At the end of 1978, indirect news received by his relatives indicated that he was very thin, weakened and demoralized. His family does not know whether he is stUl alive.
Very few releases of poUtical detainees from "re-education" camps have been reported in the past four years. In March 1979 it was reported that about 20
101
prisoners from camps in northern Laos had returned to Vientiane during the preceding weeks; some apparently made their way to the capital on foot. These seem to be the first releases from "re-education" since 1976. The A^ew York Times of 25 March 1979 quoted Prince Souvanna Phouma as saying that the former officials were not living in camps but had been integrated into local society. However, the article indicated that relatives of the detainees said that almost all the prisoners continued to be confined in camps.
