Equatorial Guinea (the Republic of)
The government of President Masie Nguema has been responsible during the past 10 years for persistent and serious violations of human rights.
During those 10 years, at least 600 prisoners, possibly many more, were executed for poUtical reasons or died in prison as a result of torture and other forms of ill-treatment. Methods of torture are brutal and include severe beatings with sticks and metal rods, hanging prisoners in chains which cut through their flesh, and pouring petrol onto open wounds. Prison conditions are extremely harsh and many prisoners die. This pattern remains unchanged in spite of an investigation by the United Nations Commission on Human Rights. During the year, Amnesty International received further reports of arbitrary arrests and detentions, torture and summary killings. Additional documentary evidence was made available in a report published in November 1978 by the International University Exchange Fund, which stated that senior government officials personally tortured prisoners.
Tensions between the government and the Roman Cathohc Church, which in the past led to the closure of mission schools and churches, culminated in June 1978 in a total ban on all church services. At least four priests are known to have been detained without trial in 1978 after conducting services such as baptisms and funerals. Some reports suggest that the total number of Roman Catholic priests and nuns imprisoned is much higher. Relatives of the exiled Bishop of Bata, Raphael Nze Abuy, were also reported to have been arrested and detained without trial. In July 1978, seven Spanish-bom priests were expelled from the country after paying a large fine.
On several occasions during the year, the government publicly refuted allegations of human rights violations and criticized the campaign which, it said,
18
was being mounted against it. For example, Onde Obiang Aiogo, a special representative to the United Nations, told the General Assembly on 3 October 1978 that there were "no problems of human rights and far less any persistent violation of them" in Equatorial Guinea. Similar claims were made to journalists by Vice-President Nguema Esono Nchama, during an official visit to Cameroun in February 1979. During this same visit, Agustin Nze Nfumu, Head of Protocol at the presidential office and one of the seven-man delegation led by the Vice-President, asked for political asylum in Cameroun.
Amnesty International made a number of appeals not only to President Masie Nguema, but also to the Chairman and Secretary General of the Organisation of African Unity (OAU), and to individual African heads of state, who were asked to consider how OAU influence might be used to prevent further violations and to restore respect for human rights in Equatorial Guinea.
Amnesty international's usual technique of individual adoption cannot be used because of fears that the government would take severe reprisals against any prisoners identified by name. As a result, Amnesty International groups have been involved in more general campaigning work for ail prisoners of conscience and victims of human rights violations.
Ethiopia
The Provisional Military Administrative Council, or Derg, consolidated its control in Ethiopia by eliminating the clandestine opposition Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Party (EPRP) which had assassinated many pro-Derg officials, and by recapturing most of Eritrea held until November 1978 by the Eritrean independence movements. Rural guerrilla activity continued in Eritrea, the Ogaden and parts of the Southern regions. Refugees from armed conflict and political persecution continued to flee to neighbouring countries in massive numbers, while serious famine threatened a milhon people in Wollo and other regions.
Particular targets for poUtical arrest or kiUing were the remnants of the EPRP; suspected adherents of the former All Ethiopia Socialist Movement (MEISON), which in August 1977 had lost its role as the core of the Provisional Office for Mass Organization Affairs (POMOA), created by the Derg to spearhead the revolution; people originating from areas of armed conflict; and pro-Derg political groups which advocated the formation of a ruling civilian political party of the same pohtical character as the Derg.
Amnesty Intemationars concerns were pohtical imprisonment, torture and political killing. There had been a substantial improvement by the end of 1978. The government's "Red Terror" campaign against the EPRP (involving large-scale pohtical arrests, mass killings, the exposure in public of the bodies of those summarily executed and systematic torture) had reached its peak in the capital Addis Ababa between December 1977 and February 1978 and had ended by May 1978. Many political prisoners were released after intensive political instruction, but practices similar to the "Red Terror" continued in other parts of Ethiopia, especially in the Eritrean capital of Asmara, in Tigre, the Ogaden and the south. In December 1978 there were several reports of the persecution of minority Christian sects, particularly the Evangelical Mekane Yesus Church, whose members were in some cases forced to abandon their faith within 15 days
19
and pronounce their support for the revolution under threat of death. Some leaders of this Church were arrested in October 1978, but most were freed after a few weeks following international pressure. In Addis Ababa there were also similar arrests and "disappearances". For example, in September, girls in a Mekane Yesus church choir were tortured after they refused to sing revolutionary songs. The same month Amnesty International learned of the arrest of 40 pupil teachers in Addis Ababa on political grounds.
Many poUtical prisoners were released in 1978, including thousands of youths of either sex detained during the "Red Terror" campaign. The total number of prisoners in early 1979 was beUeved to be about 8,000, although some sources put the number higher. Only a minority are known by name, being mostly prisoners held since 1974-75 because of their position under the former government. It is rehably reported that the release of some of them, such as the old, young, sick and some women, was seriously considered by the Derg as the fourth anniversary of the revolution in September 1978 drew near, but a political crisis intervened within the Derg, in which senior Derg officials were briefly jailed and further purges of alleged MEISON supporters took place. At least two well-known detainees, Yilma Deressa, 70-year-old former Foreign Minister, and Meheteme Selassie Wolde Meskel, a former minister, are known to have died in detention. They had been detained since 1974 with about 300 others — young and old — in the dank, unlit cellars of the Derg^s headquarters in the former Menelik Palace and had not been permitted visitors. Some had been exonerated by the official commission of inquiry in 1974 of the offences for which they had been arrested: responsibility for the deaths in the famine of 1973 and 1974. The conditions of about 80 women and girls held in Akaki Prison improved and some received weekly visits from relatives. Amnesty International still received allegations of torture of newly arrested political prisoners, by beating, especially on the feet, while tied in a painful posture or suspended by a rope; by pulling out fingernails; and by burning the body with fire or hot oil.
Amnesty International groups campaigning on human rights violations in Ethiopia during this period concentrated on exposing political killings, torture and political imprisonment, and appeaUng to the authorities to respect the right to Ufe and the rule of law. They were still unable to adopt individual prisoners of conscience for fear of reprisals. Special appeals were made in connection with the fourth anniversary of the revolution, the death of Yilma Deressa and the persecution of Christians in the south.
An Amnesty International campaign was launched in November 1978 with the publication of a report describing its work under Haile Selassie's government campaigning against political imprisonment, torture, the death penalty and harsh prison conditions; and detailing political imprisonment, torture and political killings since the Derg took power in the 1974 revolution. The government's response was again to accuse Amnesty International of being an imperialist counter-revolutionary organization which failed to take any action on human rights violations under the former feudal regime. The Ethiopian embassies refused to meet delegates from Amnesty International.
In March 1979, Tadesse Terrefe, Ethiopian ambassador to the United Nations at Geneva, strongly criticized Amnesty International's supplementary submission to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights. Offering no factual rebuttal
20
of the submission, he criticized Amnesty International's objectives. The Commission, despite being urged by its ad hoc working group to hold a public debate on human rights violations in Ethiopia (as revealed by the Ethiopian Herald, 6 March 1979), decided only to keep the situation "under review", as it had since
1978.
On 16 August 1978, Amnesty International appealed to the Soviet President, Leonid Brezhnev, not to expel any Ethiopians to Ethiopia if they would face persecution because of their opposition to the military government. Despite a subsequent appeal and international news release in September, at least seven Ethiopian students opposed to the Derg were forcibly returned to Ethiopia. A further appeal of 30 October 1978 to prevent two Eritreans being subjected to forcible repatriation is believed to have been equally unsuccessful.
