TAJIKISTAN
At least 13 possible prisoners of conscience were detained following an assassination attempt on the President. One possible prisoner of conscience was extradited from Russia at the request of the Tajik authorities. At least one opposition supporter and his brother allegedly "disappeared"; the brother later reappeared. There were reports of possible extrajudicial executions during the suppression of a prison riot. Progress in bringing to justice those responsible for past human rights abuses stalled. The death penalty was extended and at least four people were sentenced to death.
More than five years of civil war formally ended in late June when President Imomali Rakhmonov and United Tajik Opposition (UTO) leader Sayed Abdullo Nuri signed a General Agreement on Peace and National Accord. The agreement, signed in Moscow, Russia, provided for a National Reconciliation Commission, to be made up of an equal munber of government and UTO representatives. The Commission was to be in charge of preparing new parliamentary elections in 1998, supervising the merger of UTO armed forces into the national army and the return of refugees, and implementing a general amnesty.
A general amnesty for people imprisoned for crimes in connection with the civil war was signed into law by President Rakhmonov in July and approved by parliament in August. It reportedly allowed people convicted of violent crimes in connection with the civil war to petition for a review of their cases if they believed they had been punished for political actions.
tajikistan
The two sides carried out several prisoner exchanges as part of the peace accord. There was opposition, some of it violent, to the peace accord from various groups which had been excluded from the National Reconciliation Commission.
At least 13 possible prisoners of conscience were detained following an assassination attempt on President RaJdimonov in the Leninabad regional capital, Khu-jand, in April. A hand grenade was thrown at the President, causing minor injuries to his legs. Two people died in the attack and more than 70 were injured. Officials reported the arrest of Firdavs Dust-boyev, who they claimed had thrown the grenade. Within days, at least 11 more people were reportedly detained in connection with the incident. The day after the attack a shoot-out was reported in a village near Khujand between police and a group of people suspected of involvement in the assassination plot. Five of the group were killed. Arrests in Leninabad region continued through May. According to reports, those detained included people who had no connection with the assassination attempt, but had been identified as government opponents because of their participation in anti-govemment protests in Leninabad a year earlier (see Amnesty International Report 1997). Firdavs Dust-boyev was said to have been an organizer of these protests. In late May police in Khujand arrested Abdukhafiz Abdullayev, younger brother of Abdumalik Abdullo-janov, a former Prime Minister and head of the secular opposition National Revival Bloc. He was apparently first held on a charge of illegal narcotics possession, but it was subsequently reported that he had been charged in connection with the assassination attempt. His supporters claimed that the charge was a fabrication, and that the motive of the arrest was to intimidate the Khujand-based opposition.
In Jxme authorities in the Russian Federation extradited Akhmajon Saidov, a former deputy speaker of Tajikistan's parliament who had been living in Russia since 1994, to Tajikistan, A warrant for his arrest had been issued in Tajikistan in August 1996 on charges of abuse of authority and embezzlement, and in February 1997 he was arrested in Moscow. There were suspicions that the true motive for bringing the charges was to pimish Akhmajon
Saidov for his connection with the National Revival Bloc, the formation of which had been annoimced at a press conference in Moscow days before the warrant was issued.
There were at least two possible "disappearances", Rizoali Ojiyev was detained for questioning on 28 February by police in Khujand, where he ran a business. Early the follovnng day witnesses saw him being brought home in a police car, and moments later a group of armed masked men who had been waiting in another car outside Rizoali Ojiyev's home seized him and drove him away, Rizoali Ojiyev's younger brother, Gadoali Ojiyev, also "disappeared" on 28 February after being detained in the tovra of Kanibadam, near Khujand. He reappeared five weeks later, and stated that he had been held by law enforcement officials in Uzbekistan, ostensibly on suspicion of involvement in an incident in mid-February when an Uzbek customs post on the Tajikistan-Uzbekistan border had been attacked by armed men crossing from Tajikistan. However, Gadoali Ojiyev claimed that he had been repeatedly questioned not about that incident, but about the activities of his brother Rizoali, He was driven back to Khujand from Uzbekistan in April and was reportedly released without charge. He subsequently went into hiding.
There was concern that law enforcement officials may have used excessive force when they stormed a penitentiary in Khujand to suppress a riot in April. The official death toll among inmates was put at 21, with over 30 wounded, but unofficial somces put the casualty figures considerably higher.
The escape from custody of a man accused of committing exfrajudicial executions in 1993 cast doubt on the commitment of the authorities to ending impunity for past human rights abuses. Khoja Karimov, a former member of parliament and former field commander of the paramilitary People's Front (see Amnesty International Report 1996), had escaped from detention by the start of the year. Arrested in November 1995, he had been held pending trial for the July 1993 "disappearance" and murder of member of parliament Saidsho Shoyev and his brother Siyarsho Shoyev, and the murder of member of parliament Tagkhoykhon Shukurov.
t/uikistanaanzania
The July general anmesty for people imprisoned for crunes connected with the civil war also gave rise to concern about impunity for members of formerly pro-govemment paramilitary groups and opposition armed forces suspected of having committed human rights abuses.
In August the authorities stated that criminal investigations into the alleged "disappearances" in 1992 and 1993 of Democratic Party activist Ayniddin Sadykov (see Amnesty International Report 1994) and several others had been opened, but that they had failed to identify the perpetrators or to establish the whereabouts and fate of the victims.
A report in May indicated that the death penalty had been extended to the offence of "hooliganism" (Article 220 of the Criminal Code), raising the number of capital crimes to 42. At least four death sentences were passed during the year. Twelve people were sentenced to death in 1996, according to official figures obtained by the International Helsinki Federation for Hiunan Rights. Two members of pro-government paramilitary forces, Safarqul Samadov and Abdurauf Urunov, were sentenced to death in 1995 after being convicted of multiple murder and other offences committed in late 1992 and early 1993. It was unclear whether provisions in the general amnesty of July extended to people convicted of capital offences. It was also unclear whether a moratorium on carrying out death sentences connected with the civil war, declared by the government in June 1995 (see Amnesty International Report 1996), was still in force.
Anmesty International sought further information about arrests of suspected government opponents in Leninabad region, including the arrest and detention of Abdukhafiz Abdullayev. Amnesty International called on the Russian authorities not to extradite Akhmajon Saidov on the grounds that he might become a prisoner of conscience. It also called on authorities in Tajikistan to provide more information about the charges against him. Amnesty International appealed for information about the whereabouts of Rizoali Ojiyev to authorities in both Tajikistan and Uzbekistan. In June Uzbek authorities replied, denying involvement in Rizoali Ojiyev's alleged "disappearance". In September the Tajik authorities informed Amnesty International that a criminal investigation had
been opened into his "disappearance" under Article 135 of the Tajik Criminal Code (hostage-taking).
Amnesty International sought further information about the conduct of law enforcement personnel during the storming of the Khujand prison. Amnesty International continued to call for complete abolition of the death penalty, and appealed for the commutation of each death sentence which came to its attention.
