URUGUAY
Two former prisoners of conscience had not yet had their release upheld by the Supreme Court of Justice. Prisoners were reportedly ill-treated during a prison protest. Human rights violations committed in past years remained unclarified.
In March Senator Rafael Michelini filed a complaint before a judge claiming that a retired army general had informed him
that some detainees who "disappeared" under previous military governments had died under interrogation, and were secretly buried (see Amnesty International Reports 1974 to 1986). In April the judge ordered an investigation into the complaint. However, in June an appeal court overturned the judge's decision by invoking the 1986 Expiry Law. This law exempts all military and police personnel responsible for hiunan rights violations committed between 1973 and 1985 from being punished (see Amnesty International Report 1987). The ruling by the appeal court was issued despite observations made by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights in 1992, and by the UN Human Rights Committee in 1993, that the Expiry Law contravened the American Convention on Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The authorities had failed to implement the recommendation of the UN Human Rights Committee that the government adopt legislation correcting the effects of the Expiry Law. However, in December the government annulled by decree rulings that had been made against 41 army officers who had been tried, imprisoned and expelled from the army during the period of military rule for their political opinions.
In May Congress received a bill on the right to seek asyliun in Uruguay fit)m President Julio Maria Sanguinetti and other members of the government. The bill states that "all foreign nationals whose situation complies with international treaties and conventions on asylum-seekers and refugees will have their refugee status recognized and, therefore, may be granted asylum". However, the bill denies asylum to people who commit a
uruguayaizbekis™
range of acts, including acts "against a country's sovereignty or contrary to its fimdamental interests", or who come from a country defined as "safe". Amnesty International believed the provisions of the bill would weaken the right to seek asylum and contravene international standards on refugees. By the end of the year the bill had not been debated by Congress.
The Supreme Court of Justice had yet to decide whether to uphold or quash the conditional release in 1996 of former prisoners of conscience Federico and Carlos Fasano (see Amnesty International Report 1997].
In June prisoners in Libertad Prison in Montevideo, the capital, protested against having their exercise time curtailed. Guards ordered the prisoners out of their cells while firing weapons at the ceiling. At least 24 prisoners were reported to have been beaten and one prisoner was shot in the leg. A Congressional human rights commission received a complaint about the prisoner shot in the leg, but was not known to have conducted an investigation into the incident.
Members of the security forces accused of human rights violations committed under past governments, including the "disappearance" and subsequent extrajudicial execution of Eugenio Berrios, remained unpunished (see previous Amnesty International Reports).
In May Amnesty International reiterated previous calls on the authorities to ensure a full and independent investigation into human rights violations committed under past military governments, and to bring those responsible to justice.
