LAOS
Three prisoners of conscience continued to be held. Three political prisoners continued to serve prison sentences imposed after unfair trials.
The govenmient of President Nouhak Phoumsavan retained severe restrictions on freedom of expression and association. Information about human rights violations was difficult to obtain ovring to the lack of official information and censorship of the news media.
In July the Association of South East Asian Nations (asean) granted Laos full membership of the grouping.
Three prisoners of conscience continued to be held together with criminal prisoners in "Re-education" Camp 7 in a remote area of the northeastern province of Houa Phanh. Thongsouk Saysangkhi, Latsami Khamphoui and Feng Sakchit-taphong had been sentenced to 14 years' imprisomnent in November 1992 after a grossly unfair trial. Despite the official charges against them, it was believed that
they had been detained for peacefully criticizing the political and economic system and for advocating a multi-party system (see Amnesty International Report 1997). Conditions in the camp remained harsh, with no medical facilities and irregular access to visitors. The three men continued to suffer from ill health requiring medical treatment.
Three political prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment after an unfair trial in 1992 continued to be held at "Re-educa-tion" Camp 7. Pangtong Chokbengboun, Bounlu Nammathao and Sing Chan-takhoummane had previously been detained for 17 years without charge or trial (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1997).
Amnesty Intemational continued to call for the immediate and imconditional release of Thongsouk Saysangkhi, Latsami Khamphoui and Feng Sakchittaphong and urged that while they remained in detention they be treated in accordance with intemationally recognized standards, particularly v\dth regard to provision of medical treatment. In May a provincial official was reported to have told joumalists that the prison sentences of the three men might be reduced if they "repented".
The organization also continued to call for the fair trial or release from prison of other long-term political prisoners. No response had been received from the authorities by the end of the year.
