DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
Thousands of people were arbitrarily detained for short periods, including prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience. Reports of torture and ill-treatment continued to be received. Some 30 people were shot dead by police in disputed circumstances.
In June a delegation of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (iachr)
dominican repu8uc
visited the country. While recognizing the efforts of the government to improve the prison system through the establishment of the Commission for the Reform and Modernization of Justice, delegates criticized the severe overcrowding and poor conditions in prisons and the excessive slowness of the justice system. FoUowing the lachr visit, the authorities announced plans to relieve overcrowding in prisons and to expedite the processing of detainees' cases.
Throughout the year the government of President Leonel Fernández faced widespread protests about economic and social issues. Among the measures taken by the authorities to deal with the increasing unrest was the transfer of 7,000 military personnel to the police and the creation of an elite riot squad. Members of human rights organizations trying to document human rights violations faced harassment and, in a few cases, imprisonment.
Thousands of demonstrators were arbitrarily detained for short periods during the year. In October and November at least 500 members of popular organizations, including hiunan rights defenders, were rounded up by police in advance of a general strike in November. Several of those detained were believed to be prisoners of conscience. They included Danilo de la Cruz, a member of the Comité Dominicano de Derechos Humanos (cddh), Dominican Human Rights Committee, who was detained by police in November while he was observing a peaceful demonstration in Capotillo, Santo Domingo. He was held incommunicado for seven days in a cell at the National Police Palace and questioned under torture (see below) about his human rights activities before being charged with "defamation" and released on bail. Another cddh leader, Abel Rojas, was arrested in November accused of killing a
youth during the general strike. In December, following a habeas corpus petition, he was released for lack of evidence. However, it was not clear whether the authorities intended to appeal against the ruling.
The mass repabiation of Haitians living in the country continued throughout the year and resulted in widespread detentions of anyone suspected of being Haitian, including Haitians living in the country legally, and several black Dominicans. There were also some reports of ill-treatment by Dominican soldiers.
Reports of torture and ill-treatment by the security forces continued. In November Danilo de la Cruz (see above) was reportedly handcuffed and hung by the wrists from an iron tube on three consecutive days, causing serious injury to his arms, wrists and fingers. Kennedy Vargas, a journalist detained overnight in November, was reportedly beaten while held handcuffed in a rat-infested cave at the Support Unit of the armed forces. The Armed Forces Ministry later denied he was ill-treated. Other victims included minors and journalists.
No fiurther news was received of the investigation into the torture of four prisoners at Plan Piloto police station in Santo Domingo in August 1996 (see Amnesty International Report 1997).
The judicial investigation into the "disappearance" of Narciso González in May 1994 continued, but had not concluded by the end of the year (see previous Amnesty International Reports).
Many people were reportedly injured and some 30 Idlled by the security forces in disputed circumstances, some in the context of popular protests, prison disturbances or alleged armed confrontations. In many cases, excessive force appeared to have been employed by security officials and several of the killings appeared to be possible extrajudicial executions. In January Manuel Mancebo, who was unarmed, was reportedly shot five times by police as he lay begging for his life. In February Ilex Actoin, a Haitian, was reportedly shot dead by two police officers because he refused to pay a bribe to avoid deportation.
In April six people, including three retired army generals, were indicted for murder after the authorities reopened the judicial investigation into the extrajudicial execution in 1975 of journalist Orlando Martinez Howley, who was killed after he
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC/ECUADOR
criticized the then President, Joaquin Bala-guer. in his newspaper column.
Between August and November the po-hce authorities announced the dismissal of over 200 pohce officers for committing serious offences. It was not clear how many of the offences involved human rights violations, or whether charges had been brought against any police officer alleged to have committed such violations.
Amnesty International continued to call for a thorough and independent investigation into the "disappearance" of Narciso González and sought information about the legal situation of several possible prisoners of conscience. The organization also urged the authorities to conduct full and impartial investigations into several cases of people shot dead by police in disputed circumstances and into allegations of torture.
