GEORGIA
Several conscientious objectors were reportedly imprisoned. Further cases of tortiu« and ill-treatment in custody were alleged. All death sentences were commuted and the death penalty was abolished for all crimes. In the disputed region of Abkhazia, several ethnic Georgian civilians were allegedly deliberately and arbitrarily killed by Abkhazian security forces. Around 14 people were on death row. Some 200,000 ethnic Georgians displaced by the conflict continued to face obstacles to their return.
In April the un Human Rights Committee reviewed Georgia's initial report under the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Among other things, the Committee expressed deep concern about the torture of detainees, including the use of torture to extract confessions, and deplored the fact that such acts usually went unpunished, causing a lack of confidence in the authorities which deterred victims from lodging complaints. The Committee was also deeply concemed about prison conditions, which it described as "disastrous", and noted with disquiet that some court proceedings had not met intemational fair trial standards.
The Committee's recommendations included filling the post of Public Defender as soon as possible; continuing efforts towards abolition of the death penalty; undertaking systematic and impartial investigations of all complaints of torture and ill-treatment, bringing those responsible to justice and compensating victims; systematically excluding confessions obtained under diuess; and reviewing all convictions based on confessions allegedly extracted under torture.
georgia
The post of Pubhc Defender, estab-Hshed under the 1995 Constitution specifically to monitor the defence of individual rights and freedoms (see Amnesty International Report 1996), was filled in October.
In November parliament abolished the death penalty for all crimes.
The situation in Abkhazia remained tense. The mandate of the un Observer Mission in Georgia (unomjg) was renewed, as was that of the peace-keeping force from the Commonwealth of Independent States. In August President Eduard Shevardnadze met the head of the de facto Abkhazian authorities as part of ongoing efforts to resolve the region's political status. A Georgian partisan group named the "White Legion" continued to claim responsibility for armed attacks on Abkhazian targets.
By the end of the year parliament had still not considered a draft new bill on a civilian alternative to compulsory military service, to replace a 1991 law which had not been put into practice. Young men objecting to military service on grounds of conscience continued to face imprisonment for refusing their call-up papers. Several such prosecutions were believed to have taken place during the year, but details of individual cases were difficult to obtain. Officials reported that Kakhaber Galashvili, a lehovah's Witness, had been released from an 18-month prison sentence imposed in July 1996 for refusing conscription on religious grounds.
There were further reports of torture and ill-treatment. In September, for example, a young woman was reportedly raped by several police officers after she went to Mamueli police station in order to take a meal to her husband, who was being held there on a charge of murder. The procuracy instituted criminal proceedings, but the police officers were said to have gone into hiding and it was not clear if any charges had been brought by the end of the year.
At least two law enforcement officials were imprisoned following prosecutions connected with the torture or ill-treatment of detainees. Gela Kavtelishvili, former deputy head of the Interior Ministry's Department to Combat Drugs and Drug-Trafficking, was sentenced to four years' imprisonment in May for, among other things, using electric shocks on a suspect while investigating a murder (see Amnesty
International Report 1997). Another Interior Ministry official was also sentenced to fom years' imprisomnent, following the death from head injuries of David Amashukeli in December 1996 (see Amnesty International Report 1997). P. Bezhanishvili was found guilty of striking David Amashukeli several times around the head with a truncheon after an altercation in the street.
Between January and June at least three death sentences were commuted, including that passed on political prisoner Badri Zarandia who had been sentenced in 1996 after a trial which appeared to fall short of international standards (see Amnesty International Report 1997). By the end of the year all death sentences had been commuted: 54 men under sentence of death had their sentences commuted to 20 years' imprisonment in July and the last death-row prisoner had his sentence commuted following the abolition of the death penalty in November.
Several ethnic Georgian civilians were allegedly deliberately and arbitrarily killed by Abkhazian security forces. In February, for example, Vazha Dzandzava was said to have died in the village of Chuburkhinji after being beaten to death by Abkhazian police who accused him of illegally possessing a weapon.
In September the de facto Abkhazian authorities stated that there were 14 men on death row at that time, mostly convicted of premeditated, aggravated murder, but that there had been a de facto moratorium on executions since 1993.
Many of the estimated 200,000 ethnic Georgians displaced by the conflict in Abkhazia continued to face obstacles to their return, on what appeared to be grounds of their ethnicity and suspected political sympathies. In July the un Security Council again condemned the obstruction of their return, and urged the de facto Abkhazian authorities to accelerate significantly the process of voluntary return without delay or preconditions, and to guarantee the safety of those who had already returned spontaneously.
In April Amnesty International informed the un Human Rights Committee of its concerns in Georgia. The Committee addressed many of these in its recommendations to the government.
Amnesty International continued to call for a judicial review of all political
georgia/germany
trials in which confessions had reportedly been obtained under duress, and for a full, prompt and impartial investigation into all allegations of torture and ill-treatment in custody, with the results made public and the perpetrators brought to justice. It welcomed the commutation of all death sentences in July, and the complete abolition of the death penalty in November.
Amnesty International mged the de facto Abkhazian authorities to ensme the safety of all residents, regardless of their ethnic origin, by, among other things, instigating prompt, impartial and comprehensive investigations into all instances in which Abkhazian forces were alleged to have deliberately and arbitrarily killed civilians. Officials informed Amnesty International in September that they instituted a criminal investigation in each such case, but that the secmity situation made it difficult to identify the perpetrators. The organization urged the de facto Abkhazian authorities to commute all death sentences, and to take steps towards abolition of the death penalty. Amnesty International also urged them to take all appropriate and timely measures to ensure the voluntary return of refugees and displaced people, under conditions in which their safety, and the safety of those who had already spontaneously returned, could be guaranteed,
