TAIWAN
Several people detained in police custody allegedly suffered ill-treatment and at least two detainees died. There were renewed calls for human rights safeguards in the military as further information emerged on suspicious deaths of conscripts. The use of the death penalty increased markedly with at least 29 people executed.
taiwan
President Lee Teng-hui, under pressure from public opinion over allegations of govemment cormption and gang violence, appointed a new Prime Minister. Vincent Siew took office with a reshuffled cabinet in September. In July the National Assembly adopted amendments to the Constitution which reinforced presidential powers, gave the Legislative Yuan (the main lawmaking body) the right to hold votes of confidence in the cabinet, and trimmed the powers of the Taiwan Provincial Govemment, an intermediate tier of administration.
The anniversary of a massacre of mainly Taiwanese civilians by government troops in Febmary 1948 was made a national holiday. A government proposal to "pardon" the Taiwanese leaders of the protests which led to the massacre was opposed by survivors on the grounds that the protesters had committed no offence and therefore needed no pardon.
In May the Minister of Justice stated that his administration was considering the reintroduction of whipping as a punishment for certain offences committed by juveniles. However, no such measures had been implemented by the end of the year. In October and December the Legislative Yuan passed legislation increasing the number of offences carrying a mandatory death penalty to at least 60.
In October the Council of Grand lus-tices (cgj), a constitutional tribunal, ruled that several aspects of the law governing military tribunals were unconstitutional because the law did not allow for appeals before civilian tribunals and did not adequately safeguard judicial independence.
Under constitutional provisions, the govemment was given a two-year period to amend the relevant legislation. The Ministry of National Defence (mnd) agreed to amend the legislation to allow appeals before civilian coiuts when the death penalty had been imposed by a military court. However, the mnd did not accept all the cgf's findings in relation to the independence of judges in military tribunals. The law had not been amended by the end of the year.
A member of the Jehovah's Witness religious group was reportedly detained in January for refusing to undergo military service. The mnd stated that there were no plans to introduce alternative forms of military service or to recognize conscientious objection to military service.
Several detainees were allegedly ill-treated by police and at least two died in police custody. In May the death in police custody of Li Yao-hsi, a farmer from Taipei Coimty, led to violent protests by residents of Juifang Township, where Li had been detained. Police initially claimed that Li Yao-hsi had committed suicide. However, an autopsy suggested that he had died of suffocation after water had been forced down his throat. Seven police officers were held for questioning and were released on bail in late May. In October Ai Han-ching died in police custody in Taichung County. Five policemen suspected of having beaten Ai Han-ching to death were suspended and briefly detained for questioning, while some of their superiors were given adminisfrative punishments. Criminal proceedings against the policemen involved in the two cases were still pending at the end of the year.
Concem continued to be expressed throughout the year over alleged human rights violations against military conscripts. There was no progress in investigations into the deaths of conscripts given disciplinary punishments (see Amnesty International Reports 1996 and 1997). In November Lei Tzu-wen, a respected surgeon, was charged with arson after he set fire to his own surgery in a suicide attempt. Dr Lei's attempted suicide followed his repeated protests at the alleged inadequacy of official investigations into the causes of the death of his son, Lei Cheng-ju, who was found dead during his military service in 1994. The military alleged that Lei Cheng-ju had hanged himself.
taiwana/wikistan
However, there were indications that he had been killed as a result of bullying or arbitrary punishment. Hours before his death, Lei Cheng-ju had phoned his parents to seek help, stating that an officer "wanted to harm" him. Forensic experts who examined photographs of his body suggested that he was strangled and that water was poiored down his throat before his body was hanged to simulate suicide. The MND denied that officers had committed any wrongdoing in this case, and refused requests for a new inquiry.
The death penalty continued to be widely used, and the number of people executed rose to at least 29. Following the legalization of the use of lethal injections to execute prisoners, the first execution by lethal injection was reportedly carried out in May. Prisoners sentenced to death continued to be at risk of ill-treatment in detention: the practice of permanent shackling of the hands and feet of these prisoners continued.
Prisoners awaiting execution included people about whose guilt there were strong doubts. Su Chien-ho, Liu Ping-lang and Chuang Lin-hsiung, sentenced to death in 1991 for a double murder despite strong indications that they were innocent, remained in prison (see Amnesty International Reports 1996 and 1997). They were liable to be executed at any time once their execution warrant was signed by the Minister of Justice. They had exhausted all legal appeals and the courts refused to grant them a retrial.
In one case during the year, a death sentence was stayed on appeal. In January the Supreme Court ordered a retrial for Chang Fang-tien, sentenced to death in 1996 for murder. The Supreme Court accepted Chang Fang-tien's allegation that his original confession to the police had been made under dmess. The retrial had not been completed by the end of the year, but a police officer convicted of ill-treating Chang Fang-tien during interrogation was given a suspended prison sentence in July.
In Febmary and July Amnesty Intemational renewed its appeals for the commutation of the death sentences passed against Su Chien-ho, Liu Ping-lang and Chuang Lin-hsiung. In November, following a visit to Taiwan by Amnesty International delegates, the organization sought further information from the authorities about the case of Chang Fang-tien.
