HONDURAS
Hiunan rights defenders continued to be threatened and attacked. Children, especially street children, were subjected to hiunan rights violations, including rape, by members of the security forces. There were allegations of torture in prisons. Prison conditions amounted to cruel, in-hiunan or degrading treatment or punishment and led to several prison riots. Eleven people, including indigenous leaders and peaceful demonstrators, were killed in circumstances suggesting that
they were extrajudicially executed. Efforts to end impunity for past human rights violations made little progress.
The ruling Liberal Party won elections in November. Carlos Flores Facuss6 was elected President.
In October the process of transferring the police force fi^om military to civilian control began.
Indigenous people staged massive demonstrations during the year demanding land rights and investigations into the murder of several of their leaders.
A series of bomb attacks continued (see Amnesty International Report 1997). Among the targets were the National Congress, the law courts in San Pedro Sula, facilities of the Public Ministry and private enterprises. No group claimed responsibility for the attacks and there were no official investigations.
In August Hondiuas ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
Himian rights defenders were threatened and attacked. Bertha Oliva de Nativí and Liduvina Hernández, leading members of the Comité de Familiares de Detenidos Desaparecidos en Honduras (cofadeh). Committee of Relatives of the Disappeared in Honduras, received several anonymous telephone death threats. In August there were reports that the homes and offices of Dr Ramón Custodio López, President of the Comité de Defensa de Derechos Humanos en Honduras (codeh). Committee for the Defence of Human Rights in Honduras, were under heavy surveillance by secmity forces. In September Benigno Ramírez García, a human rights defender working with the poor in San Pedro Sula and Yoro, was wounded and his three-year-old son Edwin was killed by three men carrying automatic weapons who opened fire on his
honduras
truck, Benigno Ramírez was trying to mediate between two parties in a land dispute. One of the parties to the dispute, a former member of military intelligence, was suspected of being behind the attack. No investigation had been carried out by the end of the year. The National Human Rights Commissioner, Dr Leo Valladares Lanza, and one of his regional Deputy Commissioners also received death threats.
Children, especially street children, continued to be victims of human rights violations. In March, a 16-year-old street girl was raped by a member of the Fuerza de Seguridad Pública (fsp), Public Security Force, in a police station in Tegucigalpa, the capital. In June the policeman was arrested and charged with rape.
In February the Second Criminal Court confirmed the decision of the Appeals Court to revoke the 16-and-a-half-year prison sentence imposed on a military officer for the rape and killing of Riccy Mabel Martinez Sevilla in 1991 (see Amnesty International Reports 1994 and 1997). However, the Court increased the sentence on the second officer from 10 to 15 years' impr i sonment.
In May the First Court of Appeals confirmed a six-year prison sentence on two members of a Hondiuas Army Battalion who raped an ll-year-old street girl, Martha Maria Saire, in 1994 (see Amnesty International Report 1995).
Allegations of torture within prisons were confirmed by a senior doctor in the central penitentiary. He submitted a complaint to a court alleging that penal authorities and prison guards were torturing and ill-treating prisoners and calling for an investigation. No investigation had been started by the end of the year.
There was widespread rioting in prisons, leaving at least two prisoners dead. In August prisoners burned down several prisons and there were mass escapes from prisons in different parts of the coimtry. The riots were sparked by massive overcrowding, insanitary conditions and poor food.
In a pattern consistent with previous years, 11 people were killed in circumstances suggesting that they had been extrajudicially executed. Leaders of indigenous groups were among the victims. Some killings were reportedly carried out by landowners (or on their orders) with the complicity of local authorities and
military personnel, in the context of disputes over land and natural resources.
In April Cándido Amador Recinos, General Secretary of the General Council of Assessment for the Development of Indigenous Groups in Honduras, and Ovidio Pérez were killed in Copán Ruinas, Department of Copán. Both were members of the Chorti indigenous group. Other possible victims of extrajudicial executions during the year were: 17-year-old Manvil Pinace, a member of a community organization protesting at evictions, in April; Jesús Alvarez Rochez, leader of the Gari-fima community, and Jorge Manueles, a Lenca, in May; Adán Romero and Pedro Ramos, of the Tolupan indigenous group, in August; and Jorge Castillo and Julián Alberto Morales, members of the Garifuna indigenous group, in October. In the previous decade about 30 members of indigenous groups involved in defending their rights had been murdered. Investigations were carried out in only one case — that of Cándido Amador Recinos, which had not yet reached any conclusion — and no one was brought to justice.
In April José Cristine Díaz Herrera and 15-year-old Wilmer Alexander Vásquez were killed when members of the police and army violently dispersed a group of peaceful demonstrators in El Paraíso, Department of El Paraíso. According to eyewitnesses. Wilmer Vásquez was kicked in the head after he had been shot and was lying on the groimd. In August a police officer was charged with his miu-der and arrested.
Judicial proceedings for past human rights violations made litde progress. Thirteen out of 19 military officers, charged in 1996 for the "disappearance" and killing of Adán Avilés Fúnez and Amado Es-pinoza Paz in 1982 (see Amnesty International Report 1997), were in hiding. Two of the 19 were arrested and four gave themselves up to judicial authorities, Proceedings against these six officers were in progress, but the case against the other 13 was stalled. Similarly, there was no progress in bringing to justice those responsible for past "disappearances", including the temporary "disappearance" of six students in 1982 (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1997). At least three former members of the security services, considered to be important witnesses in these and other cases against high-ranking military officers
HONDURAS/HONG KONG
accused of human rights violations, were killed during the year by unidentified men.
Investigations into the killing of Miguel Angel Pavón and Moisés Landaverde in 1988 made some progress. Miguel Angel Pavón was regional president of codeh in San Pedro Sula. Initial judicial investigations established a link between his miu'-der and evidence he had given to the Inter-American Court of Human Rights on "disappearances" in Honduras in the early 1980s, implicating high-ranking members of the government and military (see Amnesty International Reports 1989 to 1992). In July 1996 the Dirección de Investigación Criminal, Directorate of Criminal Investigations, appointed two investigators to the case. They submitted their report in March 1997, which confirmed the identity of a lieutenant and a civilian already suspected of carrying out the killing. However, charges had not been brought by the end of the year.
Amnesty International called on President Carlos Roberto Reina and other government authorities to initiate prompt, full and independent investigations into the killings of indigenous leaders and to bring those responsible to justice. The organization urged the government to comply with agreements signed with indigenous peoples and called for immediate measures to ensure the safety of indigenous people in Honduras. Amnesty International also called on the authorities to investigate the killings in April when the police and army violently broke up a peaceful demonstration. Amnesty International also urged the authorities to guarantee the safety of human rights defenders.
