MACEDONIA
(THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF)
A man sentenced to three years' imprisonment for "insulting" the national symbols of the state was a prisoner of conscience. Four ethnic Albanians were sentenced to long terms of imprisonment
after unfair trials but they remained free pending appeal; at least two might be prisoners of conscience if imprisoned. Hundreds of people, mainly ethnic Albanians, were tortured or ill-treated by police. One man died as a result of ill-treatment and two others may also have been unlawfully killed by police.
Early in the year a number of municipal coimcils in the west of the coimtry passed regulations making it obligatory to display the flags of the national minorities, mainly Albanian and Turkish, on municipal buildings. The opposition Albanian Party of Democratic Prosperity had taken control of the councils in local elections of November 1996. During the year, the party was renamed the Portia Demokratike Shqiptare (pdsh), Democratic Party of Albanians. The government challenged the regulations and referred them to the Constitutional Court, which held that the regulations were unconstitutional. On 8 July the government passed a new law regulating the use of the flags of the national minorities. Although it allowed the use of the flags for private purposes, the new law restricted their use on public buildings to public holidays. That night, police removed the flags ftom the municipal building in Gostivar and detained the mayor. Violent confrontations followed on 9 July between police and demonstrators.
In March a law was passed establishing the National Ombudsman, whose mandate included the investigation of human rights violations. However, the Ombudsman's office was not fully in operation by the end of the year. In April a new Code of Criminal Procedure came into effect which strengthened the rights of those detained
MACEDONIA
or questioned by police, but these were not respected in practice.
In April Macedonia ratified the Eiu'o-pean Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, and Protocol No. 6 concerning abolition of the death penalty. In June Macedonia ratified the Eiuopean Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and its Protocols Nos. 1 and 2.
The mandate of the peacekeeping force, the UN Preventive Deployment Force (uNPREDEP), was extended twice during the year to expire in August 1998. The mandate of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe Spillover Mission was also extended.
In August I£o Gavrilov was sentenced to three years' imprisonment for "damaging the reputation of the Republic of Macedonia" imder Article 178 of the Criminal Law. He deliberately trod on the national flag at National Day celebrations on 2 August. He was a prisoner of conscience.
In September, two leaders of the local authorities in Gostivar, both ethnic Albanians. were convicted of "failing to carry out a judicial decision" following the removal of the national minorities' flags from municipal buildings on 9 July and the clashes that ensued. The trial was unfair. Defence lawyers were denied unsupervised communication with their clients during much of their time in custody, and were denied adequate opportunity to prepare the defence. Refik Dauti, President of the municipal council, was sentenced to three years' imprisonment and, if imprisoned, might be a prisoner of conscience. Rufi Osmani, the mayor, who was also convicted of fiuther more serious charges of "inciting national hatred" and "organizing resistance", was sentenced to 13 years and eight months' imprisonment. They remained free pending appeal at the end of the year. In October the President of Tetovo Municipality was sentenced to two and a half years' imprisonment on similar charges. He would be a prisoner of conscience if imprisoned.
Hundreds of people were tortured or ill-treated by police. Most of the victims were ethnic Albanians and some were ethnic Tiuks who were beaten in the town of Gostivar during or following the 9 July protests. The protests were violent, involv-
ing the use of firearms, petrol-bombs, bricks and metal bars by the demonstrators, causing injiuies to police officers, nine of whom needed hospital treatment. However, the police severely beat or otherwise ill-treated many people who were not using violence, who had no connection with the demonstration, or who were not offering any resistance at the time of the ill-treatment. The victims included minors as young as 13 and elderly men and women. One of the victims, Milaim Dauti, died in hospital as a result of head injuries sustained during beating by the police. The beatings generally occurred in the streets, in police stations and diuing house searches. Among those beaten was 61-year-old Adem Rexhepi, whose injiuies included concussion and several broken ribs. His wife Latifi was also hit on the head in their home and his son was also beaten during arrest and detention. A smaller number of people were arrested in Tetovo in connection with the demonstrations. Some men from both Gostivar and Tetovo, mainly political activists, were taken to poHce stations in other towns and ill-treated. For example, Arsim Sinani, president of the youth branch of the PDSH, was arrested in Tetovo and taken to Skopje where he was systematically beaten during several hours of interrogation. He was released without charge. Relatives and a lawyer were denied information about his whereabouts following his detention.
At least 200 people received hospital treatment following the 9 July protests, the majority as a consequence of ill-treatment by police.
There were other reports of ill-treatment by police of Macedonians and members of minorities other than the ethnic Albanians. In July Pepi Krstanov, who declared himself to be an ethnic Bulgarian, was reportedly beaten in Struga. His teeth were broken and he sustained other injuries.
Two ethnic Albanian demonstrators died of bullet wounds during the July demonstrations. They may have been unlawfully killed, but the authorities appeared not to have investigated their deaths fully or that of Milaim Dauti (see above).
In July Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to carry out thorough, impartial and independent investigations into the deaths and injiuies of demonstrators in Gostivar. It asked the authorities
MACEDONIA/WALAWl
to remind police of international standards on the use of force and firearms and to ensure that detainees were treated in accordance with international human rights standards.
