SOUTH AFRICA
There were reports of torture and ill-treatment in police custody and in prisons. More than 100 deaths in custody were reported. Members of the security forces and right-wing paramilitaries were implicated in killings of trade unionists, local councillors and other activists. Evidence continued to emerge of systematic violations of human rights under the former government.
In December President Nelson Mandela was succeeded as president of the African National Congress (anc) by Deputy President Thabo Mbeki. Talks between the anc and the Inkatha Freedom Party (ifp) about a "peace deal" for KwaZulu Natal included proposed amnesties for those implicated in the political violence. Towards the end of the year there were reports of political tensions and violence between anc supporters and supporters of the newly formed United Democratic Movement. There was an increasing number of apparently targeted killings of white farmers, and a high level of violence between organized criminal gangs and anti-crime vigilantes in the Cape Town area.
During the year the national parliament passed a number of laws with
significance for human rights. The Correctional Services Amendment Act, which established a judicial inspectorate of prisons and permitted the construction and management of prisons by private businesses, inadequately protected the rights of prisoners. The Criminal Law Amendment Act provided for the resentencing of 453 prisoners whose death sentences had been declared unconstitutional in 1995, and deleted provisions in other statutes which had allowed for capital punishment. The Abolition of Corporal Punishment Act repealed statutory provisions permitting judicial and other forms of corporal punishment. The Criminal Procedure Second Amendment Act, which restricted the right to bail for people accused of serious offences, appeared to unnecessarily restrict the rights of the accused. The State of Emergency Act empowered the President to declare a state of emergency and make regulations suspending certain rights subject to Section 37 of the Constitution.
The Commission on Gender Equality, which began operating in April, focused initially on violations of women's rights in rural and other marginalized sectors.
Human rights monitors and the statutory Independent Complaints Directorate (icd) received reports of torture and ill-treatment by police officers. In January police officers allegedly tortured and ill-treated a nmnber of suspects held in police and prison cells in connection with violence in the Lusikisiki area of the East-em Cape. The provincial Minister of Health and Welfare confirmed that the prisoners, who had apparentiy been beaten on their backs and buttocks with a sjambok (whip), suffered "severe injuries" and had been denied food, medication and toilet facilities. Foiu' required hospitalization for severe dehydration, blood in their urine and sjambok wounds. An investigation ordered by the provincial Commissioner of Police had not concluded by the end of the year.
Between April and November the icd reported receiving seven complaints of rape of criminal suspects by police officers. In April the Atfomey-General for KwaZulu Natal withdrew charges against a police officer due to be retried for the rape of Thokozani Nzama in a cell at Stanger police station two years earlier. His previous conviction and lO-year
south africa
prison sentence for the rape had been overtinned by the High Court on a technicality in 1996. The police officer had remained on duty pending his successful 1996 appeal hearing. During that period he had allegedly threatened the life of the complainant. In June Thokozani Nzama was raped, beaten and shot dead by four unidentified men.
Eight members of the Umfolozi Public Order Policing Unit, based at Mtubatuba in the North Coast region of KwaZulu Natal, appeared in court in July charged with assaidting Kevin Kunene, Chairperson of the KwaMbonambi Environmental Group, and four other local community activists in February 1996. The court heard evidence that police officers abducted the five activists and subjected them variously to beatings, electric shocks and suffocation. The trial was due to conclude in February 1998. In another development, prosecution proceedings were instituted against police officers from the Middleburg Miuder and Robbery Unit following the seizure of torture equipment from their office in 1996 (see Amnesty International Report 1997].
The icd, which has a statutory responsibility to investigate every death in police custody, received reports of 134 such deaths between April and November, the majority in Gauteng Province, KwaZulu Natal, and the Eastern and Western Capes. Investigations continued into the circumstances of these deaths. In June, 17-year-old Angelo Asia died in hospital following his arrest by Ravensmead police officers. They allegedly beat, choked and used tear-gas on him, before throwing him in their van and then dumping him, unconscious, in a police cell. The icd had nearly completed its investigation by the end of the year. Also in June a Burundi refugee, Jean-Pierre Kanyangwa, died within hours of being arrested by Cape Tovra police. When the police brought him to the refugee section of the Department of Home Affairs, he was in pain, but the officers allegedly refused to take him to hospital. An immigration official called an ambulance, but Jean-Pierre Kanyangwa died before reaching the hospital. A preliminary post-mortem examination showed that he died as a result of injiuy to his spleen. An inquest was scheduled for 1998.
In July the icd recommended disciplinary action against a Potchefstroom
police officer in connection with the death in custody in February of a criminal suspect, Swartland Dails. Independent post-mortem examinations revealed that the detainee had died of unnatural causes. The icd were investigating possible causes of death, including electro-shock tortiue. The police officer involved was already under investigation in connection with other allegations of torture and ill-treatment.
A number of serious incidents of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners were investigated by the statutory Human Rights Commission. In one incident in February, warders at Helderstroom Maximum Prison allegedly beat, kicked, punched and used electric shields on more than 50 prisoners when moving them from communal to isolation cells. Apparently, no disciplinary action was taken following the Commission's investigation. Some of the same warders were reportedly also involved in an incident at Pollsmoor Maximum Prison in May, when 150 warders recruited from different prisons allegedly assaulted prisoners with batons, fists and pistols during a search for weapons. A ministerial inquiry found, among other things, that 155 prisoners sustained injimes requiring medical attention, and that the prison doctor failed to provide medical care for many of them. In December police investigators recommended to the Attorney-General that 132 warders be prosecuted for assault and other offences.
Prisoners transferred to a new maximum security prison which opened in September, the cmax, were held in solitary confinement in 3.5m x 2m cells, with one hoiu's daily exercise in a 4m x 2m outdoor cage. The Minister of Correctional Services denied that the conditions were potentially damaging to prisoners' mental health.
The Human Rights Commission investigated allegations that prisoners were being held in leg irons at Victor Verster Prison, and confirmed that in one case a prisoner had been held in leg irons for as long as 60 consecutive days.
Political violence in the province of KwaZulu Natal resulted in more than 300 deaths, according to the non-govemmental Human Rights Committee. One of the worst affected areas was Richmond, where in May Rodney van der Bijl, a member of the Transitional Local Council, was shot
south africa
dead outside his home. Less than two weeks earlier, other councillors had resigned, allegedly under pressure from a self-styled local "warlord", provincial member of parliament and leading member of the newly formed National Consultative Forum (ncf) who had been expelled from the anc after his alleged links with the former police Security Branch emerged. In July, after the ncf was defeated by anc candidates in a council by-election, two new councillors, Bheka-musa Mchxmu and Alpheus Mchunu, and tbuee other anc members were dragged from thefr homes and shot dead. The previous day, they had reported seeing the "warlord" with police officers distributing weapons. In September police from combined national task forces arrested him and 23 others. They were remanded in custody to stand trial in 1998. In October a national investigating officer indicated that the role of senior police in the Richmond killings was under investigation. The same month, the national government deployed hundreds of police and soldiers in the Richmond area.
In the rural areas of Tsolo and Qumbu in the Eastern Cape, at least 151 people were killed during the first nine months of the year. There were indications of police acquiescence in the killings. In one attack in August, gunmen killed seven women and injured another, before setting thefr home alight. The attack followed the refusal by the house-owner to join an anti-crime vigilante group. Government intervention leading, for instance, to the deployment of non-local police and soldiers failed to stop the killings,
At least six National Union of Mine-workers (num) officials and their relatives were victims of targeted killings by alleged members of a rival union, the Workers' Mouthpiece Union, in violence which started near Rustenburg but spread to the Eastern Cape. Other senior num officials and shop stewards received death threats. There were indications that a white right-wing paramilitary group and police officers were implicated in the killings.
In March the Durban High Coiut convicted 13 ifp supporters on 18 counts of murder and six counts of attempted murder in connection with the December 1995 attack on Shobasbobane (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1996).
In May an inquest court ruled that Dr Henry Vuka Luthuli, who had been shot dead in his Esikhawini surgery in 1990, had been killed by a police constable from Vlakplaas, the base of the former security police counter-insurgency imit. The court referred the case to the Attorney-General for a decision on prosecution.
In September a former agent of the covert Qvil Cooperation Biueau was remanded in custody to stand trial for the 1989 miuder of human rights activist David Webster (see Amnesty International Report 1990).
The judicial inquest into the death of eight ifp members outside the anc's Shell House headquarters in March 1994 (see Amnesty International Report 1995) concluded in the Johannesburg High Comt in December. The presiding judge was unable to establish criminal responsibility for the deaths, hut stated that there was no prima facie justification for the anc guards to shoot at the crowd, and that "the barrage of fire was in any event grossly excessive".
Further information on past human rights violations emerged through Truth and Reconciliation Commission (trc) investigations. The life-span of the Human Rights Violations, and Reparations and Rehabilitation Committees was extended by Parliament until 30 April 1998, and that of the Amnesty Committee until 30 June 1998. In October the Reparations and Rehabilitation Committee recommended financial compensation for the estimated 22,000 people whose complaints have been corroborated by the trc by June 1998,
The trc held hearings on the role of the health and business sectors, the judiciary, religious institutions and the media in creating a climate which encouraged human rights violations. There were also hearings on "events" or patterns of human rights violations, including a hearing on the role of state structures in the June 1986 destruction of "ktc" squatter camp in Cape Town, and a special hearing on women's experiences of political and state violence, and torture, including sexual assault and rape.
Public hearings on amnesty applications from former security police officers resulted in important admissions of their involvement in the torture and murder of government opponents. For instance, former security police officer Jeff Benzien
SOUTH AFRICA/SPAIN
demonstrated how he had used torture by suffocation to extract information. One of his commanding officers acknowledged having endorsed this method of interrogation. Former security officials admitted abducting and murdering three Fort Elizabeth Black Civic Organization leaders who "disappeared" in 1985 (see Amnesty International Report 1986).
The trc's investigations led to the identification of secret graves and the exhumation of the bodies of a number of anc members who had apparently been extrajudicially executed by the security forces in the 1980s.
Despite the emerging evidence, former National Party government leaders denied having authorized security force abuses.
The trc also heard evidence on human rights abuses committed by former opposition organizations, for instance, in amnesty application hearings involving members of the armed wing of the Pan Africanist Congress and during Section 29 subpoena hearings on alleged abuses committed by the so-called Mandela United Football Club in the late 1980s.
The trc sought a High Court review of the Amnesty Committee's decision to grant amnesties to a group of anc members, including currently serving cabinet ministers. The Committee denied amnesty to a former security police officer for the torture of Mkhuseli Jack, an activist from Port Elizabeth, in 1985, but granted amnesties to former Vlakplaas security police unit members Dirk Coetzee, Almond No-fomela and David Tshikalange, for the 1981 murder of human rights lawyer Griffiths Mxenge. The latter's family announced that they would seek a High Court review of the decision,
Amnesty Intemational representatives visited South Africa on five occasions, meeting government officials, human rights monitors and others to investigate the problem of impunity, the functioning of the criminal justice system, and allegations of human rights violations in prisons and tortme and deaths in police custody. Representatives also attended trc hearings, presenting written and oral submissions on human rights violations and recommendations for their prevention. In October the organization submitted recommendations to the government and national parliament on the draft National Prosecuting Authority Bill, and made a
further submission on South Africa's arms trade with central African countries, appealing for government support for measures to protect human rights in the region.
