IRAQ
Hundreds of suspected government opponents, including possible prisoners of conscience, were reportedly detained without charge or trial and tens of thousands of others arrested in previous years continued to be held. Hundreds of executions were reported during the year, some of which may have been extrajudicial executions. Death sentences continued to be imposed. Torture and ill-treatment continued to be widespread. The fate of thousands of people who "disappeared" in previous years remained unknown. Human rights abuses by Kurdish political groups, including "disappearances", arbitrary arrests and extrajudicial executions, were reported in areas of Iraqi Kurdistan under Kurdish control.
Economic sanctions imposed on Iraq in 1990 by un Security Coimcil resolutions remained in force. In June the un Security Council renewed an agreement, first implemented in December 1996, allowing Iraq to sell oil worth us$2bn every six months and to use the proceeds for humanitarian purposes. Two "air-exclusion zones" over northern and southern Iraq continued to be imposed. In October the Iraqi Government barred us members of the un Special Commission (unscom) from inspecting weapon sites in Iraq. In November the un Security Council passed Resolution 1137 imposing an international travel ban on all Iraqi officials who block un weapon inspections. At the end of November unscom resiuned its weapon inspections.
In May Turkish government forces entered parts of northern Iraq in pursuit of members and fighters of the opposition Kurdistan Workers' Party (pkk). Military clashes broke out and forces of the Kiu-dis-tan Democratic Party (kdp) took part in support of Turkish forces. Serious human rights abuses were reported in the city of Arbil (see below). By the end of June most Turkish forces had reportedly pulled out but they re-entered the area in September. By the end of the year, thousands of Turkish troops remained deployed in northern Iraq.
In October heavy fighting broke out in the Kurdish-controlled provinces between the forces of the kdp and those of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (puk), in breach of a cease-fire agreement signed by the two parties in October 1996 (see Amnesty International Report 1997). During the clashes thousands of people were reportedly forcibly displaced.
In April the un Commission on Human Rights adopted a resolution condemning "the massive and extremely grave violations of human rights and of international humanitarian law by the Government of Iraq" and extended for a further year the mandate of the un Special Rapporteur on Iraq, In October the un Human Rights Committee considered the fourth periodic report submitted by Iraq on its implementation of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (iccpr). The Committee noted that the impact of un sanctions caused "suffering and death in Iraq and especially to children". In its concluding observations, it regretted that the
iraq/israel and the occupied terrftories
government's report did not address the actual state of implementation of the iccpr and that many of the questions relating to allegations of human rights violations in Iraq were not answered. The Committee also expressed its deep concern about reports received from many sources concerning the high incidence of human rights violations in Iraq.
Widespread arrests of suspected government opponents, including possible prisoners of conscience, continued to be reported during the year. In June hundreds of Shi'a Muslims were said to have been arrested by the security forces in Kar-hala' during processions celebrating a religious anniversary; scores of others were shot dead (see below). Most of those arrested were reportedly transferred to Baghdad and al-Hilla, although thefr fate and exact whereabouts remained unknown at the end of the year. Among those reportedly arrested were Sa'd Dawud Muhammad, 'Alia' 'Abd al-Kadhim, Jassim Sarsuh Hussain and Kadhimiya Muhammad 'Ali. Scores of people, including women, were reportedly killed and himdreds of others injiued when the security and intelligence forces clashed with hundreds of Shi'a Muslims from al-Basra participating in an annual religious procession to the Shi'a holy shrines in Karbala' in June (see above). The security forces reportedly opened fire indiscriminately on the crowds. Among the victims were 'Abbas 'Ali Mazhar, Sahira Muhammad 'Ali, Talib Dawud Muhammad, Zahra Hashim "Abbas and 'Udai Ra'uf Sultan.
Hundreds of prisoners and detainees were executed diuing the year, although it was not possible to determine the exact number; some may have been extrajudicially executed. For example, in the period between Jidy and October, at least 14 officers of the intelligence, special and security forces, and former members of the Ba'th Party were executed for involvement in a coup attempt and on charges of plotting to assassinate President Saddam Hussain. Among those executed were 'Ali Hassan 'Alyan al-Samarra'i and Ahmad Taha al-'Azzuz, both former leading members of the Ba'th Party, Brigadier-General Fauzi Mahmud al-Samarra'i, Brigadier-General Faruq Falih al-'Ali and Colonel Ahmad 'Abd al-Wahab al-'Ubaidi. Six of the victims had been arrested in December 1996 and reportedly tried and convicted
by the special court of al-Mukhabarat al-'Amma (General Intelligence Services) in Baghdad. No details of the trial procedures followed in their case were available.
Hundreds of convicted political prisoners were said to have been executed in Abu Ghraih and al-Radhwaniya Prisons near Baghdad; some of them were reportedly awaiting their release after having served their prison sentences. Among them was Ahmad Nur al-Din, a member of a Turkman party from Kirkuk. He had reportedly been arrested by government forces when they and kdp forces entered Arbil in August 1996 (see Amnesty International Report 1997) and sentenced to life imprisonment. In July his family in Kirkuk was reportedly instructed by the security forces to collect his body from Abu Ghraih Prison. In November the authorities reportedly ordered the execution of hundreds of prisoners, most of whom were members of opposition groups, who had been sentenced to death or to life imprisonment. Among the victims were Jamil Nur al-Din 'Allawi, Fu'ad Ramadhan Karim and Hassan Salih Abu al-Quba.
In July a group of six people, including a woman, were sentenced to death by hanging on charges of organized prostitution and smuggling alcohol to Saudi Arabia. They were convicted by the special court at the Ministry of the Interior in Baghdad, which allows no appeal to a higher court. At the end of the year it was not known whether they had been executed. In December Ghalib 'Ammar Shahab al-Din, a Jordanian national, was sentenced to death on charges of smuggling car parts, but it remained unclear whether his sentence had been commuted by the end of the year.
In December four Jordanian nationals -including two brothers, Sa'id and Salah Yusuf 'Ali al-Dawji, Walid Muhammad Tawfiq Nuseirat and Rizq Bishara Rizq -were executed in Baghdad. They had been convicted of smuggling car parts and sentenced to death in October by the special court at the Ministry of the Interior. A fifth Jordanian national, Muhammad 'Ali Muhammad Salih al-Sabah, was also executed in December. He had reportedly beep sentenced to death in June 1995 on charges of muxder.
Torture and ill-treatment continued to be widespread. Torture methods included the use of electric shocks on various parts
iraq/israel and the occupied terrftories
of the body, puUing out fingernails, setting dogs on detainees and severe stretching of arms and legs.
The fate of thousands of people who "disappeared" in previous years remained unknown. They included hundreds of suspected members of opposition groups and their relatives who were arrested when Iraqi govemment and kdp forces took control of Arbil in August 1996; thousands of Shi'a Muslims arrested in the aftermath of the March 1991 uprising; more than 600 Kuwaiti and other nationals arrested by Iraqi forces during the occupation of Kuwait in 1990 and 1991 and believed to be held in Iraq; an estimated 100,000 Kurdish civilians who "disappeared" in 1988 in the so-called "Operation Anfal"; and thousands of Shi'a Muslim Arabs and Feily Kurds who were arrested on the basis of their Iranian descent during the 1980-1988 Iran-Iraq war (see previous Amnesty International Reports). Victims included 33 members of the Yazidi community who were arrested in July 1996 in Mosul; Mohammad Rashid Tuzlu, General Secretary of the Turkmeneli Party, who was arrested along with other party members in September 1996 in Arbil; and three brothers, 'Imad, 'Adil and 'Atif 'Abd al-Hussain 'Ushair, who were arrested in 1981 because of their Iranian descent. During the year further "disappearances" were reported but it was not possible to ascertain the number.
Human rights abuses were reported in Kurdish areas under the control of the two main political groups, the kdp and the puk. In January Ahmad Sharifi, an Iranian national and a former member of the Iranian opposition Organization of Iranian People's Fedaii Guerrillas (Minority), "disappeared" after he was arrested in his home in Sulaimaniya, reportedly by members of the puk secxuity forces. His fete remained unknown at the end of the year. In Febmary two members of the Assyrian community, Lazar Mati and his son Havel Lazar, were deliberately killed when a group of armed men stormed the kdp-controlled Asayish Prison in Shaqlawa where the two men had been detained. No investigation was known to have been carried out into the killings nor into the apparent failure of the authorities to protect the prisoners.
In May armed clashes broke out in Arbil between kdp and pkk forces in the wake
of Turkish govemment troops' incursion into Iraqi Kurdistan (see above), kdp forces launched attacks on several pkk offices in the city as well as in the suburb of 'Ain Kawa. Scores of people were killed and, according to unconfirmed reports, 28 pkk members, including four women, were taken prisoner by kdp forces and executed. The women were said to have been raped before being killed, Television reporter Bekir Dogan, a Turkish national, was reportedly among several people arrested during the same period when armed men, believed to be members of the kdp security forces, entered the Mesopotamian Cultural Centre in Arbil. At the end of the year his fate and whereabouts remained unknown.
Diuing the year. Amnesty Intemational appealed to the Iraqi Govemment to halt human rights violations, including the detention of prisoners of conscience, arbitrary arrests and incommunicado detention of political suspects, unfair trials, "disappearances" and executions. The organization also asked the authorities to conduct a full investigation into the execution by govemment forces of suspected members of opposition groups arrested in Arbil in August 1996 (see Amnesty International Report 1997).
In October Amnesty Intemational published a report, Iraq: "Disappearances" -unresolved cases since the early 1980s, in which it appealed to the govemment to put an end to "disappearances" and to clarify the fate of hundreds of thousands of people who had "disappeared" since the early 1980s.
In September Amnesty International sought further information from the govemment about six people sentenced to death and appealed for commutation of their sentences. In its reply, the government stated that the six defendants had received a public trial in accordance with Iraqi laws, that they had confessed to the charges of "alcohol smuggling, white-slave trade and practising prostitution in Saudi Arabia", and that they had been allowed access to a court-appointed lawyer. However, the govemment failed to indicate whether the defendants had been allowed the right to appeal against their convictions and sentences before a higher court.
In November the organization received a response from the govemment to the Amnesty International Report 1997. The government dismissed the information
iraq/israel and the occupied terrftories
contained in the report concemuig extrajudicial executions and tortme as "a repetition of previous allegations and lies made by the organization in its previous reports, which are exaggerated and lack accuracy and objectivity". Regarding the expansion of the scope of the death penalty to include new criimnal offences (see Amnesty International Report 1995), the govemment stated that Amnesty Intema-tional failed to take into account the exceptional circumstances resulting from un sanctions imposed on the country, which necessitated the adoption of deterrent punitive measures to combat rising crime.
Amnesty Intemational continued to express concem at human rights abuses by the kdp and the puk. The organization raised the case of Ahmad Sharifi on a number of occasions with the puk leadership, who promised to look into it. However, no response had been received by the end of the year. Reports of deliberate killings of pkk detainees in May in Arbil were raised during a meeting between Amnesty International and a kdp official and the organization's concerns were conveyed to the kdp leader, who issued a statement in May rejecting allegations that detainees were killed or raped in kdp custody. In July the organization received a letter from the kdp leader stating that the case of Bekir Dogan had been investigated and no person of that name had been arrested. However, no details of the investigation were made available.
