MAURITANIA
More than 90 prisoners of conscience, many of them students and teachers, were detained for periods of up to three months. There were still no investigations into past human rights violations.
The presidential election on 12 December was contested by five candidates, including Kane Amadou Moctar, the first black Mauritanian to stand for president. Many opposition parties boycotted the election as their demands for an independent electoral commission were not met and some of their members were arrested (see below). President Maaouya Ould SidAhmed Taya won the election with 90 per cent of the vote.
Freedom of the press was again attacked. Le Caíame newspaper was banned until February. Mauritanie nouvelles was banned for one month in April and for three months in October, preventing it from covering the election period. This ban was challenged by lawyers on the basis that it violated freedom of expression, but the Supreme Court confirmed the ban in November. Other newspapers had individual issues seized. When the Presidents of France and Mauritania held a joint press conference in September, about 14 members of the independent press were expelled from it.
MAURITANIA
The situation of some Mauritanians who returned to the country after going into exile in 1989 as a result of intercommunal violence and human rights violations (see Amnesty International Reports 1990 to 1997) remained imcertain. They were denied identity papers and had limited access to their own lands. There were reports of arbitrary detention and ill-treatment in southern Mauritania. The authorities claimed that all Mauritanians were free to return, but many still remained outside the country, demanding guarantees for their safety and access to land.
In April Mauritania hosted a session of the African Commission on Himaan and Peoples' Rights. Official attempts to prevent some local human rights activists from attending the session were thwarted by non-govemmental organizations (see below). In November, at the next session of the Commission in Gambia, the Mauri-tanian authorities reportedly called upon the Gambian authorities to arrest a Mauri-tanian human rights activist. Aldiouma Cissoko. a spokesperson for a non-govemmental organization representing Maiuitanian refugees in Senegal, had held a press conference in Gambia. He was briefly held in police custody in Gambia.
At least 10 prisoners of conscience were arrested in January, apparently on accoimt of their political activities. They included Messaoud Ould Boulkheir, President of the political party Action pour le Changement, Action for Change, who was questioned about the party's links with Libya. He and most others were released one week later, but at least five, all members of the Alliance populaire progressiste, Popular Progressive Alliance, remained held imtil their trial in February. They were questioned about links with Libya and Arab organizations and charged with "collective illegal acts". All received prison sentences of between three and six months, but for two the sentence was suspended. On appeal, all were acquitted, except for Abdallahi Al Atiq Ould lyahi, who served a six-month prison sentence.
More than 70 students and teachers, all prisoners of conscience, were arrested between March and May. Mohamed Fadel Ould Bahaidda, deputy secretary general of the Syndicat indépendant des professeurs de l'enseignement secondaire (sipes), Independent Union of Secondary Teachers, was arrested in March, the day
before a press conference about a strike planned for early April. He and at least 12 other teachers, mostly leading members of sipes, were held for a week in prison in the capital, Nouakchott, before being sent to their home villages, where they had to report to the police daily. More than 60 students were also first held in custody in Nouakchott then sent home and required to report daily to the police. Two of them - Abdallahi Ould Hormatallah and Mohamed Ould Bilal - escaped from Boutilimit, where they were restricted, to attend the session of liie African Commission on Hmnan and Peoples' Rights in Nouakchott in April. With the support of non-govemmental organizations, the two testified before the Commission, and the Mauritanian government representative assured the two men that their safety would be guaranteed. However, less than two weeks later, these two students and many others were arrested. Some were reportedly beaten, and most were sent to their home areas. Abdallahi Ould Hormatallah and Mohamed Ould Bilal were held in Boumdeid prison. All were released without charge on 19 June.
At least 10 political activists were arrested in December. They were all members of parties which were boycotting the elections and were prisoners of conscience. They were held for less than 24 hours and some were reportedly beaten.
The Mauritanian authorities continued to prevent investigations into past human rights violations, including the suspected extrajudicial executions of more than 500 black Mauritanians held in military custody between 1990 and 1991.
Amnesty Intemational appealed to the authorities to ensure that all detainees were protected from ill-treatment and were released promptly if no recognizably criminal charges were to be brought against them. In April, at the time of the session of the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights in Nouakchott, Amnesty Intemational criticized the recent deterioration in respect for human rights and called on the govemment to comply with its obligations under the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights.
