EGYPT
Hundreds of opponents of a new agricultural law, including prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience, were detained without charge or trial. Scores of prisoners of conscience were held, including 58 sentenced to prison terms by the Supreme MiUtary Court in previous years. Thousands of suspected members or sympathizers of banned Islamist groups, including possible prisoners of conscience, were held without charge or trial; others were serving sentences imposed after grossly unfair trials before military courts. Torture and ill-treatment of detainees continued to be systematic. At least 35 people were sentenced to death and at least 24 people were executed. Armed opposition groups committed grave human rights abuses, including deliberate and arbitrary killings of at least 100 civilians.
Violent clashes continued between armed Islamist groups and the security forces, particularly in the Minya Govem-orate in Upper Egypt, resulting in dozens of casualties on both sides.
In Febmary the People's Assembly overwhelmingly approved a decree issued by President Hosni Mubarak to extend the state of emergency for another three years, It had been in force without intermption since October 1981 (see previous Amnesty International Reports). In June an administrative court in Cairo, the capital, over-tumed a decree issued in July 1996 by the Minister of Health banning female genital mutilation from being carried out in state hospitals. The court mled that the ban was unconstitutional. The government appealed against the court's verdict and in December the Supreme Administrative Coiul (State Council) upheld the decree issued by the Mirtister of Health. In October a controversial new agricultural law (Law 96 of 1992) came into effect after a five-year grace period accorded to tenant farmers. The law permits landowners to raise rents and evict tenant farmers, abolishing the provisions of the 1952 agrarian reform law which guaranteed security to farmers on rented land.
Prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience were among hundreds of people detained throughout the year in connection with opposition to Law 96. Dr Ahmad al-Ahwany, a professor of nuclear physics at Cairo University, was arrested in April and held in Istiqbal Torà Prison, reportedly on charges of planning to distribute documents "damaging to the public interest". The real reason for his detention appeared to be that he was found in possession of a bulletin critical of the new law. He was held for one month. Sayyed Ahmad al-Tokhi, a lawyer at the Egyptian Organization for Human Rights, was arrested in August and held in al-Mahkoum Prison in Torà and then in Mazra'at Torà Prison in connection with his peaceful opposition to Law 96. He was released in October. At the end of the year at least 150 farmers continued to be held without charge or trial for staging public protests against the law and at least 20 had been killed in violent confrontations between farmers and security forces and also between farmers and landowners.
Other prisoners of conscience held during the year included scores of youths, all
egypt
reported fans of western rock music, who were arrested in January and accused of membership of a satanic cult and of practising Satanic rituals. AH had been released without charge by March,
In March, five students at Cairo University were arrested, reportedly after taking part in a peaceful demonstration in protest at Israeli settlement activities in the Israeli Occupied Territories. They were detained for up to a month before being released without charge.
In May a Cairo Appeal Court upheld a sentence of one year's imprisonment and a fine handed down in 1992 on writer 'Ala' Hamed for publishing a book entitled al-Firash (The Bed) which discusses sex (see Amnesty Intemational Reports 1992 and 1993). Charges against him had included producing and possessing "printed materials of an indecent nature which encourage immorality". 'Ala' Hamed was arrested and imprisoned in Mazra'at Tora Prison and then transferred to al-Qatta Prison, north of Cairo, before he was released in August pending a final ruling in his case by the Court of Cassation.
In August, 34 alleged members of the Muslim Brothers, among them teachers, engineers, students and a doctor, were arrested and reportedly accused of membership of a banned organization, planning to recruit students as new members and possession of anti-government printed material. All had reportedly been released by the end of November.
Seven prisoners of conscience sentenced to three years' imprisonment by the Supreme Military Coiut in August 1996 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1997) continued to be held in Mazra'at Tora Prison, Fifty-two of the 53 prisoners of conscience sentenced to up to five years' imprisonment by the Supreme Military Court in November 1995 (see Amnesty International Reports 1996 and 1997) also continued to be detained; one of the 52, Hilmy Mostafa Mohammad Hammoud, aged 76, was pardoned by President Mubarak on health grounds in January. He had served more than 13 months of his three-year sentence of imprisonment with hard labour.
The 57 alleged members of a Shi'a group arrested in October 1996 (see Amnesty International Report 1997) were all released in February,
Thousands of suspected members or sympathizers of banned Islamist groups, including possible prisoners of conscience. were held without charge or trial under emergency legislation. Others had been acquitted by military or (Emergency) Supreme State Security courts, but remained in detention. For example, 'Abd al-Mun'im Gamal al-Din 'Abd al-Mun'im, a freelance journalist arrested in February 1993, had been acquitted of charges of membership of a banned Islamist group by a military court in October 1993 (see previous Amnesty International Reports), but remained held in al-Wadi al-Gadid Prison at the end of the year. At least 53 lawyers remained in detention at the end of the year. Most of them had been held for up to seven years without charge or trial (see Amnesty International Report 1997), but four — al-Shazli 'Obeid al-Saghier, Radhwan al-Timi, Mostafa al-Sayyid and Khalaf 'Abd al-Ra'uf — were arrested in June and allegedly accused of membership of al-Gama'a al-lslamiya (Islamic Group). They and 61 others were being tried by a military court at the end of the year on charges of planning to assassinate a civilian judge and other officials, and membership of an unauthorized organization.
Scores of alleged members of Islamist groups were unfairly tried by military and (Emergency) Supreme State Security courts during the year. For example, 97 alleged members of al-Gama'a al-Islamiya were tried in summary proceedings in July and August by a military court. Charges against them included planting bombs, killing the deputy head of the State Security Investigations Department (ssi), Ra'uf Khayrat, possession of explosives, and membership of an unauthorized organization. Gihan Ibrahim 'Abd al-Hamid (see Amnesty International Report 1997) was sentenced in September to 15 years' imprisonment with hard labour. Four of her co-defendants were sentenced to death.
Torture of political prisoners continued to be systematic in the headquarters of the ssi in Lazoghly Square in Cairo, ssi branches elsewhere in the coimtry, police stations and sometimes in prisons. The government failed to implement the recommendations made by the un Committee against Torture in its report published in May 1996, particularly the need to set up an independent investigation machinery to examine allegations of torture.
egypt
The most common torture methods reported were electric shocks, beatings, suspension by the wrists or ankles, burning with cigarettes, and various forms of psychological torture, including death threats and threats of rape or sexual abuse of the detainee or female relatives. Lawyers and local human rights groups lodged hundreds of complaints of torture with the Public Prosecutor's Office. No information was made available regarding any investigations into the allegations.
Hamdein Sabbahi, a joiunalist, Mohammad 'Abdu, a veterinarian, Mohammad Sulayman Fayyad and Hamdi Haykal, both lawyers, were arrested in June in connection with their non-violent opposition to Law 96. The four prisoners of conscience were held in Tora Penitentiary where they were allegedly kicked, beaten with a stick and whipped for hours. Amal Farouq al-Maas, who was tortured during her detention in 1993 and 1996 (see Amnesty International Report 1997), continued to lodge complaints against the officers she alleged had tortured her. However, no thorough and impartial investigation into these allegations was apparently conducted.
Thousands of detainees continued to be held in prisons where conditions amounted to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Detainees in al-Wadi al-Gadid Prison near the town of al-Kharga, in the desert southwest of Cairo, were reportedly denied adequate medical care. For example, Mostafa Thabit Bayyoumi, a lawyer detained without charge or trial since 1994, was denied medical treatment for his circulatory and spinal problems. His family reported that when they visited him in prison in May he had to be carried to the prison's waiting room and was im-able to speak or move.
Several people who reportedly "disappeared" after arrest in previous years remained unaccounted for. They included shopkeeper Nabil Mohammad 'Ali Hassan al-Battugi, who reportedly "disappeared" after his arrest by ssi officers in Bani Sueif in July 1996, and Sayyid 'Ali Ibrahim who "disappeared" following his arrest in Abu Qerqas in Upper Egypt in September 1995.
The death penalty continued to be used extensively, At least 55 people were sentenced to death, including four in absentia. Thirteen of them were civilians
sentenced by military courts, two in absentia, after grossly unfair trials, and five others, two in absentia, were sentenced by (Emergency) Supreme State Security courts, which allow no appeal. At least 37 people were sentenced to death for murder by criminal coiuls. At least 24 people, including 20 sentenced in previous years, were executed. In October, four people were executed. They had been sentenced to death by a military court in January in a case involving 19 defendants - 18 Egyptians and a Palestinian - all alleged members of al-Gama'a al-Islamiya. Charges against them included planting bombs in two cinemas in 1993 and killing an ssi officer. Death sentences passed by military coiirts are subject only to review by the Military Appeals Bureau, a body composed of military judges which is not a court, and ratification by the President. As far as Amnesty International knows, all death sentences passed by military coiuts since 1992 were confirmed by the Bureau and ratified by the President.
Armed opposition groups committed gross human rights abuses, including deliberate and arbitrary killings of civilians. Bomb and firearm attacks were carried out by banned Islamist groups, particularly al-Gama'a al-Islamiya and al-Gihad (Holy Struggle). At least 100 imarmed civilians were killed by armed men believed to be members of al-Gama'a al-Islamiya during the year. In February, 10 civilians, all Coptic Christians, were killed by four armed men, believed to be members of al-Gama'a al-lslamiya, in an attack on a church in the village of Abu Qerqas in Minya Gov-emorate. In March, 13 civilians, including at least nine Coptic Christians, were killed by armed men, believed to be members of al-Gama'a al-Islamiya, in two separate attacks on civilians in 'Ezbet Dawud and Naga' Hammadi, both villages situated in Qena in Upper Egypt. In November, 58 foreign tourists, including at least 33 Swiss, and two Egyptians were killed in an armed attack at a tourist site near Luxor. The six gunmen who carried out the attack were later killed. Al-Gama'a al-Islamiya claimed responsibility for the massacre.
Dr Nasr Hamed Abu-Zeid remained under threat of death firom al-Gihad (see Amnesty International Reports 1996 and 1997). He and his wife, Dr Ibtihal Younis, continued to live abroad.
egypt/el salvador
Amnesty International repeatedly appealed to the authorities to release prisoners of conscience and criticized the long-term detention without charge or trial of political detainees, The organization called for an end to trials of civilians before military courts and for political prisoners to be given fair trials. It also called for the immediate implementation of safeguards to stop tortiu« and ill-treatment of detainees, and for urgent, thorough and impartial investigations into allegations of tortiue and "disappearances", Amnesty International called for death sentences to be commuted and for the abolition of the death penalty.
In July an Amnesty International observer attended sessions of the trial of 97 alleged members of aJ-Gama'a al-lslamiya before the Supreme MiUtary Coiul.
In March Amnesty International published a report, Egypt: Women targeted by association, which highlighted the human rights abuses suffered by some Islamist women as a result of their relationship to alleged members of banned Islamist groups. By the end of the year, the government had not responded to human rights concerns raised by the organization.
Amnesty International condemned the deliberate and arbitrary killing of civilians by armed opposition groups and called on them to put an end to such killings.
