UKRAINE
At least 13 prisoners were executed and more than 260 remained imder sentence of death at the end of the year. Ill-treat-ment and torture in detention continued to be reported.
In January the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Eiuope adopted a resolution condemning the continuing executions and threatening Ukraine with eventual expulsion from the Council of Europe should more executions be carried
out. Ukraine had committed itself to an immediate moratorium on executions on joining the Council of Europe in November 1995 (see Amnesty International Reports 1996 and 1997). In January the Mirüstry of Justice released figiues showing that 167 prisoners were executed in 1996.
In May Ukraine fulfilled one of the commitments made on joining the Council of Emope by signing Protocol No. 6 to the Eiuopean Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, which provides for the abolition of the death penalty in peacetime. Ukraine ratified the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment in May, and the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms in July.
In April the UN Committee against Torture considered Ukraine's third periodic report. The Committee expressed concem at Ukraine's failure to institute an immediate moratorium on executions and warned the govenunent of the consequences should it continue to violate its obligations. The Committee also found that law enforcement officials in Ukraine had tortured and ill-treated detainees, in some cases causing their death. It said that the lack of an effective system for independent scmtiny of complaints and for compensating victims; the lack of provisions for court review of arrest and detention; and the absence of the crime of torture in national legislation, all contributed to these violations. Ukraine was also criticized for the systematic tortm« of new recmits in the armed forces; inhuman or degrading conditions of pre-trial detention; and failure to ensure access to a
ukraine
lawyer of the detainee's choice. The Committee made specific and extensive recommendations for a comprehensive plan to stop torture in Ukraine.
In November an official Council of Europe fact-finding mission to Ukraine was told that 13 prisoners had been executed between 1 January and 11 March; their petitions for clemency had been rejected by President Leonid Kuchma in November 1996. Officials stated that no further petitions for clemency were rejected and no further executions carried out. Other sources, however, maintained that executions continued beyond March. The mission was informed that 264 prisoners were imder sentence of death.
In April the Ukrainian delegation told the un Committee against Torture that over the previous three years, 529 people had been sentenced to death and 73 had had their sentences commuted. Among those believed to be on death row at the end of the year was Sergey Romanov, who was sentenced to death in July 1997 for premeditated, aggravated murder. There were allegations of serious irregularities in the conduct of pre-trial investigations in his case and reports of ill-treatment in police custody.
Death sentences on Sergey Vysochan-sky and Audrey Yevtemy were commuted in March and April respectively. Other prisoners under sentence of death, including Vitaly Gumenyuk, were awaiting the outcome of petitions for clemency. Following the Coimcil of Europe fact-finding mission to Ukraine, the Rapporteur of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Human Rights of the Council of Europe issued a report stating that the procedure for carrying out executions "is shrouded in secrecy". In particular, "relatives of executed prisoners are not informed where their sons, husbands or fathers are buried". The report also criticized the conditions in pretrial detention centres where prisoners under sentence of death were held, citing, in particular, lights being left on continuously, the lack of daylight in prisoners' cells, and prisoners not being able to leave their cells except to have a shower once every five to 10 days.
Ill-treatment and torture in detention continued to be reported. In March, Sergey Valkovanysh was reportedly tortured while in police custody in the Donetsk region. He was reportedly beaten,
suffering broken ribs, and had a plastic bag placed over his head and filled with gas. Following an official investigation, the Procurator General reportedly refused to open criminal proceedings against the police officers involved because of lack of evidence.
Maksim Pyatigorsky, a 14-year-old boy, was reportedly denied adequate medical care and refused access to his parents while held in pre-trial detention in Lukiyanovska prison from October 1996 to June 1997. The parents of two other boys reportedly lodged complaints that police officers beat their sons until they agreed to testify against Maksim Pyatigorsky.
In August there were reports that Alek-sandr Barketov, a prisoner in Krivoy Rog region, was suffering from a wasting condition and skin ulcers, and was passing blood; his health was said to be prejudiced by poor prison conditions. He was serving a two-year prison sentence for deserting from the army, allegedly following incidents of ill-treatment.
In January an Interior Ministry official reported that two of its employees in the Transcarpathian region "carried out illegal actions... during which they caused bodily harm to persons of Gypsy nationality... Information regarding rape of Eva H. by the above members of staff was not confirmed" (see Amnesty International Report 1997]. The officers were dismissed.
The Procurator General reportedly opened criminal cases against 10 law enforcement officials from ¿le Lviv investigation isolation prison allegedly responsible for the death in custody of Yury Mozola in 1996 (see Amnesty International Report 1997]. However, dming a trial which took place in February and March, the cases were reportedly closed and further investigation requested. No further information was available at the end of the year.
In September Amnesty Intemational wrote to President Kuchma, urging him to take action to stop all executions. In January the organization wrote to the Secretary-General of the Council of Europe conveying its concems about the continuing use of the death penalty and urging that the Ukrainian Govemment issue public orders to all prison govemors that no further executions be carried out.
Amnesty Intemational submitted a report to the members of the un Committee
UKRAiNE/UNTTED ARAB EMIRATES
against Torture, and met the Ukrainian delegation to discuss implementation of the Committee's recommendations.
The organization asked the Ukrainian authorities to ensure that a full and comprehensive inquiry was instigated into all allegations of tortiu« and ill-treatment.
