SLOVAKIA
At least four conscientious objectors to military service were imprisoned. They were prisoners of conscience.
In April the govemment authorized the publication of the report of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment on its visit to places of detention in Slovakia in June and July 1995. The Committee stated that it heard numerous allegations of ill-treatment by the police and concluded that persons suspected of a criminal offence mn a significant risk of being ill-treated by the police at the time of apprehension and during the first hours in police custody, and that on occasion such persons may be subjected to severe ill-treatment. The Committee also expressed concern about the apparent lack of access to a lawyer and to a doctor for persons in detention. The government ac-
knowledged the findings of the Committee and undertook to put into practice its recommendations.
In July the UN Human Rights Committee met to consider Slovakia's initial report on its compliance with the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. In its concluding remarks, the Committee "noted with concern that the remnants of the former totalitarian mle have not yet been completely overcome and that further steps remain to be undertaken in consolidating and developing democratic institutions and strengthening the implementation of the Covenant". The Committee noted the persistence of political and social attitudes adverse to the promotion and full protection of human rights. It expressed concern that insufficient steps had been taken to implement various provisions of the Slovak Constitution concerning fundamental rights, and provisions of the Covenant, including Article 18, conceming the right to altemative service of non-punitive length for conscientious objectors to military service; that Roma, who were often victims of racist attacks, reportedly did not receive adequate protection from law enforcement officials; about cases of excessive use of force by law enforcement officials, and ill-treatment of detainees during police custody; and about freedom of expression, including the excessive restrictions on this right imposed by Article 98 of the Penal Code, which makes it an offence to "disseminate false information abroad which harms the interest" of Slovakia (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1997).
In Febmary Martin Bednar, a conscientious objector, was imprisoned for refusing to perform military service. He was conditionally released in September after serving half of his one-year sentence. In May Erik Kratmiiller and Martin Badin, who had been imprisoned in June and August 1996 respectively (see Amnesty International Report 1997), were released. Miroslav Albert began serving a one-year prison sentence in September. At least four other conscientious objectors to military service were prosecuted for evading military service and faced imprisonment. In most of these cases the defendants had not submitted their application for altemative service within 30 days of being declared fit for service, as required by the Law on Civilian Service.
slovakia/somalia
Amnesty Intemational mged the authorities to release the prisoners of conscience immediately and to stop criminal proceedings against conscientious objectors to military service. In April Amnesty Intemational published a report, Slovak Republic: Restrictions on the right to conscientious objection. The organization also urged the authorities to revise the Law on Civilian Service, to bring it into line with internationally recognized principles.
