GUINEA-BISSAU
Prisoners of conscience detained during the year included six trade unionists, held briefly in January, and at least two political activists who were among many people arrested during armed conflict which engulfed the country following an army mutiny. Military and civilian detainees were frequently tortured. Women were reportedly raped by soldiers involved in the conflict. During the conflict security forces, as well as Senegalese and
GUINEA-BISSAU
Republic of Guinea soldiers supporting the government committed human rights violations. Rebel forces arrested civilians and reportedly beat them.
Under a seciuity agreement between the government of President Joao Bernardo Vieira and Senegal, the army reinforced its presence on the border with Senegal in order to prevent rebels of the Senegalese Mouvement des forces démocratiques de Casamance (mfdc). Democratic Forces of Casamance Movement, from using Guinea-Bissau as a rear base. In January government troops reportedly killed 10 suspected mfdc rebels and arrested dozens of people, including Senegalese, accusing them of vehicle theft and gun-running. In late January Brigadier An-sumane Mané, army Chief of Staff, was accused of negligence in connection with the arms trafficking and suspended from his post. He denied the allegations and publicly accused senior government and military officials of involvement in arms trafficking. He was dismissed on 6 June.
Brigadier Ansumane Mane's dismissal ignited a military revolt. Rebel soldiers laid an ambush on the road to the airport, where President Vieira was due to pass and killed two officials. They seized military bases in Bissau, the capital, cutting it off from the rest of the country. Most of the 10,000-strong armed forces, embittered by long-standing grievances over poor conditions and low pay, joined the self-styled Junta Militar (military junta), Senegal and the Republic of Guinea acted immediately to support the government. Over the following weeks some 2,000 Senegalese and 400 Republic of Guinea troops arrived in the country. A Contact Group appointed by the Comunidade de Paises de Lingua Portuguesa (cplp), Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, negotiated a truce on 26 July. By then. Junta Militar troops controlled most of the northwest of the country. The fighting destroyed many buildings in Bissau and displaced about a third of the country's population of just over a million.
Throughout the conflict members of parliament and religious leaders inside the country, as well as individuals and human rights activists in exile, tried to promote peace talks. In August the Economic Community of West African States (ecowas) and the cplp jointly brokered a reaffirmation of the cease-fire. However,
the momentum of mediation slowed. In mid-October fighting flared again and, despite reinforcements of foreign troops supporting the government, the Junta Militar forces, reportedly joined by Mfdc fighters, took control of most of the country. President Vieira then announced a unilateral cease-fire and, after further negotiations, a peace agreement was signed in November during an ecowas meeting of heads of state in Nigeria. Under the agreement, the Senegalese and Republic of Guinea forces were to be withdrawn and an ecowas monitoring force was to be deployed In Guinea-Bissau. Benin, Gambia, Niger and Togo agreed to contribute a total of 600 troops, but by the end of the year only 80 Togolese troops had arrived.
At the beginning of the year, six officials of the Sindicato Nacional de Marin-heiros (sinamar). National Sailors' Syndicate, were arrested and held for several days: they were prisoners of conscience. Police held the wife of Cesar Vieira Có, sinamar's Vice-President, overnight as a hostage because her husband was not at home when they came to arrest him.
During the conflict security forces and Senegalese soldiers arrested civilians and soldiers suspected of supporting the Junta Militar. According to some reports, three detention centres in Bissau held over 200 prisoners. Some prisoners were detained solely on the suspicion of opposing government policies. They were prisoners of conscience. Among them was Ansumane Fati, a member of an opposition political party, Uniao para a Mudanga, Union for Change, who was arrested in early July, He had organized a petition for peace. Soldiers accused him of criticizing President Vieira and listening to the Junta Militar radio station. They beat him with military belts before releasing him.
Torture was frequently used during interrogation and as a punishment. Reports were received in February that about 20 people detained on suspicion of gun-running were being tortured under interrogation In military custody. After initially being denied access, a parliamentary committee of inquiry and members of the Liga Giij'ijeense de Direitos Humanos, Guinea (Bissau) Human Rights League, visited the detainees and heard that they had been beaten with truncheons all over their bodies. As a result, four suffered temporary paralysis: Filipe Manga lost the use of his
GUINEA-BISSAU/GUYANA
left hand; three others, including Lamine Djata, a Senegalese man, could not walk.
After the conflict started, Samba Djaló. a soldier who had joined the Junta Militar, was arrested at Jugdul, 40 kilometres east of Bissau, in late June. He escaped from prison in July and told journalists that, at the time of his arrest, a Guinea-Bissau soldier had inserted sewing needles into the skin of his penis. There were many reports of prisoners being severely beaten by soldiers or security officials.
There were also reports of Senegalese soldiers beating civilians who refused to hand over money or other possessions, and some reports of other serious himian rights violations. In late June Senegalese soldiers in a part of Bissau known as Little Moscow reportedly arrested a yoimg man, beat him and then dripped over him a substance, possibly molten plastic, which biuned his skin. Bystanders took him to a hospital. In July Senegalese troops reportedly intercepted a group of people who were trying to leave Bissau, selected 25 women, took them back to their barracks at the military headquarters, raped them and held them for two days. Capitao Quin-hague sustained multiple fractures from a severe beating with gun butts and sticks in the Pluba u suburb of Bissau in July. Senegalese soldiers who beat him accused him of being a member of the Junta Militar forces. Despite his name of Capitao (captain), he was a civilian. Capitao Quinh-ague died a few days later, apparently as a result of internal bleeding.
A few days after the August cease-fire agreement was signed, security persormel arrested Braima Djassi, apparently because he was an official of the Union for Change, and reportedly beat him.
Soldiers arrested Armando Bion in September in Bissau on suspicion of spying for the Junta Militar and reportedly beat him severely with gun butts before taking him to the navy headquarters. There were several reports about life-threatening conditions in this prison where detainees were said to be held in overcrowded cells which flooded at high tide and had no toilets.
Six people arrested in Bafatá in late October were reportedly tortured by Republic of Guinea troops.
Soon after the conflict began the Junta Militar detained an estimated 200 foreign civilians, mostly from Senegal and some
from other West African states. During interrogation they were reportedly tied up and beaten. By August, all had reportedly been released. Leopold Alfama "Duki Djarsi", a retired military officer, was arrested by the Junta Militar in Jime and held for over four months.
There were several reports that government and Senegalese soldiers extrajudicially executed unarmed civilians. According to an eyewitness, a group of five or six government security officials, one in police imiform, approached two youths who were standing chatting in the Reino area of Bissau in June. One official spoke to the youths, then reportedly fired his machine-gun, hitting one in the leg and the other in the stomach.
According to witnesses, in late June one of a group of Senegalese soldiers opened fire without warning on two unarmed security guards sitting at the gate of the us Embassy in Bissau. One of the guards was killed, the other inj"ured.
Lai António Pereira was apparenüy extrajudicially executed in July by a security official who suspected him of theft.
Amnesty International expressed concern to the authorities about the torture of detainees. In Guinea-Bissau: Human rights under fire, published in July, Amnesty International appealed to all parties involved in the fighting to respect human rights. Before and after the peace agreement was signed in November, Amnesty International urged those involved in the peace negotiations to ensure that the agreement contained provisions to protect human rights.
