PERU
At least 600 prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience accused of terrorism-related crimes remained in prison. Some 4.000 people charged with these offences were in prison under procedures which fell short of international fair trial standards. Death threats and other acts of intimidation were directed at critics of the government. Reports of torture and ill-treatment continued. Prison conditions amounted to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Armed opposition groups continued to commit hiunan rights abuses.
The amnesty laws, which sanctioned impunity smrounding thousands of cases of human rights violations committed in the context of counter-insurgency operations between 1980 and 1995, remained on the statute books. Despite several un hiunan rights bodies recommending that the authorities repeal the amnesty laws, in July President Alberto Fujimori stated publicly that the laws were approved because Peru was a sovereign state.
Armed operations by the clandestine Partido Comunista del Perú (Sendero Luminoso) (pcp), Communist Party of Peru (Shining Path), and Movimiento Revolucionario Túpac Amaru (mrta), Túpac Amaru Revolutionary Movement, re-
mained confined to isolated regions of Peru's rainforest. By the end of the year 20 per cent of the population remained imder a state of emergency covering 16 per cent of the national territory.
No judges were nominated by Congress to replace the three judges dismissed from the Constitutional Tribunal in May 1997 (see Amnesty Intemationai Report 1998). As a result the Constitutional Tribimal was imable to exercise its full functions in upholding the Constitution, including the protection of human rights. In keeping with requirements enshrined in the Constitution, sufficient signatures from the public were obtained to hold a referendum on whether President Fujimori should be allowed to stand for a third term of office. However, in September Congress rejected the referendum as a result of a law, passed during the collection of signatures, stating that referendums coidd only be held with the additional approval of Congress.
In May, following Congress' approval of a law curtailing the functions of the National Council of the Magistracy, a constitutional body responsible for the appointment and removal of judges and attorneys, the Council protested that the law undermined its independence and its members resigned en bloc. This concern was echoed by opposition parliamentarians, jurists, and many sectors of civil society. Steps taken to reinstate the functions of the Council were deemed by these critics to be purely cosmetic. The Attorney General publicly stated that his autonomy and independence also remained curtailed, blaming the situation on the ongoing reform of Peru's judicial system. Intergovernmental organizations and critics of the government expressed concern that the rule of law, the independence of the judiciary, and the protection of human rights were being undermined.
The mandate of the Ad Hoc Commission charged with recommending a presidential pardon for prisoners falsely accused of terrorism was further extended to December 1999 (see Amnesty International Reports 1997 and 1998). In November a law came into effect which made provision for judges to immediately quash the criminal records and outstanding judicial procedures of these prisoners. Since the Commission started its work in 1996, 444 prisoners had been pardoned and
PERU
released. Scores of other prisoners falsely accused of terrorism-related crimes were acquitted by the courts and released.
In June the executive passed a set of Decree Laws which defined certain serious common crimes as "aggravated terrorism". Under this legislation those accused can be held incommunicado for up to 10 days and tried by military courts. The Decree Laws, widely regarded as being modelled on Peru's 1992 anti-terrorism legislation, were severely criticized by jurists and human rights organizations.
In February Congress approved a law on crimes against humanity in which the crimes of genocide, enforced disappearance and torture were incorporated into Peru's Criminal Code and were punishable by at least 20, 15 and five years' imprisonment respectively. The law also stipulated that these crimes would be dealt with by the civilian courts.
In January a civilian and six members of the army, who had confessed to involvement in a 1996 bomb attack in the city of Puno on a television station which was critical of the authorities, were acquitted of terrorism charges. The court ruled that acts of terrorism could only be attributed to members of the pct and mrta and not to members of the security forces on active service.
The long-standing border dispute between Peru and Ecuador, which in 1995 spilled over into an armed conflict, was brought to an end in November with the signing of a new border treaty. During the armed conflict civilians from both countries suffered human rights violations (see Amnesty /niernofj'ona/ Report 1996).
The un Special Rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers and the un Committee against Torture published statements on Pem's human rights situ-adon in Febmary and May respectively. Both welcomed the ending of the use of "faceless judges", but expressed concem at the continued use of military courts to try civilians accused of terrorism and at the passing of legislation ciutailing the functions of the National Council of the Magistracy which undermined the independence of the judiciary. The Committee against Torture also expressed concern about "frequent and numerous allegations of torture".
The govemment continued to ignore the recommendations of the Inter-American
system for the protection of human rights that compensation be paid to victims of human rights violations and their relatives. Maria Elena Loayza Tamayo, a victim of torture and imfkir trial; iJie relatives of Ernesto Castillo Páez, who "disappeared" in 1991; and the 21 victims of the 1990 Chumbivilcas massacre, did not receive compensation. However, compensation was paid to the relatives of the three El Frontón prisoners who "disappeared" in 1986 (see Arrmesty Intemational Report 1998). At the conclusion of a visit to the country in November, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights publicly recognized important advances in the protection of human rights since the Commission last visited Pern in 1993, including that no complaints of "disappearances" or extrajudicial executions had been filed before the Commission since 1995. However, the Conunission expressed concem at the lack of independence of the judiciary, at the failure to fully observe the rule of law and fair trial standards, and at the use of military courts to investigate human rights cases and try civilians. The Commission urged the authorities to repeal the 1995 amnesty laws and to establish the truth surrounding human rights violations in the past.
By the end of the year, at least 600 prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience accused of terrorism-related crimes remained in prison. Prisoner of conscience Carlos Ortega López had initially been detained in May 1993 and falsely charged with terrorism-related offences. He was acquitted and released seven months later. However, in November 1996 he was again detained, following a mling by the Supreme Coiul of Justice that he be retried. He was subsequently sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment. Other prisoners of conscience still detained at the end of the year included Marco Antonio Ambrosio Concha, Carlos Florentino Molero Coca and Marco Antonio Monge Hoyos (see Amnesty International Report 1998) and former Congressman Yehude Simon Munaro.
Seven prisoners of conscience, including Zacarías Merma Farfán (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1998), and 77 possible prisoners of conscience falsely accused of terrorism benefited from presidential pardons and were released during the year.
PERU
Some 4,000 people were serving sentences or awaiting trial under anti-terror-ism legislation which fell short of international fair trial standards. Despite positive but piecemeal reforms to this legislation in previous years (see Amnesty International Reports 1993 to 1998), civilians accused of treason continued to be tried by military coiuts, defence lawyers were still prohibited from cross-examining members of the security forces involved in arrests and interrogations, and trials were not heard in public.
Death threats and other acts of intimidation directed at critics of the government persisted. Opposition parliamentarians Jorge del Castillo, Javier Diez Canseco and Gustavo Mohme Liona; himian rights defenders Sofia Macher, Francisco Soberón and Heriberto Benitez Rivas; and journalists César Hilderbrandt and Luis Ibérico, were among those who received intimida-tory telephone calls or faxes, most threatening them with death. Several had received death threats in previous years (see Amnesty International Report 1998). In October papers and files relating to women's rights were stolen during a break-in at the home of Giulia Tamayo León, an activist campaigning against the forced sterilization of women. She subsequently received intimidatory telephone calls.
Reports of torture and ill-treatment continued. In September, Charly Soto Ríos, a recruit based at a police training school in the Vargas Guerra military camp in the city of Iquitos, was shot dead, reportedly as a result of a stray bullet. However, film broadcast on television showed heavy bruising on his thorax and the soles of his feet, suggesting that Charly Soto may have been severely beaten prior to his death. The victim's body was apparently buried without forensic examination and an investigation into the death appeared to ignore the extensive bruising on his body.
An investigation by the Public Ministry into the death in unclear circumstances of intelligence agent Mariela Lucy Barreto Riofano in 1997 was provisionally shelved on the grounds that it had not been possible to identify those responsible (see Amnesty International Report 1998).
Prison conditions continued to be harsh and in some circumstances amounted to cruel, inhuman and degrading punishment. For example, under special
penitentiary regulations introduced in 199 2, prisoners accused of terrorism-related offences could receive one 30-minute family visit per month. Under 1997 reforms to the regulations, prisoners could receive weekly one-hour family visits, but direct contact with their visitors remained prohibited during the first two years of detention. The reforms progressively allowed for prisoners wiÄ more than two years' detention to receive two and then four-hourly family visits per week, including direct contact with their relatives, and to have access to workshops and educational classes and longer periods out of their cells. However, these benefits were only granted following a favourable official evaluation of the prisoner's behaviour. During prison visits by Amnesty International delegates in September, several pcp and mrta prisoners informed the organization that they were denied these benefits because they refused to renounce their "revolutionary ideas".
The conditions endured by prisoners accused of terrorism in Yanamayo Prison and in the prison in the Callao Naval Base near the capital, Lima, continued to be particularly harsh (see Amnesty International Report 1998). In several prisons inmates were reported to be suffering from illnesses for which they did not receive adequate medical attention. They included wheelchair-bound prisoners Florencio Arturo Varillas Tizón, Manuel Mendoza Chi ara and Juan Francisco Tulich Morales held in Yanamayo Prison.
Conditions were also harsh in the Luri-gancho Prison in Lima where some 6,300 imnates convicted of criminal offences were held in an establishment designed to hold 1,200 prisoners. Despite calls on the authorities to review the decision to bring the Challapalca Prison into operation (see Amnesty International Report 1998], prisoners accused of common crimes continued to be transferred there. The prison's location in an isolated region of the Andean highlands at least 4,600 metres above sea level, made regular visits by relatives, defence lawyers and pastoral visitors virtually impossible.
Human rights abuses by armed opposition groups continued to be reported. In May members of the pcp stormed the villages of Cachicoto and Puente Pacae, Huánuco department. They gathered the inhabitants together and then shot dead
PERU/PHILIPPINES
five peasants accused of passing information to the authorities. In September Rolando Amancio Enriquez and Juan Nal-varte Chuquillanqui were shot dead in the village of San Francisco, near Uchiza, San Martin department, for refusing to shout slogans in support of the pop.
Amnesty International repeatedly appealed to the authorities to immediately and unconditionally release all prisoners of conscience. In February the organization appealed to the authorities to review the conditions prevailing in Challapalca Prison, including the effects of its location on prisoners' health and their right to maintain effective contact with relatives, lawyers and pastoral visitors. In June Amnesty International wrote to the authorities reiterating previous appeals for the antiterrorism laws to be brought into line with international fair trial standards.
In August Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to transfer the three wheelchair-bound prisoners from Yanamayo Prison to a hospital where they could be given adequate medical care. In November the three prisoners were transferred to Socabaya Prison near the city of Arequipa, but it was not known if they received the treatment they required. In September an Amnesty International delegation visiting the country was granted access to prisoners accused of terrorism in Castro Castro and Chorrillos Prisons, but was refused access to them in Yanamayo Prison. Permission was also granted to visit Lxirigancho Prison but access to Challapalca Prison was denied.
Throughout the year the organization appealed to the authorities to ensure the safety of numerous individuals threatened with death and called on President Fujimori to publicly condemn these and other forms of intimidation directed at critics of his government. In several of the cases the authorities indicated that measures were taken to protect the victims but failed to bring those responsible to justice.
