ROMANIA
At least two prisoners of conscience were held. There were numerous reports of torture and ill-treatment, in at least one case resulting in death. Shootings by police officers in disputed circiunstances resulted in at least one death. Some of the victims were Roma.
In Febmary the govemment authorized the publication of the report of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment on its visit to places of detention in Romania in September and October 1995. The Committee stated that "persons detained on suspicion of committing a crime, at the time of arrest and/or in the course of interrogation, face a not inconsiderable risk of being subjected by the police to ill-treatment, which is sometimes severe ill-treatment, even torture". Conditions of detention in the municipal police stations visited by the Committee in Bucharest, Cluj-Napoca and Timi§oara were described as "at best mediocre, but often deplorable... [and] could justifiably be designated as inhuman and degrading". The Committee recommended that high priority should be given to human rights training of police officials at all levels, and to improving conditions, particularly overcrowding, in penitentiaries. The Committee issued extensive recommendations concerning the rights of all detainees. The government responded that the recommendations would be taken into consideration and steps taken to incorporate them into law. However, the govemment had failed to revise the Law Concerning the Execution of
ROMANIA
Sanctions, which was last amended in 1973, by the end of the year.
In April the governing coalition elected Radu Vasile to be the new Prime Minister.
In May the government introduced in parliament a draft Penal Code and Penal Procedure Code, proposing to abolish Article 200, which criminalizes homosexual relations between consenting adults in private, and the first paragraphs of Articles 238 and 239, concerning defamation of public officials. The draft also proposed to reduce the sanctions for Articles 205 and 206, which make insult and libel criminal offences. In June, in recognition of this legislative proposal, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe decided to end the procedure for monitoring Romania's compliance with the obligations and commitments accepted on admission to the Council of Europe (see Amnesty International Report 1996). Five days later, the Chamber of Deputies of Romania's parliament rejected the government's proposal to abolish Article 200 and the debate on the draft as a whole was closed.
Mariana Cetiner, a prisoner of conscience who had been arrested in October 1995 and sentenced to three years' imprisonment imder Article 200, paragraph 5, of the Penal Code for attempting to seduce another woman, was released in March following a pardon by President Emil Con-stantinescu. The draft law abolishing Article 200 noted that all convictions under paragraphs 1 and 5 of the law would be officially re-examined by the coiuls responsible for the execution of the sentence. After the draft law was rejected by parliament, the authorities did not disclose the number of detainees still held under this law.
In August Cornel Sabou, a joimialist, was arrested in Baia Mare. He had reported allegations made by some farmers that the judge used forged documents to take possession of their property. He was convicted of libelling a local judge and sentenced to 10 months' imprisonment, but was temporarily released in October after his sentence was suspended for three months. Cornel Sabou was a prisoner of conscience. In July Ovidiu Scutelnicu and C>rago§ Sfintu, journalists from lafi, were sentenced to one year's imprisonment for an article which the coxul found to be libellous of a judge. In their article the
journalists speculated that a police colonel, who was in charge of investigating corruption cases, would be dismissed and stated that his wife, who is a judge, had tried some of the corruption cases. The colonel was reportedly suspended from duty on the same day that the article was published. The two journalists were at liberty pending an appeal.
Reports of torture and ill-treatment were numerous. Relatively few victims filed complaints and investigations in most cases appeared not to have been carried out promptly and impartially. The Minister of the Interior and police authorities repeatedly claimed that such incidents were rare. Nevertheless, information received from the office of the General Prosecutor indicated that a significant number of officers had been brought to justice for ill-treatment of detainees in their custody. In 1997 military prosecutors had indicted 48 law enforcement officials for the offence of "abusive conduct", 17 for "abusive investigations" and two for torture. In the first six months of 1998, 21 officers were indicted for "abusive conduct" and two officers for "abusive investigations".
One man died in suspicious circumstances, apparently as a result of iU-treat-ment. In August Elinoiu Toader was punched and kicked by a police officer in . front of a store in Nereju, Vrancea coimty. The officer then reportedly instructed the owner of the store to take Elinoiu Toader behind the building and to beat him all over the body. The following morning Elinoiu Toader died in his sister's house. In the comse of an investigation, a witness was allegedly beaten with a truncheon on the palms by another officer to induce him to sign a statement that Elinoiu Toader had died as a result of alcohol abuse. At least two other witnesses were also threatened by local police. A day before the autopsy was carried out, the police inspectorate issued a statement that Elinoiu Toader had died as a result of consumption of siugical spirit and that the body of the deceased did not bear any signs of violence. However, photographs of the body showed injuries that were consistent with the alleged beating, and the autopsy reportedly established that Elinoiu Toader had suffered three fractured ribs.
In September in Poiana Lacului, Argef county, foiu- boys were questioned by the police about a theft of a bicycle. One
ROMANIVRUSSIAN FEDERATION
13-year-old boy was allegedly beaten with a truncheon on the palms to make him confess to the theft. Another boy was hit on the head. Three police officers then arrested 23-year-old Nicolae Cazacu and questioned him for four or five hours. He was reportedly pimched in the face and kicked. After refiising to sign a statement confessing to the theft, he was reportedly forced to lie on a table with his face down and severely beaten with a truncheon on the back until he fainted. He was then splashed with water and beaten with a truncheon on the palms. Following his release, Nicolae Cazacu was photographed and examined by a forensic medical expert who described in a certificate mid-tiple injuries on the nose, both palms and the back, which were consistent with his allegations of torture. The three officers suspected of torture were still on duty in Poiana Lacului at the end of October.
Some of the victims of police beatings were members of the Romani commimity. In June in Sâruleçti, Càlàraçi county, dozens of police officers broke into Romani homes and were reported to have indiscriminately beaten men, women and children. Three officers reportedly beat Gabriel Mihai who then ran outside his house. One officer shot him in the back and the leg, seriously injming him. Mar-gareta Mihai was reportedly kicked in the back and then, while attempting to help her husband, hit with the butt of a gun in the face. Seven or eight officers who entered the home of Mihai Cristache punched and kicked him. They then handcuffed him to another Rom and pushed them into a van. The 10 detained Roma, who were held at the local police station for around five hours, were subsequently released without charge.
There were other reports of shootings by police officers in disputed circumstances. In May, following a fight in a discotheque in Codlea, 16-year-old Marian Ciulei, who was running to catch a train, was ordered by the police to stop. He was then shot in the back and later taken to hospital where he was treated for injuries to the lung, kidney and liver. His family reportedly did not file a complaint. The results of an official investigation, obligatory when the police use firearms, had not been made public by the end of the year.
In August in Opri§or a police officer came to arrest Constantin Stan to serve
108 days' imprisonment for disturbing the peace and public order. Constantin Stan reportedly attempted to flee and the police officer, after ordering him to stop, fired once into the air. He then shot him in the back, in the region of the right kidney. Constantin Stan died on the way to hospital. The residts of an investigation into the shooting had not been made public by the end of the year.
In January the Ministry of the Interior published a report on cases Amnesty International had raised with the authorities in 1997.
In February Amnesty International wrote to the then Prime Minister, Victor Ciorbea, expressing concern about investigations into allegations of police torture and ill-treatment, noting what appeared to be a pattern of evasive responses by the authorities to communications from Amnesty International.
In March Amnesty International published a report, Romania: A summary of human rights concerns, which included extensive recommendations regarding legislative reforms and the prompt and Ùior-ough investigation of allegations of tortme and ill-treatment by law enforcement officers. In Jime the authorities published a reply to this report, which outlined the government's proposal to revise the Penal Code and the Penal Procedure Code. However, it failed to provide Amnesty International with requested information concerning specific cases of police shootings, torture and ill-treatment.
