EL SALVADOR
Several people reportedly died as a result of torture by members of security forces. Members of the judiciary involved in investigating human rights violations continued to receive death threats.
In April the Constitutional Division of the Supreme Court of Justice declared admissible an appeal, submitted in December 1997 by a private citizen, to declare unconstitutional the General Amnesty Law for the Consolidation of Peace. The law, which was approved by the government in March 1993, provided protection from prosecution for all those responsible for carrying out or covering up human
rights abuses during the civil war, including judicial officials (see Amnesty International Report 1994). The Supreme Court had not issued a decision by the end of the year.
The term of office of Dr Victoria Marina Velásquez de Avilés, National Human Rights Procurator, ended in March. However, her successor, Eduardo Peñate Polanco, was not appointed imtil Jidy after protracted discussions in the Legislative Assembly and deep disagreements on the appointment.
The Penal Code and Procedural Penal Code finally came into force in April; they had been expected to become operative in January but the Supreme Court of Justice, the Ministry of Justice and the Attorney General's office had requested a delay in late 1997 which was approved by the Legislative Assembly in January. Further reforms to the codes were pending at the end of the year.
In July President Armando Calderón Sol called on the Legislative Assembly to ratify the motion approved in October 1996 by the previous Assembly to reinstate the death penalty for rape, kidnapping and aggravated homicide. The Legislative Assembly had not responded to the call by the end of the year.
Several people died in custody reportedly as a result of torture by police. For example, Juan Carlos Presa Henriquez was arrested by members of the MetropoUtan Police Force of Santa Ana at a fair celebrating the local patron saint's feast day in July. He was allegedly beaten in the vehicle while being transferred to the police station, and suffered multiple injiuies, especially to the head, which caused his death. Twelve police agents were arrested, but in October the Third Magistrates Court in Santa Ana decided that there was sufficient evidence to prosecute only one agent for murder. A second agent was charged with a lesser offence. The trials of both agents were pending at the end of the year.
In September there were reports of the emergence of a new clandestine vigilante group calling itself "Chicos Buenos" ("Good Guys"). There was concern that the group's activities were reminiscent of previous groups, such as the Sombra Negra (Black Shadow), which functioned as "death squads" and were responsible for "social cleansing" in the mid-1990s;
EL SALVADOR/EQUATORIAL GUINEA
some of those groups had been connected to the security forces. The "Chicos Buenos" issued public statements making death threats against alleged criminals and were suspected of being responsible for the deaths of five people found with their throats slit in early September in Santa Ana. By the end of the year, the authorities had reportedly neither commented on nor investigated the alleged involvement of this group in the murders.
Death threats against and harassment of members of the judiciary led Alirio Ernesto Orantes, a judge in Santiago Nonualco, Department of La Paz, to leave El Salvador in September. He had been involved in initial inquiries into the murder of a joimialist in 1997. In the course of his work he had carried out searches of premises belonging to the Policía Nacional Civil (pnc), National Civil Police. He was subsequently subjected to threatening telephone calls, surveillance by the pnc, and harassment at his home. Another judge acting in the same case allegedly also received threats.
In October further judicial proceedings began against those accused of the killing in 1996 of Francisco Antonio Manzanares Monjaraz, a member of the Frente Farabundo Marti de Liberación Nacional, Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front (see Amnesty International Reports 1997 and 1998). The defendants were four members of the División de Investigación. Criminal Investigation Division, of the pnc. The final stage of the case was scheduled to take place in 1999.
Amnesty Intemational called on members of the Legislative Assembly not to ratify the reinstatement of the death penalty.
