TAJIKISTAN
Several political prisoners were allegedly tortured in pre-trial detention and six were sentenced to death after an unfair trial. One of them, who was critically ill, was denied appropriate medical treatment. At least 18 other people were sentenced to death. No executions were reported.
In January President Imomali Rakh-monov signed a decree granting an amnesty to all opposition leaders, including Sayed Abdullo Nuri, leader of the United Tajik Opposition (uto) and chairman of the National Reconciliation Commission (nrc). The same month an agreement was reached on which govemment posts would be given to uto members, but progress in sharing out cabinet posts was slow.
TAJIKISTAN
In April the NRC annoimced that it would investigate reports that five mass graves containing the bodies of an estimated 2,600 victims of the 1992-1993 civil war had been discovered close to the capital, Dushanbe.
In May, following international protests, parliament amended a controversial draft law which would have banned religious political parties, thereby outlawing the uto.
In July President Rakhmonov rejected a new law on the protection of the honour and dignity of the President of Tajikistan, which provided for punishments including terms of imprisonment of up to six years for making public statements critical of the President. The provisions of the law were, however, incorporated into the new criminal code which came into force in September. The new criminal code also decriminalized consenting homosexual acts between adult males and reduced to 15 the number of articles carrying a possible death sentence. It also stipulated that on commutation death sentences should be replaced with 25 years' imprisonment.
In March, six men were sentenced to death by the Supreme Court for treason, banditry and terrorism, apparently without right of appeal. Among them was Abdulkhafiz Abdullayev, die younger brother of Abdumalik Abdullojonov, a former prime minister and the head of the opposition National Revival Bloc. Abdulkhafiz Abdullayev, Firdavs Dust-boboyev, Ilkhom Dodojonov, Buriboi Akbarov, Jumaboy Juraev and Rustam Shaykhitdinov were found guilty of planning and carrying out an assassination attempt on President Rakhmonov in Khu-jand in April 1997 (see Amnesty International Report 1998). Nine other co-defendants received prison sentences ranging from one to 14 years. Supporters of Abdulkhafiz Abdullayev claimed that the motive for his inclusion in this criminal case and for the charges against him was to intimidate the Khujand-based opposition, which had been excluded from the peace process.
There were allegations that during the investigation and even during the trial his co-defendants had been forced under duress to incriminate Abdulkhafiz Abdullayev. According to one report, Firdavs Dustboboyev, Buriboi Akbarov
and Ilkhom Dodojonov were tortured after they had denied in court that Abdulkhafiz Abdullayev had been involved in the assassination attempt. They were reportedly subjected to electric shocks and beaten witb sticks at the Ministry of Security. Firdavs Dustboboyev allegedly had two of his ribs broken, one hand severely injured, and lost his sight in one eye.
Abdulkhafiz Abdullayev was tried and sentenced to death despite medical evidence that he was critically ill with cancer and was unfit to stand trial. He was reportedly still not receiving appropriate medical attention a month after being sentenced, despite a further recommendation by a medical panel that he be transferred to a specialist oncological unit. He was reportedly denied chemotherapy treatment and remained on death row, where his condition was said to be steadily deteriorating. He was reportedly unable to walk unaided.
Petitions for clemency by the six men sentenced to death were submitted to President Rakhmonov who reportedly rejected them at the end of December.
At least 18 other people were sentenced to death. No executions were reported during the year.
Amnesty International expressed grave concern at reports that Abdulkhafiz Abdullayev was denied appropriate medical treatment and urged that he be moved to a specialist hospital. The organization also called on the authorities to investigate swiftly and impartially allegations that several of Abdulkhafiz Abdullayev's co-defendants were beaten or otherwise tortured in order to extract confessions.
Amnesty International expressed concern that the law on protecting the honour and dignity of the President of Tajikistan proposed by parliament could be applied in ways which violated the right to freedom of expression as set out in Article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
Amnesty International welcomed the reduction in the number of offences punishable by death in the new criminal code. It continued to appeal for the commutation of death sentences and to call for the total abolition of the death penalty.
