SWITZERLAND
A total of 548 people were sentenced to imprisonment or suspended imprisonment for refusing to perform military service. Of these, 281 based their refusal on religious, ethical or political grounds, according to statistics published by the Federal Military Department. However, there were claims that the total number of people who had refused on conscientious grounds was far higher than that reflected in the department's restricted categories. Many conscientious objectors served their sentences during 1988 and were considered prisoners of conscience. These included people sentenced in 1988 and earlier years, many of whom had expressed their willingness to perform an alternative civilian service.
Regular periods of military service are compulsory for all men aged between 20 and 50 and there is no provision for alternative civilian service, which could be introduced only if Article 18 of the Constitution was amended by referendum. There is limited access to unarmed military service for conscripts able to prove that the use of arms would result in "a severe conflict of conscience" on religious or ethical grounds.
In January the committee of the National Council - the lower house of parliament - examining a draft bill to modify the Military Penal Code and the Federal Law on Military Organization, voted in favour of its general provisions (see Amnesty International Report 1988). The committee carried out detailed examination of the bill in May and October. Under the draft
EUROPE/SWITZERLAND/TURKEY
bill, refusal to perform military service would remain a criminal offence. Punishment for those recognized by military tribunals as having objections based on religious or ethical grounds would be a period of compulsory work ranging from one and a half times the length of military service to two years. If completed, no sentence would appear on the individual's criminal record, thereby "decriminalizing" the sentence. Those objecting on other, unrecognized, grounds would continue to receive prison sentences and a criminal record.
Article 81 of the Military Penal Code allows military tribunals to sentence people refusing to perform military service to up to three years' imprisonment but in practice sentences rarely exceed one year. Where a military tribunal recognizes a conscript's "severe conflict of conscience" on religious or ethical grounds, a sentence of up to six months' imprisonment may be imposed. Such sentences are normally served in the form of arrêts répressi/s -allowing prescribed work outside prison during the day - or in the form of "semi-detention" - allowing objectors to continue their normal or approved employment outside prison during the day. Sentences of less than six months' imprisonment imposed on "unrecognized" objectors are also frequently served in the form of "semi-detention".
Pierre Lambert, a pacifist, entered prison in December to serve a five-month sentence passed by a military tribunal in February. The tribunal recognized that his refusal to perform military service was prompted by sincere, ethical beliefs but concluded that if he was suffering a conflict of conscience it had not reached sufficient intensity to qualify as "severe". He did not therefore qualify for the more lenient sentence of arrêts répressifs. In August a military tribunal hearing the case of Markus Sommer, a student, concluded that although his refusal was prompted by ethical as well as political beliefs, his political beliefs were dominant. He did not therefore satisfy the first condition necessary for the granting of arrêts répressifs and commenced a seven-month prison sentence in December.
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the release of conscientious objectors imprisoned as prisoners of conscience and pressed for the introduction of
the right to refuse to perform military service on conscientious grounds and for the provision of a genuine alternative civilian service outside the military system. Amnesty International was concerned that the draft "decriminalization" bill would not introduce such a service and that under its provisions people who refuse military service for reasons of conscience would continue to be punished.
In October Switzerland ratified the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
