GHANA
At least 50 critics or opponents of the government arrested in previous years, including several prisoners of conscience, continued to be detained without trial throughout 1988 and there were a number of new detentions. There were some releases, including prisoners of conscience. At least 28 people were sentenced to death and 21 executions were reported.
Out of a group of five prisoners of conscience held during the year, two -Akwasi Adu-Amankwah, a trade union official, and Tony Akoto-Ampaw, a former student leader - had still not been brought to trial at the end of 1988. They were among a group of seven detainees arrested in 1987. In a letter to Amnesty International in August, the government's information department alleged that Akwasi Adu-Amankwah had "sought to bring about a violent confrontation between some sections of organized labour". However, the authorities did not provide evidence that he or any of those detained in 1987 had used or advocated violence and it appeared that they had been imprisoned solely on account of their opposition to government policy. Two of the group had been released at the end of 1987 (see Amnesty international Report 1988), three others were freed during 1988: John Nde-bugre, a former government minister, and Ralph Kugbe, were released in April and Kwame Karikari, a journalist, was released in December.
In February the authorities released Ben Ephson, a journalist who had been detained incommunicado since September 1987, apparently also on account of his
non-violent criticism of government policy.
B.D.D. Asamoah, an official at the secretariat of the military government, the Provisional National Defence Council (PNDC), was arrested in August. A senior government official claimed he had published incorrect information about the armed forces and said he was suspected of planning illegal activity. According to other sources, he was detained because he had written a document accusing leading government officials of corruption. He had reportedly been released by the end of the year. Akrong Wiafe, a government-employed journalist who was arrested in November, apparently on suspicion of distributing B.D.D. Asamoah's document, remained in detention.
In August Lieutenant-Colonel Owusu Agyekum, a member of the medical staff at a military hospital in Accra, was reportedly arrested. He had just returned from the United States and was apparently suspected of contacts with government opponents abroad. He was believed to be still in detention without charge at the end of the year.
Over 50 detainees were reportedly held without charge under security legislation throughout 1988, many of them former armed forces personnel arrested in previous years in connection with alleged plots against the government. They included Corporal Isaac Opare, allegedly involved in a coup attempt in 1983; Sergeant Anamolga George Akolgo and Private John Kwesi Attipoe, apparently suspected of involvement in an attempt to assassinate the head of state in February 1985; and Corporal Moses Harley, who was reported to have been severely ill-treated following his arrest in October 1985 on suspicion of involvement in another conspiracy against the government in 1985. Corporal Samson Nyame Bekyere was also said still to be in detention. He had reportedly been acquitted in August 1983 when brought to trial for involvement in a coup attempt but to have been immediately redetained under the Preventive Custody Law of 1982 (PNDC Law 4).
PNDC Law 4 empowers the PNDC to order the detention without trial for an unlimited period of anyone suspected of endangering the security of the state. The authorities are under no obligation to in-
AFRICA/GHANA/GUINEA
form detainees of the reasons for their detention and since 1984 the courts have not been allowed to review the legal basis or reasons for detentions.
At least four of a group of some eight armed forces officers were also reported to have been released in late 1988. They were members of the Armed Forces Reserve Unit, a commando corps alleged to have been involved in the torture of detainees arrested in recent years in connection with coup attempts. They were apparently detained in 1986 on suspicion of involvement in conspiracies against the government.
Three people detained without trial in 1987 in connection with a dispute over the succession to a traditional chieftaincy in Yendi were released uncharged during the year (see Amnesty international Report 1988). Afa Ajura, a religious leader in Tamale, was apparently released in March; Ibrahim Mahama, a lawyer and former member of parliament, and another detainee, Amadu Sana, were released in July. An unknown number of those sentenced to death in 1987 for murders committed in factional fighting in connection with the Yendi dispute were released in an amnesty in December.
At least 28 people were sentenced to death during the year following conviction for armed robbery and murder. Eleven people convicted of armed robbery in a number of separate trials were executed by firing-squad in June; at least six of them had been sentenced in 1987.
A further 10 men were executed by firing-squad in October. They had been convicted in three separate trials in August and September of ritual murder- premeditated murder committed in the context of magical or religious beliefs - and their sentences were confirmed by the National Appeals Tribunal in September. A woman was convicted and sentenced to death in the September trial but the outcome of her appeal was not known.
All those sentenced to death are believed to have been convicted by Public Tribunals, special courts established in 1982 by the PNDC. As in previous years, it was not clear whether the Public Tribunals were fully independent. They could impose the death sentence for offences specified by the PNDC but not necessarily punishable by death in law, or in cases where the judges felt it was merited. Tri-
bunal judges were appointed by the PNDC and had no specific protection against dismissal. The National Public Tribunal, the highest court to which those convicted by lower Public Tribunals could appeal, could try cases itself and hear appeals against its own decisions, sitting as a National Appeals Tribunal. The independence of the appeals process was therefore not ensured.
In December an amnesty was announced for an unspecified number of prisoners convicted of criminal offences to mark the anniversary of the coup which brought the PNDC to power. Included were an unknown number of people sentenced to death for murder in 1987 in connection with the Yendi dispute, and Salifu Amank-wah, an armed forces officer sentenced to death for murder in November 1987.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience and expressed concern about the long-term detention without trial of other political prisoners. It also appealed for the commutation of death sentences and for an end to executions.
