SENEGAL
Several opposition leaders, who may have been prisoners of conscience, were among those imprisoned in connection with disturbances following presidential elections in February. However, they had all been freed by the end of the year. The government also released people who had been imprisoned in previous years on account of their activities in support of autonomy for the Casamance region, but there were new arrests on the same grounds. There were several reports of beatings and ill-treatment of prisoners by police and allegations that in one case this had resulted in death.
A state of emergency and a curfew were declared in the Dakar region on 29 February when disturbances broke out after the first results of presidential and National Assembly elections held the previous day were announced. These indicated that the incumbent President, Abdou Diouf, had been re-elected. Several opposition leaders were arrested. They included Amath Dansokho of the Parti de l'indépendance et du travail, Party for Independence and Labour, who was held only briefly, and Abdoulaye Wade, the leader of the Parti démocratique sénégalais (PDS), Senegalese Democratic Party. He and six other leading PDS members who were arrested, including Ousmane Ngom and Boubacar Sail, were charged with orchestrating violent protests and conspiring against the security of the state. They were brought to trial before the State Security Court in April. None was convicted on the main charges: three were acquitted and the others were convicted on lesser charges.
AFRICA/SENEGAL
Abdoulaye Wade was given a one-year suspended sentence for organizing a nonviolent public gathering, Boubacar Sail received a two-year sentence for instigating violent protests against a pre-election visit by President Diouf to Thiès, and two others received six-month sentences.
During the trial, defence lawyers argued that the /lagrant délit procedure (a special procedure allowing for a more summary trial for cases in which defendants were allegedly caught in the act of committing a crime) should not have been invoked. They said that some of the accused had been arrested at home and had not actually been committing an offence either at the time of their arrest or immediately beforehand. The defence lawyers also complained about various other procedural irregularities. The defendants maintained that their arrests were the result of premeditated action on the part of the authorities. When the presiding judge ruled that a senior police officer called as a witness need not reveal who had ordered him to arrest the accused, the defence lawyers withdrew from the case in protest.
There were further arrests in March and April in connection with peaceful demonstrations in Dakar against the cost of living and in support of the release of opposition leaders. Some of those held were charged with participating in illegal demonstrations and briefly imprisoned. For example, Abdoulaye Bathily, Secretary General of the Ligue Démocratique-Mouvement pour Je parti du travail (LD-MPT), Democratic League-Movement for the Labour Party, was arrested in April and convicted of participating in an illegal demonstration. He was given a one-month suspended sentence. The same month Mamadou N'Doye. a trade union leader, and four teachers and students were arrested for protesting against Abdoulaye Bathily's trial. They were tried in April and acquitted.
When the state of emergency was lifted in June, several people convicted of politically motivated offences during or after the election campaign remained imprisoned. However, they were released under an amnesty granted by the National Assembly, which applied to all those convicted of political offences committed between 1 January and 18 May. Boubacar Sail was among those released. In addition, all
prisoners serving sentences of less than 15 years who had been convicted by the State Security Court between 1 January 1982 and 31 July 1987 in connection with their involvement in a campaign for Casamance autonomy were also released under the amnesty. As a result, all but five prisoners serving sentences in relation to Casamance autonomy had been released by the end of 1988.
Other suspected supporters of Casamance autonomy who were arrested in 1986 and 1987 and who had not been brought to trial benefited from the amnesty. They included Laurent Diamacoune and Sanoune Bodian.
Eight people out of some 25 army, police and security service personnel arrested in February, accused of allegedly raising funds for the Casamance autonomy movement, were released pending trial in October. Mamadou Sané, known as N'Kru-mah, who was released in December 1987 after serving a five-year sentence in connection with the Casamance issue, was rearrested in February and was still in custody at the end of 1988. The reasons for his detention were not clear. Mamadou Sané and four other people were believed to have been arrested by authorities in Guinea Bissau- where they were reportedly seeking military assistance - and handed over to security personnel in Senegal. It is not clear what judicial procedures were followed.
Further arrests of government opponents occurred after the lifting of the state of emergency in Dakar, but most of those detained were held only briefly. They included 12 members of the LD-MPT, including its Deputy Secretary General, Mamba Guissé, and two members of the PDS who were arrested at Louga in late August. Five of them were charged with holding a prohibited meeting and inciting others to demonstrate. However, they were released pending their trial in November, at which all defendants were acquitted. In December two PDS members and four former police officers were arrested in connection with a car bombing in Dakar. They remained in police custody at the end of the year.
A number of people arrested during the state of emergency claimed they were beaten or assaulted while in custody. One detainee died after alleged police ill-treatment. Malang Gassama, an opposition
AFRICA / SENEGAL / SIERRA LEONE
party supporter, was arrested on 20 March outside his house in Dakar a few weeks after the curfew had been imposed. He was allegedly beaten in police custody and died in hospital the next day, apparently as a result of injuries he had sustained. There was no judicial investigation into the circumstances or cause of his death. According to the Minister of Justice this was because his relatives had not lodged a complaint with the authorities.
Amnesty International expressed concern to the government about the imprisonment of Abdoulaye Wade and others who appeared to have been detained for the peaceful exercise of their rights to freedom of association and expression. The organization called for a full investigation into the circumstances of Malang Gassama's death in view of allegations that he had been ill-treated while in police custody.
The government replied that none of those detained during the state of emergency was a prisoner of conscience. The Minister of Justice disagreed with Amnesty International that the most prominent supporter of Casamance autonomy, Father Augustin Diamacoune Senghor, had been a prisoner of conscience while imprisoned between 1982 and 1987. He challenged the accuracy of Amnesty International reports that prisoners detained in Casamance in 1986 and 1987 had been tortured. However, the government was not known to have carried out any independent investigation into these reports.
