SURINAME
New reports were received about alleged extrajudicial execution of suspected government opponents at the end of 1987. Two people detained were possible prisoners of conscience but both were soon released.
The country returned to civilian rule on 25 January when Ramsawak Shankar, who had been nominated by the National Assembly two weeks earlier, was sworn in as President. However, the Jungle Commando, a group which from 1986 engaged in armed opposition with the aim of overthrowing the military government, continued to make sporadic attacks during the year. There were attempts to start talks between the government and the group but final agreement had not been reached by the end of 1988. The State of Emergency declared in December 1986 remained in force in three eastern districts.
In January six members of the Bush Negro community were reported to have been killed and a seventh seriously injured in an incident on 31 December 1987 at Atjonni. The seven, all men, were reported to have been seized while they were returning to their homes in the interior with other villagers. Their captors, soldiers who suspected them of belonging to the Jungle Commando, took them into the jungle and a search party of villagers later found six of them dead. The corpses showed bayonet and gunshot wounds. The seventh villager was found badly wounded but still alive. He was hidden and sent to hospital in Paramaribo after an international organization secured permission from the authorities to move him. He later died.
In May it was reported that Winston Zerp, a nurse who had been held prisoner by the Jungle Commando since 1986 but had been released in late 1987 for health reasons and allowed to go to French Guiana, had been arrested at Paramaribo airport on his return in late March or early April. The authorities apparently suspected him of supporting the Jungle Commando because he had worked with an international medical organization treating the civilian population during his captivity. He was released after a few weeks; no charges were brought against him.
On 10 December Stanley Rensh, founder of Mooiwana 86 - a local human rights organization - was arrested by military police when he returned to Suriname from a visit to the United States. The authorities stated that he was suspected of having links with the Jungle Commando, although it appeared that he might have been detained on account of his human rights activities. He was taken to Fort Zeelandia - a compound in central Paramaribo which includes a prison used by the military police- where he was allowed to see a lawyer but not his family. He was released two weeks later.
On 5 November Gangaram Panday, a Surinamese, was arrested on his arrival from The Netherlands, where he had been living during the previous year. He was reportedly returned by the Dutch authorities, which had denied his application for asylum. He was taken to a cell at Paramaribo airport and was found dead on 7 November, having allegedly committed suicide.
Amnesty International wrote to President Shankar in May to inform him about its concerns under the previous military government, including the imprisonment of possible prisoners of conscience and the extrajudicial execution of suspected government opponents and unarmed civilians in areas most affected by the armed conflict. The organization welcomed the provisions in the Constitution adopted in 1987 which assert the rights to freedom of expression and security of person, and prohibit torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. Amnesty International noted that the Constitution asserts the right to life and urged the government to introduce legislation as soon as possible to abolish the death penalty for all crimes.
THEAMERICAS/PERU/STVINCENTANDTHEGRENADINES
In July Amnesty International issued an update to its 1987 report, Suriname, Violations of Human Rights, which described alleged extrajudicial executions carried out on 31 December 1987, and sent a copy to the government for comment. At the end of the year no response had been received.
Amnesty International also sought information about the arrests of Winston Zerp and Stanley Rensch and urged the government to investigate the circumstances of Gangaram Panday's death in custody.
