ALBANIA
Prisoners of conscience were held in prison or corrective labour camps under legislation which severely restricted certain human rights; it was impossible to estimate their numbers. Legal safeguards for people facing trial on political charges were inadequate and prison conditions harsh. The death penalty was available for a large number of offences, including all but one of the political offences defined under the criminal code but it was not known whether any death sentences were imposed or executions carried out during the year.
Information about political prisoners and about the death penalty was limited as a result of strict official censorship and restrictions on freedom of movement.
It appeared that most prisoners of conscience were imprisoned for having attempted to exercise their rights to freedom of expression and freedom of movement. People who criticized economic or political conditions in Albania or who publicly expressed or propagated their religious convictions were liable to imprisonment under Article 55 of the criminal code, which penalizes "Fascist, antidemocratic, religious, war-mongering or anti-socialist propaganda" with three years' to 10 years' imprisonment. When the offence has had "especially serious consequences" the penalty is imprisonment for not less than 10 years, or death. Amnesty International learned of people who were serving sentences between 1980 and 1985 under this article, some of whom were apparently still imprisoned. Many
others, it appeared, were serving sentences after conviction under paragraph 11 of Article 47, dealing with "flight from the state", for having attempted to leave the country without permission. This is an offence punishable by a minimum of 10 years' imprisonment, or death. Permission to travel abroad is severely restricted by the state.
Information was received that a number of political prisoners who were serving sentences in the 1970s and early 1980s had been released, either at the end of their sentences, or as a result of pardons granted in 1982 and 1986. Others remained in prison, including those excluded from these pardons because they had two or more convictions for political offences.
Since 1967 when Albania was officially declared "the first atheist state in the world" all organized or public forms of religious worship have been illegal. In that year religious buildings were closed, all religious communities deprived of legal status and their officials banned from fulfilling religious duties.
In succeeding years there were reports of clergy being imprisoned or interned, usually on collective farms. During 1988 official hostility to religious belief and practice persisted. In August an article in an official youth newspaper, Zeri i Rinise. (Voice of Youth), repeated calls for the continued "struggle against old reactionary ideologies, backward customs and vestiges of religion and petit bourgeois psychology".
In July the death occurred of Father Pjeter Meshkalla, a Jesuit priest who was apparently still in detention after 25 years in prisons and corrective labour camps for his opposition to state anti-religious policies. However, it was reported that Nikoll Troshani. a titular bishop, had been released from prison and was living with relatives in Lezha. Two priests. Fathers Mikel Koliqi and Simon Jubani, were reported also to have been released. There was no further information during 1988 about Father Ndoc Luli (see Amnesty International Report 1985). reported in earlier years to have been imprisoned for celebrating religious services.
The authorities continued to intern people whose relatives had left the country without permission, though those held had not committed any offence. Internment may be administratively imposed for
EUROPE/ALBANIA/AUSTRIA
unspecified periods, without recourse to courts, on "members of the family of fugitives" and on others regarded as a danger to the country's social system.
Legal safeguards for political prisoners during investigation and trial proceedings were extremely limited. Under the code of criminal procedure they had no statutory right to visits from relatives during the investigation phase or access to a legal adviser either during the investigation or at their trial unless the court "deemed it necessary". Lawyers lost their legal status and the institution of advocacy was abolished in 1967.
Former political prisoners reported that conditions for political prisoners remained harsh, with poor food, inadequate hygiene and medical care. Some prisoners of conscience were held at Burrel Prison where prisoners regarded as particularly dangerous - including former government officials - are detained. Political prisoners were also held in corrective labour camps, among them Qafe e Barit in Puke district. Koco Vlladimir Prifti, who was imprisoned from 1972 to December 1984 for attempting to leave the country illegally, told Amnesty International in 1988 that political prisoners at Qafe e Barit, where he spent the last part of his sentence, were forced to work long hours mining pyrites in conditions that were primitive and often dangerous. Those who refused to work or who failed to achieve the required high production norms were sent to punishment cells, where they slept on wooden planks without a mattress, received severely reduced rations and were denied exercise as well as visits and food from home,
Throughout 1988 Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to release all prisoners of conscience but did not receive a response.
