NIGERIA
More than 30 prisoners of conscience were detained without charge or trial. Five leading officials of former governments were released from restriction or detention without having been tried. Ill-treatment of criminal suspects was reported and a large number of prisoners died from harsh prison conditions which were so poor as to constitute cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Over 70 people were sentenced to death. More
than 85 prisoners were executed, most of whom had been denied any right of appeal.
At least 30 prisoners of conscience, including trade unionists and journalists, were detained by the security police for periods of up to several months. They were believed to have been held under the State Security (Detention of Persons) Decree, No. 2 of 1984. This empowers the Chief of General Staff, the Inspector-General of Police and the Minister of Internal Affairs to detain indefinitely and without charge any person considered a threat to the economy or security of the state. There is no legal recourse against such detention.
Eleven trade unionists were detained for several weeks or months without charge. Two members of the Civil Service Technical Workers Union - Zira Njidda and Anthony Ubale - and two members of the National Union of Nurses and Mid-wives - Alfa Imam and Yusuf Ladan- were held without charge for four months. They had been arrested in April in connection with demonstrations and strikes in protest against a petrol price increase. About 100 other trade unionists were also detained but were released after about two weeks.
Four leaders of the Academic Staff Union of Universities were arrested in July following a dispute over salaries and the banning of the union by the government. They were released without charge after a month. One of them, Dr Festus lyayi, was held for one night in extremely cramped police cells in Benin City where he was reportedly stripped, beaten by other inmates and made to sleep on a wet floor. There was no bedding and overflowing basins in one of the cells provided the only form of lavatory for some 50 prisoners.
Three leading officials of a bank employees' union - Paul Obanya, Kehinde Bello and Ralph Obiechie - were arrested in July after members went on strike to protest the closure of the union's office by the police. They were detained incommunicado and without charge until their release in December.
At least 10 journalists were briefly detained for questioning following publication of articles critical of the authorities. Etim Etim, a reporter with the Guardian newspaper in Lagos, was arrested in August by the security police and detained incommunicado and without charge for three months on suspicion of obtaining
AFRICA/NIGERIA
secret government documents.
In December 11 senior employees of the National Electric Power Authority (NEPA) were sentenced to life imprisonment after a trial held in camera before a special court. They were arrested in October following a strike which resulted in widespread power cuts,, and were held under the State Security Decree, both before and after being charged with conspiracy and with inducing employees to tamper with and disrupt power supplies. They were tried before a special court established in 1984, the Miscellaneous Offences Tribunal, which functions separately from the ordinary court system. It comprises a High Court judge sitting as chairman, three armed forces officers and one police officer. Some defence lawyers withdrew from the proceedings when, apparently for security reasons, the court decided that the evidence of security police should be heard in camera. After the sentencing the 11 submitted an appeal to the Special Appeals Tribunal but this had not been heard by the end of the year. Amnesty International began investigating whether they were prisoners of conscience, imprisoned because of their participation in a strike rather than on account of criminal damage.
In January restrictions were lifted on Alhaji Shehu Shagari and Alexander Ekwueme, who had been confined to their home villages since their release from detention in July 1986. They were President and Vice-President of the civilian government which was overthrown in 1983.
In December three detainees were released - Major-General Muhammadu Buhari, head of the military government in power from 1983 to 1985, Major-General Tunde Idiagbon, former Chief of Staff, Supreme Headquarters and Lawal Mohammed Rafindadi, former head of the national security services. They had been held without trial since the coup of August 1985 brought the present government to power.
Conditions in police cells and prisons, including grossly deficient sanitation and overcrowding, reportedly resulted in a large number of prisoners dying from disease and medical neglect. In September the Lagos High Court refused on technical grounds to hear an appeal by prisoners at Kirikiri Maximum Security Prison for an
increase in their daily food allowance. The application said 66 prisoners had died there between January and July, mostly from hunger and disease, 27 in the month of July alone. Eighty-nine prisoners were reported to have died at Ikoyi Prison in Lagos between January and October.
At least 70 death sentences were imposed, over 60 of them after convictions by Robbery and Firearms Tribunals. Operating outside the ordinary legal system, these special courts are presided over by a High Court judge who may sit alone or with a senior military and a senior police officer. These courts do not meet international standards for a fair trial since they do not allow a right of appeal to a higher court, requiring only that convictions and sentences be confirmed or disallowed by the relevant State Military Governor. All of the 85 known executions were believed to have resulted from convictions by Robbery and Firearms Tribunals and were therefore carried out by firing-squad, most of them in public. Amnesty International believed that the full figures for death sentences and executions were probably higher than those of which it was aware.
There were widespread protests against the sentencing to death of 12 young men in June by a Lagos State Robbery and Firearms Tribunal. One of the youths was subsequently revealed to have been aged 14 at the time of the offence. He alleged that he had been beaten in police custody. The two principal defendants also claimed that they had been beaten and forced under duress to name and implicate others in the offence. They were deported to the neighbouring People's Republic of Benin (where they were believed to have nationality) before the death sentences were passed. One defendant died in prison before the end of the trial, apparently because of poor prison conditions and inadequate medical treatment.
Although Lagos State's criminal procedure law does not allow the death sentence to be passed on any person below the age of 17 at the time of the offence, in this case attempts in the High Court to stop the executions on these grounds failed. This was because the 1984 decree establishing Robbery and Firearms Tribunals specifically precludes the High Court from ruling on any decisions made by such tribunals. It was reported that the Department of Justice in Lagos State believed that the police
AFRICA/NIGERIA/RWANDA
investigation and the trial were marked by procedural irregularities and that, if there had been a right of appeal, the convictions would have been overturned. No decision on the case had been announced by the end of the year but the Federal Minister of Justice stated in December that the executions would not be carried out.
The High Court - from which there is a right of appeal to the Appeal Court and then to the Supreme Court - imposed at least 11 death sentences. Executions are carried out by hanging inside prisons, but are not announced officially. It was not known, therefore, if any hangings took place during the year.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of individual prisoners of conscience and investigated the cases of possible prisoners of conscience. It also urged the government to ensure that detention conditions met international standards for the treatment of prisoners and called for the commutation of all known death sentences. In September an Amnesty International delegation visited Nigeria to compile information on use of the death penalty, among other human rights concerns.
