LEBANON
Government forces and armed militias carried out hundreds of arbitrary arrests of suspected political opponents, some of whom may have been prisoners of conscience. Many prisoners were detained incommunicado for long periods - some had been held for several years — without reference to any judicial procedure. Some of these forces also reportedly tortured and executed detainees, either following decisions of summary tribunals or after no judicial process of any kind.
Lack of central government control and inter-factional fighting between governmental and non-governmental forces posed considerable problems for the accurate assessment of information on human rights. However it was clear that all sides were responsible for some abuses.
Lebanon's governmental structure disintegrated further during the year. Deputies of the Lebanese Parliament twice failed to elect a president and at the end of the year the country had two rival prime ministers and two army commanders. Syrian Government forces extended their control of northern Lebanon, the Beka' Valley and West Beirut to include the southern suburbs of Beirut and the coastal road towards Sidon. Israeli Government forces deployed military and intelligence units in an area it called the "security zone" along the Lebanon/Israel border.
Amal, a mainly Shi'a organization, regained control over territory in southern Lebanon between Israel's "security zone" and Sidon following clashes with the pro-Iranian Hizbollah organization. The Lebanese Forces (LF), a mainly Christian militia, consolidated its hold over East Beirut and the coastal area to the north as far as Barbara, with the aid of five mainly Christian brigades of the Lebanese Army. The predominantly Druze Progressive Socialist Party (PSP) controlled the Shouf mountains to the south of Beirut. The
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA/ YEMEN (ARAB REPUBLIC)/ YEMEN (PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF)
South Lebanon Army (SLA), a mainly Christian militia, controlled an area 80km by 20km along the southern Lebanese border, in conjunction with Israeli Defence Force (IDF) units. Each of these nongovernmental entities possessed certain governmental attributes, such as control over territories and populations; as such they had the means and responsibilities to respect human rights. Other smaller nongovernmental groups, such as the Popular Nasserite Organisation, various Palestinian factions, Hizbollah and Islamic Jihad, were responsible for human rights abuses such as kidnapping, torture of detainees and summary execution, but their territorial control was not as extensive or effective as the principal militias'.
Amal, the LF, the PS? and the SLA all arrested prisoners arbitrarily, particularly during hostilities or periods of inter-factional tension when prisoners, both combatants and civilians, were taken as hostages who could later be used in prisoner exchanges. Others were arrested at checkpoints, during house-to-house searches, or by mobile patrols.
Amal arrested dozens of Palestinians during fighting in February and May around refugee camps in the southern suburbs of Beirut and near Tyre and Sidon. Amal also arrested hundreds of Hizbollah members or sympathizers during hostilities in southern Lebanon in April and in the southern suburbs of Beirut in May, August, October and November, often after house-to-house searches. Such arbitrary arrests were often carried out in retaliation for actions taken against Amal supporters by Palestinian groups or by Hizbollah. Others detained by Amal included members of rival political parties or militias, such as the Lebanese Communist Party, or the Arab Socialist Ba'th Party, and people suspected of being agents of Israel or the SLA. Detainees were held for periods ranging from a few days to much longer periods: some people detained by Amal have been held for several years - some among seven LF members released in May had been detained for five years. Those detained by Amal were held in south Beirut and in Tyre, Nabatiya and Zefta in southern Lebanon. Several hundred detainees were released by Amal during the year, sometimes in exchange for members of the Amal militia held by other groups.
In April, July and August the LF
arrested several people suspected of being followers of Elie Hobeika, the organization's former leader. They included George Yunis and Kamil Abu Malhab, who were apparently suspected of violent activities in support of Hobeika. Some prisoners were released after they agreed to enlist in the Lebanese Army. In August the LP arbitrarily detained several East Beirut deputies for a few hours to prevent them attending a session of Parliament called to elect a president. The LF also detained members of rival militias and people suspected of gun-running for other militias, and participated in several releases and prisoner exchanges. Detainees were held without judicial process, often for months at a time in detention centres at Majlis Harbi in Qarantina, at Ibail and at Adonis barracks near lounieh. Some detainees were said to have been held for several years. It was not possible to estimate the number of those held.
The PSP detained members of other groups to hold them as hostages. Its prisoners included members of Amal and the Lebanese Army, and some of the PSP's own members, who were apparently held for disciplinary reasons. There were believed to be few long-term prisoners at the militias' main detention centre at Beit Eddine.
The SLA carried out arrests, sometimes in conjunction with Israeli Government forces. Most of those held were Lebanese Shi'a suspected of involvement in attacks against the SLA and against Israeli troops inside Israel's self-declared "security zone". Among those reportedly detained were eight schoolgirls. Between 250 and 300 detainees were reported to be held in the SLA's main detention centre at Khiam. Figures for those held in the SLA's other detention centres, such as Bint Jbeil, were not known. Most detainees were held without charge or trial for periods ranging from a few months to two or three years.
There were frequent allegations of torture from detainees held by government forces and militias. It was not possible, however, to verify such allegations and to collect detailed testimonies from former detainees. In May five members of Hizbollah who had been detained by Amal alleged they had been tortured in detention and that their arms and legs had been broken. In August another detainee held by Amal was said to have been tortured in a
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA/ YEMEN (ARAB REPUBLIC)/ YEMEN (PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF)
detention centre near Jabel Amel hospital in A1 Bass camp near Tyre, thrown from a window and partially paralysed as a result. First-hand testimonies describing torture which had taken place in previous years were also received from former detainees of Amal. A Palestinian held for two months in early 1987 in an Amal detention centre in Toura, south Lebanon, said that during interrogation he was beaten with sticks on his feet (faJaqa), beaten while tied to a car tyre (dulJab), hit repeatedly on the ears, and suspended from the ceiling over a rod with weights on his hips and wrists (balanco). He alleged that most of some 70 other Palestinians held with him were similarly tortured.
Reports were received of the torture in previous years by the LF of two suspected supporters of Elie Hobeika. One was arrested in mid-1986 and held for five months in Jbail. The other was detained from 19 January to 12 February 1986 in Qarantina, where he was interrogated and beaten about the head with gunbutts. He was arrested a second time after a house-to-house search in September 1986 and taken to Adonis barracks near Jounieh, where he was detained for 15 days. During interrogation about his brother, who was suspected of having joined Elie Hobeika's forces in Zahle, he was beaten with fists and gunbutts all over his body, including his head and eyes.
There were also reports of torture by the SLA. Detainees released from the SLA detention centre in Khiam alleged that they had been ill-treated and tortured with methods including electric shocks. Some said they had been placed in solitary confinement for up to a week in cells measuring three feet square and three feet, six inches high and kept in total darkness. Detainees alleged that Israeli personnel were often present during interrogation.
Both Amal and the LF were reported to have executed prisoners. In January Amal executed Haatem Kan'aan in Haret Hreik, Beirut, after accusing him of murder. In August an Amal militiaman was sentenced to death by an Amal field court for the murder of a Hizbollah member. It was not known whether the sentence was carried out. Amal was reported to have summarily executed a Palestinian from Qassmieh camp in September, and a Hizbollah 'aJim (learned person) Sheikh 'Ali Karim, at an Amal checkpoint at Bir
Salasel in August. The LF executed Ghas-san Lahoud and Samir Zaynoun for high treason by firing-squad at Dbaye in January. The two had been sentenced by a court martial at which they were apparently denied defence lawyers.
Amnesty International wrote to the leaders of Amal and the LF to express regret at the executions and to ask them to intervene to prevent further such abuses. At the end of the year the organization received a communication from the LF stating the militia's intention to remain in regular contact with Amnesty International and offering to hold talks in Beirut.
