JAMAICA
More than 190 prisoners were under sentence of death for murder. Two prisoners were hanged, bringing to 59 the number of hangings since these were resumed in 1980 after a four-year moratorium. A number of prisoners, both on death row and in the general prison population,
THE AMERICAS/NICARAGUA
alleged they had been ill-treated by prison guards and members of the Jamaica Defence Force.
Nathan Foster and Stanford Dinnal were executed in February. Their appeals to the Jamaica Court of Appeals against convictions for murders committed in 1980 and 1981 respectively had been dismissed in 1981 and 1982. Subsequently neither prisoner had legal representation and neither had been able to lodge appeals with the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council QCPC) in London, which acts as a final court of appeal for Jamaica. Lawyers in London appealed unsuccessfully to the Governor General for stays of execution to allow them time to consider the merits of such an appeal. As the result of a struggle with warders Nathan Foster sustained a broken arm; at the time of the execution it was in plaster and strapped behind his back.
In February warrants were issued for the execution of Earl Pratt and Ivan Morgan, although their case was pending before the Human Rights Committee established under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). They had submitted a complaint to the committee on the grounds, among other things, that their right under Article 14 of the ICCPR to have their case heard within a reasonable time had been infringed by the failure of the Jamaica Court of Appeal to issue a written judgment in their case for almost four years and that there had been other delays. They were granted last-minute stays of execution following an intervention by the Human Rights Committee and other organizations, and at the end of 1988 their complaint was under consideration by the Committee.
A stay of execution was also granted in the case of Trevor Ellis, convicted of murder and sentenced to death in 1980, who was due to be executed in March. His conviction rested on the evidence of a single witness who had picked him out at an identification parade six weeks after the crime. In 1985 the ICPC had rejected a petition submitted on his behalf in which it was argued that the identification evidence was weak, but the stay was granted after lawyers pointed out that the JCPC had agreed in 1987 to review three other cases in which conviction was based on disputed identification evidence and thus had accepted that an important point of law was involved. During 1988 the JCPC agreed to hear the cases of three other
prisoners under sentence of death who had been convicted partly on the basis of disputed evidence. The six cases were to be consolidated and heard in 1989.
Stays of execution were also granted to Rudolph Walker, Ezekiel Pryce and Lenford Hamilton, who were due to be executed in November. None of them had appealed to the JCPC at the time the death warrants were issued and they had not therefore exhausted all legal avenues of appeal.
In September the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (lACHR) issued a resolution on a complaint submitted in 1987 by Clifton Wright, who had been under sentence of death since 1983. He alleged that he had not received a fair trial before a competent and impartial tribunal and that the government had thereby violated his rights. In particular he argued that both the trial judge and his defence lawyer, who was instructed only on the first day of the trial, had overlooked important evidence given by a pathologist at his trial and that it had not been presented as possible grounds for appeal to the Jamaica Court of Appeal. The lACHR decided that his rights had been infringed and recommended that the government investigate the case and "afford Mr Wright a judicial remedy". In November, however, in a response circulated to the General Assembly of the Organization of American States, the government contested the commission's findings both on procedural grounds and on the substance of the complaint.
In response to an inquiry about alleged ill-treatment in 1986 of Victor Francis, a death row prisoner, the Ministry of Justice informed Amnesty International in March that the authorities did not condone ill-treatment of prisoners and made all possible efforts to prevent its occurrence (see Amnesty international Report 1988). In this case the authorities acknowledged that the prisoner had been struck with a baton by a prison warder, although the result was said to have been only a superficial injury.
Several prisoners, including some on death row, were reportedly injured by prison guards and Jamaica Defence Force personnel assisting them. One incident occurred when several prisoners were allegedly assaulted during a search of cells by prison guards and Defence Force personnel and then denied medical attention. Another incident reportedly occurred at the Gun Court Rehabilitation Centre, where four prisoners
THE AMERICAS / JAMAICA/ MEXICO
were said to have been beaten in July by guards who accused them of attempting to escape, with the result that one prisoner died and three others required hospital treatment for broken limbs.
In February Amnesty International appealed to the government to commute death sentences passed on Nathan Foster and Stanford Dinnal. Amnesty International was concerned about the two executions in February. In March it urged the Governor General, Sir Florizel Glasspole, to grant clemency or at least a stay of execution to Trevor Ellis, since the judicial process had not served to remove what it believed were severe doubts about the fairness of his conviction.
In November Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Justice to appeal for a stay of execution on behalf of Rudolph Walker, Ezekiel Fryce and Lenford Hamilton, expressing deep concern that warrants had been issued before the prisoners had exhausted all avenues of appeal and pointing out that lack of legal representation since appeal to the Jamaica Court of Appeals could have seriously undermined their ability to pursue further appeals. Amnesty International also said that since steps were being taken to lodge further appeals it believed it would be contrary to justice and international standards for the executions to take place. Amnesty International expressed concern that to proceed with execution in these circumstances could cause a miscarriage of justice which, in a capital case, would be tragically irremediable.
