ZIMBABWE
Many political detainees, some of whom appeared to be prisoners of conscience, were released early in 1988. Some political prisoners facing criminal charges alleged that they had been tortured and three South African security agents convicted of murder were sentenced to death. Five prisoners were executed. A number of security personnel convicted of human rights offences were released under an amnesty.
At the end of 1987 the two main political parties - the ruling Zimbabwe African National Union-Patriotic Front (2ANU-PF) and the minority Zimbabwe African People's Union (ZAPU) - agreed to form a
AFRICA/ZIMBABWE
single party. In January 1988 President Robert Mugabe formed a new cabinet, which included a number of senior ZAPU officials. In April, to mark the unity agreement, the President announced an amnesty for armed government opponents -known as "dissidents" - and for some prisoners convicted of offences related to armed opposition. More than 100 "dissidents" surrendered under the terms of the amnesty, with the result that security in the rural areas of Matabeleland, in southwestern Zimbabwe, improved markedly.
In January two long-term uncharged detainees who appeared to be prisoners of conscience were released. Neil Harper and John Austin, both senior customs officials, were arrested in early 1986 as alleged South African spies; the real reason for their detention appears to have been that their professional activities had displeased a senior political figure. In 1986 the High Court dismissed initial charges against them under the Official Secrets Act but they were then issued with indefinite detention orders under the nationwide state of emergency which has been in force since 1965. They remained in detention despite a judicial ruling that the reasons given for their detention orders were inadequate. The government-appointed Review Tribunal, which considers all administrative detainees' cases, also recommended their release but was overruled by the government. Their eventual unconditional release appeared to be tacit acknowledgment that there had been no substance in the allegations against the two.
To coincide with the government's amnesty in April at least 12 long-term
political detainees were released. They included a possible prisoner of conscience - Makhatini Guduza, a senior ZAPU official who in February 1986 had been forcibly returned from Botswana, where he had been officially recognized as a refugee. Four other possible prisoners of conscience held in administrative detention until April - Albert Nkomo, Judia Ncube, Debby Nyathi and Thembani Masonda -were then charged with receiving war materials from South Africa. They were subsequently acquitted and released.
Later in the year at least seven people were served with detention orders under the state of emergency regulations after criminal charges against them had been dropped. A senior civil servant. Jack Lewis-Walker, and five other people alleged to have spied for South Africa, had charges against them withdrawn in August but were promptly redetained. Jack Lewis-Walker had been served with a detention order on his arrest in September 1987 but the Review Tribunal considering his case in early 1988 had recommended his release. The recommendation was overruled by the government.
After his redetention the Review Tribunal considered his case a second time and again recommended his release, only to be overruled once more. At least one of those detained with Jack Lewis-Walker, Ivor Harding, was alleged to have been tortured by officials of the Central Intelligence Organization (CIO). He was said to have had his head forced into a bath of water, causing partial suffocation.
Leslie Lesia, a South African trader, was arrested in April or May 1987 by the Mozambican authorities in Maputo. He was handed over to the Zimbabwean CIO, apparently without being extradited, and later charged in connection with a bomb explosion in Harare in May 1987 which killed a woman. He was reported to have been so severely beaten by CIO interrogators at Goromonzi detention centre near Harare that both his legs were broken. In October 1988 charges against him were dropped and he too was served with an indefinite detention order under state of emergency regulations. At the end of 1988 he was still being held.
There were no reports of torture by the police in 1988 but as in previous years political prisoners in ClO custody were in serious danger of ill-treatment. At her trial
AFRICA/ZIMBABWE
in 1987, Odile Harington, a South African found guilty of spying, alleged that while in CIO custody she had been beaten on the soles of her feet, had her head forced into a bucket of water and had been sexually assaulted. In November 1988 the Supreme Court halved her 25-year sentence on appeal, citing her uncontested allegations of torture as a factor in its decision. However, there was no judicial or government inquiry into Odile Harington's treatment or into other persistent allegations of torture by the CIO.
Another prisoner who consistently alleged torture by the CIO, including beatings and partial suffocation, was Philip Conjwayo, who was charged with murder following a bombing in Bulawayo in 1987. He and his co-accused, Kevin Woods and Michael Smith, admitted to working for the South African security forces and were convicted and sentenced to death in November. Amnesty International was concerned not only about the allegations of torture and the death sentences but also about the reported short-term detention of the wives and children of Kevin Woods and Michael Smith, apparently intended to coerce the two men into making self-incriminating statements.
In June the High Court heard an application by relatives of nine ZAPU supporters who had "disappeared" after they were reportedly taken from their homes in Midlands province by members of the security forces in early 1985. The judge ordered the police to investigate the men's fate and report back to the court by 30 September; the police failed to do so. During the year the government failed to respond to requests for information about Fraser Sibanda, Edward Moyo and Shad-reck Denga Moyo, who had "disappeared" in police custody in 1985 (see Amnesty international Report 1988).
In June President Mugabe declared an amnesty for 75 members of the CIO, army, police and ZANU-PF imprisoned for human rights offences. The authorities presented this as complementing the amnesty for "dissidents" and political detainees. Among those released was a CIO officer, Robert Masikini, who had been sentenced to death a week earlier for murdering a prisoner in his custody. He was one of at least four prisoners under sentence of death who were amnestied. Amnesty International welcomed the lifting of the
death sentence but was concerned about the implications of this widespread amnesty for human rights violators.
At least seven prisoners were sentenced to death in 1988; five prisoners were hanged in August. However, in October the Minister of Justice informed Amnesty International representatives in Harare that the government intended to review the use of the death penalty in order to reduce the scope of its application.
Amnesty International welcomed the release of political detainees in early 1988 but continued to call for all such detainees to be tried fairly and promptly on recognizably criminal charges, or released. Amnesty International also called for impartial investigation of reports of torture of prisoners by the CIO and into the 1985 "disappearance" cases and urged the government to abolish the death penalty.
fi.--"
MOV
m:

ii



fpirÌ?"'
t«s
1 tttiì^gumf
itekat et wot^r ^ Iwtfi	to
k0*ttáte«Í. {fi NovvCÓttN-;	d Ut A
Otff	hit^Mf^M'r--
i|Mir. -cttkti; ^tertttñ* «« A Ak
m iikf
■ Aili^ ■•ptrnmm'-'^ ìSt^^mv^' by iitf^
ttÊtmi Swiib.	for


■hn i # ^^ m^M'^ÉiH
WWMBIÄIII*«»
fil
-(Mot'

■ f'5

• ^ífví^^^-^íHv^.-.^ ............^
"'lili.


toejwiber. AmftNitv
MM» wmi -tbvr ^Mäi^	but
Ml-tktiw^t«« é^'ïcnn d^ânUtft^ k*	-«^^«.c-rte UNIÄ'
nurklaifili^'
Itf l^ii t (W i ^MMCN^VN	'W'í
Wìiùm	'fise^t hmíÁ 4
Vy Tiimt»^^ »in« TjAft MMM «Hiotf
MMsítsiei^	im
^l/çi^	v.m Tb» toá^n
'tís^ aetart IsjrM
lím
....... —. „,,
ItiS 'Ú*'
.iihinauim'. I
o dwfh ft «mi ^jpti» «ttdffiiM'«	Âî
prÜHlm« in bU	^	1 ^
';aa«t four ptíMmt^'i ^'^tm



.Î7V
[ ' ''' '	'.ly*'^."^" .'"y
\ ' ---t.

i«ttb who «mr«
