INDIA
Several thousand critics and opponents of the government, including many prisoners of conscience, were held without charge or trial in preventive detention or under laws directed against "terrorist" activity. There were widespread reports of torture and allegations that some prisoners had died in custody as a result of torture. Dozens of people were sentenced to death and at least four executions were carried out, in one case despite widespread doubts about the guilt of the convicted man. There were reports of extrajudicial killings by police, especially in areas where opposition groups resorted to violent action.
Political violence increased in Punjab which, since May 1987, has been under direct rule from the capital, New Delhi, the period of direct rule having been extended under the specially enacted 59th Amendment to the Constitution. More than 2,000 people were reportedly killed in 1988 by armed Sikh groups active in Punjab and neighbouring Haryana, among them leading politicians, officials and unarmed Hindu and Sikh civilians. Political violence decreased, however, in West Bengal, after the Gorkha National Liberation Front (gnlf) reached an accord in August which provided for a largely autonomous Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council.
There was continued violent opposition in other areas, notably in Andhra Pradesh where several dozen people were reportedly killed by Naxalites - Maoist revolutionary groups - and in Bihar, Jammu and Kashmir.
In March Parliament passed the 59th Amendment to the Constitution: it provided for a state of emergency to be proclaimed in Punjab on the broadly defined
ASIA AND THE PACIFIC/INDIA
grounds of "internal disturbance" if "the integrity of India" was threatened. Under the amendment the right to life, as guaranteed in the Constitution, could be suspended and security forces empowered to shoot people at will. No emergency had been proclaimed by the end of the year and existing special laws continued to be used to detain political opponents.
Despite assurances in August by Home Minister Buta Singh to the Lok Sabha (lower house of Parliament) that the government would use the National Security Act (NSA) in Punjab "as sparingly as possible" and would ensure there would be no "political victimization", its provisions continued to be widely used to detain political opponents, journalists and trade unionists. In Punjab, the NSA permitted up to two years' detention without charge or trial and in the rest of India up to one year. Detention orders were reviewed by an Advisory Board whose decisions were binding on the detaining authority - such reviews starting after six months in the case of Punjab and after three months in the rest of India.
Those detained in Punjab under the NSA for "activities prejudicial to the security of the country", included several hundred supporters of the Unified Akaii Dal (UAD), who were arrested in May after they had protested peacefully against the army entering the Golden Temple in Amritsar to dislodge armed Sikhs. Most were released within a few months but several Sikh leaders were still in detention at the end of the year. Kuldip Singh Arora, the Amritsar correspondent of the United News o/India press agency, was detained in April accused of meeting Sikh militants inside the Golden Temple. He was released uncharged in June but other journalists were subsequently detained under the NSA, including Mohinder Singh of the daily Akaii Patrika, who was arrested in July and remained in detention at the end of the year.
In November the Director-General of Police in Punjab said that 3,082 "suspected terrorists" had been arrested in the state during 1988. Of this total 2,257 were still being held without trial on 24 October, he said, and only one had been tried and convicted. In March and September the authorities released without explanation 40 and 138 respectively of the 365 Sikh detainees who had been held without
trial for over four years on charges of "waging war". The others remained in Jodhpur Jail, Rajasthan, and by the end of 1988 had still not been brought to trial. Many were believed to be prisoners of conscience arrested in June 1984 when security forces stormed the Golden Temple, although they had taken no part in the actions of armed Sikh militants who had earlier retreated to the Temple.
The NSA was also used in areas such as the state of Tripura where six leaders of the Left Front opposition party were detained for two weeks in October.
The Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act (TADA), which permits up to a year's detention without charge on broadly defined grounds, was also widely used in different states to detain political activists. Under the Act it is extremely difficult to obtain bail: the detainee must satisfy a magistrate that he or she is innocent. The TADA also provides for trials in camera. Contrary to the Indian Evidence Act. in which statements to the police are excluded, apparently on grounds of unreliability, the TADA permits statements made to senior police officers to be used in evidence. Appeals can only be made within 30 days of the date of judgment, and only to the Supreme Court - a course of action few detainees can afford.
Those detained under the TADA included people involved in civil liberties work and other peaceful activities. In May two leading members of the All Naga Students Union were detained in Manipur state while trying to ensure that cases of alleged torture and extrajudicial killings of villagers by soldiers of the Assam Rifles in July and August 1987 (see Amnesty internationai Report 1988) were thoroughly investigated. In neighbouring Assam, many members of the All Bodo Students Union, which was campaigning for a separate tribal homeland through what it claimed were non-violent methods, were also detained without trial. A number were still in prison at the end of the year. There were also detentions in Gujarat, where the TADA had previously been widely used to detain non-violent activists, including trade union members. In February Chief Minister Amarsinh Chaudhury stated that 1,382 people who had been arrested under the act in earlier years had been released, some on court orders and others because the government
ASIA AND THE PACIFIC/INDIA
had dropped charges against them. Those detained in 1988 included members of the state's Muslim minority who were arrested 10 days before local by-elections on charges of involvement in communal riots which had taken place a year earlier. In Jammu and Kashmir the Public Safety Act and the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act were used to detain opponents of the state government. In March the lammu and Kashmir High Court ordered the release of 35 members of the Muslim United Front, declaring their detention illegal.
Those arrested under the TADA often complained that they were refused access to lawyers for several days after arrest and that, despite a legal requirement that those arrested be brought before a magistrate within 24 hours of arrest, police refused to do so until several days or weeks had passed. Professor Jagmohan Singh, a lecturer in economics at Jai Hind College, Bombay, who said he was arrested on 12 October, was denied access to a lawyer for five days and only brought before a magistrate on 1 November. Like many others held without access to their families or to a lawyer. Professor Jagmohan Singh claims that he was ill-treated during the initial interrogation period in order to extract a "confession".
There were widespread reports of torture, despite Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi's statement in a British Broadcasting Corporation interview in January that "we don't torture anybody". In a few cases the courts granted compensation to torture victims. Frequent allegations of torture were received from areas of armed conflict such as Punjab, parts of Andhra Pradesh and northeastern India, and from rural areas in which members of tribal communities and the scheduled castes appeared particularly prone to police brutality and torture, including rape. In May the Supreme Court ordered an investigation into the case of Balkar Singh, a Sikh, He was detained in November 1987 by Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) personnel, who held him in unacknowledged detention at Mai Mandi CRPF headquarters in Amritsar for five days. They then brought him before a magistrate and claimed he had been arrested the previous day. Balkar Singh says he was stripped, hung from his wrists which were tied behind his back, then hung upside down
and given electric shocks. A Canadian doctor who visited him in jail but was not allowed to examine him stated that he appeared to "have been seriously physically mistreated". In October, before the Supreme Court could announce its findings on the torture allegations, Balkar Singh was released uncharged and without explanation.
Allegations that the police had beaten and raped villagers, particularly members of the scheduled castes and tribes in Bihar, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Haryana, Tamil Nadu, Orissa and Assam were common. Often police refused to register complaints and, in the case of rape, to allow medical examination of the victims. For example, six tribal women of Ghatiyari village, Bihar, reported that police refused to register complaints that they had been raped by police from Sundar Pahari Police Station in April and that they had not been medically examined. Elsewhere, witnesses to human rights violations were reportedly tortured, apparently as a means of intimidating them or to retaliate against them - as happened in Manipur state, where soldiers of the Assam Rifles allegedly tortured villagers who had testified or were due to testify against them.
In November the Minister of State for Home Affairs reportedly announced that four people had died in police custody since the start ofthe year and that two such deaths had occurred in 1987. However, press reports suggested that there were at least 57 such deaths in 1988 and 48 in 1987, many of them allegedly due to torture by police. Cases were reported from nearly all Indian states. Investigations into such deaths were not always carried out and were often only instituted after public pressure. Although in some cases police officials were suspended and/or transferred, it was extremely rare for those responsible to be arrested, tried and sentenced to imprisonment, as happened in one case involving police from the Purivhat Police Station in Cuttack, Orissa. However, in an important judgment in December, the Madras High Court ordered the Tamil Nadu Government to pay compensation to a woman whose husband had "disappeared" after arrest by Wallajabad police in February 1985. The Court ruled that police officials were the instruments of the state and had acted under its powers, and that the state was therefore fully re-
ASIA AND THE PACIFIC/INDIA
sponsible for their actions.
Staged killings - also known as "encounter" killings - of alleged or real political activists by the police continued to be reported from areas including Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Manipur, and tribal areas of Madhya Pradesh. Most reports of such killings, however, came from Punjab, where because of witnesses' fear of reprisals violent actions by Sikh militants rarely resulted in prosecutions. Dozens of people were killed in Punjab in what were officially described as violent "encounters" with the police. In a number of cases those killed were reported to have been executed extrajudicially after their arrest, unacknowledged detention and interrogation. The police said some had been shot "while trying to escape".
Staged or "encounter" killings also occurred in Andhra Pradesh, where the victims were mostly suspected supporters ofNaxalite groups. Armed Naxalites were involved in clashes with the police but in a number of cases it appeared that individuals said by the authorities to have died in "encounters" had been arrested, tortured and killed in police custody, the police having cremated or dumped the often mutilated bodies.
Dozens of death sentences were imposed and there were at least four executions. At the end of the year those under sentence of death included Satwant Singh and Kehar Singh, two Sikhs convicted in connection with the assassination of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi in 1984. There were widespread doubts about the guilt of Kehar Singh, who was convicted on a charge of conspiracy to murder. In May it became a capital offence to cause death through the use of illegal arms or ammunition, and in December, for second convictions of drug-trafficking. In October the Supreme Court overruled a 1983 judgment which had held that a two-year delay in carrying out executions would automatically result in commutation. The Court ruled that "no fixed period of delay could be held to make the sentence of death inexecutable".
Amnesty International worked for the release of several hundred prisoners of conscience, among them those held in Jodhpur Jail, Rajasthan. It published its concerns about arbitrary arrests, curbs on legal safeguards, the torture of detainees, and extrajudicial killings in reports pub-
lished in August - India: a review of human rights violations - and in November - India: reports of human rights violations in Bihar. It appealed for clemency for several prisoners sentenced to death. Amnesty International's requests to visit India to discuss human rights concerns continued to be refused, and the organization received no response to any of the questions raised in its report concerning abuses in India as a whole.
The organization also requested permission to visit Bihar to discuss recommendations submitted in the November report and to attend court proceedings in Manipur concerning alleged abuses by the Assam Rifles. However the government failed to grant Amnesty International such permission, even though the state government of Manipur had said that the organization could attend court proceedings.
The government's only response to the August report - which included six detailed reports of torture, death in custody and "disappearance" by the Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF) of Tamils in northern Sri Lanka - was that it would investigate the charge that members of the IPKF had been responsible for rape and brutality, that it had found many charges to be baseless, and that it would publish the findings of its investigations "in due course". No specific findings had been published by the end of the year.
Amnesty International informed the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Torture and the Special Rapporteur on Summary and Arbitrary Executions of its concerns regarding India, including alleged abuses by the IPKF in Sri Lanka. These reports were also submitted to the government but no reply was received. The Indian Government did inform the UN that 13 bodies had been identified among 32 people reported missing from Meerut in May 1987 whose cases had earlier been submitted to the United Nations Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances (see Amnesty International Report 1988). The government failed, however, to specify whether they had been shot in secret by members of the Provincial Armed Constabulary, as eye-witnesses said was the case. In August Amnesty International made an oral statement to the UN Working Group on Indigenous Populations about torture, including rape, of members of tribal communities and sched-
ASIAANDTHEPACIFIC/INDIA/INDONESIA-EASTTIMOR
uled castes, by police, and about the difficulties faced by victims in obtaining justice, despite the protection afforded to them by international safeguards and by the Indian Constitution.
