TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
At least 21 people were sentenced to death, all of whom had been convicted of murder. At the end of the year there were about 54 people under sentence of death. One prisoner was scheduled for execution in June but was granted a last-minute stay of execution. There have been no executions for nine years. Another prisoner, who had been under sentence of death for over 10 years, was released on humanitarian grounds. In April the Senate approved a motion calling for the urgent appointment of a commission of inquiry into the death penalty but this had not been established by the end of 1988.
The motion in favour of a commission of inquiry into the death penalty was introduced by Ramesh Deosaran, an independent senator. It was approved by the Senate on 12 April by a majority of 22 to three. The Minister of Justice is reported to have said subsequently that the government would want the commission to report on the status and effectiveness of the death penalty, as proposed by Senator Deosaran. However, despite the minister's positive response and a call in the original
motion both for the commission to be appointed as a matter of urgency and for it to report back as quickly as possible, the commission had not been appointed by the end of the year.
Boodram Bedassie, who had been under sentence of death for over 12 years, was granted a stay of execution on 8 lune on grounds not known to Amnesty International. The prescribed execution procedure requires a condemned prisoner to be advised on a Thursday of execution to be carried out the following Tuesday. Boodram Bedassie, however, was told on Tuesday 7 June that he would be executed on 9 June. When two death sentences were annulled in 1987, departure from this procedure was among the court's criticisms of the case. Boodram Bedassie's lawyer filed a motion which argued that his constitutional rights had been violated by the issuing of the death warrant and his prolonged incarceration on death row. The motion was due to be heard in November by the High Court but the hearing was postponed until April 1989.
Lalchan Nanan, who had been under sentence of death since July 1977, was released from prison in October on humanitarian grounds in accordance with a recommendation made to the President by the Advisory Committee on the Power of Pardon. He had been under sentence of death since 1977 and during that time his health had deteriorated significantly. A further matter of concern was that his sentence had been imposed by a majority decision ofthe jury instead of a unanimous decision, as required by law (see Amnesty International Report 1987 and 1988). Amnesty International had appealed on several occasions for clemency to be granted to Lalchan Nanan.
Amnesty International appealed to President Noor Hassanali on behalf of Boodram Bedassie. The organization expressed regret at the decision to execute shortly after the Senate had decided to institute a commission of inquiry into capital punishment. It urged the President to commute the sentence or stay the execution pending the commission's report. Later, Amnesty International welcomed the stay of execution and the decision to establish the commission.
In September Amnesty International expressed concern to the government after learning that a prisoner who had been
THE AMERICAS /TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO / UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
sentenced in 1984 to 10 years' imprisonment for a criminal offence had also been sentenced to a flogging, which was still pending. Amnesty International asked the government to ensure that the punishment was not carried out and urged it to abolish flogging on the grounds that it constitutes cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.
