LIBERIA
At least 16 prisoners of conscience were detained without trial. An opposition party leader and a former Supreme Court judge were among 10 people convicted of treason after an unfair trial. A former deputy head of state and others were killed in unexplained circumstances fol-lowing an alleged invasion. Prisoners were reported to have been killed and others to have died in prisons where they were severely ill-treated. At least 10 people were sentenced to death but no executions were known to have been carried out.
At least 16 people were imprisoned solely on account of their non-violent opposition to the government. Although Liberian law stipulates that a suspect must be charged or released within 48 hours of arrest, most were detained for several days and one for nearly a year without being tried or brought before a court. Others were held in apparently unlawful detention for weeks or months before they were charged.
Nathaniel Nimley Choloply was arrested on his return to Liberia from the United Slates in December 1987 and was detained, incommunicado and uncharged, until November 1988. He was apparently suspected of involvement with government opponents in exile. The authorities ignored a habeas corpus writ served by the Circuit Court in February directing that he should appear in court. He was held for five months at the Post Stockade, a military detention centre in the capital, Monrovia, and in June transferred to the remote prison camp at Belle Yellah, some 140 kilometres from Monrovia, where on arrival he was reportedly stripped and beaten. A further habeas corpus writ was ignored in September. He was released in November.
In April the Sun Times and Footprints Today newspapers were banned and six of their journalists detained without charge for about a week following the publication of articles the authorities considered critical of the government.
In September nine students were detained illegally for nearly two weeks. They were among 21 students arrested ata meeting with church leaders to discuss the unrest which followed a government ban on student political activities. The others were held briefly and released.
About 20 people were arrested in March and accused of involvement in a conspiracy to overthrow the government. Although some were eventually released uncharged, 10 were brought to trial in August after being held incommunicado for five months. They included Gabriel William Kpoleh, leader of the opposition Liberia Unification Party and a former prisoner of conscience; Ceapar Mabande, a university professor and former Supreme Court judge; and members of the armed forces. They were convicted of treason and sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment in October. At the end of the year their appeals to the Supreme Court had not been heard.
Shortly after his arrest in March, one of the suspects, Joe Robert Kaipaye, died from injuries sustained after falling from a window of the Executive Mansion, the official residence of President Samuel Doe, during interrogation by the President. According to an official statement, he committed suicide. No inquest was held into his death.
AFRICA/LIBERIA
When the 10 alleged conspirators came to trial before the Criminal Court in August the military authorities continued to deny them access to legal counsel. This was in defiance of a court ruling and the defendants' lawyers withdrew from the trial in protest.
It appeared that those convicted were prisoners of conscience. The prosecution alleged that they had plotted to overthrow the government and to assassinate the President. However, defendants said during the trial that the authorities had used improper pressure to induce many of those arrested to give evidence for the prosecution and Gabriel Kpoleh claimed that he had been prosecuted to prevent him standing in forthcoming presidential elections. State witnesses were illegally held incommunicado until the trial. Defendants claimed that they had been held in very poor conditions at the Post Stockade; one said he had been denied food and water for several days while another said that he had refused money offered by the Minister of Justice if he would testify falsely. A witness called by the prosecution said he had been assaulted for refusing to give evidence. After the trial defence lawyers alleged that the principal prosecution witness and members of the jury had been bribed.
A former senior member of the military government, Major-General Nicholas Podier, and some five others were killed by the security forces in July in circumstances which had not been explained by the end of the year. According to official statements. they were killed in fighting when government forces clashed with an armed band of 11 men said to be invading Liberia. However, other sources reported that they were arrested after crossing the border from neighbouring Côte d'Ivoire and were taken to Scheiffelin military base near Monrovia where Major-General Podier, Captain Humphrey Moore, John Seekey and others were killed by the security forces. The others arrested in the same incident, believed to number five, were apparently subjected to beatings, both on the journey to Scheiffelin and after their detention at the Post Stockade, in September three of them, including two United States nationals, were charged with treason but in November, after apologizing to President Doe, they were released. About five others detained in connection
with the alleged invasion, including three members of the former military government apparently arrested in Monrovia, were released uncharged at the same time. No inquest or any other form of official investigation was carried out into the circumstances in which Major-General Podier and others were killed by the security forces.
In July, after a minor incident between nationals of neighbouring Sierra Leone and military personnel in which a Liberian soldier died, hundreds of Sierra Leoneans - both men and women - were detained and their homes and businesses looted by members of the armed forces. Over 100 were held for several days in underground cells at the Executive Mansion, where they were reportedly severely beaten and one of their number shot dead. They were then released uncharged.
Reports were received of deaths, ill-treatment and very harsh conditions at Belle Yellah prison camp during both 1987 and 1988. Four prisoners were alleged to have died between lune and October 1987 of starvation. Thomas Jackson, held without charge since 1984, apparently on suspicion of having committed a criminal offence, was reportedly shot dead in July 1988 while attempting to escape. The camp was said to hold over 70 prisoners, most of them untried criminal suspects detained since 1984, two of whom were under 15 years old at the time of their arrest. Half the prisoners were said to be permanently chained by the neck in pairs and others had heavy logs chained to their ankles. They were reportedly forced to do hard labour in order to obtain meagre amounts of food and severely beaten if they complained of illness.
Further reports were received during the year of poor conditions at the Post Stockade, where civilian detainees were held illegally for several months. Food and water was allegedly withheld from some detainees for several days. They had to sleep on the ground without bedding and the floors of cells were said to be covered in excrement. No government action to investigate the cause of prisoners' deaths or to improve conditions at either Belle Yellah camp or the Post Stockade was reported.
In two trials in May and July 10 people were sentenced to death following their conviction on charges of ritual murder -
AFRICA / LIBERIA / MADAGASCAR
premeditated murder committed in the context of magical or religious beliefs. It was not known whether appeals to the Supreme Court had been heard by the end of the year or whether executions had been carried out.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience, investigated the cases of prisoners held on suspicion of threatening the security of the state and urged an improvement in prison conditions. The organization appealed to the President to commute all death sentences of which it was informed.
