COMOROS
One prisoner of conscience was released before completing his sentence. Another, a leading opponent of the government sentenced to life imprisonment after an unfair trial in 1985, remained in prison.
Sixteen political prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment after an unfair trial in 1983 also remained in prison throughout the year. More than 40 people arrested in 1987 in connection with an alleged coup attempt were still in custody and had not been brought to trial by the end of 1988. Four politically motivated arrests were reported during the year; all four detainees were released after about two months.
Two prisoners of conscience sentenced in November 1985 for participation in a coup attempt were still in prison at the beginning of 1988. Moustoifa Said Cheikh, Secretary General of the Front démocratique des Comores (FDC), Democratic Front of the Comoros, were serving a life sentence at M'dé military camp. Abdou Mhoumadi, serving an eight-year sentence at Voidjou military camp (see Amnesty International Report 1988), was freed in March by order of President Ahmed Abdallah. Sixteen former members of the Presidential Guard, convicted at the same trial of involvement in the coup attempt and sentenced in November 1985 to life imprisonment, were held in Itsund-zu Prison throughout 1988. They had not received a fair trial.
Two former government ministers, Mohibaca Baco and Salim Djabir, and two history teachers. Said Dhoifir and Said Nassur, were arrested in March. All were residents of Mohéli. They were reportedly detained in connection with a leaflet criticizing the government for its social and economic marginalization of the island of Mohéli and accusing the authorities of discrimination. The four were released without charge after about two months; they were believed to be prisoners of conscience.
At least 40 people arrested in connection with an alleged coup attempt in November 1987 remained in custody throughout the year. It seemed that they may have been accused of offences against state security and trespassing in a prohibited zone with criminal intent. They had not been brought to trial by the end of the year.
The authorities said three people had been killed in the alleged 1987 coup attempt but other sources continued to assert that the three had died in custody after torture by foreign mercenaries serving as officers in the Presidential Guard.
AFRICA/ COMOROS / CONGO
When handed over to their families the bodies of the three were reportedly mutilated. The government indicated in December 1987 that a parliamentary commission would investigate what had occurred but by the end of 1988 no further information had been made public about the three deaths.
In May Amnesty International sent the government a memorandum detailing its concerns about the imprisonment of people for their conscientiously held views, insufficient legal protection against torture and ill-treatment, and unfair political trials. It called for time limits on incommunicado detention to be strictly observed in order to safeguard detainees against torture and ill-treatment and for detainees to be granted prompt access to legal counsel. It also urged measures to ensure that courts would not admit statements extracted under torture. Amnesty International also urged the government to grant the 16 soldiers convicted in November 1985 of attempting to overthrow the government in March 1985 a new trial which would meet international standards of fair trial; to permit independent inspection of prison conditions; to investigate impartially all allegations of torture and ill-treatment; and to abolish the death penalty. By the end of 1988 Amnesty International had not received a response from the government.
The organization appealed for the immediate and unconditional release of Moustoifa Said Cheikh and of the four people arrested in Moheli in March. It also expressed its concern about people detained without trial at the end of 1987 and called for an investigation into the deaths of the three said to have died as a result of torture.
