HONGKONG
There were reports of the ill-treatment of detained Vietnamese asylum-seekers. Two Hong Kong children convicted on criminal charges were caned - a punishment which Amnesty International considers cruel, inhuman and degrading. Twenty-nine prisoners were reported to be under sentence of death, most of them believed to have been convicted of murder. There were no executions.
The Draft Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (HKSAR) was published in April as a basis for consultation with the people of Hong Kong. A second draft was scheduled for publication in 1989. The Basic Law will serve as a "mini-constitution" for Hong Kong when the People's Republic of China assumes sovereignty over the territory in July 1997. The draft was issued by a committee composed largely of representatives of the People's Republic of China, with a smaller number of Hong Kong representatives. The document covered aspects of the future political, social and economic
structure in Hong Kong, and included a chapter on the fundamental rights and duties of residents.
In March two boys aged 14 and 15 each received four strokes of the cane after they were convicted of robbery and assault. They were the first canings for such offences reported since 1985. Under Hong Kong law, caning may be inflicted for various offences. The punishment has most often been imposed on people convicted under Section 33 of the Public Order Ordinance for carrying an offensive weapon in a public place, though the use of corporal punishment under this provision was apparently under review at the end of 1988. However there were no reports of official moves to abolish it in other areas of the law.
In July about 100 Vietnamese asylum-seekers were punched, kicked and struck with truncheons by Correctional Services Department (CSD) personnel after a disturbance at the Hei Ling Chau detention centre. The asylum-seekers were later moved to another detention centre in which they were again reportedly ill-treated. In late August the Governor of Hong Kong appointed two justices of the peace to investigate the allegations of ill-treatment; their report concluded that "unnecessary force" had been used by CSD personnel, whom they did not identify. The Governor subsequently appointed civil servants to decide what disciplinary action should be taken against the CSD staff involved and ordered a review of CSD procedures.
The assaults followed changes in the government's policy towards Vietnamese refugees. In lune a procedure was introduced to screen all newly arrived Vietnamese and allow only those classified by the authorities as "genuine refugees" to remain in Hong Kong. Amnesty International requested information about the screening procedure in a letter sent to the Hong Kong Governor in luly. The organization asked for assurances that asylum-seekers would be given proper legal representation and the opportunity to appeal for review of decisions to deny asylum. In addition, Amnesty International requested assurance that the decisionmaking authorities would take into account the risk of human rights violations which those returning to Viet Nam might face. In September an agreement was
ASIAANDTHEPACIFIC/ HONG KONG / INDIA
reached between the government and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), under which the UNHCR would be allowed to monitor the screening process. By the end of the year no Vietnamese had been repatriated to Viet Nam.
According to press reports in July, 29 prisoners were under sentence of death in Stanley Prison. All had been convicted of murder, which carries a mandatory death sentence. However, no executions have been carried out since November 1966, following abolition of the death penalty the previous year in the United Kingdom and the Governor has commuted over 200 death sentences. Amnesty International learned of six death sentences passed for murder in 1988 and of three death sentences commuted to life imprisonment.
In July Amnesty International published a memorandum reviewing the Draft Basic Law of the hksar. The organization expressed concern that the draft law offered insufficient protection against torture and arbitrary arrest and did not adequately guarantee the right to life and other fundamental rights, including freedom of expression, freedom of association and religious freedom. Amnesty International also expressed concern that although the Governments of the United Kingdom and China had given assurances that after 1997 Hong Kong citizens would continue to be protected by the International Covenants on Human Rights neither government had spelled out how this should be done. These treaties now apply to Hong Kong because the United Kingdom has ratified them, but by the end of the year China had not done so.
Two Amnesty International delegates visited Hong Kong in July to discuss the organization's concerns with members of the Basic Law Drafting Committee and representatives of professional and community groups.
Amnesty International later requested meetings with representatives of China on the Drafting Committee but had received no reply by the end of the year.
