GREECE
More than 300 prisoners of conscience, all of them conscientious objectors to military service, were in prison. Most had been sentenced to four years' imprisonment. All but two had objected on religious grounds and were Jehovah's Witnesses. A number of criminal suspects and some conscientious objectors alleged they were ill-treated.
In October Greece ratified the United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
Michalis Maragakis, the first person who objected to military service on purely
EUROPE/GREECE/HUNGARY
pacifist grounds, was released in December after serving 20 months of his 26-month sentence (see Amnesty international Report 1988). Another pacifist conscientious objector, Thanasis Makris, was arrested in April and sentenced to five years' imprisonment. His sentence was reduced in October to one and a half years' imprisonment. Before his trial Thanasis Makris began a hunger-strike in protest against his imprisonment. The hunger-strike, in which Michalis Maragakis joined, continued until the announcement in July of a new draft law introducing alternative civilian service.
The draft law, proposing that conscientious objectors perform either unarmed or community service, had not been debated in the Greek Parliament by the end of the year. The proposed duration of both types of alternative service was double that of ordinary armed service.
Some conscientious objectors received sentences longer than the usual four years' imprisonment. In October two Jehovah's Witnesses were sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment and one to 13 years. By the end of the year these sentences had not been referred to the appeal court. On appeal such sentences are usually reduced to four years, although the 10-year prison sentence passed on Georgios Argyrios Tsi-kilis, another Jehovah's Witness, was reduced on appeal in November to five years, two months.
Some conscientious objectors alleged that they had been ill-treated in Avlona Military Prison. Amnesty International wrote to Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou in February to urge an investigation into these allegations but received no response.
In August several criminal suspects alleged that they were tortured or ill-treated. Yannis Bouranis, a burglary suspect, alleged that during five hours of interrogation at Thessaloniki Central Police Station he was punched, struck with a truncheon and given electric shocks on his genitals. A medical report certified multiple wounds.
Andreas Filiastidis alleged that he was beaten by police while in custody in Moshato Police Station in August. Two fellow detainees also complained of ill-treatment.
In December Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Justice raising
these and other allegations of ill-treatment.
Throughout the year Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience held for their conscientious objection to military service. The organization also sent observers to the trial of Michalis Maragakis in February and the trial of Thanasis Makris in May.
