ZAMBIA
At least 20 suspected critics and opponents of the government, some of them prisoners of conscience, were detained without trial. Some who had been detained in earlier years were released, but there were additional arrests in October in connection with an alleged conspiracy against the government. The arrests occurred shortly before elections in which President Kenneth Kaunda won another five-year term of office. There were reports of harsh conditions of imprisonment, which may have resulted in deaths of a number of prisoners, and of the torture of suspects in police custody. The death penalty continued to be imposed on people convicted of aggravated robbery and murder, but no executions were reported.
Among a number of prisoners released during the year was Faustino Lombe, a prisoner of conscience freed in May. He had been detained without charge since 1981 for plotting the escape of detainees awaiting trial for treason. Like many other political prisoners, he was held under the Preservation of Public Security Regulations, which allow the President to order indefinite administrative detention without trial "for the purpose of preserving public security".
Also released were 10 Angolan refugees, all long-term residents in Zambia, who had been held in Solwezi Prison since mid-1987. The authorities apparently suspected them of supporting armed opponents of the Angolan Government. There were indications that the government intended to expel the 10 Angolans but it was
not known whether it had done so by the end of 1988.
Three alleged members of an opposition political party, the People's Redemption Organization (PRO), illegal under the terms of Zambia's one-party Constitution, remained in custody throughout the year under presidential orders. Henry Kalenga, Joseph Chitalu and Peter Chiko Bwalya, who appeared to be prisoners of conscience, were arrested in early 1986. Stanislaus Kachenjela, a fourth detainee who had been held accused since May 1986 of belonging to the PRO, was released by order of the Ndola High Court in January. His release took place six months after the government had indicated to a review tribunal that it no longer wanted his detention. Chisala Mukunto, Fred Petelo Mulenga, and Mathew Kasonde Ngosa, detained in February 1987, were released without charge in December 1988. They were apparently suspected of giving refuge to Henry Kalenga during the brief period between his escape from custody and his rearrest. Others released in December were two former politicians - Alfred Musonda Chambeshi and John Chipawa Sakulanda - and a broadcasting executive. Mario Malyo. They had been arrested in 1987 on suspicion of planning to revive the United Progressive Party (UPP). which was banned when Zambia was declared a one-party state. They too had been held under presidential detention orders and appeared to have been prisoners of conscience.
In October six army officers and three civilians reportedly were arrested on suspicion of planning a coup to coincide with national elections later that month. In November the authorities announced that eight of them were to be detained indefinitely under the Preservation of Public Security Regulations. The ninth, a civilian, was reportedly released. Those remaining in detention include General Christon Tembo, formerly head of the national army and, at the time of his arrest, Zambia's ambassador to the Federal Republic of Germany.
The authorities are not obliged to reveal their reasons for detaining people under the Preservation of Public Security Regulations. The reasons cannot, in any case, be challenged in the courts. The regulations require that detainees be told of the formal grounds for detention and that their cases be reviewed by a special tribunal. The
AFRICA /ZAMBIA / ZIMBABWE
tribunal can recommend release or continued detention, but it sits in camera and the President is not obliged to implement its confidential recommendations. Detainees' only legal recourse, therefore, is to challenge the technical legality of detention orders. They may claim, for example, that the authorities failed to inform them in writing within the legally prescribed 14-day period ofthe grounds for detention.
In many cases the courts delayed hearings of political prisoners' applications for writs of habeas corpus. Some delays lasted for over a year, even though applications dealing with an individual's liberty are supposed to be heard urgently. It was unclear whether delays were caused by the incapacity of the judiciary to process a large backlog of cases or by deliberate obstruction. However, it appeared that political prisoners' main legal safeguard against arbitrary detention was ineffective.
The courts continued to rule that some prisoners accused of serious criminal or political offences had been tortured by the police and, on occasions, denied medical treatment for injuries sustained under torture. A judge in the Livingstone High Court ruled in June that five people charged with murder had been severely tortured and denied food when they refused to confess to an alleged crime. The judge declined to accept as evidence the confessions they had made under torture but did not order further investigation into the torture allegations or prosecution of those allegedly responsible. In 1987 the same judge had ordered the prosecution of a police officer who had allegedly tortured Moffat Kashweka, a prisoner on trial for espionage, but no proceedings against the police officer were reported. In another case, in May, a Lusaka magistrate ordered prison officials to send two suspects to hospital after these officials had failed to carry out a similar court order issued previously. The suspects were on trial for aggravated robbery and claimed that they had sustained injuries under torture by the police.
Further allegations of torture were made in July by a foreign tourist who alleged that soldiers had kicked and punched him, burned him with cigarettes, pierced his toes with needles, and stabbed him on a finger. They reportedly had accused him of espionage after he took a photograph of the train in which the soldiers were travelling.
Harsh prison conditions may have resulted in a number of deaths. Lusaka Central Remand Prison, for example, was reportedly so overcrowded that 60 prisoners awaiting trial were put in a cell designed for four people. Some prisoners had been in these conditions for as long as four years while awaiting trial. Similar conditions were reported in other remand prisons. At Kamfinsa Remand Prison in Kitwe three prisoners awaiting trial died of an unspecified illness during one week in June, reportedly because of medical neglect and harsh prison conditions.
At least 13 people were sentenced to death for murder or aggravated robbery, crimes which carry a mandatory death sentence, but no executions were believed to have occurred during the year. At least three people appealed successfully against death sentences, but the Appeal Court confirmed the sentences of six others. A soldier previously sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment received a death sentence in July after the state successfully argued that he should have been charged with aggravated robbery.
Amnesty International investigated the cases of political detainees held without trial, three of whom appeared to be prisoners of conscience, and urged the government either to charge them and promptly bring them to trial or release them. Amnesty International investigated reports of harsh prison conditions which may have constituted deliberately cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
