ELSALVADOR
There was increased activity by so-called "death squads", which the government said were outside their control but which were widely alleged to be composed of police and military personnel operating both in uniform and in plain clothes. They were responsible for abductions, "disappearances" and politically motivated killings of suspected opponents of the government, including former political prisoners, trade unionists and human rights activists. The authorities took little action to investigate such violations. There were reports of torture and of one death in detention, apparently as a result of torture.
Throughout the year the government of President Napoleón Duarte - who was
seriously ill - continued to face armed opposition from the Frente Farabundo Marti para la Liberación Nacional (FMLN), Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front. The FMLN was accused by local human rights groups and others of abducting and killing civilians whom they suspected of supporting or collaborating with the authorities.
It remained difficult to identify those responsible for many apparently politically motivated killings. However, in a number of cases there was persuasive evidence that abductions and killings were carried out by "death squads" composed of police or military personnel, and that their actions were condoned or encouraged by the authorities.
The authorities frequently failed to mount proper investigations of alleged violations and made few efforts to identify and bring to justice those responsible. Special government investigative bodies -such as the government human rights commission which had begun functioning in 1983 and the Special Investigative Commission established in 1985 under a United States Government-funded judicial reform program - made little progress into past abuses, which they were mandated to investigate. These included cases from the early 1980s as well as more recent ones such as the November 1986 "disappearance" of secondary school student Miguel Angel Rivas Hernández. The authorities' interpretation of the October 1987 amnesty for those implicated in politically motivated crimes precluded the possibility of those responsible being prosecuted. The amnesty had been granted under the terms of the Central American Peace Agreement (see Amnesty International Report 1988).
More than 400 political prisoners had been released in 1987 under the terms of the October amnesty, but it remained unclear why the government prevented 16 political prisoners from benefiting from the 1987 amnesty. Most had been charged with involvement in political killings or kidnappings but were simply reclassified as common law prisoners. Others arrested in the course of the year and charged with "terrorist offences" were also classified as common law prisoners. It was believed that at the end of the year 45 such people were in detention. Amnesty International was concerned that they were being held on the basis of confessions made to the
THE AMERICAS / EL SALVADOR
security forces during interrogation, and that proceedings against them had not been completed within the time limits specified by Salvadorian law. Throughout the year political detainees were repeatedly transferred to other prisons, often to remote parts of the country. This made it difficult for families to visit and for human rights groups to monitor their prison conditions.
There were several hundred "disappearance" cases reported. These included former political prisoner José Edil-berto Espinoza Abrego, who "disappeared" after being seized in January by men in plain clothes, and trade unionist Eliseo Córdova Aguilar, detained in July by heavily armed, hooded men. Fellow trade unionists stated that a witness had seen Eliseo Córdova Aguilar in detention at Treasury Police headquarters shortly after his abduction. The Treasury Police, however, have denied holding him and he remains "disappeared".
There were allegations that security forces posed as anti-government guerrillas in order to implicate the guerrillas in apparent abuses. One such alleged case occurred in October, when soldiers from the Second Infantry Brigade posing as FMLN guerrillas visited the hamlet of San Antonio La Junta, Metapán, Santa Ana department, and abducted five people. Two of the peasants were members of the National Association of Agricultural Workers; none has been seen since. Villagers said they recognized some of the men as soldiers who had participated in a military operation in the area a few days before.
In January two day labourers - José Luis Cornejo Calles and Manuel de Jesús - and 14-y6ar-old Javier Santamaría Medina were detained on their way home from a religious festival in San José Guayabal, Cuscatlán department. According to eye-witnesses, they were taken away in a truck by several men, some of whom wore green, army-style shirts. Their bodies were found on 1 February at a site that had been notorious for the dumping of corpses in the early 1980s -Devil's Doorway, southeast of the capital. They had been tortured, and were found blindfolded with their thumbs tied behind their backs, a method of restraint routinely employed by the security services.
Auxiliary Archbishop Rosa Chávez publicly attributed these killings to the First Artillery Brigade's counter-insur-gency sec-
tion. He suggested that the bodies had been abandoned at the Devil's Doorway so that the killings would be attributed to the "death squads". Several days after the crime the National Guard and the then head of the Armed Forces General Staff, General Adolfo Blandón, promised to investigate it. In June the Ministry of Defence sent the court judge a list of the troops who had been patrolling but to Amnesty International's knowledge nothing else has been done on the case and no military personnel have been called upon to give evidence.
In February two representatives of the independent Human Rights Commission of El Salvador (CDHES) were detained by soldiers of the Atlacatl counter-insurgency brigade in the San Pablo Tacachico and Atiocoyo area, La Libertad department. They were attempting to investigate the killings of 10 people whose bullet-riddled and mutilated bodies had been found there in the second half of January. According to the CDHES, the fact that the representatives' detention was acknowledged by the authorities and they were released the following morning was due to the incident being filmed by journalists who had been alerted to their arrest. To Amnesty International's knowledge, there has been no official investigation into the killings.
Two other killings and an apparent "disappearance" were reported in February after the security forces captured Mario Cruz Rivera, Félix Antonio Rivera and Sebastián Gutiérrez on 25 February. According to relatives and local villagers, the day after their capture the men were forced to run barefoot through a burning field before two of them were stabbed to death by army personnel. The armed forces said that they had died in an armed clash. However, when the bodies of two of the men were exhumed in late May under the direction of a Danish forensic pathologist, they bore signs of having been mutilated before they were killed. The fate of the third man was unclear.
Several freed political prisoners "disappeared" or were shot. On 25 March former political prisoner Oscar Leonel Corado Martínez was shot dead as he travelled on a bus in San Salvador. The killers were two armed men in plain clothes whom witnesses believed to be from the security forces.
In May ludge Jorge Alberto Serrano Panameño was machine-gunned at point-blank range in front of his home by plainclothes gunmen who arrived in a jeep. Two
THE AMERICAS / EL SALVADOR
days earlier he had refused the request for amnesty filed by a group of army officers and businesspeople. The group faced charges of involvement in the kidnapping of wealthy Salvadorians for ransom. It was alleged by Salvadorian human rights groups that high-ranking members of the military had been involved in the decision to kill him. To Amnesty International's knowledge, there have been no official findings as to who was responsible.
In August the Ministry of Defence claimed that Swiss theologian lürg Weis was one of three "extremists" who had died during a shoot-out with National Police agents in the hamlet Las Flores, Cabanas department, after he had opened fire on a National Police patrol. However, the Swiss Foreign Ministry stated that there appeared to be no evidence that he had been armed at the time of his death. The results of two autopsies carried out in Switzerland, and the findings of a European mission of inquiry which visited the country in September, suggested that Jürg Weis may have been detained and illtreated before he was killed. The examining pathologist in Switzerland found that he had been hit repeatedly with a blunt instrument while still alive. There is little information available about the two Salvadorians who died.
The Ministry of Defence attributed the September deaths of 10 peasants to the actions of the armed opposition. It appeared, however, that they had been executed extrajudicially by government security forces. According to local villagers the 10 killed had been among 40 people detained in the school-house in the small village of San Francisco, jurisdiction of San Sebastián, San Vicente department, by uniformed members of the Jiboa Battalion attached to the Fifth Infantry Brigade. The 10 bodies were found nearby next day with their hands bound and with bullet wounds to the back of the neck, head, chest and face. The army changed its version of events three times, saying first that the dead were eight guerrillas and two soldiers who had been killed in an armed confrontation. When it emerged that the 10 were peasants, the army said that they had been killed when guerrillas attacked an army convoy taking them away for interrogation. Following widespread local and international condemnation of the killings, an investigation was announced. The bodies were exhumed and an examination revealed that the cause of
death for nine of them was high calibre bullets in the head and neck, fired at a distance of 10-15 centimetres. The army then stated that after the guerrillas had attacked the convoy and killed the 10, they later returned to shoot them again at close range in order to tarnish the army's image. The then Armed Forces Chief of Staff, General Blandón, subsequently reported the arrest of a major and a lieutenant attached to the Fifth Infantry Brigade, but local human rights monitors reported that no such arrests were carried out. No detention orders were issued against those believed to have been involved in the killings. In December the judge in charge of the case resigned, complaining of threats, and the investigation reportedly came to a halt.
There were new developments relating to the death of Herbert Anaya Sanabria, a leading member of the CDHES who was the victim of an apparently politically motivated killing in 1987 (see Amnesty International Report 1988). Those responsible for his killing and that of Archbishop Oscar Amulfo Romero in 1980 were the only cases excluded from the October 1987 amnesty for those implicated in politically motivated crimes. In January Jorge Alberto Miranda Arévalo, a student who had been arrested on an unrelated charge, confessed to involvement in the murder. In February, however, he retracted his confession alleging that it had been made while he was in virtual incommunicado detention for 12 days. He said that during this time he was under severe psychological and physical pressure and had been injected several times with a drug he was unable to identify. Nevertheless, at the end of 1988 he remained at Mariona men's prison near San Salvador. He was held in virtual isolation on charges of involvement in the killing. Reportedly, his family and lawyers could see him only in the presence of his guards. The authorities have ignored repeated requests from international human rights delegations to interview him.
Others arrested in the course of 1988 on political charges also said that they were ill-treated during interrogation. One, José Alas Gómez, appeared to have died in custody in January apparently as a result of torture. The Treasury Police announced that he had died of a heart attack after his arrest, but photographs of his body appeared to show severe injuries, including burns, laceration of the testicles, bruising to the head
THE AMERICAS / EL SALVADOR / GRENADA / GUATEMALA
and face and bleeding from the mouth and nose. Amnesty International knows of no inquiry into the circumstances of his death.
Throughout the year Amnesty International appealed to the Salvadorian authorities to investigate these and other abuses, and in October published a report, EI Salvador: "Death Squads" - A Government Strategy. This contained detailed information about recent abductions, "disappearances" and killings by "death squads" apparently acting on behalf of, or with the acquiescence of the government. At the time of the report's publication Amnesty International repeated its call to the Salvadorian authorities to ensure speedy and impartial investigations of all alleged human rights violations, to bring to justice those found responsible for torture, killings and other abuses and to train all members of the armed forces and security services to abide by international human rights standards.
In March Amnesty International met the United Nations Special Representative for El Salvadorand provided him with information on its concerns. In an oral statement before the February-March session of the UN Human Rights Commission, Amnesty International expressed its view that a move then under way to terminate the mandate of the Special Representative did "not appear to be justified". This was in view of reports by the Special Representative and by the UN's Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary "Disappearances" which indicated that the situation in the country was "if anything, deteriorating".
