CZECHOSLOVAKIA
At least 17 people were known to be prisoners of conscience and many others whose identities were not known were believed to be in prison for their nonviolent political and religious activities or
EUROPE / CZECHOSLOVAKIA
for peacefully attempting to leave the country without official permission. Some of these prisoners were released under an amnesty in October. Many people were subjected to short-term detention without charge and other forms of harassment for the non-violent exercise of their right to free expression. Several prisoners of conscience were reportedly ill-treated. At least one person was sentenced to death.
Throughout 1988 the authorities continued to charge people in connection with the peaceful exercise of human rights. As in previous years, several people who might have become prisoners of conscience received suspended sentences and others remained at liberty because their trials were postponed. Under an amnesty announced by President Gustav Husak on 27 October to mark the 70th anniversary of the Czechoslovak Republic, several prisoners of conscience were released and charges against others who seemed likely to become prisoners of conscience were dropped.
House searches and harassment of political and religious activists continued, and many were detained without charge for up to 48 hours to prevent their participation in peaceful, unofficial meetings and demonstrations. Despite an increase in the number of unofficial groups concerned with civil and political rights, it remained difficult to obtain detailed information on cases of individuals imprisoned for exercising their human rights.
On 7 July 1988 Czechoslovakia ratified the United Nations Convention' against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
Among the prisoners of conscience was Daniel Mraz, a woodcutter from Prague. He was arrested near the Czechoslovak border with Austria in June and charged with "leaving the republic without permission" (Article 109 of the penal code). His wife and two children had emigrated to Austria in 1986 but his applications to join them had been unsuccessful. In September he was sentenced to eight months' imprisonment but he was released under the amnesty declared in October.
Czechoslovak law offers no civilian alternative to military service. In August Vladan Koci, a young Christian, was sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment for
"evading call-up for military service" (Article 269). In his defence he stated that he was unable to take the military oath or perform military service on religious and moral grounds. He was amnestied and released in October.
Among prisoners of conscience who did not benefit from the amnesty were three members of the Independent Peace Association, an unofficial group formed in April to promote demilitarization and the rights of conscientious objectors. Tomas Dvorak and Lubomir Vydra were arrested a week before the amnesty and accused of distributing leaflets calling people to participate in a peaceful, unofficial demonstration to mark the republic's 70th anniversary. They were initially charged with "preparing for public instigation of others to commit a crime" (Articles 7 and 164 of the penal code). Later the charge was changed to the more serious one of "preparing for incitement" (Articles 7 and 100). Thus they did not benefit from the amnesty declared the following day.
Hana Marvanova, a lawyer, was arrested in October and also charged with "incitement". Material she wrote as an editor of the Independent Peace Association's bulletin allegedly "evoked feelings of distrust towards the role of the Czechoslovak Communist Party and undermined the role of the armed forces". Lubomir Vydra was released from custody in December but the charge against him was not dropped and he may still face trial. Hana Marvanova and Tomas Dvorak were still in pre-trial detention in Prague at the end of the year. They and Lubomir Vydra face up to three years' imprisonment if convicted.
Frantisek Lizna, a Roman Catholic priest imprisoned between 1981 and 1983 and barred by the government from exercising his clerical duties (see Amnesty InternationaJ Report 1983), was arrested in October after he had left a leaflet at a bus station calling for the release of political prisoners. He was charged with "undermining public order" (Section 6 of the Law on Misdemeanour) and was sentenced in November to two months' imprisonment.
Before the October amnesty two prisoners of conscience were known to have been released, contrary to usual practice, before the end of their sentences. Ervin Motl, a firefighter, was sentenced to three years' imprisonment in 1986 for "subversion" (Article 98). The sentence on Walter Kania
EUROPE / CZECHOSLOVAKIA / FINLAND
was suspended in May for one year on health grounds. He had first been imprisoned in 1977 and since has been given two sentences for attempting to send abroad letters alleging lack of medical attention (see Amnesty International Report 1987).
Several prisoners of conscience were reported to be in poor health as a result of inadequate medical attention and harsh prison conditions. When visited in prison by two American doctors in May, Jiri Wolf (see Amnesty international Reports 1979, 1981, 1984. 1987) complained of depression and nervous disorders and said his requests for a neurological examination had been repeatedly denied. In the previous six months he had been given four periods of punishment lasting 10 to 15 days after complaining about ill-health and refusing to work. Punishment involved transfer to another cell and reduced bread rations.
Pavel Wonka (see Amnesty Internationa] Report 1988) was released in poor health at the end of his three-year sentence in February but rearrested in April for failing to comply with the terms of his protective surveillance. At his trial later that month he was reportedly unable to walk as a result of injuries sustained during his first imprisonment and he died in prison on 26 April of pulmonary emboli (blood clots in the lungs).
In January Amnesty International wrote to Milos Jakes, who had recently been elected Secretary General of the Czechoslovak Communist Party, informing him of its concerns in the republic. Throughout the year the organization appealed for the release of all prisoners of conscience and sought information on prisoners thought likely to be prisoners of conscience. In August, Amnesty International sent an observer to Ivan Polansky's appeal against a four-year sentence for "subversion" (Article 98) but its representative was barred from the courtroom.
In January Vladimir Ludek was sentenced to death by the Hradec Kralove Regional Court after being convicted of murdering his wife and four children. Amnesty International appealed for his sentence to be commuted.
