MOROCCOAND WESTERN SAHARA
Several hundred people arrested in previous years for alleged political offences, including prisoners of conscience, remained in prison throughout 1988. There were new arrests of political suspects, some of whom were held in garde (i vue (incommunicado) detention beyond the limit prescribed by Moroccan law. The fate of about 100 former military personnel imprisoned since the early 1970s was
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA/ YEMEN (ARAB REPUBLIC)/ YEMEN (PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF)
still unknown. There were reports of tor* ture and ill-treatment of prisoners, including hunger-strikers protesting against conditions in detention, and of two deaths in detention. Two death sentences were imposed although no executions took place.
Those held throughout 1988 included 39 prisoners of conscience who in 1977 had been tried and sent to prison for periods up to life imprisonment. They had been convicted on charges of, among other things, plotting against the internal security of the state and membership of clandestine Marxist-Leninist groups. They included Allai El Azhar, a teacher of classical Arabic, and Driss Rekab Bouissef, an electrical engineer. In addition. 26 possible prisoners of conscience remained in prison. Most were students sentenced in 1984 to up to 15 years' imprisonment for conspiring to overthrow the government and on charges of belonging to Qa'idiyin, Grassroots, an unauthorized students' group whose members came together for the purpose of participating in elections to the Union nationale des étudiants marocains (UNEM), Moroccan National Students Union. They had been held incommunicado by police in garde à vue detention for up to several months during which, they alleged, confessions which were later used as evidence against them in court were extracted under duress. Pretrial investigations in most of their cases had been carried out without the presence of their lawyers, who had been denied adequate time to prepare a defence and denied ready access to case dossiers. Moreover, defendants' complaints about procedural irregularities and that confessions had been extracted under duress were reportedly not investigated by the court. Four of the prisoners were released in 1988 after completing their sentences.
Other possible prisoners of conscience included 41 individuals accused of belonging to a clandestine organization, ila
al Amam, Forward. Most also belonged either to UNEM or to the Syndicat national des enseignants (SNE), National Union of Teachers. They included Hassan Belkehal, a technician active in UNEM while he was a student and later a member of the Syndicat des travailieurs phospha-tiers (STP), Union of Phosphate Workers, and Mohamed Qnouch, a postgraduate student.
Fifteen of the 41 had been sentenced by the Court of First Instance in Casablanca in 1986 to between three years' and four years' imprisonment on charges related to public order offences during riots in 1984, membership of an illegal organization and distribution of leaflets hostile to the government. The other 26 had been convicted by the Criminal Chamber of the Court of Appeal in Casablanca in 1986 on charges of conspiring against the government and had been sentenced to between three years' and 20 years' imprisonment. In both cases the pre-trial and trial proceedings appeared to fall short of internationally recognized standards for a fair trial. In particular, the defendants had been held in prolonged incommunicado detention in police custody and had allegedly been tortured and convicted on the basis of confessions said to have been extracted under torture or threat of torture. Eight were released in 1988 after completing their sentences.
Between February and early April nine people, most of them students, were arrested and reportedly held in incommunicado detention apparently on account of their alleged participation in peaceful student or trade union activities. Their families were not informed of their whereabouts or given reasons for their arrest. Six of them were released in June. The three others were reported to have been brought before an examining magistrate but at the end of the year their legal status was still unclear and some reports suggested that they were still being held incommunicado.
The Moroccan authorities continued to refuse to disclose any information about some 100 military personnel believed to have been held in secret detention, incommunicado and in grossly unsatisfactory conditions since their imprisonment in connection with attempts on the life of King Hassan II in 1971 and 1972. Some were reported to have died as a result of
MIDDLE EASTAND NORTH AFRICA / MOROCCO AND WESTERN SAHARA
harsh prison conditions, others were said still to be in custody despite the fact that their sentences had expired.
The Moroccan authorities provided no new information about 80 Saharans who allegedly "disappeared" after they were taken into custody by Moroccan security forces in 1976. In January officials of the Ministry of Justice told Amnesty International that they had investigated a number of these cases but found that the individuals concerned did not appear on their prisoner and detainee lists. They denied that they were in detention, adding that the scanty details available about the 80 made investigation difficult.
During the year several hundred people were reported still to be detained in El Ayoun Prison following their arrest in November 1987 at the time of a visit to the Western Sahara by members of a United Nations technical survey mission. The arrests were said to have taken place to prevent those arrested expressing their views to the visiting delegation. At the end of the year there was still no information about their legal status or whereabouts.
There were new reports of torture and ill-treatment of political prisoners. In January two possible prisoners of conscience, Dahbi Machrouhi and Najib Hamdani, were reported to have been beaten with a rod, dragged downstairs by the legs and kicked in the face, head, neck and body after a dispute about the provision of food to prisoners. They were then reportedly stripped and put into a cachot-a small, dark, punishnient cell used for solitary confinement - where they were held naked for three days together with five others before being taken out and subjected to folako - beatings on the soles of the feet - and returned to the cachot for a further seven days with minimal food and no medical care. They went on hunger-strike in protest at their treatment and were later moved to hospital in a serious condition. They and the other five prisoners who had been subjected to ill-treatment ended their hunger-strike between 5 and 7 April and were transferred to Ghbila Prison.
Ahmed Chaib and Ahmed Chahid, both of whom had been sentenced to death in 1984, when they were among 71 alleged members of an unauthorized Islamic movement convicted of state security offences, were also reportedly tortured. This
began in January 1988 after they were transferred from Kenitra Central Prison to Laalou Civil Prison in Rabat following an attempted escape during which one guard was killed and two were injured. In Laalou Civil Prison the two were reportedly tortured and ill-treated for more than three months. They were said to have been beaten with iron bars, sticks and leather belts, humiliated and degraded, subjected to falaka, and kept chained for long periods in cachots in such a way as to restrict movement and prevent them standing upright. Both were later sentenced to death for premeditated murder of the guard killed during their escape attempt.
Amnesty International sought further information about the deaths in detention of Sabouni El Mehdi and Adrioush bou Chaib. Both deaths occurred in August shortly after the two were imprisoned. Sabouni El Mehdi is believed to have been taken into custody after going to the Casablanca commisariat (police station) where his son was reported to have been held for a criminal offence. According to information received by Amnesty International, he was ill-treated while in custody and, although he complained of stomach pains and pains in his leg, he received no medical attention. His precise age was not known but he was described as "elderly". He is reported to have died approximately 14 hours after his transfer to Ghbila Prison. Adrioush bou Chaib is reported to have suffered from cardiac problems and to have had only one lung. He was reportedly arrested in early August after a tobacco company brought charges against him for illegally selling cigarettes. He died the same month in Ghbila Prison.
In January an Amnesty International delegation visited Morocco to discuss human rights with the government, in particular Amnesty International's concerns relating to the use of garde à vue detention, allegations of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners and investigation of deaths in detention. Delegates met the Ministers of Justice and of the Interior and other officials. In July the organization submitted a memorandum to the government detailing its concerns and recommending specific measures to improve human rights.
Amnesty International also urged the authorities to establish an impartial inquiry into the alleged torture and ill-
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA/ YEMEN (ARAB REPUBLIC)/ YEMEN (PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF)
treatment of Dahbi Machrouhi and Najib Hamdani, and other torture allegations, but without response. In June the organization inquired about nine people reportedly detained incommunicado between February and April and the several hundred others said to be held in El Ayoun Prison. The Moroccan authorities did not respond.
In October Amnesty International called for the commutation of the death sentences imposed on Ahmed Chaib and Ahmed Chahid.
