LAOS
More than 180 political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, who had been held without charge or trial, were released. However, hundreds of others reportedly remained in detention without charge or trial, mostly in "re-education" labour camps or on individual "reeducation" work assignments in remote provinces. Most were former civil servants and military personnel arrested fol-lowing the change of government in 1975, some apparently on account of their nonviolent opposition to the new system of administration. Others had been arrested since 1975, in some cases because of their political opinions or ethnic origin. Arrests of alleged "reactionaries" were reported on several occasions by the official news media but no details were given. The death penalty was available, but no death sentences or judicial executions were reported. However, in November the official news media reported that a local security official in Champassak province had recently been given the title "heroic youth" for "beheading a reactionary enemy element" who had apparently been neither charged nor tried.
Local elections were held for the first time since the formation of the Lao People's Democratic Republic in 1975. The government said these would be followed by the election of a national assembly and the promulgation of a constitution
and new legal codes to replace those abrogated in 1975. Meanwhile, there remained no clear legal basis for political prisoners to challenge the grounds for their detention. This reportedly resulted in some local authorities taking advantage of lack of human rights safeguards to hold political prisoners indefinitely and requiring them to perform unpaid manual or skilled labour. Government restrictions on access to the country made it difficult to obtain human rights information.
Between September and November some 160 people were reportedly released from Phanh province. They included Khamphouy Souksavath, a former police officer and one of several prisoners in poor health after years of hard labour and poor medical treatment in detention. Others released included former air force officer Phouy Upravan and former provincial police chief Boualoy Kingkittisak. Local officials in Attapeu province confirmed the release of some 25 prisoners from "re-education" work assignments there, although their information also suggested that two other prisoners. South and Thongkham, had died in detention. Most of the 25 were former low-ranking military officers or non-commissioned officers. Like prisoners released from Sop Pan, they were officially said to have become "people" (pasason) - they had satisfactorily completed their "re-education" and their rights as ordinary citizens could be restored.
In an interview broadcast in November, Kaysone Phomvihan, Chairman of the Council of Ministers, said that since 1975 the government had "given freedom to a large proportion of those whom it had been necessary to send for re-education". He added that "There are only some people who still need to stay on. It is hoped that they will have a conscience so as to return to their families soon." Thirty-seven people were known to be held in Houa Phanh; they included Khamphan Pradith, a Christian poet and former deputy provincial governor, who had been a prisoner of conscience since 1975.
The names of some 185 people apparently still held in Attapeu were known, and included the probable prisoner of conscience Tang Kim Chia, arrested in 1979 in connection with his status as a leading member of the Chinese community in the capital Vientiane.
ASIA ANDTHE PACIFIC / LAOS / MALAYSIA
Two Roman Catholic priests detained since 1980 in Champassak Prison were reportedly released in August. They were Bishop Thomas Khamphan, the Vicar Apostolic of the Diocese of Pakxe, and Father Bouniiep. There was confirmation of the release in earlier years from other detention centres of Father Tito Banchan and Father Ling, also Roman Catholic priests apparently held for their nonviolent religious beliefs or activities.
Information was received from the prison authorities about four possible prisoners of conscience previously reported to have been held without charge or trial for several years in Nong Pat Prison in Vientiane province (see Amnesty International Report 1988). It indicated that three of them, Bounkhouang, Me E and Keo Pakx-ane, had been transferred to another prison, and the fourth, Bouaphan Pakdan, may have died in detention. The prison authorities provided no information about what had happened to three other prisoners: Thit Meun, Bounlert, and Vanh-na.
In correspondence with Lao officials, including a letter to Chairman Kaysone Phomvihan in November, Amnesty International welcomed the reported releases and urged that remaining political prisoners either be charged with recognizably criminal offences and fairly tried, or released. Referring to the government's plans to hold national assembly elections and promulgate a constitution and legal codes, the organization also urged the incorporation of human rights safeguards into domestic law.
