LESOTHO
A journalist who criticized the government was detained without trial for several weeks and then deported. An armed hijacker taken prisoner after an incident in September died in custody in suspicious circumstances. No progress was made in identifying those responsible for the killings of two former government ministers and their wives in 1986. There were new attacks on opponents of the South African Government resident in Lesotho.
In February the ruling Military Council, headed by Major General Justin Lekhanya, declared a state of emergency in response to a rise in violent crime. Under emergency regulations, the police were empowered to arrest without a warrant people suspected of armed robbery or certain other criminal offences, and to detain them incommunicado for up to 14 days. The police were also granted immunity against prosecution for any acts committed in the course of their duties under emergency powers. In April the High Court declared the state of emergency invalid, but it was reimposed within days after the government took powers to issue a new decree. A number of reports suggested that, by the end of the year, the combination of extensive detention powers and the immunity provision had resulted in an increased incidence of police abuse and ill-treatment of criminal suspects in custody.
Johnny Maseko, editor of The Mirror newspaper, was deported in December after four weeks in detention without charge or trial. He was believed to be a prisoner of conscience. Initially arrested
in late October and charged with criminal defamation, apparently on account of newspaper articles criticizing the government, he was quickly released on bail. However, he was rearrested on 14 November and detained under the Internal Security (General) Act 1984. This permits detention without charge or trial for 42 days: the first 14 days on the authority of a police officer, the second 14 days by order of the Commissioner of Police, and the final 14 days on the order of a government minister.
In September, shortly before Pope John Paul II was due to arrive in Lesotho, a bus containing more than 70 people going to await his arrival was hijacked by four armed men whose motive was unclear. Three of the hijackers and two of the hostages were killed in a gunfight when South African commandos assisting local security forces stormed the bus. The fourth hijacker, later identified as Samuel Hlapo, was captured and handed over to the Lesotho authorities, who announced next day that he had died of wounds sustained during the gunfight. However, a South African Government spokesperson and witnesses to the arrest reported that Samuel Hlapo had been wounded only superficially at the time of his capture and handover to Lesotho security personnel. A post-mortem examination found that his throat had been slit and his skull smashed, prompting speculation that he had been deliberately killed in custody. It was not clear whether there had been any official investigation into the circumstances of this death by the end of the year.
No progress was made in identifying those responsible for the apparently politically motivated killings in 1986 of two former government ministers and their wives (see Amnesty International Report 1987), although there were two witnesses to the killings.
There was a further suspicious death in March. Mazizi Maqekeza, a South African exile belonging to the African National Congress (ANC), which is banned in South Africa, was shot dead by an unknown gunman while in police custody in a Maseru hospital. He had been arrested following a shooting incident in late February, in which another ANC member was killed by Lesotho police. At the time of his death he was undergoing hospital treatment for wounds received during the
AFRICA/LESOTHO/LIBERIA
February shooting. A third ANC member, Mbulelo Ngono, also arrested in connection with the February incident, was later reported to have "disappeared" from Lesotho police custody and it was unclear what had happened to him.
Amnesty International was concerned about the detention of Johnny Maseko. It also believed that the deaths of Samuel Hlapo and Mazizi Maqekeza, and those of the former government ministers and their wives killed in 1986, should be thoroughly investigated, and that those responsible should be brought to justice.
