PAKISTAN
For most of the year political prisoners convicted by special military courts during an earlier period of martial law remained in prison without judicial redress. At least eight executions were carried out, four of them in public. However, after a change of government in December the majority of political prisoners were released and over 2,000 death sentences were commuted. At least 19 prisoners were reported to have died in custody as a result of torture. Special Courts for Speedy Trials continued to impose death sentences. Dozens of members of the Ahmadiyya community were arrested and prosecuted on religious grounds, as in previous years, and before the change of government hundreds of other people were detained without charge or trial following political meetings and demonstrations and, in Sind Province, after intercommunal disturbances.
In May President Zia ul-Haq dismissed Prime Minister Mohammad Khan Junejo and his cabinet and dissolved the national and provincial assemblies. He appointed a caretaker cabinet, and in July announced that general elections would be held in November, although it appeared that candidates would not be permitted to represent political parties. In June the President decreed the Enforcement of Shari'a Ordinance 1988, which attempted to make Shari'a (Islamic law) the supreme law of Pakistan by empowering the high courts to admit petitions concerning any law claimed to be "repugnant to the injunctions oflslam". The Shari'a Ordinance was designed to enable the courts to review those areas of legislation which could not be reviewed by the Federal Shari'a Court.
However by the end of the year the Ordinance still had to be approved by the National Assembly and the Senate.
President Zia and other senior military officers were killed in an air crash in August and the Chairman of the Senate, Ghulam Ishaq Khan, became Acting President. In October, in response to an application brought by Benazir Bhutto, leader of the Pakistan People's Party (PPP), the Supreme Court ruled that the elections should be party-based. They took place as scheduled, the PPP won the largest number of seats and Benazir Bhutto was sworn in as Prime Minister on 2 December.
Prime Minister Bhutto immediately asked the Acting President to commute all death sentences and announced an eight-point amnesty program which led to the release of hundreds of political prisoners who had been convicted by special military courts during the period of martial law from 1977 to 1985. Many of those released said that they had been tortured in jail.
Among those released was prisoner of conscience Ganshyam Parkash, a medical student and President of the Democratic Students Federation (DSF) in Sind Province. He had been detained in 1982 and convicted in 1985 by a special military court of "creating hatred amongst the armed forces, and between people of different provinces and classes".
Before the change of government more than 100 people were arrested for violating Section 144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, which gives the provincial government the power to ban public gatherings and demonstrations and to impose a curfew "in urgent cases of nuisance or apprehended danger". Among those charged with violating such bans were opposition party members who organized meetings and processions in September and October, and over 40 people who demanded the release of political prisoners in September.
Before the change of government dozens of people were arrested under the Maintenance of Public Order Ordinance (MPO), which empowers the authorities to order the preventive detention without trial for up to three months of anyone considered to be "acting in any manner prejudicial to public safety or the maintenance of public order". Under Article 10 of the Constitution, a review board must decide whether detention should last more
&&%*)&%%*)&%'*&%*)&%%*&"%*
ASIA ANDTHE PACIFIC/PAKISTAN
than three months. Several people were arrested under Section 16 of the MPO, which provides for imprisonment for up to three years of anyone whose "speech, statement, rumour or report" is considered to "cause alarm to the public" or to contribute to any activity considered by the government as "prejudicial to public safety and maintenance of public order". Those charged under this section included local opposition party leaders and others alleged to have made speeches and chanted slogans against the government of President Zia. In January the Government of Sind published a list of 72 prisoners arrested in previous years who had been released. Some of them had been detained without trial under the MPO for several months.
Members of the Ahmadiyya community
-	a religious group whose members consider themselves Muslims but whose Islamic status is disputed by the government
-	continued to be arrested. Under amendments made to the penal code in 1984, Ahmadis may be imprisoned for up to three years for calling themselves Muslims or for engaging in Muslim religious practices, including wearing badges displaying verses from the Quran. According to a newspaper report in September, 3,113 Ahmadis have been charged under this amendment. In December an Ahmadi travelling by bus to Faisalabad was reportedly confronted by two young men who demanded that he hand over his ring, which had Quranic verses inscribed on it. He refused and they demanded that the police register a case against him. He was reportedly charged with preaching his faith on the bus and sent to Chiniot Prison to await trial.
Over 100 political prisoners convicted by special military courts following unfair trials remained without judicial redress. As the result of a constitutional amendment their sentences could not be challenged before a higher tribunal. In February the government announced that according to a new procedure the executive authorities could review the cases of prisoners sentenced by special military courts. By the end of October, however, only two political prisoners were known to have been released. In October a former Major-General, Tajammal Hussain Malik, was freed. He had been sentenced in 1980 to 14 years' imprisonment after being con-
victed of conspiracy against President Zia's government. A former Governor of the Punjab, Ghulam Mustafa Khar, who was arrested on his return to Pakistan in 1986 after a military court had sentenced him in absentia to 14 years in jail, was also released in October. In September, the Acting President reduced a number of sentences imposed by special military courts, including those on 25 prisoners convicted on criminal charges who had the remaining part of their sentences reduced in full or part, and 13 people convicted in absentia, whose sentences were quashed.
Amendments made to the Constitution before the lifting of martial law prevented civilian courts reviewing the decisions of military courts. However, the Supreme Court of Pakistan ruled in October that the provincial high courts could review cases of political prisoners sentenced by military courts on certain grounds, and several petitions were filed.
At least 60 people, most of whom had been arrested on criminal charges, were reported to have been tortured in detention. The President of Jeay Sind Student Federation (JSSF), Bashir Qureshi, and four other JSSF members - Faiz Jakhrani, Mum-taz Tunio, Anis Peerzada and Muneer Shah - were reportedly tortured in Karachi Central Jail. They had been arrested on suspicion of conspiracy to kill the Mayor of Hyderabad, a member of the Mohajir community who was attacked in July. They were kept in police custody for four weeks after which they were allegedly unable to stand and could not speak because their faces had been badly beaten. A medical student, Niaz Ali Bhatti, another JSSF member arrested in the same case, was reportedly hung upside down, beaten on the feet with a sacho-putar (a belt with sharp nails), made to stand for several days with a noose round his neck and given electric shocks. His father and younger brother were reportedly assaulted in front of him in an attempt to extract a "confession".
There were also reports of women detainees being raped and beaten by police. In July, three women held at Nawan Kot Police Station in Lahore were reportedly made to strip, were beaten on the genitals and two of them were raped. This occurred over two days, while a false case was registered against them under the Hudood Ordinance for the sexual offence of Zina
ASIA ANDTHE PACIFIC/PAKISTAN
(adultery), which carries a maximum punishment of death by stoning. Following the presentation of a writ petition to the Lahore High Court, an official inquiry confirmed that they had been raped and tortured and found that the charges against them were false. Although the Lahore High Court ordered a criminal case to be registered against the police involved, none was known to have been arrested by the end of the year.
At least 19 prisoners died in police or judicial custody, reportedly as a result of torture. Jaffar Ilyas Tatur Maghsi, arrested in June on suspicion of being a docoit (bandit), died in July inNaraJail, allegedly after being struck on the head. A postmortem examination concluded that his death was caused by a coma, "due to extensive violence to the skull on the left temporal side caused by hard and blunt substance" (sic), but jail officials claimed that he had committed suicide by hitting his head against the wall. Several other people also allegedly died in Nara Jail after beatings.
The courts continued to sentence people to flogging on charges of rape and drug-trafficking, although the total number sentenced is not known. Five people were flogged in Sahiwal in March. In April, Jan Mohammad, a mentally handicapped prisoner who had not been sentenced to flogging, was reportedly tied to a log in Haripur Jail and on the orders of the jail superintendent received 15 lashes in front of other prisoners, some of whom began a hunger-strike in protest.
Several cases of deliberate.killing by the security forces were reported from Sind Province. In January four people were killed by the security forces in Ghangro Mori village during what they claimed was an "encounter" with armed dacoits. However, two of the victims, Ghulam Nabi and Niaz Machhi, had reportedly witnessed the torture in police custody of fellow-villager Ameer Ali, which had allegedly caused his death. They had been named as witnesses in a complaint against the police filed by Ameer Ali's cousin, who was himself injured in the January incident. Although the Sind Government ordered a judicial inquiry into allegations that these were deliberate killingSf no news of its findings was received during the year.
At least 111 people were sentenced to death. Seventy-eight of the death sen-
tences were passed by Special Courts for Speedy Trials and one by the Federal Shori'a Court.
Following the promulgation in 1987 of the Special Courts for Speedy Trials Ordinance (see Amnesty international Report 1988), such courts continued to impose sentences of imprisonment and death. Although originally set up for a year's trial period to deal with cases of "heinous crimes and anti-state activities", in August their jurisdiction was expanded to cover crimes including abduction, kidnapping and food adulteration. In October 1988 the trial period was extended for a further year by presidential ordinance. These courts' procedures departed from the customary safeguards contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure: the police were to submit their report to the court within 14 days of the date of arrest and the court could adjourn for only two days, with the result that there might be difficulties calling defence witnesses.
In August a couple sentenced in 1987 under Islamic law, Hudood Ordinance, to be stoned to death after conviction of adultery were acquitted following a review of their case. The grounds for their acquittal were that there was neither a confession from the accused nor an eye-witness to the alleged offence.
There was information on eight executions, four of which took place in public in January and February. In April and July Amnesty International expressed serious concern about public executions and the number of people under sentence of death, and urged the government to commute all death sentences and to abolish the death penalty.
In September Acting President Ghulam Ishaq Khan commuted the death sentences imposed on six people convicted by military courts of banditry and murder to life imprisonment. Amnesty International welcomed the remissions and commutations which had taken place, but continued to press for a full judicial review of all cases of political prisoners sentenced in unfair trials by military courts. In December the organization welcomed the news that many of these prisoners were to be released by the new government and that all pending death sentences were being commuted.
Amnesty International expressed concern to the Sind authorities about the
ASIAANDTHEPACIFIC/PAKISTAN/PHILIPPINES
alleged killing by police of four civilians in Ghangro Mori and urged that the findings of a judicial inquiry be made public.
