UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Eleven prisoners were executed in 1988. At the end of the year 2,182 prisoners-an unprecedented figure — were under sentence of death in 34 states. Federal legislation expanding the scope of the death penalty and providing it for certain drug-related murders was passed by Congress. There were calls for an inquiry into the case of a former member of the Black Panther Party serving a life sentence who was convicted of murder in 1972. Concerns were raised about the lengthy pretrial detention of a Puerto Rican independence supporter. A federal court was critical of conditions under which two women convicted of politically motivated criminal offences were held in a maximum security prison unit. The court ruled that their placement in the unit because of their political beliefs was unconstitutional. The unit was closed and the prisoners transferred. There were complaints of ill-treatment of prisoners. Presidential and Congressional elections were held in November. Vice-President George Bush was elected to succeed Ronald Reagan as President. He was due to be inaugurated in January 1989.
Eleven prisoners were executed in 1988 bringing the number of executions since
1977 to 104. Three executions each were carried out in Louisiana and Texas, two in Florida and the others in Virginia, Utah and Georgia. It was estimated that around 300 death sentences were imposed.
Robert Streetman, convicted of murder in 1983, was executed by lethal injection in Texas on 7 January after the US Supreme Court denied a stay by a tied four-four vote. The court had indicated that a stay of execution might be granted if a new appeal was made but the Texas Attorney General refused a reprieve to allow lawyers time to do this. Robert Streetman was kept waiting before his execution for more than three hours. For part of this time he was strapped to a stretcher in the death chamber.
Two mentally ill prisoners, Wayne Felde and Leslie Lowenfield, were executed in Louisiana on 15 March and 13 April respectively. Wayne Felde, a former Viet Nam war veteran, had been diagnosed in 1979 as suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder. He was convicted in 1981 of the murder of a police officer. Leslie Lowenfield, convicted of murdering his estranged girlfriend and four members of her family, was diagnosed as a paranoid schizophrenic who was "currently unable to understand the death penalty". The Supreme Court denied his application for a stay by five votes to four but two of the dissenting justices strongly criticized the lower courts for contravening 1986 Supreme Court directions which prohibit states from executing insane prisoners.
Willie Jasper Darden, who was black, was executed in Florida on 15 March for the murder of a white furniture store owner in 1973. Studies have shown that black defendants convicted of killing white victims are substantially more likely to receive death sentences than those in black victim cases.
New witness evidence came to light in 1986 in the form of two sworn affidavits which cast doubt on his guilt but this was dismissed on technical grounds. The fairness of his trial had previously been criticized by several courts. Nevertheless, the courts had upheld his conviction. Willie Jasper Darden spent 14 years on death row and survived six death warrants before his execution.
The courts criticized the court-appointed lawyers representing two prisoners executed during 1988. Earl Clan-ton, executed in Virginia on 14 April, was
THE AMERICAS / UNITED STATESOF AMERICA / URUGUAY
represented by a trial lawyer who had never handled a death penalty case before and spent only eight hours with his client, including the period of the trial itself. A federal court overturned Earl Clanton's death sentence in 1986 because of the lawyer's inadequacies but the death sentence was reimposed on appeal by a higher court. In the case of James Messer, executed in Georgia on 28 July, the trial lawyer who represented him was criticized for failing to call potential defence witnesses and not presenting important mitigating evidence. Instead, the lawyer had emphasized the horror of the crime and suggested to the jury that death was the most appropriate punishment. Despite the appellate courts' criticisms, the sentence was not overturned.
On 29 June the Supreme Court vacated the death sentence imposed on a juvenile offender, William Wayne Thompson, who was 15 when he participated in the murder of his brother-in-law. William Wayne Thompson was sentenced to death in Oklahoma, which sets no minimum age at which the death penalty may be imposed. Four members of the court concluded that "evolving standards of decency" made the execution of a 15-year-old offender "cruel and unusual" punishment, in violation of the constitution. A fifth justice concurred - but on more narrowly defined grounds -with the judgment vacating the death sentence. Amnesty International had submitted an amicus curiae (friend of the court) brief in May 1987 in which it presented evidence on international practice and standards prohibiting the execution of minors.
The Supreme Court agreed in June to review the constitutionality of the death penalty for offenders aged under 18 at the time of the crime and a decision was expected in mid-1989. At the end of 1988 there were 28 such offenders under sentence of death in 12 states.
In June (in Franklin v. Lynaugh) the Supreme Court dismissed an appeal which had challenged the constitutionality of a key provision in the Texas capital punishment statute - the provision that mandates juries to impose a death sentence if they find unanimously that the murder was deliberate and the defendant poses a continuing threat to society, regardless of the mitigating circumstances.
In another Texas case (Penry v.
Lynaugh), the constitutionality of the limitations placed on juries when considering mitigating evidence was again questioned. The case was pending at the end of the year. The court was also asked to rule on the separate issue of whether it would be cruel and unusual punishment to execute John Paul Penry, who has a mental age of seven.
In July Georgia became the first state to enact legislation prohibiting the death penalty for defendants convicted of murder who are found "guilty but mentally retarded". At least 10 per cent of prisoners under sentence of death are thought to be mentally retarded.
In November President Ronald Reagan signed into law new federal legislation which included provisions permitting the death penalty to be imposed for certain drug-related murders. In July Amnesty International wrote to both the Speaker and the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives about the provisions, which were then under debate. It noted that expansion of the scope of the death penalty conflicted with Article 4(2) of the American Convention on Human Rights, which states that the death penalty "shall not be extended to crimes to which it does not presently apply".
In May Amnesty International made public its concerns in the case of a former Black Panther Party (BPP) leader convicted of murder in 1972 and serving a life sentence in California. Elmer "Geronimo" Pratt may have been denied a fair trial on account of his political activities. Elmer Pratt alleged that he had been "framed" by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) as part of its Counter-intelligence Program (COINTELPRO) against domestic political groups. New evidence which came to light after his trial indicated that he was personally targeted for "neutralization" by the FBI between 1968 and 1971 on account of his political activities. It also revealed that the chief prosecution witness was an FBI informant who, during the trial itself, had denied that he had any connection with the FBI. The FBI had planted informers in Elmer Pratt's defence team and received information relating to the defence strategy during the trial.
A court hearing in 1985, which was attended by an Amnesty International observer (see Amnesty International Report 1986), had dismissed Elmer Pratt's
THE AMERICAS / UNITED STATESOF AMERICA / URUGUAY
motion for a new trial. It ruled that the chief prosecution witness had been an FBI "contact" rather than an informer. The court confirmed that the FBI had planted informers in the defence camp during the trial but found that Elmer Pratt had not suffered as a result of the surveillance. It ruled that the FBI's COINTELPRO operation against Pratt had been a "purely collateral matter" that had not jeopardized the outcome of his trial. In June the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeal turned down Elmer Pratt's appeal on technical grounds.
In May Amnesty International asked the Governor of California to order an inquiry into the case. The Governor replied that he was without "the authority, ability and resources" to do this and suggested it was a matter for the courts to decide.
Filiberto Ojeda Rios, a member of a Puerto Rican independence organization, was held in pre-trial detention in Connecticut for 32 months on charges of armed robbery. In May 1988 a federal court ordered his release on bail because "due process cannot tolerate any further pretrial detention". However, Ojeda Rios was rearrested in August and charged with a new offence of assault at the time of his original arrest in August 1985. He was denied bail by the court and again placed in detention where he remained at the end of the year.
Amnesty International was concerned that Ojeda Rios' lengthy pre-trial detention may have undermined his right to be tried within a reasonable period or else released. The organization wrote to the US Attorney General and asked why bail had been refused on the new charges despite the fact that Ojeda Rios appeared to have complied scrupulously with the stringent conditions placed on him during his three-months' release on bail. It had not received a reply by the end of the year, but was informed that its letter had been forwarded to the magistrate responsible for signing the detention order.
Amnesty International also inquired about Ojeda Rios' conditions of imprisonment at the Metropolitan Correctional Center in New York following reports that he had been held in virtual incommunicado detention with only limited access to lawyers. There were also reports that he had been denied dietary and other health requirements. The Director of the Federal
Bureau of Prisons replied to Amnesty International that Ojeda Rios was receiving "appropriate care and treatment".
In July a Federal District Court ruled as unconstitutional the detention in a High Security Unit (HSU) of two women held at Lexington Federal Prison, Kentucky, because of their political beliefs. It ordered their transfer into the general prison population. The court also found that the general conditions in the HSU had at times "skirted elemental standards of human decency". The prisoners were removed from the HSU shortly afterwards and the unit was closed. The government has appealed against the ruling (see Amnesty International Report 1988).
Amnesty International sent an observer to attend the court hearing. The observer's report was then submitted to the Director of the Federal Bureau of Prisons shortly before the federal court ruled in July. The report noted that there was substantial evidence of HSU prisoners' physical and psychological deterioration during custody there. It described the prison regime as "deliberately and gratuitously oppressive". Amnesty International concluded that the conditions of confinement constituted cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. It found that the prisoners' prolonged isolation, humiliating strip-searches and additional restrictions had had a detrimental effect on their physical and mental health.
Amnesty International made inquiries about reports that prisoners in several state prisons had been ill-treated. They included the Michael Unit of the Texas Department of Corrections where guards were alleged to have beaten prisoners who were handcuffed and kept in leg-irons on various occasions between April and December 1987. At least one prisoner was said to have required hospital treatment for his injuries. The warden of Michael Unit informed Amnesty International that no such incidents had occurred.
It was reported that prisoners in the Administrative Control Unit of the Southern Ohio Correctional Facility were shackled and chained to cell fixtures. Others were apparently sprayed with chemical mace and high-pressure water and left in empty, unheated cells for several days.
In a letter of inquiry to the prison authorities, Amnesty International cited the United Nations Standard Minimum
THE AMERICAS / UNITED STATESOF AMERICA / URUGUAY
Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. Article 33 states that "Instruments of restraint shall never be applied as punishment" and "Chains and irons shall not be used as restraints." The prison authorities denied that prisoners had been ill-treated but admitted that shackles, chains and mace were used for restraining purposes.
