MOZAMBIQUE
Some 900 long-term political detainees were held without charge or trial throughout the year; about 450 others were released. Most detainees were suspected members or supporters of the ResistSncia Nacional Mogambicana (RNM or RENAMO), Mozambique National Resistance, an armed opposition group fighting against the government. Twenty-two political prisoners who had been convicted at unfair trials in previous years were released in December although about 30 others remained in prison. Only one political trial was reported. No death sentences were passed and the number of court-imposed floggings was greatly reduced.
Significant steps were taken by the government to increase protection for human rights. The National People's Assembly approved the ratification of The African Charter on Human and People's Rights in August. The Revolutionary Military Tribunal - a special court established in 1979 to try all cases concerning offences against the security of the state as well as some economic and military offences - was to be abolished in December when the Supreme People's Court was established. Legal provision for the establishment of this court
had been made in 1978 but the Revolutionary Military Tribunal was setup in 1979 as an interim measure to try security cases. Trials before the Revolutionary Military Tribunal were often summary and those under its jurisdiction had no right to apply for habeas corpus or to appeal against conviction or sentence. The last trial before the Revolutionary Military Tribunal was held in March when Ian Douglas Grey, an Australian missionary, was sentenced to 10 years, six months' imprisonment for collaborating with the RNM. Ian Douglas Grey was said to have collaborated with the RNM in Tete province while working for a Malawi-based fundamentalist Christian group, the Shekinah Ministries. The trial was held in camera but for the first time foreign observers, including an Australian diplomat and a lawyer appointed by the defendant's family to observe the trial, were admitted. In future those accused of security offences will be tried by provincial courts under ordinary criminal procedure and allowed a right of appeal to the Supreme People's Court.
There were important changes in the administration of justice affecting the armed forces. In July a new law concerning military offences adopted in 1987 came into effect. This contained penalties to deter members of the armed forces from illegally arresting or abusing civilians. It also specified that a number of offences, including treason and crimes against civilians in areas of conflict, were punishable by death; other crimes were punishable by flogging. A law creating permanent military courts with jurisdiction over military offences adopted in 1987, also came into force in July. This provided defendants sentenced by provincial military courts with a right of appeal to the Supreme People's Court. It also permitted the establishment, during a state of war or siege, of temporary courts martial before which prisoners would be tried under summary procedures and denied a right of appeal. However, it provided that all death sentences imposed by military courts must be reviewed by the Supreme People's Court and would only be carried out if confirmed by the court. During the year permanent military courts were set up in four provinces but no trials were held before them.
Fighting continued between government forces and the RNM. It was particularly intense in the centre and south of the
AFRICA/MOZAMBIQUE
country. Millions of people had been displaced from their homes or had sought refuge in neighbouring countries causing social breakdown in many areas. The RNM was reported to have carried out many attacks on civilians which resulted in deaths; it was also reported to have taken civilian prisoners, some of whom were killed. In the past the RNM is said to have tortured prisoners. According to government sources nearly 3,000 RNM activists reportedly surrendered under the terms of an amnesty law announced in December 1987 guaranteeing that armed government opponents who surrendered before the end of 1988 would be allowed to return to civilian life.
According to official statements, about 1.400 detainees suspected of fighting for the RNM or of other security offences were held without charge or trial at the beginning of the year. Some 450 of these detainees were released uncharged. The authorities also stated that the releases were ordered for all those detained for half the period of imprisonment to which they might have been sentenced if convicted of offences they were suspected of having committed. By the end of the year some 950 long-term detainees were apparently still being held while their cases were processed. About 200 suspected members of the RNM were reported by government sources to have been detained by the armed forces during 1988 but they were not brought to trial. It was unclear how long they remained in military custody while their cases were investigated by the military authorities, who are obliged by law to hand them over as soon as possible to the security or criminal police.
Twenty-two convicted political prisoners serving sentences of two years to 30 years in prisons in the north of the country were released in December. About 30 others continued to serve sentences imposed between 1979 and 1986 after unfair trials by the Revolutionary Military Tribunal and reduced in the December 1987 Law of Pardon under which over 40 other prisoners convicted by the same court were released. Most had been convicted of committing crimes of violence on behalf of the RNM or of assisting it in other ways. Carlos Gamboa Lopes Val6rio, about 70 years old, had been sentenced by the Revolutionary Military Tribunal to 30 years' imprisonment in December 1979 on charges
AFRICA / MOZAMBIQUE / NAMIBIA
of organizing a clandestine group in support of the RNM at the Central Hospital in Maputo, where he worked. In December 1987 his sentence was reduced to 22 years, six months' imprisonment. The trial had been unfair, since he and other defendants did not know they were to be tried until the day of their trial and were not given adequate legal assistance. They had no opportunity to appeal against conviction or sentence.
In contrast with previous years, few flogging sentences were known to have been imposed. Two flogging sentences were imposed in May and September by civilian courts in Maputo City. In January a village council in Cabo Delgado province sentenced a man to 25 lashes and 30 days' imprisonment for selling rotten meat but it was not clear whether the council had the authority to impose such a sentence. In the same month the Maputo City Court imposed a four-year prison sentence on the secretary of a grupo dinamizador, local government support committee, which had illegally ordered the flogging in June 1987 of an alleged adulterer who died as a result of the 19 lashes he received.
In October an Amnesty International delegation visited Mozambique and met President Joaquin Chissano, the Minister of Justice and other government officials. The delegates welcomed legislative changes and other steps to improve human rights. They urged the government to undertake a review of the cases of all long-term political detainees held without trial and all political prisoners serving sentences after unfair trials before the Revolutionary Military Tribunal. The delegates also urged the government to repeal legislation empowering the courts to impose floggings and to abolish the death penalty. In addition, the delegates sought information on the whereabouts of political opponents of the government who "disappeared" after they were detained in the mid-1970s (see Amnesty international Report 3987 and 1988). The authorities refused to provide such information but stated that relatives of the prisoners concerned who had sought information directly from the government had received full answers to their inquiries and that other relatives could do so.
