POLAND
Many critics and opponents of the govern-ment were subjected to arrest, short-term detention or other forms of harassment for their non-violent exercise of the right to freedom of expression. Some were re-
portedly ill-treated; some were tried and sent to prison. One hundred imprisoned conscientious objectors, including at least 14 prisoners of conscience, were released after the introduction of an alternative to military service.
In July the Polish Parliament, the Sejm, approved changes to the military draft law to allow three years' alternative service for conscientious objectors - two years' for students - in non-military institutions. Fourteen prisoners of conscience whose cases had been taken up by Amnesty International - all members of the unofficial peace movement WoJnoid i Pokdj (WiP), Freedom and Peace, were released from prison after agreeing to perform the new form of service. The official Polish Press Agency announced that 86 other imprisoned religious conscientious objectors -probably Jehovah's Witnesses - had also been freed. In June the authorities issued the text of a new oath of allegiance which omitted reference to the Soviet army. In the past a number of prisoners of conscience had been imprisoned for refusing to swear the oath because of its reference to "fraternal alliance" with the Soviet army.
Amnesty International investigated complaints about the application of the new alternative service law. In at least one case a conscript was not given the opportunity to apply for alternative service. Jan Tomasiewicz, from Warsaw, was arrested in December and charged with evasion of military service. In 1986 he had returned his draft card on grounds of conscientious objection to military service and a warrant had been issued for his arrest. In June 1988 he was detained by the police and in the course of interrogation was told that the proceedings against him were no longer valid. Until his arrest in December Jan Tomasiewicz was not aware he still faced charges of evading military service, He had not been given the option of doing alternative service.
In June the "accelerated procedure" for certain offences was included in the Code of Penal Procedure. The procedure, which had been established under legislation passed by the Sejm in May 1985 and which was valid for a three-year period (see Amnesty International Report 1986), provides for the investigation of certain offences by the police, without involvement of the Public Prosecutor's Office, and requires that investigation be complete with-
EUROPE/ POLAND / ROMANIA
in 48 hours of a suspect's arrest; a trial then takes place immediately before a single judge with the police acting in place of the public prosecutor. By not allowing defence lawyers enough time to prepare cases the procedure often severely restricts defence rights.
The procedure is most frequently applied to prosecutions by misdemeanour courts, before which, since 1986, people arrested for participating in "activities designed to foster public disquiet", unauthorized publishing activities and membership of banned organizations have been tried (see Amnesty International Report 1988). "Accelerated procedure" has been applied to many cases of people prosecuted for non-violent exercise of their right to freedom of expression.
There were reports of dozens of arrests during strikes throughout Poland in April and May and again in August. The authorities declared the strikes illegal and a number of people throughout the country, including activists in the banned trade union Solidarity, were arrested and detained. Most were released after periods of detention under a provision which allows the police to hold people for up to 48 hours without charge - a mechanism often used to prevent people from taking part in demonstrations. Others, however, were sentenced to up to three months' imprisonment. For example, Solidarity spokesperson, Janusz Onyszkiewicz, a mathematics lecturer from Warsaw, was arrested at his home on 5 May. Two days later he was sentenced to six weeks' imprisonment by a Warsaw misdemeanour court. He was apparently accused of having told foreign journalists about two incidents on 1 May when police entered a Gdansk church in order to attack demonstrators and dispersed a Warsaw demonstration with truncheons. He was convicted of spreading false information, released on 16 May without official explanation, and on 19 May his sentence was changed on appeal from imprisonment to public labour - a punishment normally imposed for offences such as absenteeism.
During the May strikes four members of the illegal PoJska Portia Socjalistyczna (PPS), Polish Socialist Party, were detained and charged with assaulting an industrial guard at the Dolmel electronics factory in Wroclaw. The four - J6zef Pinior, Czeslaw Borowczyk, Jolanta Skiba and Aleksandra
Sarata- had attempted to organize a strike at the factory. They denied the charges, stating that the guard had been injured when he tried to evict them forcibly from factory premises. They were found guilty, heavily fined and given suspended prison sentences of up to a year.
There were reports of ill-treatment of detainees, often prisoners of conscience, held in short-term detention on account of their non-violent exercise of the right to freedom of expression. Wladyslaw Fus was detained in Wroclaw in March during a demonstration demanding the release of Kornel Morawiecki, leader of the banned opposition group Fighting Solidarity who was then in prison. Wladyslaw Fus was reportedly taken to a police station, beaten, bound and gagged, thrown against a wall so he lost consciousness, revived and put in a straitjacket with a noose around his neck and again beaten. He was eventually taken to hospital, apparently because of injuries sustained in detention.
At least one person was sentenced to death for murder but it was not known whether the sentence was carried out.
Throughout the year Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience and investigated cases of possible prisoners of conscience. The organization twice sent representatives to observe the trial in Wroclaw of the four PPS members charged with assaulting a factory guard. Amnesty International also urged the Polish authorities to investigate allegations that detainees had been ill-treated.
