PHILIPPINES
Dozens of real or suspected critics and opponents of the government reportedly "disappeared" in custody or were seized and executed by members of military or paramilitary forces without being brought to trial. Victims included suspected rebels, left-wing activists and church, trade union and human rights activists. There were reports of torture of detainees and some prisoners claimed they had been imprisoned on criminal charges for political reasons. A proposal to reinstate the death penalty was introduced in Congress.
Armed conflict between government forces and the New People's Army (NPA), the armed wing of the Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP), continued throughout the year. The government's counter-insurgency strategy involved use of both regular armed forces and armed citizen volunteer groups, commonly known as "vigilantes". However, in July President Corazon Aquino announced that, in response to criticism of "vigilantes'" human rights record, the groups would be disbanded. Instead, she said. Citizens' Armed Force Geographical Units (CAFGUs), together with unarmed local civilian self-defence groups, known as Bantay Bayan, would be established throughout the country. In addition, the authorities said they would improve the screening of recruits and the training and supervision of civilian armed groups; it was not clear by the year's end whether this had been effective.
The NPA was responsible for killing soldiers, police and civilians. The Alex Boncayao Brigade (ABB), a Manila-based NPA unit, publicly acknowledged responsibility for the assassination of several police officers during the year, including the killing of an officer accused by left-wing groups of involvement in the abduction and "disappearance" in March of Angelito loaquin, a youth activist. The NPA also claimed responsibility for the murder in January of an ex-mayor of Tubungan, Iloilo, whom they had taken prisoner. The organization said that he had confessed before an NPA "people's court" to ordering the killing of suspected rebels some years previously.
Among those reportedly killed by government or government-backed forces during the year were several human rights activists. Andres Rio, a journalist and district chairperson of the Human Rights Advocates of Leyte, was shot dead together with his companion, Manuel Dotollo, by soldiers from the 43rd Infantry Bataillon (IB) in the village of Himacugo, Hindang district, on 30 lanuary. The soldiers later claimed the two had been shot in an armed encounter, but local residents said they had been arrested, burned with cigarettes and stabbed before being shot dead by the soldiers. An investigation by the government-appointed Commission on Human Rights concluded that the two men had not been killed in an armed encounter but to Amnesty International's knowledge no action had been taken against the soldiers involved by the end of the year.
In Negros Occidental province several members of the families of two activists in the Basic Christian Communities (BCC) were reportedly killed by soldiers who suspected them of supporting the NPA. The BCC - community organizations of Christians established particularly in remote areas which priests are unable to visit regularly - were apparently suspected of sympathizing with the NPA because of their work in encouraging cooperative enterprises and political organizations. In February the wife of Pedro Obero, the BCC head in the village of Na-ilan, Cabia-an district, and three relatives, all young children, were killed by armed men believed to be soldiers from the 7th IB, in an attack on their home. In April Reynaldo de los Santos, an active member of the BCC's justice and peace committee in Hima-
ASIA AND THE PACIFIC / MALDIVES / NEPAL
maylan, and of other human rights organizations, was shot dead with his wife and three children aged six to 14 at their home in Aton-Aton, Mambagatan district. The attack occurred after local soldiers apparently accused Reynaldo de los Santos and his family of supporting the NPA. Following the deaths the Negros military command announced that there had been an armed encounter between the NPA and army Scout Rangers in which three rebels and one child had been killed. However, the sole survivor of the de los Santos family, together with other witnesses, stated that the family had been alone in their home when soldiers attacked them with automatic rifles and grenades. An inquiry was initiated by the Criminal Investigative Service of the Philippines Constabulary (PC), but its results were not known by the end of the year.
Three human rights lawyers were killed within a three-week period in mid-year. Ramos Cura, an attorney representing an imprisoned CPP leader and other suspected NPA members, was shot dead in June outside his house in Angeles City, Pampanga, by unidentified men whom local residents believed to be members of paramilitary "vigilante" groups armed and supervised in counter-insurgency operations by the local military. Attorney Alfonso Surigao, regional coordinator for the Free Legal Assistance Group (FLAG) - a network of human rights lawyers - and principal defence counsel for a group of farmers facing charges of rebellion, was shot dead at his house in Cebu City also in June. In early July a man confessed to the killing, saying he had been ordered to kill Attorney Surigao by a PC intelligence chief in Cebu. The intelligence chief was later arrested and charged with murder. Attorney Emmanuel Mendoza, who had received death threats because he had defended slum-dwellers and youth activists in Manila, was shot dead in a Manila street in July. The government's National Bureau of Investigation later announced that principal suspects in the killing were two police officers. Several other human rights lawyers received death threats during the year.
A number of activists in the national left-wing youth movement Kabafaan para so Demokrasya at Nasyonalismo (KADENA), Youth for Democracy and Nationalism, were arrested, killed or "disappeared" during the year. Police in Man-
ila claimed KADENA was a front organization for the ABB and its "sparrow units" (assassination squads). Two half-brothers - Angelito Joaquin, aged 16, and Roberto Pascual Sr, active in KADENA and related youth and community organizations, "disappeared" during the year. Angelito Joaquin was last seen on 23 March when witnesses saw him being arrested by police. Roberto Pascual was abducted by seven unidentified men armed with automatic rifles at his home in Navotas, Manila, on 7 April. Police officers denied that the two had been arrested and both were still missing at the end of the year.
Dozens of farmers "disappeared" after apparently having been taken into custody for questioning by soldiers on armed operations against the NPA. Eleven farmers active in the militant Small Farmers' Association of Negros "disappeared" from Bungsaran village, Ilihan district, in March. Villagers reported that they were arrested by members of the 332nd PC company who told relatives that the 11 would be sent home after questioning, but the company later denied having made any arrests. A government team investigating the "disappearances" in July was told by a local official that he saw the 11 farmers being taken away by men in military uniform but the investigators failed to visit the village to collect statements by relatives or other witnesses. At the end of the year the 11 farmers were still missing.
When she came to power in 1986 President Aquino took a number of steps to halt torture. However, the practice was reported with increasing frequency during the year. Several prisoners accused of leading roles in the NPA and/or CPP claimed they had been ill-treated or tortured in detention, especially while undergoing questioning at major military intelligence commands in the Metro Manila area. Elpi-dio Latorilla, Valeriano Alvarando and Anastacio Cortez, three men suspected by the authorities of being leading figures in the Mindanao CPP, were arrested in Quezon City between 5 and 9 July. According to their later statements, they were held incommunicado in an intelligence unit at the Philippine Army headquarters at Fort Bonifacio until 20 July. They alleged that during this time they were nearly suffocated with water and plastic bags, repeatedly and severely beaten and kicked, forced to lie on ice, had metal
ASIAANOTHE PACIFIC/PHILIPPINES
objects inserted into the anus, were burned with cigarettes, and subjected to mock executions. The outcome of any official investigations into these allegations was not known.
Detainees were also reportedly tortured or ill-treated in police stations. Eden Piano, arrested in June with his father, who was accused of repairing weapons for the NPA, had a nervous breakdown as a result of his experiences in police custody in Ballesteros, Cagayan district. He told his family that he had been severely beaten, nearly suffocated with water and forced to dig his own grave. An independent medical examination reported scars and contusions on his body and diagnosed a reactive psychosis requiring continued psychiatric care. In July the official Commission on Human Rights recommended that the Ballesteros police station commander be prosecuted but by the end of the year it was not known if any charges had been filed in court.
Others imprisoned under criminal charges accused of involvement in or support for the NPA, alleged that the charges against them were politically motivated and that they were being held for nonviolent activities in legal left-wing associations. Thirteen activist farmers from Nueva Ecija province said they were arrested in Baguio City in June during a meeting to review their activities and to plan a campaign against government land reform proposals. Several said they were tortured in custody in order to extract confessions and an official medical examination revealed evidence of injuries on 10 of the prisoners. The farmers were brought to court, charged with illegal possession of firearms and, in some cases, with subversion.
Official investigations into allegations of human rights abuses continued to be hampered by the unwillingness of military officials to cooperate, by the fact that soldiers and police may only be tried by military courts and by witnesses' fear of recriminations should they testify. The official Commission on Human Rights conducted investigations into several cases of human rights violations but by November, although there had been more than 1,000 reported incidents, the Commission announced that only 79 cases had been filed with military or civilian courts.
By the end of the year no military or
police officer had been convicted of a serious human rights-related offence committed under President Aquino's government. However some troops or police faced charges relating to allegations of human rights violations. Soldiers accused of the February 1987 killing of 17 villagers in Lupao village, Nueva Ecija district (see Amnesty International Report 1988), whose court-martial opened in February, were still being tried at the end of the year. A decree issued under former President Ferdinand Marcos - Presidential Decree (PD) 1850, preventing soldiers or police from being tried in civilian courts - remained in force, although bills to amend or repeal it were introduced in Congress. In September 1988 President Aquino waived PD 1850 in the case of the PC major charged with the murder of Attorney Alfonso Surigao.
A bill to reinstate the death penalty, abolished under the 1987 Constitution, was introduced in Congress. House Bill 295 - to reinstate the death penalty for 15 "heinous crimes", including murder and the sale and importation of prohibited drugs - was passed by the House of Representatives. The proposal was due for discussion in the Senate, but at the end of the year it had not reached this stage.
Amnesty International made repeated appeals for independent and impartial investigations into reports of "disappearances" or political killings by government or government-backed forces. In March Amnesty International published a report - Philippines; Uniawful Killings by Military and Paramilitary Forces - which gave details of over 70 killings during 1987 and called for thorough, independent investigations and effective measures to prevent further killings.
Amnesty International representatives visited the Philippines for talks with government and military officials in June and July. During the second visit, the Secretary General of Amnesty International met President Aquino, who assured him that human rights violations would not be tolerated by her government, which, she said, was committed to bringing those responsible for such violations to justice.
In September and November Amnesty International sent the authorities documents outlining reports of incommunicado detention, ill-treatment and torture it had received during the year. The organ-
ASIAANDTHE PACIFIC/PHILIPPINES/SINGAPORE
ization appealed for independent, thorough investigations into all such allegations and asked for official comments. Having received no substantive response, in December Amnesty International issued a public document drawing attention to the apparent re-emergence of torture, calling on the authorities to enforce legal safeguards against the practice and to investigate the allegations.
