SOUTH AFRICA
Thousands of people, including many prisoners of conscience, were detained without trial under state of emergency regulations or other security laws on account of their actual or suspected activities in opposition to apartheid. Many others were jailed for alleged political offences after trials which may have been unfair - defendants and uncharged detainees required to testify against them under threat of further imprisonment alleged that they had been tortured or ill-treated while held incommunicado in prolonged pre-trial detention. There were new deaths in custody of political detainees in suspicious circumstances. The death penalty continued to be used at a high rate: 117 people were hanged at Pretoria Central Prison and further executions were believed to have been carried out in Transkei and other nominally independent "homelands". Death sentences imposed on the "Sharpeville Six" and others, including four white police officers convicted of murdering prisoners, were commuted by State President P.W. Botha.
There was continued armed opposition to the government, in particular by the military wing of the banned African National Congress (ANC), which was re-
portedly responsible for various bombings and other acts of sabotage, some of which caused civilian deaths. A number of alleged ANC guerrillas were arrested or brought to trial during the year. In contrast, those responsible for a series of sabotage attacks directed at organizations critical of the government were not identified or apprehended. Such attacks included a bomb explosion which destroyed the Johannesburg headquarters of the South African Council of Churches (SACC) and an arson attack which destroyed the offices of the Southern African Catholic Bishops' Conference (SACBC) in Pretoria. The SACC and SACBC have long been critical of the government.
In June the government renewed for a further year the nationwide state of emergency which has been continuously in force since 12 June 1986. In February it had invoked its emergency powers to restrict drastically the activities of 18 political, community and other organizations. These included two human rights groups -the Detainees' Parents' Support Committee and the Detainees' Support Committee - which had actively monitored and campaigned against the use of detention without trial, torture and other human rights violations. Subsequently, the activities of over a dozen other non-violent organizations, including the End Conscription Campaign (ECC), were similarly restricted.
Detention without trial continued to be used extensively. Most political detainees were held under the emergency regulations. These empower all police and other security forces personnel to arrest people arbitrarily and detain them without charge for up to 30 days if they believe it will contribute to the termination of the emergency or preserve public order. After 30 days a detainee may be held for an indefinite period at the discretion of the Minister of Law and Order. When issuing such an order the Minister is not required to take account of any representations made by the detainee nor to divulge his or her reasons for issuing the order.
Many prisoners of conscience were among those held under the emergency regulations throughout 1988. A number of people have been detained without charge or trial since the emergency was first imposed in mid-1986; there were more than 100 such people remaining in detention at the end of the year. They included Sehlolo
AFRICA/SOUTH AFRICA
Dennis Neer, a leading black trade unionist from Port Elizabeth; Ivy Gcina, leader of a women's organization in the same city; and Thabo Makunyane, a former student and a previous prisoner of conscience. They and other emergency detainees had no effective means of challenging their detention or learning how long it might continue.
Although there were releases of long-term and short-term emergency detainees, increasingly detainees were served with restriction orders curtailing their freedom of movement, association and expression. Raymond Suttner, a white law lecturer held without charge since June 1986, was released on 5 September but placed under nightly house arrest. He was required to report to the police twice daily and prohibited from writing or saying anything for publication, from attending political gatherings and from having more than four visitors at any one time. He was forbidden to enter any educational institution and was therefore unable to return to his university teaching post. Stringent restrictions were similarly imposed on other released detainees, including newspaper editor Zwelakhe Sisulu. Released in December after almost a year in detention without charge or trial, he was placed under nightly house arrest and prohibited from writing for publication.
In September the plight of emergency detainees was brought into sharp focus when three prisoners of conscience escaped from detention while receiving treatment at a Johannesburg hospital. They successfully sought refuge in the US Consulate and appealed publicly for the state of emergency to be lifted and all detainees freed. Five weeks later the government agreed to withdraw their detention orders and the three were able to leave the consulate freely.
Those detained under the emergency included children and young people. At the end of May the Minister of Law and Order stated that no children under 16 were currently detained, although he acknowledged the continuing detention of a number of 16- and 17-year-olds. Dr Max Coleman, a leading South African human rights activist, challenged the Minister's assertion. He interviewed five detainees in Johannesburg's Diepkloof Prison, one of the prisons used to hold emergency detainees. who confirmed in sworn state-
ments that they were under 16 years of age.
Not all political detainees were held under state of emergency legislation. Some were held under security laws which have permanent effect, notably the Internal Security Act (ISA) of 1982 and similar laws in force in each of the four nominally independent "homelands". The most commonly used provision was Section 29 of the ISA, which permits security police to detain suspects indefinitely for interrogation without charge or trial, in solitary confinement and incommunicado throughout. In some cases detainees held under emergency regulations were transferred to Section 29 detention when lawyers sought access to them, or when court applications challenging the grounds for their detention were initiated. Former prisoner of conscience Noma India Mfeketo, for example, was first held under the emergency regulations after her arrest in Cape Town on 21 September. When court action was initiated to challenge the officially stated reasons for her detention she was placed under Section 29 on 12 October. She remained in incommunicado detention at the end of the year.
As in previous years. Section 29 of the ISA was directly associated with reports of torture and ill-treatment. In one case, Pet-rus Mokaba, a student activist, was alleged to have been chained to a chair and beaten, and subjected to sleep deprivation and other ill-treatment while detained under Section 29 in March. His sister sought a court order to protect him from further assault but this was denied. By the time of the court hearing - at which police officers denied torturing him - Petrus Mokaba's mother, who had seen him in detention shortly after his alleged torture, was unable to give evidence as she herself had been detained under the emergency regulations.
Police torture and ill-treatment of uncharged political detainees was also reported from the "homelands". In July and August students and others detained after widespread protests in the Venda "homeland" were reported to have been severely abused by local police, in particular by being beaten on the body and soles of their feet with sjamboks, a type of whip. In Transkei a former university student, Aga Khan Tiya, was reported to have been suffocated with a wet towel and stabbed in the throat while under interrogation by
AFRICA/SOUTH AFRICA
security police. His condition came to light only when he was moved to hospital under police guard and admitted to an intensive care unit.
Graphic evidence of torture in the Ciskei "homeland" emerged during the trial of six security police officers in connection with the death in 1987 of Eric Mntonga, a former prisoner of conscience and prominent political activist (see Amnesty Internationa] Report 1988). Those accused were the head of Ciskei's security police, his deputy and four other officers. Eric Mntonga had been found dead in his car and an inquest held without the knowledge of his family or lawyer had attributed his death to murder by unknown persons. However, it later emerged that he had been detained by security police, beaten about the face and suffocated to death during interrogation at Mdantsane police station. He was then stabbed in the neck and chest and his body removed from the police station in an attempt to conceal police responsibility for the killing. The trial was continuing at the end of the year.
In another case, 10 police accused of beating to death Makompo Kutumela, a detained Black Consciousness activist, in 1986, were acquitted in March despite an inquest finding that they were responsible (see Amnesty International Report 1988). Their acquittal followed a prosecution decision not to submit evidence from two witnesses to the killing.
Further deaths in custody in suspicious circumstances were recorded in 1988. In March Andile Kobe's body was found on a beach shortly after he was arrested and seen to be beaten by police at George in Cape Province. The police said his injuries must have been the result of his jumping from a vehicle and escaping. Three police were subsequently charged with murder but had not been brought to trial by the end of the year. In December Amos Khoza, aged 18, fell to his death from the seventh floor of an apartment block shortly after being detained as an alleged ANC guerrilla and taken there by police. Police said he had committed suicide but this was thrown into doubt by eye-witness reports that he was handcuffed and his feet manacled at the time of his fall.
Security police powers to detain incommunicado suspected government opponents without disclosing their arrest
or place of detention have long been seen as a context in which "disappearances" can occur. In June Stanza Bopape, a leading community activist, "disappeared" while detained under Section 29 of the ISA. Police said he escaped three days after his arrest on 9 June while they were replacing a flat tyre on the car in which they had been taking him to Vereeniging. However, his lawyers alleged that several days after this, security police told them that he was still in detention and that they were not informed of his "escape" until early July. Stanza Bopape's family, who had likewise not been informed, also thought the police explanation unlikely as police had made no attempt to question relatives or others about the alleged escape.
There were dozens of political trials during the year, some of which resulted in the imprisonment of actual or possible prisoners of conscience. The so-called Delmas trial, which had started in January 1986, concluded in December. Eleven of the 19 defendants (three had been acquitted at an early stage of the trial) were convicted, four of them on treason charges arising from civil unrest in the Vaal Triangle area in late 1984. The four, all former prisoners of conscience, received prison sentences ranging from six to 12 years. A fifth defendant received a five-year term and the others were given suspended sentences. During the trial the judge summarily dismissed one of two assessors he had appointed to hear the case with him, claiming that the assessor was biased in favour of the accused. When accused of bias himself by the defendants the judge refused to withdraw from the trial.
Other political trials were marked by allegations of torture of defendants in pretrial detention and by use of uncharged political detainees as state witnesses. Such witnesses who refuse to give evidence may be imprisoned for up to five years. In July, for example, Abdul Kader received a two-year sentence when he refused to testify against seven people standing trial before the Pretoria Supreme Court.
Three white critics of the government were imprisoned after refusing, for reasons of conscience, to undertake military service in the Defence Force on account of its role in maintaining apartheid. Ivan Toms, a doctor well known for his medical work among black squatters in the Western
AFRICA / SOUTH AFRICA / SUDAN
Cape, was jailed for 21 months in March. David Bruce and Charles Bester received maximum sentences of six years when they were tried in July and December respectively for refusing to perform military service.
The death penalty continued to be used extensively. In all, 117 people were hanged at Pretoria Central Prison; further executions may have been carried out in some or all of the four nominally independent "homelands". In March State President P.W. Botha rejected a clemency petition submitted by the "Sharpeville Six" (see Amnesty International Report 1988). Defence lawyers obtained a stay of execution and subsequently urged the Appeal Court to order a new trial on the grounds that important new evidence was available. The Appeal Court rejected this on 23 November but all six death sentences were commuted the same day by State President Botha, who also commuted six other death sentences. Those granted clemency included four police officers, two of whom had been convicted of murdering a political detainee in May, and two convicted of murdering two alleged drug dealers in April.
At least six government critics were killed in the country in circumstances which remained unclear at the end of the year. For example, 18-year-old Godfrey Sicelo Dhlomo was shot dead in Soweto on 25 January, five days after appearing in a United States documentary film alleging that he had been tortured while in detention. There were opposition claims that he and others were killed by government agents, but those responsible for his death were not identified.
Amnesty International continued to press for the release of prisoners of conscience and for the prompt, fair trial or release of other political detainees. The organization made numerous appeals on behalf of detainees and those under restriction orders, urged impartial investigation of torture allegations and deaths in custody and campaigned for commutation of the death sentences imposed on the "Sharpeville Six" and other prisoners. Amnesty International provided information on its concerns in South Africa to the Ad Hoc Working Group of Experts on Human Rights in Southern Africa set up by the United Nations Commission on Human Rights, and other UN bodies.
