SWEDEN
Nine Kurdish refugees remained under town arrest as a result of an administrative order imposed on them by the government in 1984.
In accordance with anti-terrorist provisions in the Aliens Act the government had decided that the nine - Aptullah Altun, Necmi Augiin, Ismet Celepli, Halis Ikinci-
EUROPE / SWEDEN / SWITZERLAND
soy, Karip Kent, Huseyin Koseoglu, Erdo-gan Sarikaya, Mehmet Tas and Ahmet Ulusoy - should be deported on the grounds that they were suspected of being terrorists. At the same time it declared that the expulsion order would be deferred as the nine Kurds might face political persecution if returned to Turkey, their country of origin. Instead the government imposed restrictions on their freedom of movement. The refugees had to report three times a week to the police and could not leave or change their town of residence without police permission. Breach of any of these regulations could result in imprisonment for up to a year.
Amnesty International was concerned that the authorities had not indicated when these restrictions might be lifted and that it seemed the legality of the restrictions could not be challenged before a court.
Amnesty International wrote to the Swedish Government in 1985 and in 1987. On both occasions the government replied that it would review the cases if there was reason to do so. However, in 1987 the government also stated that it would not take any action on the basis of Amnesty International's letter. In September 1988 the government announced that a parliamentary committee would be appointed to review anti-terrorist provisions in the Aliens Act.
In December the organization wrote again to the government requesting it to reconsider the cases of the nine Kurds and asking further detailed questions about procedures under which restrictions had been imposed upon the Kurds and about review procedures.
In March Amnesty International wrote to the government about the expulsion of two Palestinians and the imminent expulsion of two others on the grounds that they were suspected of being terrorists. The organization feared that they could face torture by the Syrian authorities in Lebanon or Syria. (For further details please see entry on Syria.)
In June Sweden ratified the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
