BRAZIL
The killing of peasant leaders and members of the indigenous population con* tinued, apparently with the acquiescence of local authorities. There were continued reports of torture and ill-treatment of criminal suspects and prisoners, and of the killing of criminal suspects by uniformed and off-duty police in circumstances suggesting the killings were extrajudicial executions.
A new Constitution was promulgated in October. This prohibited torture, set out specific rights for detainees and forbade the use of the death penalty in peacetime. The public prosecution service was given autonomy from the executive and the duty to oversee criminal police inquiries.
In September Amnesty International published a report, Brazil: Authorized Violence in Rural Areas, which documented a pattern of human rights violations in rural areas carried out with the acquiescence of the authorities. Amnesty International takes no position on competing claims over land ownership but the organization was concerned about the almost total impunity with which these abuses were committed and evidence that some local authorities not only tolerated them but were sometimes directly involved.
The report included some 50 cases of peasants, trade unionists and church workers who had been killed in the context of land disputes. Such killings were selective: the victims were community leaders
and others trying to establish peasants' claims to land and labour rights. Most of the killings appeared to have been carried out by gunmen hired by large landowners, speculators and rival claimants. In some cases there were indications of direct police involvement. The report gave details of how official inquiries into these killings were frequently jeopardized and obstructed. At the time of publication of the report, of more than 1,000 killings reported since 1980 Amnesty International knew of only three in which gunmen had been convicted; the organization did not know of any convictions of those who had hired gunmen to carry out the killings.
In the light of evidence of the failure of state authorities to conduct impartial investigations into political killings in rural areas Amnesty International called upon the federal authorities to open independent investigations into the cases documented and in future to use the federal police in parallel investigations. It recommended that special attention be given to evidence that law enforcement and local government officials, and private parties, had colluded in instigating or perpetrating these abuses or in obstructing subsequent criminal investigations.
The report was first presented to the Brazilian Government in April in the form of a memorandum, with a request for comment. In June Amnesty International sent a delegation to Brazil to discuss the issues and individual cases raised in the memorandum. Federal government representatives told the delegation that, although the government was aware of the scale of human rights violations and recognized failures in the administration of justice at state level, it did not accept responsibility for matters within state jurisdiction. At the end of the year Amnesty International was still awaiting the federal government's detailed response to individual cases raised in the memorandum.
During 1988 several peasants' and rural workers' leaders involved in land disputes were killed with the apparent acquiescence of local state authorities. On 5 February Francisco Domingos Ramos, President of the Rural Workers Trade Union of Pancas, Espirito Santo state, was shot dead by a gunman. Before his death Francisco Ramos had sought an investigation into death threats made against him by
+'($$&)&'$#%+&(##*)&#$$*)&&
a landowner in 1986; he was killed two weeks before a court was due to look into the threats. Three police officers were later indicted for his murder but charges against the landowner and an alleged gunman were dropped in October.
On 6 December Joâo Batista, a land rights lawyer and Socialist Party representative in the Legislative Assembly in Para state, was shot dead in front of his family. On the day of the killing he had told the Assembly that two military police had made death threats against him. By the end of December the police had failed to obtain a full statement from his widow -the principal witness to his killing - despite her efforts to provide an account of the events.
Francisco Alves Mendes Filho, known as Chico Mendes, the President of the Rural Workers Trade Union of Xapuri, Acre state, was killed on 22 December. Chico Mendes was widely known for his role in organizing rubber tappers to defend the environment. There had been six previous attempts on his life and he had appealed repeatedly and unsuccessfully to local, state and federal authorities to arrest those he believed were trying to kill him. Although these individuals had been convicted of previous murders, police repeatedly failed to enforce arrest warrants against them, and allowed them to move about the region freely. After the killing of Chico Mendes they were charged with his murder.
For the first time several killings of this type resulted in successful prosecutions. In February two men were sentenced to 24 years' and 25 years' imprisonment for the killing of Father Ezechiele Ramin in July 1985 (see Amnesty international Report 1986). In April another man was sentenced to 18 years, six months' imprisonment for killing Father Josimo Moráis Tavares in May 1986 (see Amnesty International He-port 1987). In each case people were formally charged with commissioning the killings; in neither case were they brought to trial. In September five men received sentences ranging from two years' imprisonment to 27 years' imprisonment for killing three Xacriabá Indians in Itacaram-bi, Minas Gérais state, in February 1987.
An increasing number of Brazil's indigenous people suffered violent attacks from ranchers and others laying claim to their land, and over 30 killings of indigen-
THEAMERICAS/BRA2IL
ous people were reported. In some areas it seemed that the situation was tolerated by the authorities. In March 14 Indians, including five children under the age of 12, were killed and 23 others wounded when gunmen opened fire on a group of about 60 unarmed Ticuna Indians. The attack occurred while the Indians were waiting for a meeting with a lawyer from the Fundaçao NacionaJ do Indio (FUNAl), National Indian Foundation, and the military police, in the municipality of Benjamin Constant, Amazonas state. Most of the dead and wounded were shot as they tried to escape in canoes. The subsequent police investigation appeared to have been seriously deficient. In May the Federal Appeals Court ruled that gunmen accused of the killings should be tried in a local court, despite fears that the local authorities' hostile attitude to the Ticuna Indians would make an impartial hearing unlikely. The trial was still in progress at the end of the year.
In the Territory of Roraima the isolated Yanomani tribe continued to suffer violent attacks by armed prospectors. There was little progress in investigations into some 25 killings of Yanomani Indians reported during 1987 and 1988. In October Ovelârio Tames, a 17-year-old Macuxi Indian youth, died in police custody in Norman-dia, Roraima, reportedly after being severely beaten by civilian police officers.
There were further reports both of torture and ill-treatment of criminal suspects as a means of obtaining confessions, and of deaths in custody. In September, after a habeas corpus writ had secured his release from custody, Silas Abel da Conceiçao alleged that he and Pedro de Almeida had been tortured after their arrest in Belo Horizonte, Minas Gérais state, as suspects in a robbery. He said that they had both been tortured by being beaten while suspended from an iron bar - the pau de arara (parrot's perch) - being given electric shocks and having water forced into their nostrils. Silas da Conceiçao alleged that Pedro de Almeida had died under torture and that his body had been removed from the police station in a plastic sack. He also alleged that he had been threatened with death by the police officers responsible unless he testified that Pedro de Almeida had escaped from custody. Silas da Conceiçao was last seen alive on 7 October being escorted through his neighbourhood
THEAMERICAS/BRAZIL/CHILE
by two of the poUce officers whom he had accused of killing his friend. His body was found later with a bullet in the back of the neck. A police inquiry was opened but the officers under investigation were not suspended from duty pending its outcome. A further inquiry was opened when witnesses and relatives of the two youths alleged that they were being followed and threatened by these officers.
There were renewed reports that police officers in Rio de Janeiro were involved in the activities of so-called death squads. These were held responsible for hundreds of killings, mostly of criminal suspects under 18 years of age, in Baixada Fluminense on the outskirts of the city. Between July 1987 and February 1988 the state government's Special Commission of Inquiry into Extermination Groups examined 161 cases, resulting in charges against eight police officers.
In December Simone Amaral Cequeira, aged 17, and Disney Erwin Rodriguez, were detained in Nova Friburgo, Rio de Janeiro state, by three men in plain clothes who were later identified as members of the military police. This apparently occurred after Disney Rodriguez had accused local police officers of extortion in drugs-related cases. Two days after they had been abducted the bodies were found on a rubbish tip on the outskirts of the city, bearing marks of torture and mutilation. At the end of the year two military police officers were facing charges of murdering the two.
The authorities failed to institute rigorous investigations into incidents in which lethal force was used in disputed circumstances. It was not until six months after the incident on the Tocantins Bridge, Para state, in December 1987 - in which up to 10 gold miners and their relatives were shot dead by military police (see Amnesty International Report 1988) - that the government's Human Rights Council initiated an investigation in loco. A federal police inquiry was opened but its results had not been made public by the end of the year. Inquiries into a similar incident in November, at Volta Redonda, Rio de Janeiro state - when three steel-workers were killed by members of the armed forces - had not been completed by the end of the year. The deaths occurred when soldiers were ordered to take control of the National Steelworks Company, then under occupation by striking metal-workers.
In November the relatives of 40 of some 125 people who had "disappeared", mostly during the mid-1970s under former military governments, submitted a petition to the Supreme Court. The petition was based on the new constitutional provision of habeas data which established the right of access to personal files, including those held by the security services. In considering the petition the Attorney General gave his opinion that such files should be opened to help relatives clarify the fate of the "disappeared". At the end of the year the Supreme Court had not issued a judgment.
In September Amnesty International launched a campaign to draw its concerns about human rights violations in rural areas to the attention of the authorities at local, state and federal levels. By the end of the year the Federal Government had not replied to the memorandum Amnesty International had submitted in April. During the course of the year the organization sought information from the federal authorities about investigations into killings of 14 Ticuna Indians and of a Patax6-ha-ha-hae Indian in March, and into the death in police custody of a 17-year-old Macuxi Indian in October. The organization continued to seek information from the government's Human Rights Council (National Council for the Defence of the Rights of the Person) about incidents involving police use of lethal force, such as the killings on the Tocantins Bridge in December 1987.
