ITALY
Excessive delays were reported in judicial proceedings in political cases and in the investigation and judgment of allegations of ill-treatment of people in police custody. There was a substantial increase in the number of these allegations and many reported in previous years were still the subject of judicial proceedings. Large numbers of people who objected to performing national service on conscientious grounds were imprisoned.
According to unofficial estimates, over 60 per cent of the prison population were awaiting final judgments during the year. Law 330 introduced in August was seen as
EUROPE/ITALY
a response to this problem. It reduced the number of offences requiring arrest and preventive detention and sought to reduce the number of people in custody by increasing the availability of alternatives to imprisonment such as house arrest and police registration.
A new Code of Penal Procedure was published in October and was due to come into force in October 1989. The inquisitorial system of criminal justice will be replaced by a system containing many features of an accusatorial system. It is aimed at simplifying and speeding up excessively lengthy judicial procedures and strengthening the rights of the defence. Among its provisions are the abolition of the role of the investigating judge, the introduction of abbreviated forms of trial, and the right of cross-examination during court hearings. Prosecutions based entirely on the uncorroborated testimony of dissociati and peniiti - alleged former accomplices offered remission of sentence in exchange for cooperating with the judicial authorities - will no longer be possible.
Since 1977 Amnesty International has repeatedly criticized the excessive length of legal procedures and expressed concern that many defendants in political cases might not have received fair and prompt trials. The severe problems in the current legal system were evident in a number of political trials which took place during the year.
In October the Supreme Court ruled in the Rome section of the "7 April" case, over nine years after the first defendants were arrested (see Amnesty international Report 1980 to 1988). It confirmed the appeal court sentences of June 1987 which had acquitted many of the leading defendants originally sentenced for belonging to subversive associations and to "armed bands". They had been charged in connection with the activities of Autonomía Operaia (Workers' Autonomy) - a grouping of left-wing organizations. Amnesty International had sent observers to first instance and appeal hearings and considered that the first instance trial breached European and international norms because defendants had not received a fair trial within a reasonable time.
The appeal hearing of 112 defendants in the Padua section of the "7 April" trial opened before Venice Assize Court in
January. The judicial proceedings had begun in 1979 (see Amnesty International Report 1980 to 1987). In March the court reduced many of the sentences passed by the first instance court in 1986. This had concluded that Auionomia Operaia was not an "armed band" and had acquitted those charged solely in connection with their alleged membership of the group. A Supreme Court hearing was still pending at the end of the year.
Another trial related to the Padua section of the "7 April" case opened before Padua Assize Court in October. Claudio Cérica, Marcello Faganelli, Mario Saltarin and Stefano Micheletti were accused of belonging to a subversive association and forming an armed band, the Fronte Comunista Combatteníe (FCC), the Fighting Communist Front. They were also charged with possession of arms but were not accused of being the material authors of specific violent acts. It was alleged that the FCC was one of the groups under the umbrella of the Autonomía movement and had carried out violent attacks between 1977 and 1980. In November Claudio Cérica and Marcello Faganelli were convicted of subversive association; Claudio Cérica was sentenced to three years, four months' imprisonment, two years of which were suspended; Marcello Faganelli was sentenced to one year's suspended imprisonment. Both were immediately placed in provisional liberty. The other two defendants were acquitted. An Amnesty International observer who attended the trial commented on the vague and generic nature of the charges and was concerned about the extent to which the court relied upon uncorroborated evidence of peniiti -in this case former Red Brigade members.
Several hundred people were believed to be serving sentences of up to 16 months' imprisonment as a result of their refusal, on religious or political grounds, to conform to the national service laws. The majority were Jehovah's Witnesses. As the period of alternative civilian service is eight months longer than ordinary military service. Amnesty International considered that it did not provide an acceptable alternative to military service and that those imprisoned for refusing to undertake it were prisoners of conscience.
In March Amnesty International wrote to the Defence Committees of both houses of parliament following reports that a
EUROPE/ITALY
number of draft bills amending the law on conscientious objection were under consideration. Amnesty International stated that the length of alternative service should not be punitive and expressed concern that under the current law there was no provision for conscripts to apply for conscientious objector status after they had joined the armed forces and that the grounds on which such status was granted were unduly restrictive. The letters also drew attention to the international legal standards on which Amnesty International's position is based. A new draft law was being drawn up at the end of the year.
All allegations of ill-treatment in police custody reported during 1988 concerned criminal suspects. However, Francesco Badano, arrested by the Padua Flying Squad in connection with a robbery, was also suspected of belonging to a right-wing terrorist group. A police officer was fatally shot in the course of Francesco Badano's arrest on the morning of 16 May. Francesco Badano's lawyer stated that when he saw his client in the police station later in the day his eyes and face were heavily bruised and swollen and his feet were so swollen he was unable to walk. Francesco Badano alleged that he had been beaten and given several injections. A forensic doctor called in to examine him ordered the prisoner to hospital. The next day the family was informed that Francesco Badano had committed suicide by hanging in the hospital's high security wing. His father filed an official complaint on 18 May and the Public Prosecutor immediately opened a judicial inquiry. The police stated that the injuries on the detainee's body were attributable to a violent struggle at the time of arrest. In early November the findings of forensic specialists representing both the prosecutor and the family confirmed the existence of injuries to the soles of the detainee's feet which were "not consistent" with injuries inflicted in the course of a violent arrest. There were also said to be injuries on his body "consistent" with such an arrest. Amnesty International wrote to the authorities asking to be informed of the outcome of the inquiry and of any judicial proceedings arising from it.
In July 15-year-old Antonio Leone was shot in the head while being questioned at a carabinieri barracks outside Naples in connection with a number of thefts. He lost
an eye. The carabinieri stated publicly that the gun had not been aimed at Antonio Leone and had fired accidentally. His 14-year-old co-detainee alleged that both were threatened with a gun held towards the back of Antonio Leone's neck just before it fired. The medical examination contradicted the carabinieri account of the incident. Amnesty International wrote to obtain confirmation that a full judicial investigation was being carried out to establish the exact circumstances in which the shooting occurred. In October the Minister of the Interior informed Amnesty International that the case was being examined by the judicial authorities.
Allegations of ill-treatment often concerned North African immigrants. It was reported that a dossier sent to the Milan Public Prosecutor in April by the medical staff of San Vittore Prison described an alarming increase in the number of prisoners requiring medical treatment on arrival for injuries consistent with physical ill-treatment. The dossier apparently listed the cases of approximately 47 prisoners, the majority North African immigrants, who had been transferred to the prison after spending short periods in the custody of law enforcement agencies. Amnesty International wrote to obtain information on the progress of an inquiry reportedly opened by the Prosecutor's office. No reply had been received by the end of the year,
It was reported that an amnesty had been granted to four police officers sentenced to suspended prison terms in 1983 for abusing their authority during the interrogation of a Red Brigades member by beating him, tying him to a table and forcing him to drink large quantities of water (see Amnesty International Report 1983 and 1986). In 1984 an appeal court convicted them on a lesser charge of coercion and in 1987 the Supreme Court found them guilty of "attempted coercion", upholding the mitigating circumstances allowed by the lower courts of "having acted for reasons of high social and moral value". The lesser charge qualified them for an amnesty.
In June Amnesty International received a communication from the Inter-Ministerial Committee on Human Rights within the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. It referred to issues raised in the Amnesty International Report 1987, including subsequent developments in two judicial in-
EUROPE/ITALY/POLAND
quiries concerning alleged torture and ill-treatment in police custody. According to this information, one of the approximately 30 people whose cases was included in an investigation opened by the Naples Procurator General in 1986 was awaiting trial on a charge of calumny against the police; a second such case was under investigation. However, there was no news about the other cases of alleged ill-treatment. Amnesty International was also informed that no date had been set for the trial of a number of law enforcement agents who had been committed for trial in October 1986 in connection with Salvatore Marino's death in custody in Palermo during August 1985.
The Inter-Ministerial Committee on Human Rights also addressed Amnesty International's criticism of legal procedures by supplying information about the functioning of the judicial system and explanations on how it had been applied in specific political trials described in recent issues of the Amnesty International Report.
In December Italy ratified the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment and the Sixth Protocol to the European Convention on Human Rights concerning the abolition of the death penalty.
