ANGOLA
Many suspected members or supporters of the Uniao Nacionol para a independ#n-cia Total de Angola (UNITA), National Union for the Total Independence of Angola - an armed opposition group fighting against the government - con-tinned to be held without charge or trial. Over 20 others were sentenced to prison terms after trials which may have been unfair and others who had been tried in previous years continued to serve sen-nces against which they had been unable to appeal. Three former security officials were convicted of ill-treating prisoners. Seven people were sentenced to death for murder and a death sentence passed in 1987 was commuted on appeal. No death sentences were carried out and in December the head of state announced that the sentences of all prisoners currently under sentence of death were being commuted.
Fighting between UNITA, which was supported by South African troops until they withdrew in September, and government forces aided by Cuban soldiers, continued throughout the year. In December Angola, Cuba and South Africa signed agreements concerning the independence of Namibia which were to lead to the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola. Angola and South Africa each agreed not to allow their territory to be used for attacks against the other. However neither would pledge to end financial or diplomatic support for the African National Congress (ANC) and the South-West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO) - which have been backed by Angola - and UNITA -
which has been backed by South Africa.
Prisoners were taken by both sides during conflict between government troops and UNITA forces and some were said to have been tortured or killed. There were reports that in some areas the government's military or security police, known as "red berets", extrajudicially executed suspected UNITA supporters. In the south some government soldiers who deserted were reportedly summarily executed upon recapture. These reports were impossible to confirm. There were further reports, relating to previous years, that UNITA tortured or killed suspected opponents.
Official sources announced the arrest of some 200 members or suspected members of UNITA in areas of conflict but the total of those held, including suspected civilian UNITA supporters, seems to have been significantly higher. Hundreds of other members or suspected members of UNITA arrested in previous years were held without trial. Other UNITA members reportedly surrendered voluntarily to the authorities in response to a government policy of clemency first announced in 1978. In December a law was passed guaranteeing that armed government opponents who surrendered and agreed to obey the Constitution would be allowed to return to civilian life. The measure, which was to take effect from February 1989 and remain in force for a year, also applied to government opponents who had been detained or imprisoned by the Angolan authorities.
Several members of the Church of Jesus Christ on Earth, known as the Tocoist Church, were reportedly arrested in May. The reasons for these arrests were not reported, though in previous years there had been clashes between two factions of the sect which had resulted in arrests. Three Zairian asylum-seekers held without charge since December 1985 were released, one in late 1987 and the other two in early 1988.
In January nine former security officials were tried by the People's Revolutionary Court in the capital, Luanda, on charges concerning the torture of detainees in 1983 or 1984, most of whom had been tried for diamond-smuggling by the same court in October 1984 (see Amnesty International Report 1985). This was the first report of a trial of officials accused of torture since Angola achieved independence in 1975, although officials were dismissed in 1979
AFRICA/ANGOLA
following allegations that security police had tortured and killed prisoners. The nine former officials tried in January were accused of involvement in a plot to discredit the government by forcing detainees to make statements alleging that high-ranking government officials had been involved in diamond-smuggling. The court found that three of the former security officials had personally tortured or ill-treated detainees, by, for example, subjecting one to a mock execution and causing another to be held in handcuffs in a bathroom for over two days. Another of the victims, Francisco Fragata, had been convicted of espionage in October 1984 and sentenced to death, though a month later his sentence had been commuted to six years' imprisonment. At the time the appeals court did not indicate whether the original sentence had been imposed on the basis of statements made under duress. The court which tried Francisco Fragata's alleged torturers in January reportedly concluded that what had happened to him had not affected the verdict in the 1984 trial.
At the end of the January trial two of the former security officials found guilty of torture were sentenced to four months' imprisonment for "treating prisoners with illegal severity" while the third, the leader of the alleged plot, was also convicted of "rebellion" - attempting to change the form of government by illegal means — and sentenced to 18 years' imprisonment. Three others were convicted of "rebellion" and given 15- and 16-year sentences; their superior officer received a three-year sentence for negligence. The remaining defendants. both charged with torturing prisoners, were acquitted.
As in previous years very few of the prisoners suspected of supporting UNITA were charged and tried. Regional Military Tribunals tried the cases of over 20 people accused of committing crimes such as sabotage and sentenced them to periods of imprisonment ranging from two years to 16 years. Few details of the trials were available but in the past trials by regional military courts were known to have been unfair, particularly as defendants were not adequately assisted by defence counsel.
The trial of 30 members of the Church of Jesus Christ on Earth began in November before the People's Revolutionary Court in
Luanda. Neither the names of the defendants nor details of the charges against them were available but the charges apparently arose out of violent clashes between two factions of the sect in December 1986 and a demonstration in February 1987 (see Amnesty International Report 1988). The trial was believed to be continuing at the end of the year.
There were reports that a group of about 25 political prisoners were released at the government's orders in late 1988. They apparently included Estevâo Gomes Dias, who was serving a 12-year prison sentence imposed in 1981 for complicity in bomb attacks in Huambo in support of UNITA. His trial before the People's Revolutionary Tribunal was believed to have been unfair.
In contrast to previous years no political opponents of the government were sentenced to death. However, an increased number of death sentences as a punishment for ordinary crimes was reported. Seven people were sentenced to death for murder in the course of robbery. A soldier and five other people who were apparently dressed in military uniforms at the time of their crimes were sentenced to death by military courts in January and October. The seventh, an army deserter, was sentenced to death by the People's Revolutionary Court in June. None was executed.
In May the death sentence passed in August 1987 on Felix Mateus Mungue -the first person to be sentenced to death by an ordinary district court - was commuted to 22 years' imprisonment by the Tribunal da Relaçâo, the court of appeal in ordinary criminal cases. The court concluded that although he was guilty of murder there had been mitigating circumstances. In its verdict the court referred to increasing opposition at the level of international public opinion to the use of the death penalty as punishment for ordinary crimes and declared that states and their institutions had a duty to preserve the most sacred human right to life. In December President José Eduardo dos Santos announced the government's intention to commute the sentences of all prisoners currently under sentence of death as a measure of clemency "to mark the 40th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and in the name of national harmony". He reported that a law commuting the death sentences had been drafted
AFRICA/ANGOLA/BENIN
and was to be submitted to the National Assembly in early 1989.
There were reports that Tito Chingungi, a former UNITA representative in the United States, had been recalled to UNITA's headquarters in southeastern Angola and briefly held in custody for expressing opposition to some of UNITA's policies. Amnesty International also received further information in 1988 about human rights abuses within UNITA between 1979 and 1986. During this period, internal critics and opponents of the UNITA leadership are reported to have been tortured and killed. In March 1982 three women were declared witches and burnt to death with members of their families before watching crowds. In September 1983, 12 people were burnt, including, it is believed, Joao Kalitangui, his wife, their three children aged between seven and 15 years, and a 12-year-old niece. Joao Kalitangui had been accused of plotting against the life of UNITA leader Jonas Savimbi.
There were reports that SWAPO continued to hold prisoners in Angola, although in October it announced that they were to be released and rehabilitated. Over 100 SWAPO members apparently accused of spying for South Africa had been held in SWAPO bases since 1986. No information was available about the legal basis for their imprisonment in Angola, or about their whereabouts or conditions of detention. They included Samuel Thomas, a former employee of the Zambia-based United Nations Institute for Namibia, and Johannes Konjore, a former SWAPO representative in Zambia. Bience Gawanas, a London-based barrister and SWAPO member, was reportedly detained by SWAPO in Zambia in August and subsequently transferred to SWAPO premises in Luanda. The reasons for her detention remained unclear at the end of the year. No new information was received during the year about ANC members reportedly imprisoned in ANC bases in Angola.
Amnesty International continued to make inquiries about political detainees but received no reply from the authorities. It also investigated the cases of prisoners believed to be held in Angola by SWAPO with the acquiescence of the Angolan Government. Amnesty International welcomed the government's decision to bring to justice security officials accused of torturing prisoners and called for the intro-
duction of specific safeguards to prevent torture. The organization continued to urge the commutation of death sentences, welcomed the commutation of a death sentence in May and the draft law to commute all such sentences.
