BURUNDI
There were reports of many extrajudicial killings of civilians by government troops during military operations to suppress intercommunal disturbances in two northern provinces. Most of those killed belonged to the majority Hutu community. Other Hutu suspected of opposing the government, including prisoners of con-science, were detained without trial, both before and after the intercommunal unrest.
Major Pierre Buyoya, who took power in a military coup in September 1987, continued to head the Comité militaire de salut national (CMSN), the Military Committee for National Salvation, which was composed entirely of officers belonging to the minority Tutsi community which dominates the army. In October, following the intercommunal violence, the Hutu community was given stronger representation in the government and a prominent Hutu leader, Adrien Sibomana, was appointed Prime Minister.
In August intercommunal killing involving the Hutu and Tutsi communities broke out in the provinces of Ngozi and Kirundo, particularly in Marangara and Ntega districts near the border with Rwanda. The disturbances began in Marangara but appeared to have calmed down when on 14 August the first killings were reported in Ntega, where a number of Tutsi were killed by Hutu using machetes and spears. Violence then spread rapidly throughout Ntega district and to Marangara. Government troops were brought in to quell the disturbances but in the course of what the authorities described as
AFRICA/BURUNDI
counter-insurgency operations against armed rebels they carried out apparently systematic reprisals against Hutu civilians. Many people, including women and children, were said by eye-witnesses to have been killed by soldiers while fleeing and others were reported to have been killed after being herded into huts which were then set on fire. Medical examinations of Hutu civilians who sought refuge in Rwanda revealed that many had bayonet or gunshot wounds in the back, apparently caused by weapons of a type used in Burundi only by the armed forces.
In the wake of the killings several thousand Hutu fled to Rwanda; some also sought refuge in Tanzania and Zaire. Three days after the killings began the government estimated the number of dead at 5,000 and implied that most were Tutsi who had been killed by Hutu. Other sources suggested that as many as 20,000 people had been killed, the majority of them Hutu.
At the end of August the government announced that the killings had ceased and in September President Buyoya appointed a 24-member commission, comprising 12 representatives from each community, to study the question of national unity. The commission was not mandated to investigate the August killings; this task was said by the authorities to have been entrusted to a "technical commission" neither the composition nor terms of reference of which were revealed. At the end of the year its findings had not been made public. However in December official sources indicated that some 60 civilians were to be charged in connection with offences committed during the August disturbances, although no disciplinary measures were to be taken against members of the armed forces. The authorities conceded that some innocent civilians might have been killed by soldiers but said that such killings had not been the result of a deliberate policy of reprisal.
At the beginning of 1988 six former senior officials of the government of ex-President Jean Baptiste Bagaza who had been arrested in October 1987 as part of a government anti-corruption campaign were still in custody. At least one of them, Isidore Nyaboya, a former Minister of Public Works, was charged with complicity in the embezzlement of public funds and was brought to trial in June. He was acquitted
by the High Court but the government protested against the verdict and rede-tained him. He was retried in August after the intercommunal killings, convicted of falsification of public documents and sentenced to eight years' imprisonment. It was not clear how many other officials had been tried by the end of 1988.
Arrests of Hutu were reported both before and after the August killings. Early in the year suspected supporters of the Parti pour la Jifa^ration du peupJe hutu, (PALIPEHUTU), Party for the Liberation of the Hutu People, an opposition group based outside Burundi, were said to have been arrested in the provinces of Cibitoke and Gitega. In January six other Hutu who had been deported from Rwanda were detained on their arrival in Burundi, apparently because they were suspected of plotting against the Burundi Government. One, Hezekiya Sahera, was reported to have died as a result of beatings inflicted while he was in custody. In February the other five were released uncharged, apparently after local people in their home area, Cibitoke, had protested against their detention.
Those detained following the outbreak of violence in August who appeared to be prisoners of conscience included Marc Ntahondereye, a development worker in Kirundo, who was arrested together with several others. At the end of the year it was not known whether they had been released.
Six signatories of an open letter addressed to President Buyoya by 27 academics and students at the end of August were among those arrested and still held at the end of the year. Apparently no formal charges were brought against them but the authorities alleged that they had incited racial hatred. They included Aloys Habonimana, Leonce Ndikumana and Augustin Nsanze, all teachers at the national university. Further arrests of Hutu intellectuals occurred in September and October; those detained included two civil servants, Melchior Ndadaye and Pierre Claver Sendegeya, who were arrested in Gitega province at the end of October after attending a public meeting at which relations between the Hutu and Tutsi communities were reportedly discussed. The government publicly acknowledged only the detentions of the signatories of the open letter. This gave rise to fears among
relatives for the safety of other Hutu prisoners.
Amnesty International expressed concern to the government about reports of extrajudicial killings of civilians by government troops in August and called for immediate action to prevent further killings and to investigate the events. Amnesty International also urged the government to identify publicly all those detained, to reveal where they were being held, and to release unconditionally all those detained for the peaceful expression of political opinions.
