VIETNAM
Nearly 5,800 political prisoners were said to have been released from administrative detention in "re-education" camps in two major amnesties announced during 1988. They included more than 1,000 military officers and civilian personnel of the former Republic of Viet Nam who had been detained without charge or trial since 1975. According to the government, only about 130 political prisoners held since 1975 remained in "re-education" camps by the end of the year. However, several hundred others arrested in later years were believed still to be in detention, including at least 25 prisoners of conscience, some of whom were brought to trial in 1988 after years in detention without charge or trial. The government media reported several incidents of ill-treatment and killings of detainees in custody by police and public security forces during 1988. According to press reports at least five people were sentenced to death but no executions were publicly announced during the year.
The doi moi, "renovation", program sanctioned at the sixth congress of the Communist Party of Viet Nam (CPV) in 1986, continued to be implemented. Aimed at reform of the political and economic structure of the party and the state, it has also brought about gradual improvements in civil and political rights. A Criminal Procedure Code, the first of its kind in Viet Nam, was adopted by the National Assembly in June and was scheduled to come into effect in January 1989.
Information on the system of compulsory "re-education" remained scarce, although the two amnesties announced by the Council of State on the occasion of the
Vietnamese New Year in February and National Day in September were widely publicized. Figures issued by the authorities suggested that together the amnesties resulted in the release of 11,500 prisoners of whom nearly 5,800 had been held in administrative detention without charge or trial in "re-education" camps. The remainder were thought to have been held for alleged criminal offences. Among those released from "re-education" were over 1,000 people held since 1975 on account of positions they had held in the armed forces or the civilian administration of the former Republic of Viet Nam. More than 160 of them were released from the Nam Ha "re-education" camp in Ha Nam Ninh province and a total of 700 were reportedly released from camps in Xuan Loc in Dong Nai province and in Ham Tan in Thuan Hai province. Those released reportedly included a former minister, 11 former army generals, several former senators and parliamentarians, 82 former military and intelligence officers, and at least 35 chaplains who had served in the armed forces of the Republic of Viet Nam.
Announcing the February releases, Phan Quang, a Deputy Minister of Information, stated that those freed had "shown repentance and made progress during the course of their re-education". He said that "only 159 persons of the former Saigon regime" continued to be detained since 1975. In June, the Interior Minister, Mai Chi Tho, stated that of a total of 500,000 people detained in "re-education" camps following the end of hostilities in 1975, including more than 100,000 officers, only about 190 of the "most dangerous" members of the former administration were still in detention. Earlier in the year CPV Secretary General Nguyen Van Linh had announced that all remaining prisoners held in "re-education" camps would be released, without referring to numbers of prisoners affected.
During 1988 Amnesty International learned of the release of 15 prisoners of conscience, most of whom had been in "re-education" camps for more than 12 years. They included lawyers Nguyen Huu Giao, Vu Ngoc Truy and Dao Van; journalists Le Van Tien and Pham Van Tam; two Roman Catholic priests. Do Bich Ngo and Le Trung Thinh; Thich Nu Tri Hai, a Buddhist nun; Nguyen Dan Que, a medical doctor; and Truong Vi Tri and Tran Trung
ASIAANDTHEPACinC/VIET NAM
Dung, who had been elected representatives in the former National Assembly and Senate respectively. Dozens of other untried political detainees whose cases Amnesty International had been investigating for many years were known to have been released during 1988.
However, at least 25 other prisoners of conscience were still imprisoned at the end of the year. Most were held in administrative detention without charge or trial. They included writers, journalists, businesspeople, teachers, Buddhists, and Catholic and Protestant clergy, all of whom had been detained since the late 1970s on account of their alleged political sympathies or for dissenting from government efforts to control activities in the economic, cultural and religious spheres. One such prisoner, novelist Duong Hung Cuong, who had been held in administrative detention since May 1984, was reported to have died in custody in January 1988.
At least two other prisoners of conscience, Thich Quang Do and Thich Huyen Quang, both prominent Buddhist monks, continued to live under house arrest in their native villages. In June Bishop Nguyen Van Thuan, a long-term detainee, was reported to have been allowed to receive letters for the first time in 13 years. He was said to have been released from house arrest in November.
In June another prisoner of conscience, Monsigneur Nguyen Kim Dien, the Archbishop of Hue, died after an unspecified illness. He had also been under house arrest and had had severe restrictions placed on his religious activities.
Press reports indicated an increase in the number of prisoners of conscience tried under provisions of the penal code introduced in January 1986. Several prisoners of conscience brought to trial after they had served long periods in untried detention were charged with involvement in "counter-revolutionary activities". In April writers Doan Quoc Sy and Hoang Hai Thuy were tried by the People's Court in Ho Chi Minh City after spending four years in untried detention. They were convicted of spreading "propaganda against the socialist system" and sentenced to nine and eight years' imprisonment respectively. Both appealed against the verdict and were reported to have had their sentences reduced in November by one and two
years respectively.
In May Ho Hieu Ha and two other Protestant pastors were reported to have lost appeals against prison sentences which had been imposed by the People's Court in 1987 after they had been found guilty of "preaching against the revolution". They were believed to be held at the Chi Hoa Prison in Ho Chi Minh City.
Thich Tue Sy and Thich Tri Sieu, prisoners of conscience and monks who are among Viet Nam's foremost Buddhist scholars, were tried by the People's Court in September together with 19 others. They were alleged to have engaged in subversive activities and to have established a "counter-revolutionary organization". The two monks were sentenced to death, the others to prison terms ranging from four years to life imprisonment. It was later reported that the Supreme People's Court had commuted the death sentences to long prison terms.
In August and September the Ho Chi Minh City People's Court sentenced a total of 47 people to prison terms ranging from two years to life imprisonment on charges of "attempting to overthrow the revolutionary government". All were reported to have been convicted of writing and distributing "counter-revolutionary documents designed to discredit the system" and "almost all" to have pleaded guilty. Although the Constitution provides for defendants to plead their cases and to seek legal assistance, these defendants were not accorded the right to independent legal counsel of their own choosing. Amnesty International believed these trials fell short of internationally accepted standards.
Reports in the government media about deaths in custody and ill-treatment of suspects in detention gained greater prominence during the year. One referred to the practice of "arbitrary arrests, coached testimony, testimony obtained by trickery, forced testimony, and even beatings of the accused to obtain confessions that conform to the opinion of cadres". On at least two occasions members of the security forces were tried and found guilty of killing suspects in custody. In April a police officer was sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment by the Supreme People's Court for having beaten to death a 13-year-old student he had arrested on suspicion of stealing grain and then attempting to conceal
ASIA ANDTHE PACIFIC / VIET NAM
the murder. In September three police officers were imprisoned for between four and 10 years after they had been found guilty of torturing to death a man suspected of stealing a radio-cassette player. The three policemen reportedly attempted to fake the prisoner's suicide by hanging the body from the bars of a cell window. A post mortem examination revealed that he had been beaten to death.
At least five death sentences were pronounced during the year. In May a Ha Noi court reportedly sentenced to death two men who had been arrested for the armed theft of a motorcycle and who had later escaped from the central prison in Ha Noi. In September the Ho Chi Minh City People's Court sentenced to death Tran Van Luong and two Buddhist monks -Thich Tue Sy and Thich Tri Sieu - in separate proceedings for "counterrevolutionary activities". The two monks reportedly had their sentences commuted to imprisonment before the end of the year but the outcome of the appeals process for the other three prisoners was not known.
Throughout 1988 Amnesty International called on the government to release all prisoners of conscience and to review the cases of all political prisoners held in administrative detention in "reeducation" camps. The organization also appealed to the government to commute all reported death sentences.

