CAPEVERDE
Three police officers were imprisoned for torturing prisoners and causing the death of one of them. One person was imprisoned for and two others charged with offences connected with their criticism of the government.
Joao Alfredo Fortes Días was imprisoned in April after the Supreme Court upheld his conviction for painting slogans that were defamatory to the government on walls. He had been sentenced to nine months' imprisonment in November 1987 by the Regional Criminal Court in Minde-lo, Sao Vicente Island, but was released pending his appeal (see Amnesty International Report 1988).
On 1 November the director of Terra Nova, a Roman Catholic monthly newspaper noted for its strong criticism of government policies, was given a suspended three-month prison sentence and a fine for abusing press freedom. His appeal had not been heard by the end of the year. The newspaper had published articles by a correspondent, José Teófilo Santos Silva, which the court found offensive to the reputation of a government official, the ruling party and other institutions. He was also charged with abusing press freedom but the trial was postponed until the following year.
In February the senior officer of a police station on Brava Island and two of his subordinates were sentenced by a military court to 14 and eight years' imprisonment respectively. They were found guilty of causing the death of one prisoner, Arlindo Gongalves, and physically abusing two others. They were also ordered to pay
compensation to the victims or their families. Arlindo Gongalves died in Brava police station on the morning of 4 November 1987, the day after he and two others were arrested and severely beaten while under interrogation about a crime of arson.
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Two prisoners of conscience were held throughout the year and a third one was released in November. There were new arrests of possible prisoners of conscience, none of whom had been tried by the end of the year.
Under the terms of the Constitution adopted in 1986 all political activities outside the framework of the newly created Rassemblement démocratique centrafricain (RDC), Central African People's Alliance, the sole political party, were banned. The government continued to enforce the ban.
Two prisoners of conscience sentenced to three years in prison in August 1987 remained in prison throughout 1988. Jeanne-Marie Ruth Rolland and Thomas Koazo had both been tried before the Special Tribunal, a court set up in 1981 specifically to try political cases, and from which there is no right of appeal (see Amnesty internationaJ Report 1988).
A third prisoner of conscience, Modibo Walidou-Bachir, who had been arrested in November 1986, apparently for criticizing the new Constitution, was released in November. He had been charged under Article 7 7 of the penal code with setting up
AFRICA/CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC/CHAD
a political party. He was brought to trial before the Special Tribunal in August 1987. However, the court asked for more information about his case and the trial was adjourned. It had not been resumed by the time of his release.
At least four students arrested in the capital, Bangui, in September, were still in Ngaragba Prison at the end of the year. They appeared to have been detained for political reasons but no charges were known to have been brought against them. The four had been among more than a dozen students arrested in March 1986 after a strike in protest against changes in the system of allocating grants and against the high level of unemployment among university graduates. The students had been tried and released.
At the beginning of the year Amnesty International learned of the arrest and detention without trial of Guy Kossi Bella, a citizen of the Central African Republic. Kossi Bella had been arrested at Bangui Airport on his return to the country from Chad at the end of December 1987. A member of a banned opposition political party, he had previously been arrested in March 1982, accused of involvement in a coup attempt and had later escaped from detention and gone into exile. In early 1988 he was accused of endangering the security of the state; however, he was released in March without having been charged or brought to trial. Amnesty International had been concerned that he might have been arrested for political reasons.
In February President Kolingba commuted the death sentence imposed on former head of state jean-Bedel Bokassa in June 1987 to one of life imprisonment. Jean-Bedel Bokassa had been convicted of conspiracy to murder, illegal arrest and detention of children, illegal detention of other prisoners and embezzlement of public funds (see Amnesty internationaJ Report 1988). However, three people convicted in 1982 were believed still to be under sentence of death.
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the release of three prisoners of conscience and made inquiries about the detention without charge of Kossi Bella and of the students arrested in September.
A number of prisoners of conscience were held throughout the year. Together with many other suspected government opponents, they were detained without charge or trial, incommunicado and often in secret. There were new political arrests including those of more than 20 suspected government opponents arrested in June and July. The fate of many alleged opponents of the government arrested in pre* vious years was still unknown. A number of prisoners reportedly died in custody in suspicious circumstances. According to a government statement, 312 political prisoners arrested in previous years were released in December. A recognized refugee was reportedly arrested and executed in custody after being forcibly returned to Chad from Togo.
The armed conflict between Chad and Libya which began in 1982 came to an end, and in October the governments of the two countries restored diplomatic relations. However, a territorial dispute over the Aouzou Strip, along their common border, remained unresolved. Several hundred members of the Libyan armed forces and at least one Libyan civilian were still held as prisoners of war together with Chadians who had fought alongside them.
Acheikh Ibn Oumar and Dr Facho Balaam, the two leaders of the Front patriotique tchadien (FPT), Chadian Patriotic Front, a coalition group opposed to President Hissein Habré, signed a reconciliation agreement with the government in November. They returned to N'Djamena, the capital, from abroad, along with a number of other prominent opposition
AFRICA/CHAD
figures living in exile. Under the terms of this agreement the government was to release ail prisoners detained for supporting the FPT. The authorities announced the release of 312 prisoners in late December, but no information was available about their identities. None of the 48 supporters of the political group led by Dr Facho Balaam, the Union nationaie démocratique (UND), National Democratic Union, was known to have been freed.
Although the government was in control of most of the country, several armed opposition groups were still engaged in guerrilla activities against government troops. These included the Mouvement du salut national du Tchad (MOSANAT), Movement for the National Salvation of Chad, which was supported principally by members of the Hadjerai ethnic group; the Première armée, the First Army; and the Volcan, the Volcano. They operated mainly in the southeast of the country.
Many prisoners of conscience arrested in previous years remained in detention without trial; the secrecy surrounding their detention made it extremely difficult to obtain information about them. They included Moussa Konaté, a teacher arrested in April 1986 apparently because he was the relative of a government opponent, and Hadja Merami and her daughter, Azzina Sako, who were arrested in February 1986. Mabrouka Houni Rahil, who was arrested in 1987, remained in secret detention in N'Djamena. Her daughter, Mardié Ibrahim, who had been arrested several years earlier, was believed to be held with her mother in a building adjacent to the Société tchadienne d'énergie éJectrique (STEE), the Chadian Electric Energy Company (see Amnesty International Report 1988).
More than 180 people belonging to the Hadjerai ethnic group who were arrested in N'Djamena by the Direction de Ja documentation et de Ja sécurité (DDS), the National Security Service, between May and July 1987 remained in secret detention without charge or trial. Although no evidence was available that they had supported the armed opposition they were apparently detained because of the support given by other Hadjerai to MOSANAT. The government did not give information about the reasons for their imprisonment nor of their whereabouts. Reports received in 1988 indicated that many had been
tortured with electric shocks and severe beatings, and that some had died.
One of them, Saleh Gaba, a journalist arrested in June 1987, was reported by unofficial sources to have died in custody in mid-1988. He had reportedly been held incommunicado in the Camp des Martyrs military camp in N'Djamena until January when he was transferred to an unknown place of detention. At the beginning of the year he was reported to be seriously ill and suffering from a nervous breakdown as a result of ill-treatment. His relatives were not told about his death nor was any investigation known to have been conducted into it.
A number of Hadjerai children were reportedly detained throughout 1988. Among them were two brothers - Abder-ahmane Tchere and Dari Tchere, both aged 13 - who had been arrested in July 1987 in Bitkine, apparently because of their family connections with a suspected government opponent who had evaded arrest.
There was a new wave of arrests in June and July. At least 20 supporters of the Gouvernement d'union nationale de transition (GUNT), the Transitional Government of National Unity, were arrested in N'Djamena by members of the security service and detained without trial. The GUNT was the coalition which governed Chad from 1979 to 1982. After its defeat by troops loyal to Hissein Habré in June 1982, GUNT army units retained control of some parts of northern Chad. In October 1986 the Forces armées populaires (FAP), the Popular Armed Forces, troops loyal to the GUNT, began fighting alongside Chadian Government forces against Libyan troops stationed in northern Chad. High-ranking GUNT and FAP officials, some of whom were based in Libya, then returned voluntarily to Chad. However, after the failure of negotiations to bring about a reconciliation between the GUNT leader, Goukouni Oueddeï, and the Chadian Government, a group of GUNT supporters, members of the Zaghawa ethnic group from the northeast of the country, were arrested in June. Among them were Sidik Fadoul, a former head of military police under the GUNT government and GUNT representative in Libya from 1983 to 1987; Yacoub Ernest, former senior member of the GUNT in exile; and Mahamat Arthur, a former signals specialist in the FAP.
Another group of GUNT supporters, all
AFRICA / CHAD / COMOROS
members of the Toubou ethnic group from northern Chad, were arrested in July and accused by the security service of plotting against the government. They included Anar Oueddei, Khalifa Oueddei and Mahamat Oueddei, FAP military officials closely related to Goukouni Oueddei.
Moukhtar Bachar Moukhtar, Secretary of State at the Ministry of Agriculture until a few days before his arrest, was also arrested in July. He had been a member of the Central Committee of the ruling Union nationale pour l'indépendance et Ja révolution (UNIR), National Union for Independence and Revolution, the only permitted political party. According to some reports he was arrested on suspicion of criticizing President Hissein Habré. Later in the year he was reported to be seriously ill and to have apparently been denied medical treatment.
All prisoners were held incommunicado following their arrest and at the end of the year no formal charges had been brought against them. Since President Hissein Habré came to power in 1982 no political prisoners have been brought to trial or even had their cases referred to the judicial authorities. Instead, they have been kept in secret detention, reportedly in extremely harsh conditions.
At least one other prisoner, Commandant Galliam, was reported to have died in custody, probably as a result of torture. A high-ranking military officer, he had been arrested in mid-November 1987.
As in previous years, the government failed to account for many GUNT combatants and civilian officials arrested in July 1983 when government troops recaptured the town of Faya Largeau, Approximately 1,000 people were arrested, of whom a large number were executed extrajudicially in 1983; others were imprisoned in N'Djamena. In March 1987,19 prisoners were taken from the Maison d'arrêt, N'Djamena Prison, and subsequently "disappeared", More than 50 others reportedly died in detention as a result of ill-treatment and poor prison conditions and a group of 73 were released from detention in March 1987 and forced to join the army. At the end of 1988 the fate of almost 500 of the 1,000 prisoners was still unknown as was the fate of six civilians arrested in Abéché in July 1983.
Bichara Chaïbo, a Chadian refugee recognized by the United Nations High Com-
missioner for Refugees, was arrested on arrival at N'Djamena airport after being forcibly returned from Togo in September. He was reported to have been executed extrajudicially after being held for 10 days in the President's headquarters. A former Deputy Director of the DDS, he had escaped arrest and left Chad in December 1986 following accusations that he was plotting against the President.
Amnesty International continued to urge the government to release prisoners of conscience and appealed repeatedly on behalf of political detainees who had "disappeared" or who were believed to be in secret detention. In particular, it called on the government to reveal their places of detention and to allow all detainees to receive visits from relatives and legal counsel. The organization expressed concern about reports that Saleh Gaba had died in detention and called on the Chadian Government to conduct an urgent investigation into the circumstances of his death. No response was received.
In April Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Chad to the United Nations procedure (under Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728F/1503) for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations.
