GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC
At least 100 known or possible prisoners of conscience were sentenced to prison terms and many more may have been jailed under laws greatly restricting rights to freedom of expression, association, assembly and movement. Increased use was made of short-term detention to harass peace, environment, church and human rights activists and would-be emigrants.
EUROPE / GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC
Collection of information about individual prisoners of conscience vi^as hampered by the secrecy which surrounded political imprisonment. Trials of prisoners of conscience were rarely reported in the media, political trials were routinely held in camera and little of court judgments was made public. In addition, legislation in the German Democratic Republic (GDR) defines the terms "information" and "recipients" so broadly and vaguely that anyone who communicated information to foreigners deemed to be "to the disadvantage of the interests of the GDR" risked imprisonment.
One victim of such laws was electrician Jürgen Kunert. Before his arrest in April he had reportedly taken part in demonstrations to publicize his application to emigrate. He had planned to set up an environmentalist group in his home town, Meerane, and had corresponded with a human rights organization in the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG). When he was arrested his apartment was searched and "hostile" material was found, including, reportedly, a letter addressed to Amnesty International. He was sentenced to two years, six months' imprisonment under laws including Article 99 of the penal code, which covers "treasonable passing on of information", and Article 100, on "treasonable activity as an agent".
These and other laws continued to be used to imprison people who expressed views disapproved of by the authorities. Detlef Kowalkowski and Bernd Schiman-ski attempted to draw attention to their repeated requests to emigrate by hanging a sheet from the window of Bernd Schi-manski's flat bearing the words "We demand freedom and justice for everyone". Both were sentenced to 14 months' imprisonment in April under Article 214 for "hindering state or social activity". In letters sent abroad and to the GDR authorities Mirko Wünsche is reported to have made critical remarks about life in the GDR, mentioning the lack of opportunities for travel abroad and shortages of goods. On 7 June in Dresden he was sentenced to one year's imprisonment under Article 220 for "public vilification". He was released in November, with other political prisoners, to the FRG. Many more prisoners of conscience were victims of Article 214, as any attempt to persuade the authorities to reconsider a rejected emigration application
was liable to prompt prosecution on the grounds that such action obstructed the work of the authorities.
Because permission to emigrate is very difficult to obtain many would-be emigrants have attempted to leave the country without official permission. If arrested they have usually been charged under Article 213 with "illegal crossing of the border". Heiko Grund and Carola Hoffmann were sentenced under this article to two years' imprisonment on 31 March. They had been arrested in Hungary attempting to cross the border into Austria.
Since the 1987 amnesty (see Amnesty international Report 1988) the authorities have regularly detained people for short periods, either because they have attempted to exercise the rights to freedom of expression, assembly or association, or in order to prevent them exercising such rights. Between 17 and 25 January over 100 people were reportedly placed under house arrest or detained, apparently on suspicion of attempting to use an official demonstration in Berlin, on 17 January, to draw attention to matters other than those planned by the organizers. Most were released within days of their arrest. Vera Wollenberger, a founder of an unofficial church-affiliated group, and Bert Schlegel, Andreas Kalk and Till Böttcher, associated with a church ecology library, were tried under Article 217 for "riotous assembly" and given six-month prison sentences. These four and all others detained during or following the demonstration had been released by 8 February. Article 25 of the penal code, reportedly cited by the Procurator General in connection with the releases, allows penal measures to be dispensed with if the accused demonstrate "responsible behaviour".
In early March about 200 people wishing to emigrate were reportedly arrested, apparently in order to dissuade others from making emigration applications, although most were said to have been released within a week. The official news agency denied that the arrests had taken place.
Short-term arrests were reportedly made in Berlin on 29 September, when about 50 people were arrested and held for up to 12 hours after demonstrating peacefully against an Internationai Monetary FundAfVorld Bank conference being held in West Berlin. On 10 October 80 people
EUROPE/GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC/GERMANY, FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF
who demonstrated against official censorship of church publications were also detained for a few hours, even though their protest had been peaceful.
On 21 November 11 members of a group called "Church Services for Justice and Peace" were arrested, reportedly as a result of organizing a church service to mark Human Rights Day on 10 December and making critical remarks about the GDR in letters sent to friends in the FRO. Eight were released after several hours but three were held and in December a fourth was detained. All four were charged with "public vilification" and "making illegal contacts". At the end of the year their trial had not taken place.
During the year Amnesty International worked for the release of 55 prisoners of conscience and pressed the authorities for more information about a further 48 possible prisoners of conscience. The organization also expressed concern to the authorities about the short-term arrests made in January and called on the authorities to release the detained members of the "Church Services for Justice and Peace" group.
