BAHRAIN
Tens of people, including prisoners of conscience, were detained without trial on account of their religious or political activities. Many were members of the majority Shi'a Muslim community. At least 10 possible prisoners of conscience were given prison sentences after unfair trials and well over 100 other political prisoners, including possible prisoners of conscience, remained in prison serving sentences imposed in earlier years after trials which also failed to comply with international standards. There were new reports of torture and ill-treatment of political detainees.
The authorities continued to use the 1974 Decree Law on State Security Measures to detain suspected critics or opponents, in some cases for no more than several days, in others, for months. The son and son-in-law of a prominent Sharia Court judge. Sheikh Abdul Amir al-Jamri, arrested in September and August respectively, were believed still to be in detention at the end of the year. Members of the Shi'a Muslim community in particular were liable to detention if suspected of supporting the Islamic Republic of Iran. Some were detained briefly before religious occasions of special significance to Shi'a Muslims, such as the annual 'Ashoura processions commemorating the martyrdom of Imam Hussein, at which political slogans have been shouted in the past. Others were detained after 'Ashoura or other religious gatherings at which anti-government and anti-American political statements were made. Bahraini students returning from study abroad and pilgrims returning from Mecca were also among
those detained without trial under the Decree Law. This law permits detention without trial for renewable periods of up to three years at the discretion of the Minister of the Interior; there is no judicial review of the legality of detention until after three months have elapsed from the date of arrest. Further appeals may be made only at six-monthly intervals. In the past some detainees have been held for seven or eight years under the Decree Law.
At least two political trials took place before the Civil Supreme Court of Appeal, which tries all those charged with offences concerning internal or external security. Procedures in such cases fail to comply with international standards for fair trial. They allow the court to base its verdict solely on confessions made to the police or to an investigating judge, or on prosecution documents referring to such confessions, without requiring the court to produce witnesses for cross-examination or to produce corroborating evidence. Unless the court is seen systematically to consider whether confessions have been made voluntarily the importance given to the confession as evidence could encourage interrogators to resort to coercion in order to extract self-incriminating statements. There is no right of appeal against conviction and sentence. Proceedings are usually conducted in camera or with access restricted to one family member for each of the accused. The court's judgments, which explain the reasons for conviction, are seldom made public, and copies are not made available to defence lawyers, who are obliged to consult the court's copy.
Among those tried before this court in 1988 were a number of possible prisoners of conscience, including Tawfiq al-Mahrous and eight others, all of whom were convicted of belonging to the banned Islamic Front for the Liberation of Bahrain, and given four- and five-year prison sentences. A religious scholar, Al-Sayyid Abdullah al-Muharraqi, was also reported to have been sentenced to two years' imprisonment, apparently on charges of incitement. He was believed to have been released after serving approximately half his sentence.
No information was available on the outcome of the trial of three men - Nabil Baqer Ibrahim Baqer, Ahmed Hussein Mir-za Abdulkhaliq and Khalid Abdurrasoul Muhammad Amiri - who had been
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA / BAHRAIN / EGYPT
arrested in November 1987 and accused of planning to sabotage oil installations (see Amnesty International Report 1988].
Political prisoners serving sentences imposed after unfair trials in previous years included 14 alleged supporters of the banned Bahrain National Liberation Front, who in October 1987 received prison terms of up to five years, and 18 alleged supporters of the Islamic Enlightenment Society, who were jailed in 1984. Many others sentenced for their part in an alleged coup attempt in 1981 also remained in prison. A number of political prisoners were released, most at the end of sentences. Among those set free were Sheikh Nasir A1 Haddad, held since 1981 (see Amnesty international Report 1988].
New allegations of physical and psychological torture and ill-treatment of detainees, apparently to obtain confessions, were received in 1988. Torture is prohibited under Bahrain's Constitution, but in a number of cases detainees were reportedly made to stand upright for many hours, were deprived of sleep for long periods, beaten or suspended, and threatened while detained incommunicado and in lengthy solitary confinement.
Amnesty International sought information from the government about a number of detainees, urging that they be granted prompt and frequent access to a lawyer of their own choosing, and afforded all necessary safeguards against torture or ill-treatment. Amnesty International also sought information on trials that had taken place before the Civil Supreme Court of Appeal and requested copies of judgments.
Amnesty International proposed to the government that the organization should send a delegation to Bahrain for further discussions with the authorities about human rights; Amnesty International delegates had visited the country in April 1987. The government did not respond and by the end of the year had not commented on a document describing Amnesty International's concerns in Bahrain which the organization submitted in November. In December Amnesty International published a short report. Amnesty International's Concerns in the State of Bahrain, which made a number of recommendations about safeguards needed to prevent human rights violations.
