SAUDI ARABIA
Arrests of suspected government opponents, mostly from the Eastern Province, and of pilgrims participating in the Hajj (the annual pilgrimage of Muslims to Mecca) were reported. It appeared that some might be prisoners of conscience. Reports also emerged of the torture or ill-treatment of detainees in previous years. At least one sentence of amputation and 26 death sentences were carried out.
In August the Council of Senior Ulema - religious scholars entrusted with interpreting Islamic law - issued fatwa (religious edict) No.148, extending the death penalty to those convicted of acts of sabotage or "corruption on earth" that "undermine security and endanger lives and public or private property". Such acts were deemed to include the "destruction of homes, mosques, schools, hospitals, factories, bridges, ammunition dumps and water storage tanks, resources of the Treasury such as oil pipelines, and the hijacking and blowing-up of aeroplanes". Previously those convicted of such offences had faced execution only where loss of life had been involved.
In September four Saudis - Muhammed al-Qarus, 'Ali al-Khatim, Azhr al-Hajjaj and Khalid al-'Ulaq - were executed in Dammam in what may have been retroactive implementation of /atwo No. 148. They were convicted of smuggling explos-
ives into the country and blowing up fuel tanks at oil installations in Jubail. The last three were detained in August, several months after the arrest of Muhammed al-Qarus, and were also convicted of murdering a security officer while attempting to evade arrest.
As in previous years, suspected political opponents of the government were reportedly arrested and held in untried detention. Most were said to be Shi'a Muslims and were arrested in the eastern towns of Saihat, Safwa, al-'Awamiyya, al-Rabi'iyya, al-Qatif, Taroot and Senabes. Among them were religious scholars, teachers, students, merchants, engineers, doctors and oil workers. Many arrests took place following explosions in April at oil installations in Jubail. Those arrested included Shaikh Ja'far al-Mubarak, an old religious scholar, and his brother 'Abdullah 'Ali al-Mubarak, a headmaster from Safwa, who were arrested on 21 April and held at Dammam Central Prison. Shaikh Ja'far had been among hundreds of political prisoners released in 1987 following a general amnesty. At the end of 1988 he was reportedly held at Dammam Prison Hospital. Also detained in April was Shaikh 'Abd al-Karim al-Habil, from al-Rabi'iyya. In August he was transferred to the intensive care unit at King Feisal Hospital in Dammam where he underwent surgery on his liver. In November Shaikh Hasan Mak-ki al-Khuwaildi, a prominent Shi'a religious scholar from Safwa, was arrested in al-Hasa. At the end of the year his whereabouts remained unknown. Shaikh al-Khuwaildi had reportedly spent lengthy periods in detention without trial in 1981 and in 1983.
Arrests were also reported in connection with the Hajj. Many of those arrested were foreign nationals reportedly detained on account of their religious or political beliefs. Although some were detained while participating in the Hajj, others were arrested at airports on their way in or out of the country. They included Syed Fazil Hussain Moosavi, a Pakistani religious leader from Karachi who was arrested at Jeddah Airport with 26 associates and held for over a month. Adnan Asian, a Turkish publisher resident in the Federal Republic of Germany, was among a group detained in Mecca in July in connection with demonstrations several days before. He was released after 35 days in detention and
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA/ YEMEN (ARAB REPUBLIC)/ YEMEN (PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF)
deported. In these and other cases, detainees were denied access to legal counsel, families or diplomatic representatives and were unable to challenge their detention in the courts.
New information was received about the torture and ill-treatment of detainees in previous years. Among the practices described were/aiaqa (beating on the soles of the feet) with the ankles secured by rope to a raised pole; blows all over the body; partial submersion in water; sleep deprivation; and extended solitary confinement. Detainees were also sometimes shackled by their ankles as a form of punishment.
Testimonies received from several untried detainees who had been held at various times during the past five years in the General Intelligence Department (GID) prison in Dammam, suggested torture was commonly practised at this prison. Following arrest, detainees were reportedly held in small solitary confinement cells in almost total isolation. They were interrogated and allegedly subjected to faiaqa, beatings, threats, and systematic sleep deprivation including forced standing for two to three hours alternated with sitting, over a period of days or even weeks. After interrogation they were transferred to communal cells, holding 15 to 25 prisoners where they were allowed family visits. In some cases, they were later transferred to another prison and held for months or years before release.
One former detainee held at the GID in Dammam described his ordeal during three months of solitary confinement in 1985. Each day he was taken to an inter-, rogation room where he was questioned and slapped, punched or kicked. When the interrogator felt he was not getting answers he wanted the detainee was forced to lie on the floor of an adjoining room in which guards took turns to administer/alaqa. Usually he was unable to walk back to the interrogation room; often he lost consciousness. Another former detainee, who was arrested in 1983 and spent 36 days in solitary confinement, stated that in addition to/alaqa he was beaten all over his body and legs while his hands were tied behind his back. He was also prevented from sleeping for periods of up to 48 hours by being forced to stand and having his hands stretched above his head and tied to a metal pole.
Cruel, inhuman or degrading punishments in the form of amputation of limbs may be judicially imposed in Saudi Arabia for repeated theft where there are no mitigating circumstances. In October Ahmad bin Hassan had his right hand amputated at Hafr al-Batin following convictions for thefts from several commercial stores.
At least 26 people were executed, including nationals of Chad, Pakistan, the Philippines, Sudan and the Yemen Arab Republic, the majority following convictions for murder. All executions were public, occurring in most cases after relatives of the murder victims had demanded Qisas (retribution). Under Islamic law the relatives of a murder victim may demand Qisas in the form of the death penalty, or waive such a claim freely or by settlement.
Amnesty International appealed on several occasions to the Saudi authorities, reiterating the organization's unconditional opposition to capital punishment and urging commutation of all death sentences. Following the promulgation of fatwa No. 148 Amnesty International urged King Fahd bin 'Abd al-Aziz to consider replacing the death penalty in the edict with other punishments. The organization holds amputations to be a form of cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment and urged that all such sentences be repealed.
In January Prince Saud al-Feisal, the Foreign Minister, wrote to Amnesty International stating, "we have no objections to holding discussions with some officials of your esteemed organization about the origins of human rights in Islam and the principles of the Shari'a and its implementation in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia".
