SYRIA
Thousands of actual or suspected opponents of the government, including many prisoners of conscience, continued to be detained in the context of a state of emergency in force since 1963. The majority were held without charge or trial; in some cases they had been imprisoned for 18 years. Others remained in detention after the completion of their sentences. Reports of routine and widespread use of torture, including the torture of minors.
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA/ YEMEN (ARAB REPUBLIC)/ YEMEN (PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF)
continued to be received. Two deaths in custody were reported. Six people were executed.
Many government opponents arrested in previous years continued to be detained without trial throughout 1988. They included over 250 prisoners of conscience and 180 others who may have been prisoners of conscience. Among those held were actual or suspected members of prohibited political parties, members of several Palestinian groups, and individuals arrested in Lebanon and taken back to Syria for detention. They included members of Hizb oJ-'AmaJ aJ-Shuyu'i (PGA), Party for Communist Action; al-Hizb aJ-Shuyu'i al-Maktab ai-Siyassi (CPPB), Communist Party Political Bureau; ai-ikhwan aJ-Musiimun, Muslim Brotherhood; al-Tanzim a]-Sha'bi ai-Nasiri [PNO) Popular Nasserist Organization; Fatah; and the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (DFLP).
Between August 1987 and March 1988 over 600 people were arrested, the majority on suspicion of membership of or support for the PGA. Some 450 of these prisoners were still held without charge or trial at the end of the year; a number of them were reported to have been tortured. These detainees included women, some of whom were arrested as hostages in lieu of relatives being sought by the authorities. Lina 'Ashur al-'Askari, a student from al-Hassakeh, arrested in December 1987 and detained at Military Intelligence Headquarters in Aleppo, was held in lieu of her sister. Her three brothers, Usama, Numair and Mazin 'Ashur al-'Askari, had been detained without charge or trial for over five years. All three are PCA members and were students at Aleppo University at the time of their arrest. Five CPPB members arrested in May were also still detained without charge or trial at the end of the year, among them Butros 'Abd al-Massih, a teacher arrested by Idarat Amn al-DawJa, State Security. Another GPPB member
arrested in February died in custody.
Torture and ill-treatment of prisoners continued to be widely reported and appeared to be routine. Information was received in February about the death in custody, reportedly as a result of torture, of Muhammad al-'Arraj, a PGA member. He was arrested by Military Security in October 1987 and held at Fara' FaJastin, Palestine Branch, in Damascus, where he reportedly died in late December 1987 or early January 1988. His body was allegedly not returned to his family. In April another detainee, 'Abd al-Razzaq Abazid - a member of the GPPB - died in Damascus in the custody of Military Intelligence. His death was allegedly also the result of torture.
Seven PGA members were said to be in a critical condition after they had been allegedly tortured in early 1988. All had been arrested by Military Security between September and December 1987. One of the seven, Nizar Maradni, was said to have suffered a fractured pelvis; another, Na'man Dib, was said to be suffering from paralysis of the hands.
In August a GPPB member was reported to be in a critical condition as a result of torture. Badr al-Din Shanan, a trade unionist from Aleppo, had been held without charge or trial since May 1983. In mid-July he was said to have been transferred to hospital in a coma, suffering from myocardial infarct (damaged heart muscle) as a result of torture during interrogation. The health of another detainee, Riad al-Turk, reportedly deteriorated as a result of repeated torture over a number of years. First Secretary of the CPPB, he had been held incommunicado without charge or trial since his arrest in 1980. In January it was learned that he had gone into a coma at the end of 1987 and had been taken for intensive care treatment to al-Mezze Military Prison Hospital. In May information was received that in view of his deteriorating health the authorities had set up a special committee to examine his case. However, in November Riad al-Turk was reported to be held in solitary confinement in Damascus by Military Intelligence.
Several members of the Jewish community were reportedly tortured in detention. Nine were arrested between September and December 1987 and one other in July 1988. All were reportedly held without charge or trial and Amnesty Inter-
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA/ YEMEN (ARAB REPUBLIC)/ YEMEN (PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF)
national could not ascertain the reasons for their arrest. Among them were three secondary school students: Kassem Ghounegeh, aged 15; Musa Khalife, aged 15; and Faraj Dirzieh, aged 16. The three were arrested in September 1987 near the border with Lebanon and held in an interrogation centre in Damascus. They were allegedly beaten and whipped and, in one case, given electric shocks. Information received in July indicated that Musa Khalife had suffered paralysis of the limbs as a result of his treatment. At the end of the year, six of the 10 detainees in this group remained in detention. The three school students were among those released.
Four Palestinians were deported to Syria from Sweden during the year on suspicion of involvement in "terrorist" activities and of posing a threat to Sweden's national security. The four were reportedly suspected of involvement in Fatah. They had submitted applications for asylum in Sweden in 1985. Three were deported in March and April; at the end of the year their fate and whereabouts were still unknown. The fourth in this group, Sami Hilmi al-Sharif, was deported to Syria in October. In December information was received that he had been detained on arrival in Syria and was being held at a detention centre in Damascus. There were fears that he may have been tortured. Sami Hilmi al-Sharif was released at the end of the year and expelled to Lebanon.
Six death sentences were reported in 1988. Three men were hanged in January after being convicted of spying for Israel. In August three men convicted of crimes including murder, armed robbery and the rape of a minor were publicly hanged in Aleppo.
Throughout 1988 Amnesty International continued to express concern to the government about reports of arbitrary arrests, detention without trial of political suspects including prisoners of conscience, reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees, and the imposition of the death penalty. There was no response from the government. In an oral statement delivered in February, Amnesty International drew the attention of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights to reports of the widespread and routine use of torture by the security forces and of deaths in custody of political detainees. A Syrian Government representa-
tive responded by expressing "regret" at the "exaggerated statement" and "the biased position taken by the Amnesty International representative".
In April Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Syria and Syrian-controlled areas of Lebanon to the United Nations procedure (under Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728F/1503) for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations. The communication included information on the arbitrary arrest and detention without trial of political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience; the torture and ill-treatment of detainees; deaths in custody resulting from torture; and extrajudicial executions. A copy of the communication was sent to the Syrian authorities, with an invitation to comment. By the end of the year no response had been received.
In March, Amnesty International expressed concern to Sweden's Minister of Immigration about the deportation of a Palestinian to Syria, where the deportee risked arbitrary arrest and torture. Amnesty International sought clarification regarding the expulsion procedures followed in the case. No response was received. At the end of the year, Amnesty International expressed concern about the expulsion to Syria of Sami Hilmi al-Sharif, after learning that he had been detained upon arrival in Damascus.
