HONDURAS
There were occasional reports of short-term political detention and of detainees being held in unacknowledged custody. Torture and ill-treatment were widespread. The fate of a student leader who "disappeared" in April was still unknown at the end of the year. In January a prominent human rights activist and a trade unionist were murdered after the former had received anonymous death threats. Other human rights workers and political activists were harassed and threatened by unidentified people believed to be plainclothes security agents or members of a right-wing paramilitary group alleged to be linked to the armed forces. There was evidence that some suspected criminals had been extrajudicially executed by the security forces.
On 8 April the government declared a 15-day state of emergency in the capital, Tegucigalpa, and in San Pedro Sula, following violent protests against the deportation of an alleged drug-trafficker to the United States - an act widely held to violate the Constitution. The United States consulate in Tegucigalpa and numerous vehicles were set ablaze and at least two demonstrators were shot and killed. Scores of arrests were reported in both cities during and after the protests. The state of emergency was lifted on 13 April, before its expiry.
Several political detainees were held for days or weeks in unacknowledged cus-
tody, obliging relatives to apply for habeas corpus writs to establish their whereabouts. Seven people detained by the National Directorate of Investigations (DNI) in mid-October in Choluteca, were held in unacknowledged detention for almost three weeks. Despite the presentation of five habeas corpus writs on their behalf, their whereabouts were unknown until 14 November when the Attorney General released a statement by a military justice official that the seven were in detention in the 11th Infantry Battalion base at Sala-mar. Valle Department, awaiting trial by a military court on charges of treason, espionage, desertion and other offences. The detainees' relatives denied that the seven had previously been recruited to the armed forces; two of the detainees were said to be Nicaraguan citizens.
Some detainees alleged that they were tortured while held incommunicado in unacknowledged detention. Germán Ernaldo Castellanos Ardón and his brother Jamln Esaù Castellanos Ardón, both peasants, who had been detained in December 1987 on suspicion of stealing a horse, alleged that they had been tortured while being held by the police in Las Trojes, El Paraíso. After his release in January, Germán Castellanos told journalists he had been held for 40 days while his captors had moved him around to avoid presenting him to officials appointed by a court to execute habeas corpus writs. Both men were released without charge after the horse they had allegedly stolen was found.
Fourteen young people detained in connection with the burning of the United States consulate also alleged that they had been held without warrants following the demonstration, kept blindfolded, kicked, and severely beaten with pistols, batons and fists. They also alleged that plastic hoods had been placed over their heads and that they had been held for 24 hours without food or water and forced to sign papers they were not allowed to read. The 14, who faced charges of sedition, terrorism, arson and treason, were released on bail at the end of May and in early June. In October, Daniel Sarmiento, a rancher and leader of the National Party, and José Rafael Sánchez Irias, a farmer, were beaten and tortured by soldiers belonging to the 16th Infantry Battalion in Olancho after they had been arbitrarily detained on suspicion of cooperating with an alleged
THEAMERICAS/PERU/STVINCENTANDTHEGRENADINES
guerrilla group. The armed forces conducted an investigation into the incident which led to the replacement of the battalion's commanding officer. Amnesty International did not know of any prosecutions by civilian or military courts in respect of the ill-treatment of detainees.
The whereabouts of a student leader also reportedly detained in connection with the April protest remained unknown. Róger Samuel González Zelaya, a business studies student and a leader of the secondary students' union, was reportedly detained on 19 April in the centre of Tegucigalpa by two men and a woman in civilian clothes who were believed to be members of the DNI. His mother obtained six writs of habeas corpus in succession, naming the DNI, the FSP (National Police Force), and an army battalion, but all denied having arrested him or that he was in their custody. On 29 April the chief of public relations of the armed forces told the press that the police had arrested Róger González but when the FSP denied that they were holding him he said he had been mistaken. Later the FSP commander and the director of the DNI denied that Roger González was in detention, as did the commander-in-chief of the armed forces, who was reported to have told the press he had proof that Roger González was travelling in Canada, Mexico and Nicaragua. No evidence was produced to substantiate this assertion and at the end of the year his fate was still unknown.
In January Miguel Angel Pavón Salazar and Moisés Landaverde were shot dead in San Pedro Sula by a killer in civilian clothes riding pillion on a motorcycle. Miguel Angel Pavón was President of the San Pedro Sula chapter of the Committee for the Defence of Human Rights in Honduras (CODEH) and a deputy congress member for the opposition Party of National Innovation and Unity (PINU); Moisés Landaverde was a teacher and union official. Both men were reported to have been under surveillance before they were murdered and Miguel Angel Pavón had received death threats. It was feared the killings may have been carried out by members of an army "death squad". In the same month José Isaías Vilorio Barahona, a DNI sergeant who was alleged to have been a former member of a "death squad" attached to Battalion 3-16, a secret military intelligence unit, was shot dead by four
unidentified men in a Tegucigalpa bus station. His murder took place a day after the government had announced that it had agreed to his appearance as a witness in a case against the government being heard by the Inter-American Court of Human Rights. The case involved the "disappearance" in 1981 of a student, Manfredo Angel Velásquez, for which Battalion 3-16 had allegedly been responsible. Miguel Angel Pavón had given evidence in the same case only months before his murder. No one was arrested or charged in relation to either crime, nor had there been any apparent progress in police investigations by the end of the year. In November a US newspaper published allegations by Fausto Reyes Caballero, an ex-police sergeant who had left Honduras in August and had sought political asylum in the United States, that Miguel Angel Pavón and Moisés Landaverde had been killed by a sniper team from Battalion 3-16's San Pedro Sula headquarters. He said the same two, riding a motorcycle, had been responsible for several other killings in San Pedro Sula in 1984 and 1985.
The circumstances of other, apparently non-political, killings suggested that the victims were suspected criminals who had died in police custody as a result of torture or extrajudicial execution. In November the body of Angel Israel Lozano, who had not been seen since his arrest by the DNI on 31 August in Comayaguela, was identified after it had been discovered on the road between Tegucigalpa and San Pedro Sula. However, according to press reports, six other people reportedly detained by the DNI in Comayaguela at the end of August were still unaccounted for at the end of the year. Three other bodies were found at the same site between Tegucigalpa and San Pedro Sula, but before they could be identified they were reportedly burned on the orders of a legal official. In October the Commander-in-Chief of the FSP stated that a commission had been set up to investigate reports of executions of criminal suspects by the police; no results were known to Amnesty International at the end of the year.
Several left-wing opposition leaders and human rights activists were targets of violent attacks and harassment. Some attacks were attributed to unidentified individuals acting in the name of the Alianza de Acción Anticomunista, Alliance for
THE AMERICAS / HONDURAS/JAMAICA
Anticommunist Action (AAA) alleged to be an extreme right-wing paramilitary group which had re-emerged after several years of inactivity and was believed by Hon-duran human rights groups to be linked to the armed forces. In April defamatory posters bearing its logo and the photographs of 22 trade union, human rights and student leaders - whom it accused of sowing the seeds of "hate, terror and destruction in Honduras" - appeared in the streets of Tegucigalpa and San Pedro Sula. Successive incidents, including shooting-up of property, attempted break-ins, daubing of private homes with slogans, and the abduction and interrogation of a Roman Catholic nun, were carried out in the name of this group. CODEH and its President, Dr Ramón Custodio López, were particular targets of harassment, and on several occasions during the year CODEH staff members were confronted and threatened by unidentified individuals in plain clothes alleged by CODEH to be military undercover agents. At the end of the year no results were known to have emerged from official investigations into these incidents, despite reports in August that the activities of the AAA would be the subject of a parliamentary inquiry.
In July the Inter-American Court of Human Rights made public its first decision on a "disappearance" case, that of Angel Manfredo Velásquez Rodríguez, whose fate had been unknown since he was abducted by security force undercover agents in Tegucigalpa in September 1981. The court found that the Government of Honduras had violated his rights to personal freedom, humane treatment and the right to life, and was therefore obliged to pay fair compensation to his family. Witnesses for the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, which brought the case against the government, included a former detainee who had been held in secret detention and tortured for 80 days in 1983, and Florencio Caballero, a former Hon-duran military intelligence officer attached to Battalion 3-16. In a closed hearing the court also interviewed senior military officers, including the former operational head of Battalion 3-16. The Court was expected to rule in 1989 on the cases of Yolanda Soils Corrales and Francisco Fairén Garbi - Costa Ricans who "disappeared" in December 1981 and Saúl Godínez Cruz, who "disappeared" in July 1982.
In February Amnesty International published a report Honduras: Civilian Authority - Military Power which described human rights violations during the 1980s and called for government action to protect human rights. In particular, Amnesty International urged the government to make existing legal controls over arrest procedures and pre-trial detention effective, to take measures to end torture, to reopen investigations into past "disappearances" and to investigate thoroughly incidents involving violence and threats against government opponents and human rights workers. It also called on the government to identify those responsible and to bring them to justice.
In January Amnesty International submitted an amicus curiae brief to the Inter-American Court of Human Rights in respect of the Velásquez Rodriguez, Godínez Cruz, Fairén Garbi and Soils Corrales cases. In May and June the organization submitted information about its concerns in Honduras to the United Nations procedure (under Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728F/1503) for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations. It provided information on the "disappearance" of Róger González Zelaya to the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances, the Special Rapporteur on Torture and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights.
