MADAGASCAR
Thirty-eight prisoners who had been held without trial for more than two and a half years were released in March after being tried and either acquitted or sentenced to short prison terms. Some were believed to have been held solely as sus« pected opponents of the government. Several hundred people were reported to have been extrajudicially executed by government security forces engaged in operations in rural areas against bandits and cattle-rustlers.
The trial of 245 young people charged with criminal and political offences, including jeopardizing the security of the state, began on 29 February before a criminal court in Ambatolampy. All the defendants were suspected members of kung /u martial arts clubs who appeared on charges related to violent clashes in December 1984 between members of the clubs and the Tanoro Tonga Sai'na (TTS), Youth Who Are Aware of Their Responsibilities, a group said to have links with
some members of the government. Earlier in 1984 the clubs had been declared illegal because they had become identified with opposition to the government. In August 1985 security forces attacked the principal kung /u club in the capital, Antananarivo. A number of people were killed in the attack and over 200 were arrested. Most were later provisionally released but 38 remained in detention, all but one in Ari-vonimamo Prison, until February 1988. Eight were provisionally released a few days before their trial began.
Most of the 245 defendants were acquitted, including 10 of those held in custody since August 1985. The 28 others held since 1985 were convicted of theft and destruction of public property and received sentences of two years' imprisonment, in some cases suspended. All were released because of the time they had already spent in pre-trial detention. Other more serious charges, including offences against the security of the state, were dismissed by the court as unproved. The outcome of the trial appeared to confirm that some of those concerned had been held for more than two-and-a-half years as suspected opponents of the government on account of their membership of kung /u clubs.
In April the army, the national police and the gendarmerie began a series of operations against dahaJo - bandits and cattle-rustlers - in the provinces of Toli-ary, Fianarantsoa, Antananarivo and Mahajanga, in the south and centre of the country. Several hundred people, not only suspected cattle thieves but also farmers and villagers uninvolved in any such crimes, were rounded up by security forces and summarily executed, either in public or secretly in the countryside. Most of those killed came from remote villages and their identities were unknown. They appeared to be victims of a deliberate policy of extrajudicial execution; some were alleged to have been tortured and humiliated in public before being killed.
Questioned in the National Assembly about the conduct of these operations, the Minister of the Interior stated that three ministries - those of the interior, defence and justice - were jointly responsible for these operations. However, the Minister of Justice later denied responsibility for any illegal actions undertaken by the security forces. In an open letter opposition parties
AFRICA / MADAGASCAR / MALAWI
called on President Didier Ratsiraka to investigate abuses by the security forces, to take steps to end the killings and to bring those responsible to justice. However, further summary executions were reported to have taken place in August and September. By the end of the year it seemed that no official investigation or measures to prevent such killings had been undertaken.
Amnesty International had repeatedly called for the fair trial or release of the 38 prisoners held since August 1985. When the organization sought to send an observer to the trial he was refused permission to enter the country by the Malagasy authorities. Reports suggested that the trial was fair.
Following reports of widespread killings by the security forces Amnesty International urged the government to set up an urgent inquiry and take action to prevent further extrajudicial executions.
