BOLIVIA
Students involved in anti-government protests and trade union leaders involved in industrial disputes were detained for short periods. Torture was reported in rural areas and one peasant died in police custody in suspicious circumstances. Several other people were killed when police shot at demonstrators-who were said to have been unarmed.
At least two students were killed and more than a dozen students and academics were detained for short periods during protests in the cities of La Paz, Potosi and Cochabamba. In March Marco Antonio Uria Oropeza was killed when police opened fire on a student sit-in at San Andres University, La Paz. There were allegations that he had been shot in the head by police; the authorities said he had been shot by one of the crowd.
Unrest over government economic measures continued and five oil workers' union leaders were briefly detained in March after oil workers in Santa Cruz launched an indefinite strike over pay. Three mineworkers' leaders were also detained briefly in September following a strike over working conditions.
In March Eleuterio Gutierrez Marcani, a
miner detained since 1985 on a charge of theft (see Amnesty InternationaJ Report 1988), was sentenced to seven years' imprisonment. Amnesty International remained concerned that this criminal charge may have been brought against him because of his trade union activities and continued to investigate the possibility that he was a prisoner of conscience.
Peasants' protests against government action to restrict the growing of coca leaf escalated. Coca, used to produce the narcotic cocaine, has traditionally been cultivated in Bolivia for medicinal and dietary purposes. In June at least seven peasants were reportedly killed when police belonging to the Unidad Movil de PatruiJa Rural (UMOPAR), a specialized narcotics branch of the Bolivian police force, opened fire on thousands of demonstrators in Villa Tunari, a town in the Chapare area of Cochabamba department. The peasants were demonstrating against the use of herbicides to eradicate the coca crop in the area. The circumstances in which the killings occurred remained unclear: unofficial sources alleged that the UMOPAR agents had opened fire without warning. The Ministry of the Interior was reported to have initiated an investigation but no findings were known to have been made public by the end of the year.
There were reports that peasants taken to police barracks were tortured and of one death in custody in suspicious circumstances, that of Vicente Nina. He was one of three peasants arrested in August by soldiers from the Ayacucho Regiment based in Achacachi, Osamuyos province, (La Paz Department), reportedly on suspicion of stealing army weapons. The next day Vicente Nina's body was taken from military headquarters to the local hospital where a doctor was asked to issue a death certificate. He refused to do so on the grounds that Vicente Nina had died at least four hours before being brought to the hospital. The body was then said to have been buried clandestinely by the soldiers. However, at the request of the community it was exhumed and an autopsy was performed. At the end of the year its findings were not known to Amnesty International.
Amnesty International was concerned about the short-term detention of trade unionists and others and sought information from the government about the death in custody of Vicente Nina and the cir-
THE AMERICAS / BOLIVIA / BRAZIL
cumstances in which Marco Antonio Uria Oropeza was shot dead.
