ECUADOR
Leaders of student, trade union, peasant and indigenous organizations were subject to short-term detention in the course of strike action, demonstrations and disputes over land rights. Some, particularly members of cooperatives, were detained or attacked by armed civilians apparently acting in concert with, or with the acquiescence of, the police.
There were renewed reports of torture or ill-treatment of criminal suspects by police and military personnel and reports of at least two deaths under torture. Convicted prisoners continued to be subjected to beatings and other physical abuse by prison guards. After a change of government in August official inquiries were renewed into the fate of five people who "disappeared" in 1985 and 1986.
A new President, Dr Rodrigo Borja Cevallos of the Izquierda Democrática (ID), Democratic Left, was elected to serve a four-year term in May and the new government took office in August. The government of outgoing President Leon Febres Cordero was harshly criticized for its human rights record by domestic human rights organizations and the Ecuadorian legislature. The Minister of Interior, Luis Robles Posada, resigned in January after being censured by congress for tolerating torture, extrajudicial execution and "dis-
THE AMERICAS / ECUADOR
appearances". In March the Government of Ecuador ratified the United Nations Convention against Torture, and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
Many people were detained for short periods in the context of demonstrations and strike action. Some were prisoners of conscience; these included José Chavez, President of the Con/ederación Ecuatoriana de Organizaciones Sindicales Libres (CEOSL), Confederation of Free Trade Union Organizations, who was detained briefly during a nationwide strike over economic policies.
There were frequent reports of arbitrary detention, ill-treatment, killing and threats of death or injury by armed civilians who appeared to act with the informal authority of the police. Seven leaders of Comuna de Panyatug, an indigenous community in Cotopaxi Province, were reportedly detained and beaten with iron rods on 6 April by armed civilians accompanied by three police officers. They were reportedly held overnight, their hands bound, in the private chapel of a landowner in dispute with the community over land rights and then transferred to police cells in Latacunga. All were released without charge five days later after a writ of habeas corpus had been brought. The same killers reportedly attacked Panyatug on 29 April, killing community member José Yanchaliquin and wounding several others. Criminal investigations into both incidents were reportedly initiated but appeared to have made little progress by the end of the year.
Forty-three paratroopers from Taura Air Force Base who had been convicted of abducting President Febres Cordero in January 1987 were pardoned and released in November and December. They had alleged that they had been tortured (see Amnesty International Report 1988).
Torture by members of Servicio de Investigación Criminal (SIC), the Criminal Investigation Service of the National Police, and by some military units continued to be reported. Criminal suspects, including children, appeared to be ill-treated or tortured routinely. José Manuel Chato, aged 14, was detained in Quito in February on suspicion of theft. He was reportedly tortured with electric shocks to his genitals during interrogation at the headquarters of the army's Brigada Logis-
ticaNo. 1,Logistics BrigadeNo. 1,producing lesions which were evident in a subsequent medical examination. No progress in the judicial investigation of complaints in the case has been reported.
Autopsy reports identified internal injuries and asphyxiation as the causes of death of several prisoners who were believed to have died following torture in SIC custody. Marco Almeida Calispa was detained by the SIC in Quito in May on suspicion of theft and confirmed dead two days later. The autopsy report attributed his death to asphyxiation while in custody and cited evidence of severe bruising and of the ingestion of pesticide. In the same month José Supermán Peralta Vacillo was detained on suspicion of theft by police in Shushufindi, Napo, and taken to Lago Agrio. An autopsy reportedly attributed his death four days later to "internal injuries and bleeding produced by a wound" which had been inflicted while he was in custody.
Prisoners held on criminal charges in the major prisons in Guayaquil (Penitenciaría del Litoral), Quito (Penal Garcia Moreno) and Esmeraldas (Cárcel Pública de Esmeraldas) were reportedly subject to frequent beatings by guards and by prisoners granted special privileges. In February three inmates at the Guayaquil Prison testified to a congressional committee and to the Superior Court about the use of torture there and provided detailed accounts of execution-style killings of nine prisoners in 1986 and 1987. The nine had been among 20 prisoners the authorities said had been killed "trying to escape". The three prisoners who testified later received death threats.
At least one apparent extrajudicial execution was reported. Jorge Chalar De la Cruz was said to have been detained in June by SIC agents in Isla Piedad, Esmeraldas, after a personal dispute with a police officer. He was then tortured, mutilated by being burned, blinded and having his right ear severed, and killed. He was shot in the mouth and his body dumped in a cemetery. Inquiries into the killing which were due to have taken place were not known to have progressed.
Separate military and police courts have in practice exercised near-exclusive jurisdiction over trying military and police personnel in cases involving torture and death in custody. No convictions for these
THE AMERICAS / ECUADOR / EL SALVADOR
abuses are known to have been imposed in recent years. The Minister of Defence announced in September 1987 that a mih-tary court would investigate the reported torture of Alberto Alarc6n, aged eight, together with his family by troops of the army's BatalJbn de SeJva "Tungurahua" in May that year (see Amnesty international Report 1988). No progress in the proceedings has been reported.
A multi-party congressional commission created in August investigated the December 1985 "disappearance" of teacher Consuelo Benavides Cevallos. It confirmed that she had been detained by the navy and had died in custody and facilitated the discovery and identification of her body. Investigations into the fate of four others continued.
Amnesty International continued to raise its concerns with Ecuadorian authorities and to submit information to the relevant bodies of the United Nations and the Organization of American States.
