PARAGUAY
Increasing numbers of critics and opponents of the government were subject to short-term detention and some 400 arbitrary political arrests were recorded. Those held included trade unionists, students and peasants, some of whom were arrested in the context of land disputes. Many detainees were reportedly beaten at the time of their arrest or while in custody. The beatings were inflicted by security force personnel, sometimes assisted by civilian groups reportedly linked to the ruling Colorado Party. One long-term prisoner of conscience was released into exile. The Supreme Court confirmed a death sentence imposed in 1972 but later annulled it when a previous ruling commuting the sentence came to light.
Captain Modesto Napoleón Ortigoza, a long-term prisoner of conscience, was permitted to leave Paraguay on 15 June to take up political asylum in Spain. He had been released in December 1987 after spending 25 years in prison but was confined to the town of San Estanislao in the interior of Paraguay (see Amnesty International Report 1988). In February he was transferred to Asunción, where he was placed under house arrest at his mother's home. He escaped on 23 March and obtained sanctuary at the residence of the Colombian Ambassador, who subsequently helped negotiate his departure for Spain.
More than 200 opposition party leaders and supporters were detained briefly at the end of January when a meeting they were
THE AMERICAS/NICARAGUA
attending in the city of Coronel Oviedo was broken up by poUce and civilians apparently acting under police command. The purpose of their meeting had been to discuss abstention from the presidential elections scheduled for 14 February. Those held included students, journalists, trade unionists and political party leaders. The detainees were reportedly beaten by police and their civilian supporters, who were allegedly linked to the ruling Colorado Party. They were then taken to the local police station and released within a few hours or the next day.
In September a meeting held in a private house in the city of Caacupé, Department of Cordillera, was violently broken up by men in civilian clothes carrying firearms, accompanied by others in police uniform. Those attending the meeting, which included children, were held at gunpoint for about 20 minutes. Four leaders of the Partido Liberal Radical Auténtico (plra), Authentic Radical Liberal Party - Juan Carlos Saldivar, Carlos Caballero, Daniel Ponce Almada and Domingo Laino - were whipped, beaten with sticks and gun butts, and forcibly taken to the Department border.
In October the Head of Public Order (a police department) informed the President of the plra that all political activities of the party, including those of its youth wing the Juventud del Partido Liberal RddicaJ Auténtico Qlra). the Young Authentic Radical Liberal Party, were banned throughout the country.
Before the banning of the plra and the jlra in October - neither of which was officially recognized - their leaders and members were frequently subject to short-term detention and other forms of harassment. In June, for example, Julio César Franco and three other plra leaders were arrested by police in the town of Fernando de la Mora on the outskirts of Asunción while attending a private political gathering. No reason was given for their arrests and they were released the following day. Similarly, in July, plra President Domingo Laino and two leading members of the jlra, Ramón Ferreira and Waldino Montes de Oca, were arrested in the town of Itá after attending a religious service commemorating the 101st anniversary of the Liberal Party. They were detained incommunicado without official explanation for three days, then released uncharged.
There were further arrests of plra supporters after the party was banned.
Six people were charged under Laws 209 and 294 of the penal code on account of the peaceful expression of their political beliefs. Law 294, "Defence of Democracy", prohibits the activity of any political group which is perceived to support the notion of class struggle. Law 209, "Defence of Public Peace and Liberty of Persons" (see Amnesty internationai Report 1988), was enacted in 1970 to complement Law 294. It prohibits a wide range of activities, from selling pamphlets to holding political meetings, if the authorities deem them to be inspired by Marxism.
In January Gustavo Alfredo Zimmerliz Alcaraz, a student and member of the Movimiento Popular Colorado (mopck:o), a dissident wing of the ruling Colorado Party, was arrested by police in Asunción. He was reportedly ill-treated in custody and charged under Laws 209 and 294 with possessing subversive material and distributing leaflets published by the Movimiento Democrático Popular (mdp), Popular Democratic Movement. The mdp is a political movement founded in mid-1987 which supports the work of community groups. He was released from custody in March but legal proceedings against him were still pending at the end of 1988.
Five former members of the mdp were also charged under Law 209. They were Aldo Vera, Roque Vera. Reinaldo Peralta, Luis Schiacca and Cira Novarra, who were arrested on 21 September when police raided a meeting of social workers in a private house. They were accused of possessing subversive literature and belonging to a party with Marxist-Leninist orientation. They were released three weeks later but legal proceedings against them were still pending at the end of the year.
Members of peasant communities involved in land disputes were also subject to short-term arrest and harassment by the police and army. In luly, for example, 17 members of the Sha-Shi Neighbourhood Committee of Rural Workers in San Pedro Department were arrested without explanation; it was three days before relatives found out where they were being held. Twelve of the detainees were released within a few days, but five leaders of the community were held for over six weeks and charged with "land occupation". Charges against the five were pending at the end of the year.
THE AMERICAS / PARAGUAY / PERU
In May the Supreme Court confirmed a death sentence which had been imposed on Luciano Cardozo in 1972 by the Appeals Court in Encarnación, Itapua Department, following his conviction on charges of murder in the course of theft. The Supreme Court's decision raised the possibility that he would be the first person to be executed for more than 60 years. In August, however, the Supreme Court annulled its earlier ruling, after learning that in March 1981 it had already commuted the sentence to 30 years' imprisonment. The Supreme Court indicated that the relevant documentation on this final sentence had not been included in Luciano Cardozo's dossier "possibly due to an omission by the secretariat".
Amnesty International appealed to the authorities on a number of occasions on behalf of people subjected to short-term detention or held under Law 209. It called on the government to commute the death sentence passed on Luciano Cardozo following the Supreme Court's ruling in May. Amnesty International also urged the authorities to assist in the efforts to identify children whose parents were among the thousands who "disappeared" in custody in Argentina during the period of military rule. At least four such children were alleged to have been taken to Paraguay by couples who had had links with Argentine security forces. At the end of the year, the Argentine authorities were seeking the extradition from Paraguay of two Argentinian couples suspected of falsifying the children's birth certificates.
In April Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Paraguay to the United Nations procedure (under Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728F/1503) for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations.
