KOREA
(REPUBLICOF)
Several prisoners of conscience detained since the late 1960s and early 1970s were released but at least seven others re* mained in detention. Arrests on political grounds continued. There were few reports of torture of political prisoners but several police ofTicers were convicted of assaulting criminal suspects. Five prisoners had their death sentences commuted. No executions or new death sentences were reported.
Following his election in December 1987, President RohTae-woo was inaugurated on 25 February. In his inaugural address he declared his commitment to human rights: "The day when freedoms and human rights could be slighted in the name of economic growth and national security has ended. The day when repressive force and torture in secret chambers were tolerated is over."
After the parliamentary elections in April, in which the three opposition parties won the majority of seats, the National Assembly started to investigate reports of corruption and other abuses by the previous administration. It held hearings into the Kwangju incident of May 1980 when
ASIA ANDTHE PACIRC / KOREA (REPUBLIC OF) / LAOS
civilians were killed during protests against the imposition of martial law and troops stormed the city to end a four-day siege by anti-government protesters. The National Assembly also heard former political prisoners describe how they were tortured and began investigating the circumstances of the deaths of nine political prisoners between 1980 and 1988 and the deaths of inmates in the "purification camps" in the early 1980s.
In July the three opposition parties passed a resolution calling for the release of all political prisoners. Proposals to repeal or amend laws used to detain prisoners of conscience - such as the National Security Law, the Law on Assemblies and Demonstrations and the Public Security Law - had not reached debate by the end of the year.
Although some demonstrations organized by dissidents proceeded peacefully, hundreds of students were arrested for taking part in demonstrations that involved violence. Most were released without charge and of those who were tried the majority were released on suspended sentences. A number of workers were also arrested for organizing strikes and were usually briefly detained.
Prisoners of conscience were among more than 600 political prisoners released under a series of amnesties in February, May, June, August, October and December. They included Shin Young-bok, a lecturer imprisoned since 1968; Lee Chul and Kim Chul-hyon, two students imprisoned for alleged espionage since 1975; Lee Tae-bok, a publisher and labour activist who had been held since 1981; and Kim Keun-tae, the leader of a dissident group, imprisoned since September 1985. Among others freed were Soh Joon-shik and Kang }ong-kon, who had been held in preventive detention without charge or trial for 10 and seven years respectively for refusing to make statements of conversion to "anti-communism" after serving prison sentences. Fifteen prisoners held since 1979 in connection with their alleged membership of the South Korea National Liberation Front were also released during the year.
There were new arrests of people expressing views sympathetic to North Korea or advocating contact between people in North and South Korea. Most of these detainees, however, were released un-
charged or received short prison sentences. Yang Hong-gwan, a philosophy student, was held under the National Security Law in February, apparently for listening to North Korean broadcasts and writing articles based on what he had heard. However, he was believed to have been released shortly afterwards.
In April Song Un-hak, a labour activist who had previously been detained twice for his peaceful political activities, was arrested. He was sentenced in October to two years' imprisonment under the National Security Law after being convicted of planning to set up a dissident organization, the People's Front Against Fascists and Imperialists. Song Un-hak complained of having been beaten and denied sleep for several days after his arrest.
In June, July and August, over 6,000 students were reportedly arrested for taking part in marches supporting free communication between students from North and South Korea and early reunification of the peninsula. Most were released without charge.
Lee Pu-yong, a leading dissident released under the February amnesty, was rearrested in June and charged with participating in anti-government demonstrations. It appeared, however, that the real reason for his arrest was his involvement in efforts to reorganize dissident groups which had supported different opposition candidates in the December 1987 presidential elections. Lee Pu-yong was released on bail but had not been tried by the end of the year.
Chu In-sok, a playwright, was arrested in early August after the performance of his play Tongil Bab (The Reuni/ication), on the topic of Korean reunification. It was not known if he was still detained at the end of the year. At the end of August Shin Chul-ho, a pastor in Pupyung, and four church members were held for up to one month for showing slides of North Korea taken by visitors from the United States. Chang Ui-kyun, a publisher, was adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience. Arrested in July 1987, he had been convicted in December 1987 of contacting North Koreans in Japan. However, Amnesty International believed the true reason for his arrest to be his peaceful and legitimate political views and activities.
A number of prisoners of conscience
ASIA ANDTHE PACIRC / KOREA (REPUBLIC OF) / LAOS
who had been arrested in 1987 were tried and released. Among them were Choi Hyok-bae, a human rights and labour activist, and Lee San-ha. a poet. They were released in June and October respectively. Both had been arrested in November 1987, Lee San-ha for the publication of Halia Mountain, a poem which challenged the official description of the 1948 Cheju rebellion.
In July Amnesty International received detailed information about the detention of 50 people held under the Public Security Law. Most had spent between six and 13 years in preventive custody without charge or trial after first serving sentences for security related offences. Two of the prisoners had been held for over 34 years; the others had been rearrested some years after completion of their sentences. It is believed that many of these people were first arrested during or after the Korean War on suspicion of being North Korean agents or for having worked for the North Korean army during the war. By the end of the year about 13 of them had been either released or had died in custody; the others remained in detention.
Several criminal suspects were reported to have been tortured by having their heads held under water — a method of torture which had killed a political detainee in 1987 (see Amnesty International Report 1988]. In a number of cases the police officers responsible were prosecuted and imprisoned. Following the death of 16-year-old Myong No-yol in February, three police officers were arrested. They had tortured Myong No-yol and another teenager for four days to extract confessions of the rape and murder of a high-school student. They were tried by a district court and sentenced to between one and six years' imprisonment. After allegations of torture at Socho police station in Seoul the authorities removed the police officer in charge and arrested three other police. They were later jailed for one and two years.
In an unusual case which received wide publicity in South Korea and abroad, a police officer was found guilty in July of ill-treating a political detainee two years earlier. Puchon police officer Moon Kwi-dong was sentenced by Inchon District Court to five years' imprisonment for sexually abusing a woman detainee, Kwon In-suk, in June 1986. Kwon In-suk's appeal
against the authorities' initial decision not to prosecute was accepted by the Supreme Court in February 1988 and the court appointed her defence counsel to act as special prosecutor.
According to official sources there were no executions in the first six months of the year and none was reported for the remainder of the year. Five prisoners had their death sentences commuted to life imprisonment, two of them under the February amnesty - Choi Man-shik convicted of murder, and Kim Byong-ju convicted of espionage for North Korea. Yang Dong-hwa and Kim Song-man, two students arrested in 1985 and convicted of espionage, had their sentences commuted in the December amnesty. About 25 prisoners, mostly convicted of murder and espionage, were believed to be under final death sentences.
Amnesty International welcomed the release of prisoners of conscience under the six presidential amnesties. Throughout the year it called for the release of all prisoners it had been able to identify as prisoners of conscience, seven of whom were still detained at the end of the year serving long prison terms. Amnesty International sought information on the charges against a number of students arrested for participation in demonstrations or for distributing or writing publications the government regarded as favourable to North Korea. In November and December, the organization expressed its concern about the arrest of several publishers briefly detained for publishing books on North Korea.
Amnesty International started to investigate the cases of several prisoners arrested on charges of espionage in the 1970s and 1980s. These prisoners appeared not to have been given a fair trial and may in fact be detained for the peaceful expression of their political views. The organization also took up the cases of prisoners held in preventive detention under the Public Security Law and urged that they be either charged and tried or released.
In July Amnesty International representatives went to South Korea to meet individuals and organizations working for the improvement of human rights and the release of political prisoners. Meetings were also held with officials of the Ministries of Justice and Foreign Affairs and
ASIA ANDTHE PACIRC / KOREA (REPUBLIC OF) / LAOS
with the human rights committees of each pohtical party. In November the government replied to Amnesty International's inquiries about official investigations into a number of allegations of torture.
