AUSTRALIA
At least 14 Aboriginals died in custody in 1988, continuing a pattern of such deaths which have led some deceased prisoners' families to suggest that some deaths might have been the result of ill-treatment. The high incidence of such deaths had led to the appointment of a Royal Commission of Inquiry in 1987.
ASIA AND THE PACIFIC / AUSTRALIA / BANGLADESH
By November the Royal Commission of Inquiry into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody, which began its hearings in November 1987 with the intention of investigating 64 such deaths since January 1980, had been obliged to increase its caseload to over 100 as more cases came to its attention. The number of commission members was also increased from one to five. In December concern about the continuing deaths caused the commission, in its interim report, to issue a set of recommendations "to alleviate the toll of custodial deaths". The recommendations included procedures at police lock-ups, recruitment and training of police and prison officers and medical care. In Western Australia, the state with the highest incidence of deaths in custody, six of the 32 recommendations made in January by a local interim inquiry were adopted. In September 1987 federal and state ministers responsible for police, corrective services and Aboriginal affairs had adopted a draft code of practices and procedures for the protection of Aboriginals in custody, including measures to minimize the detention of Aboriginals who constitute a grossly disproportionate number of those taken into custody on minor criminal charges. The draft code was endorsed at a meeting of police ministers and is being implemented on "an interim basis".
On 8 July Edward Cameron, an Aboriginal, was found hanged by a single bootlace in a police cell in the small town of Geraldton, Western Australia. He had been arrested three and a half hours earlier, allegedly for breaking into a store. On 23 October Graham Walley, an Aboriginal serving 15 months for driving without a licence and for breaking and entering, was found hanged by his belt at Greenough Prison 20 minutes after an argument with prison warders. He was due for release on parole in early November. Police and prison officials claimed that Edward Cameron and Graham Walley had committed suicide. In both cases, it appeared that certain provisions of the draft code of practices and procedures relating to Aboriginals in custody, notably that belts and shoelaces should be removed, had not been implemented. A coroner's inquest into Edward Cameron's death began in October but its outcome had not been declared by the end of the year.
Amnesty International wrote to the federal government and to the state author-
ities in Western Australia following the deaths in custody of Edward Cameron and Graham Walley. It urged full and impartial investigations of the circumstances of their deaths and for all possible measures to be introduced, such as those already suggested by official inquiries, to prevent further Aboriginal custodial deaths. In response, the federal and state authorities informed Amnesty International that they were also concerned about such deaths and that a Royal Commission had therefore been appointed. They stated that both deaths, like others of Aboriginals in custody, would be the subject of coroners' inquests and would also be investigated by the Royal Commission.
Amnesty International replied in October in a letter to Prime Minister Bob Hawke, regretting that despite the adoption of the draft code for the protection of Aboriginals in custody and the guidelines issued in April by the Royal Commission, there had been further deaths. The organization urged the Australian Government to see that the draft code was finalized and fully put into practice, and that the state governments adopted and implemented the Royal Commission's guidelines without delay in order to reduce the likelihood of further deaths as soon as possible.
