ETHIOPIA
Several hundred unarmed civilians were said to have been extrajudicially executed by government forces in Eritrea and Tig-ray, where there was intensified fighting between government and opposition forces and where the government im-
posed a new state of emergency. Here and in other parts of the country, hundreds of people were arrested for suspected links with opposition groups. Seven members of the former royal family who had been detained since 1974 were released in May. However, many people arrested in previous years for political reasons, including prisoners of conscience, remained in detention without trial or had "disappeared". Torture of political prisoners continued to be reported and conditions in most prisons - particularly special security and military prisons - were harsh.
In March and April the opposition Erit-rean People's Liberation Front (EPLF) and Tigray People's Liberation Front (TPLF) gained control of several towns in Eritrea and Tigray regions. Some of these were later reoccupied by government forces but many rural areas remained under the control of these groups. Armed conflict involving other opposition forces continued elsewhere including Gondar, Hararghe and Wollega regions. Those trying to resist or evade conscription into the government's armed forces were subject to harsh penalties including extrajudicial execution. Relatives of those evading conscription were sometimes detained for short periods. There was no provision for conscientious objection to military service and children as young as 13 years old were reportedly conscripted.
The government continued its program to resettle millions of people, many from famine areas, into new villages in their own region or in other parts of the country. Many were reported to have been removed by force and those trying to resist or escape were imprisoned, ill-treated or extrajudicially executed. Twenty-two people who refused to be resettled were killed by soldiers in Keren in Eritrea in February.
There were also reports of human rights abuses by opposition organizations. For example, in April an EPLF group was said to have killed some 100 members of the Afar ethnic group who refused to join their organization.
In May the government proclaimed an indefinite state of emergency in Eritrea and Tigray. Emergency regulations empowered the security forces to "use force when necessary to ensure law and order" and to detain civilians. Special Emergency Administrators were empowered to convene military
AFRICA/ETHIOPIA
courts to try civilians accused of political offences or offences against the provisions of the proclamation - for example, disobeying an order prohibiting civilians from living in a particular area. Those convicted had the right to appeal to a higher military court and death sentences required confirmation by the Emergency Administrator. Amnesty International was unable to obtain information on the numbers of people detained or tried under the emergency but it appeared that soldiers frequently detained and executed civilians without reference to the courts.
Detailed information on political imprisonment was difficult to obtain. No official figures were published and the government did not reply to inquiries by Amnesty International or other organizations. Prisoners' relatives were threatened with reprisal if they inquired persistently about prisoners or gave information to foreign organizations. Prisoners were regularly held incommunicado for long periods without charge or trial, despite a provision in the 1987 Constitution that all arrested people should be brought to court or released within 48 hours. Detainees had no legal redress for illegal or arbitrary imprisonment. No trials of political prisoners were reported.
Several hundred suspected government opponents were arrested. Some were released but most were believed still to be detained without charge or trial at the end of the year. They were mostly held by the Central Investigation Organ - the state security police - by which prisoners have been routinely tortured, or in ordinary prisons after interrogation. Most were arrested in areas where opposition forces were active, particularly in Eritrea and Tigray, but there were also many arrests in the capital, Addis Ababa. Most of those arrested were accused of supporting opposition forces but none was charged on such a basis. In Asmara, the Eritrean capital, there were many arrests of suspected EPLF supporters. In August in Addis Ababa some 200 Erit-reans were reportedly arrested on similar grounds. In June arrests were reported in Tigray after the TPLF forces withdrew from towns they had occupied.
In February, Abdullahi Mohamed Dho-dan, an elderly poet belonging to Ethiopia's Somali community, was arrested near Hararghe for allegedly criticizing Ethiopian government policy in Somali-populated areas in the region. He was released after
some weeks, redetained later in the year, and was still held without charge or trial at the end of 1988. There were reports of other arrests of ethnic Somali critics of the Ethiopian government, some of whom were suspected by the government of being supporters of opposition guerrilla groups.
There were new reports of extensive short-term arrests of Protestant church members in Wollo and western regions, although several churches which had been closed in previous years because their activities were considered "anti-revolutionary", were reopened. Tesfaye Gabiso, an evangelist of the Baptist KaJe Hivvot (Word of Life) Church, who had been a prisoner of conscience from 1980 until 1985, was reportedly rearrested in April and still held at the end of the year.
Some political prisoners were released during the year without announcement but the authorities did publicize the release in May of seven women who had been detained without trial since the 1974 revolution on account of their family ties to the former Emperor Haile Selassie. They were the late Emperor's daughter, 76-year-old Tenagnework Haile Selassie; her four daughters - Aida, Hirut, Sebel and Sophia Desta; the former Emperor's daughter-in-law Sara Gizaw; and another relative, Zuriashwork Gebre-Igziabeher. However, three grandsons of the late Emperor -Wossen-Seged, Michael and Bede-Mariam Mekonnen - were not freed and were still held in Addis Ababa Central Prison at the end of the year. Over 30 Ethiopian Jews, members of the Beta Israel, House of Israel, sect - also known as Falashas - who had been arrested in Gondar and Addis Ababa in early 1987, were also said to have been released in 1988 without having been charged or tried.
Many prisoners of conscience and other political prisoners known to have been arrested in previous years were still held at the end of 1988. Some were in the Addis Ababa Central Prison, where several hundred of the 4,500 inmates were reportedly held for political reasons. Conditions in this prison had improved considerably but those held in regional prisons, for example in Sembel Prison in Asmara, or in security or military detention centres, faced harsh treatment and most were held incommunicado.
Many prisoners of conscience arrested in 1980 for alleged links with the Oromo Lib-
AFRICA/ETHIOPIA
eration Front, who appeared to be imprisoned simply because they were prominent Oromos, were held throughout the year. They included members of the Ethiopian Evangelical Mekane Yesus Church such as Tsehai Tolessa, the wife of the church's former head, and Zegeye Asfaw, a former Minister of Law and Justice.
Two former United Nations staff members in Ethiopia also remained in prison -Tesfa-Mariam Zeggai, arrested in 1983 for suspected opposition to the government and sentenced to 25 years' imprisonment for alleged espionage, and Shimelis Teklu, arrested in 1984, whose trial on political charges had been adjourned in 1987. Berha-nu Dinka, Ethiopia's former Permanent Representative to the UN in New York, who was arrested in 1986, was still held without charge or trial.
Thirteen alleged members of the opposition Ethiopian People's Democratic Alliance (EPDA) arrested in 1983 were serving administratively-imposed prison terms of up to 25 years (see Amnesty International Report 1988). Eighteen members of the Democratic Front for the Salvation of Somalia (DFSS), an opposition group fighting the Somalia Government and based in Ethiopia, were still detained without trial, having been arrested in 1985 and 1986. They included DFSS leader Colonel Abdul-lahi Yusuf Ahmed, who had not been seen since shortly after his arrest in October 1985.
The government continued to refuse to disclose the fate of 16 prominent former government officials and a church leader who "disappeared" in 1979. They were believed to have been extrajudicially executed, as were some 40 political prisoners associated with the EPDA and other opposition groups, who "disappeared" from prison in Addis Ababa in November 1985, and 10 others who "disappeared" in October 1986 (see Amnesty internationaJ Report 1988).
There were new reports of torture. Methods reportedly used on political prisoners held incommunicado by the security police or army included beating on the soles of the feet, suspension of the body in a contorted position, the application of electric shocks, and submersion in water. No investigations into torture allegations were reported, nor were any steps known to have been taken by the government to safeguard prisoners from such treatment.
Extrajudicial executions of civilians by government forces were reported in Eritrea after EPLF forces captured the town of Afabet and moved close to Keren and Asmara. In April over 70 people were reportedly executed in Qazien and Shebah villages; in May over 200 villagers were reportedly executed by government troops in She'eb village; and in October 11 civilians were executed in Mai Harast. There were also reports from Tigray of killings by government forces of civilians suspected of links with the TPLF. In June some 340 people were killed in villages around Hagareselam and up to 100 near Maikinetal and Adua - some 20 of them were said to have been bayonet-ted and thrown over a cliff.
Extrajudicial executions were also reported elsewhere. In Metekel district near Lake Tana, some 200 villagers were said to have been killed by the security forces in February on account of their suspected links with the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Party (EPRP). In the same month. General Tariku Yayne, a senior army commander, was arrested and extrajudicially executed, allegedly for criticizing the government for its pursuit of the war in the north. There were also reports that some 50 captured EPLF guerrillas and civilians suspected of supporting the EPLF, who had been held in Sembel Prison and Mariam Gimbi Security Prison in Asmara, were executed extrajudicially in April. In the same month over 20 elders in the southeastern town of Gode were reportedly summarily executed for opposing conscription.
Little information was available on the use of the death penalty, which may be imposed for numerous political offences as well as for murder. In August a man convicted of 15 murders by the Wollo High Court in Dessie was sentenced to death. It was not known if any judicial executions took place.
Amnesty International called for impartial investigations into reports of extrajudicial executions, particularly in Eritrea and Tigray, and appealed for an end to such killings. It called on the government not to use the state of emergency to detain civilians arbitrarily and for indefinite periods without charge or trial and sought assurances that those tried by military courts would be afforded fair trials. No reply was received from the government and no investigations into extrajudicial executions or the extent of detentions under the state of
AFRICA/ETHIOPIA/GAMBIA
emergency were known to have taken place.
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the release of prisoners of conscience and investigated cases of political prisoners detained without trial or serving prison sentences to establish if they were prisoners of conscience. The organization appealed for the introduction of safeguards against torture by the security police and the army.
