THAILAND
Three prisoners of conscience and three possible prisoners of conscience were released. However, three others were convicted of "lese majesty" and sentenced to prison terms. It appeared that they too might be prisoners of conscience. Eight political prisoners held without charge or trial since arrest in April 1987 were released. Six others arrested in 1986 or 1987 were brought to trial before military courts from which there is no right of appeal for "communistic activities" and insurrection. The trial continued, also by military court, of six other political prisoners who had been detained since July 1984. More than 20 others convicted by such courts in previous years - including 17 Muslims from south Thailand imprisoned for violent separatist activities- remained in prison without the right of appeal. At least five such prisoners were released as a result of royal pardons. At least seven people were sentenced to death, but it was not known if there were any executions.
On 16 September parliament passed a bill sponsored by Prime Minister Chaat-chai Chunhawan's government amnestying armed forces officers and senators who had allegedly led an abortive military coup in September 1985. Several groups of people, including members of parliament, lawyers, religious leaders and students called for a wider amnesty which would cover all political prisoners. Members of
ASJAANDTHEPACIFIC/THAILAND
parliament submitted three amnesty bills to the House of Representatives, and at the end of September the government said it would study the bills to decide whether to support them.
Several people were arrested and brought to trial on charges of "lese majesty". Wimon Choertchuuchon and Siifaa Sawaangyen, both students, and kindergarten owner Wasuthii Sukkasang were arrested on 28 January and brought to trial in March for allegedly producing leaflets critical of the royal family. They were reportedly entrapped into doing so by a government agent. Apparently, they had been targeted for arrest after Wimon Choertchuuchon criticized government policies at non-violent student rallies, which may have been the reason for their detention. They were freed on 30 December when the court dropped charges against them.
Three other people were arrested on "lese majesty" charges. Montri Aksornin, Sanit Chanduangsi and Chana Luangvisit were reportedly alleged to have distributed leaflets critical of the royal family. Arrested in July and tried in November, Montri Aksornin and Sanit Chanduangsi were sentenced to four and a half years' imprisonment and Chana Luangvisit to three and a half years. The trial was held in camera and so details of charges and verdict were not available. It appeared, however, that the reasons for their detention might have been their non-violent political views.
Other prisoners previously imprisoned on "lese majesty" charges were given royal pardons and released. Sanan Wongsuthii, a labour activist imprisoned since 1986 for "lese majesty" on account of public statements he had made criticizing a member of the royal family, was released in February. Wiira Musikaphong, a long-standing member of parliament, was freed in July. He had spent a month in prison after the Supreme Court rejected his appeal. He had been imprisoned because of election speeches he had made saying that a prince would live an easier life than a commoner, such as himself.
Former rubber tapper Phromneet Baan-thip, a prisoner of conscience convicted of "lese majesty" because he expressed a preference for a republican system of government and predicted the collapse of the monarchy, benefited from the general
royal pardons. He was released in October.
Six prisoners charged with "communistic activities" and insurrection - the latter carrying an optional death penalty -were brought to trial before military courts, from which there is no right of appeal. Suwat Mungchoertchuutham, detained in September 1986 while leading peaceful demonstrations against alleged local government corruption, was charged in May. He was accused of organizing protests for the outlawed Communist Party of Thailand (CPT), which has fought a guerrilla war against the government since the 1960s. Nop Prasertsom and four other prisoners detained in April 1987 were also charged in May. Two of them were accused of being CPT leaders.theothersofbeing CPT members who had spread propaganda and possessed banned left-wing books. The trial was still in progress at the end of 1988, and proceeded slowly reportedly because of the non-appearance of government officials called as prosecution witnesses.
The trial continued, on similar charges, of Phirun Chatwanitkun and five other prisoners. They had been detained since April 1984 and their trial was repeatedly postponed because government officials failed to testify on schedule.
There were reports of the ill-treatment of two Laotian asylum-seekers. In October Lee Sue and Yang Pao were allegedly severely beaten, burned with cigarettes and threatened with death by the commander of Ban Vinai refugee camp, reportedly because he suspected them of arson.
At least seven death sentences were imposed. Three police officers and two local government officials were sentenced to death for murder. Two people convicted of heroin-trafficking - a Thai man and an Australian woman - were also sentenced to death. All seven were believed to have appealed. There were no reports of executions in the news media.
In November Amnesty International wrote to Prime Minister Chaatchai urging the government to release any of the six who were prisoners of conscience, then held for "lese majesty". It also urged the adoption of measures to ensure that all political prisoners fully enjoy the right to a prompt and fair trial, including the right of appeal. The organization urged commutation of all death sentences finalized by the courts.
