NICARAGUA
Many critics and opponents of the government, including some believed to be prisoners of conscience, were detained in connection with protest demonstrations and strike activity. Some received prison sentences from police magistrates appointed by the Ministry of the Interior under a procedure which did not provide for a judicial hearing or right of appeal; others were tried on criminal charges. Approximately 3,200 political prisoners remained in prison at the end of the year. They included some 1,700 convicted of crimes committed as members of the National Guard of the previous President, Anastasio Somoza Debayle, and approximately 1,500 prisoners convicted of belonging to, or assisting, armed opposition forces. The majority had been convicted by special courts which failed to meet international standards of fairness and impartiality; some were believed to be prisoners of conscience. There were new allegations of extrajudicial executions and "disappearances" by government forces in areas affected by the armed conflict. In many cases little progress appeared to have been made by the authorities in investigating reports of politically motivated killings and "disappearances" by government forces in previous years.
In March the government signed a 60-day ceasefire agreement with leaders of armed opposition forces known as the contras, which are based in Honduras and supported by the United States. The ceasefire was extended repeatedly and 100 political prisoners were released in March under the terms of the agreement. However, in June negotiations for a permanent settlement of the armed conflict collapsed and provisions for the phased release of
THE AMERICAS/NICARAGUA
the remaining political prisoners were not implemented. Despite the ceasefire there were sporadic armed attacks by anti-government forces and new reports were received that they had carried out kidnappings and summary executions of civilians.
In January the unlimited powers of detention exercised in previous years by the Dirección General de Seguridad del Estado (DGSE), General Directorate of State Security, were ended when the state of emergency imposed in 1982 was lifted and a constitutional measure came into force allowing only 72 hours' detention before suspects were brought before a competent authority. Habeas corpus, which had been restricted under the state of emergency, was fully reinstated, and a new law governing its use came into effect in April. The government also dissolved the Tribunales Populares Antisomocistas (TPAs), Antisomocista Popular Tribunals -special lay courts operating independently of the judiciary, which since April 1983 had had exclusive jurisdiction in cases involving charges under the Public Security Law (Decree 1074). The composition of these courts, and their summary procedures, had seriously impeded rights to a fair and impartial trial. Jurisdiction over offences involving national security was transferred to the ordinary criminal courts, although trials under Decree 1074 were still subject to the same special procedures, which provided for rapid hearings, as those which had governed the TPAs. In February officials whoJiad served as TPA judges were appointed to criminal courts where they continued to preside over political cases. However, unlike TPA verdicts, which were not subject to independent judicial review, sentences imposed by the criminal courts could be taken to courts of appeal and to the Supreme Court of Justice.
In July 38 opposition leaders and activists were detained and placed on trial in connection with an anti-government protest rally in Nandaime which was broken up by police using tear-gas and batons. Many of those detained were severely beaten at the time of their arrest. Opposition leaders held included Myriam Arguello Morales, Luis Alberto Carballo Madrigal and Alejandro Sandino Muñoz, leaders of the Partido Conservador de Nicaragua (PCN), Conservative Party of
Nicaragua, and Agustín Jarquín Anaya and Juan Marcos Herrera Hernández, leaders of the Partido Social Cristiano (PSC), Social Christian Party. Also arrested were Carlos Huembes Trejos and Róger Guevara Mena, President and Secretary of the Coordinadora Democrática Nicaragüense, Nicaraguan Democratic Coordinator, a coalition of conservative parties, trade unions and business groups which organized the demonstration. Together with more than 30 others they were summarily sentenced by a police magistrate to six months' imprisonment for disturbing the peace. The sentences were quashed following representations to the Ministry of the Interior, but the case was referred to the Granada Criminal Court. In August the judge gave a preliminary verdict of guilty and formally remanded the 38 in custody to await sentencing on charges of incitement, wounding and criminal damage. In November 25 of the prisoners were released, 16 of them unconditionally, after the appellate court ordered a stay of legal proceedings against them. Those released included Luis Alberto Carballo, Alejandro Sandino and Juan Marcos Herrera; the court confirmed the custody orders against Myriam Arguello, Agustín Jarquín, Carlos Huembes, Róger Guevara and the remaining nine prisoners. Myriam Arguello and Agustín Jarquín were then released from prison on the grounds of their ill-health and placed under house arrest. The remaining prisoners were released during the second week of December. Agustín Jarquín, Myriam Arguello, Róger Guevara and Carlos Huembes were subsequently given three-year suspended prison sentences, and the other nine prisoners 18-month suspended sentences. There appeared to be no evidence that the imprisoned leaders had participated in or instigated violence; they appeared to be prisoners of conscience sentenced as an arbitrary measure intended to prevent them engaging in non-violent protest activity.
Other government opponents were imprisoned without trial in connection with opposition protests and strike activity before the Nandaime incident. Under existing laws police magistrates were permitted to jail misdemeanour offenders for up to six months without a judicial hearing or an effective right of defence or appeal. Between January and June more than 20 people who demonstrated against the gov-
THEAMERICAS/PERU/STVINCENTANDTHEGRENADINES
eminent were summarily sentenced under this procedure for offences such as disturbing the peace. In April more than 50 opposition activists were detained for several days for demonstrating in support of a hunger-strike by opposition trade union leaders which had been organized to back up strike demands of a construction workers' union.
In May four economists, three of whom were government employees and the fourth the director of an opposition research institute, were imprisoned under Decree 1074 charged with providing secret economic data to the United States Embassy. In June Mario Alegría Castillo, Director of the Private Sector Institute of Economic and Social Research (INIESEP), and Nora Aldana Centeno, an official of the government's National Food Program, were sentenced to 16 years' imprisonment for "revealing secrets prejudicial to the economic security of the country". The other two defendants, José Adrián Espinales Rodríguez and Pedro Pablo Su Olivas, each received three-year sentences. Nora Aldana had been held incommunicado for a week after her arrest. She was not brought before a court for a further week and not permitted to see a lawyer in private until 20 days after her detention. Mario Alegría was also denied access to his family or to a lawyer for more than one week. Both were convicted largely on the basis of a filmed "confession" videotaped by the DGSE while the prisoners were held incommunicado and broadcast on television by the Ministry of the Interior a few hours after their first court appearance.
Scores of peasants from areas affected by the armed conflict were detained and later charged under the Public Security Law with belonging to or assisting the contras. Many were held for several weeks by the DGSE before they were charged, and denied private access to a lawyer until after their first court appearance. There were continuing reports of detainees under interrogation being confined in dark and tiny cells, deprived of food or water for days and physically threatened in order to make them sign confessions.
About 1,700 former members of the National Guard and alleged collaborators with the Somoza government continued to serve prison sentences for crimes committed under that government. The majority had been convicted by special tribunals
whose summary procedures failed to ensure fair and impartial trials. As part of the March ceasefire agreement, the government agreed to submit all the National Guard cases for review by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (lACHR). By the end of the year the lACHR's recommendations had not been published or implemented.
There were reports that peasants suspected of assisting the contras had been killed by government troops engaged in counter-insurgency operations. Other peasants "disappeared" after they had been captured and were still missing at the end of the year. Most of these incidents occurred in Matagalpa and Jinotega provinces, in which the armed conflict had been particularly intense. In July Celso del Socorro Herrera Carballo was allegedly captured and killed by troops of the Simón Bolivar, Francisco Estrada and Rufo Marín Bataillons near El Ventarrón, Jinotega. His body was found in the mountains; he appeared to have been beaten, his neck was broken and one arm mutilated. Celso Herrera's brother, Félix Pedro Herrera Carballo, was reportedly abducted on the same day. At the end of the year his fate was still unknown.
Amnesty International renewed its requests for further information from the Military Auditor on official investigations into alleged extrajudicial executions and "disappearances" by government forces in previous years. No replies were received. One "disappearance" case was that of Pastor Cruz Herrera, a peasant from San Marcos de Abajo, Jinotega, missing since May 1983. In June 1983 his relatives had been informed by an official that he was in detention at the DGSE detention centre of Las Tejas, Matagalpa. They were later informed that the E)GSE had transferred him to Jinotega - a report the DGSE denied. An ex-detainee who had been held in Las Tejas reportedly stated that he shared a cell with Pastor Cruz but the government has denied that he had been detained. The case was referred to the government by the lACHR, which in its 1985-1986 report stated that it had not yet received a satisfactory response.
In July Amnesty International addressed a 20-page memorandum to President Daniel Ortega, based in part on the findings of its December 1987 visit to Nicaragua, which summarized its human rights concerns under the state of emergency. Amnesty International welcomed the lifting of the state of emergency and the
THE AMERICAS / NICARAGUA / PANAMA
dissolution of the TP As. It urged the government to ensure that constitutional restrictions on detention were respected, to release prisoners of conscience, to carry out a judicial review of sentences passed by the TPAs, and to release or retry those unfairly convicted. The organization also called for further steps to investigate reports of killings and "disappearances" by government security forces and to bring those responsible to justice. No reply was received.
In September Amnesty International wrote to the government expressing concern at the Nandaime arrests and urging the unconditional release of all those not implicated in violence. The organization also urged the government to ensure that all the prisoners were given a fair and impartial trial.
