MEXICO
About 12 possible prisoners of conscience were released but several others remained in prison. Many opposition activists were detained for brief periods around the time of the July national elections and at least six were killed in circumstances that have not been clarified. Other killings were reported in rural areas, usually in the context of land disputes. There were reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees.
The ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) was returned to office on 6 July with a substantially reduced majority in national elections. Carlos Salinas de Gor-tari replaced Miguel de la Madrid Hurtado
as President. He was credited with just over 50 per cent of the vote. His nearest rival-Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas, leaderofthe National Democratic Front (FDN), an alliance of several left-of-centre parties -was credited with 31 per cent.
Amnesty International had information on 14 possible prisoners of conscience held in 1988. One of them, a university professor, Javier Albavera Viveros, had been arrested in the state of Guerrero in October 1985. He was later sentenced to 32 years' imprisonment on charges of kidnapping, robbery and "wounding". In 1988 his sentence was reduced on appeal to 15 years. Amnesty International believed his detention may have resulted from his work on behalf of slumdwellers in Acapulco which he undertook as a member of a left-wing political group, or from his activity onbehalf of fellow group members held in detention.
Francisco Urbina Hernández, a peasant leader and member of a left-wing group may also have been a prisoner of conscience. Arrested in 1984, he had been convicted in 1986 of robbery with violence, criminal association and carrying prohibited firearms and had been sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment. Eight other men convicted on the same charges and serving similar sentences were granted early release in the last three months of the year. Early release may be granted after two-fifths of the sentence have been served.
Three others who may have been prisoners of conscience - Gerardo Barrios Hernández, Félix Maldonado Chame and Pedro Martinez — were released on bail in September. They were urban community leaders who had been detained in 1986 in the state of Chiapas and charged with
THE AMERICAS/NICARAGUA
fraud. Amnesty International considered that in these 12 cases, criminal charges may have been without foundation and brought for reasons linked to the prisoners' legal political activities.
There were reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners. In February Gregorio Castañón López, a Mixe Indian, claimed in a trial in Salina Cruz that he had been tortured at the military police station at Malatenco after his arrest earlier in the month. He said that he had been forced to confess to drug offences because he had been subjected to ill-treatment including being beaten and having his head submerged in water until near suffocation. After the trial he was examined by a doctor and was found to have injuries and bruising on his neck, arms and legs, dating from the period he was in custody. The army was said to have initiated an investigation into the allegations but by the end of the year Amnesty International was not aware that it had reached any conclusions. Gregorio Castañón was sentenced to seven years' imprisonment on drugs charges.
In September the Press reported that two people, one of them a minor, had died in custody and a third had become seriously ill as a result of torture by federal judicial police in Guadalajara. The commanding officer of those involved was reported to have denied the use of torture but to have commented, "If we beat people it's because no way are we going to be gentle with them."
Throughout the year dozens of people in rural areas were killed, apparently as a result of their involvement in disputes over land ownership. In several cases there were reports that those responsible were gunmen hired by local landowners who operated with the protection of local authorities. In February, for example, Efrén Sanábriga Eufracio and Eduardo González Santiago were killed by gunmen in Putla de Guerrero, state of Oaxaca. They were members of an independent group of indigenous peasants, Popular Mixtee Unity, and had been involved in a long-running land dispute. Two other members of the same group, Nicolás López Pérez and Humberto Ramírez González, were shot dead in March. The killers were alleged to be gunmen hired by the landowner with whom the peasants were in dispute.
In April Israel Maldonado Hernández was killed by gunmen in La Trinitaria, state
of Chiapas, after he had begun legal action under agrarian reform legislation to extend land worked by his community. In June 18-year-old peasant farmer Santos Villegas Hernández was killed in Chapaltepec, Tian-guistengo, state of Hidalgo, by a group of heavily armed men. The same group had reportedly killed two peasants and an eight-year-old child when they opened fire on the community of Acatenco in Tianguistengo in early February. Numerous killings have been reported in these regions in previous years, allegedly carried out by gunmen acting with the acquiescence of local or state authorities. In many such cases the state authorities repeatedly failed to detain or prosecute those responsible. At the end of the year Amnesty International was investigating these cases to assess whether local authorities colluded with powerful local individuals and gunmen to commit or cover up killings.
Other apparently politically motivated killings were reported in the context of the July elections. In early July a presidential candidate's aide - Francisco Xavier Ovando - and his assistant - Román Gil Heráldez -were shot dead in Mexico City. The two men were involved in setting up a computer system to monitor the vote. Francisco Xavier Ovando was a member of the group which had broken away from the PRI and later formed the FDN. He had reportedly been under police surveillance and had received death threats in the state of Michoacán, where he had lived until mid-1987.
In August four young men, all teenagers, were found dead in their car in Mexico City. Two of them - Ernesto del Arco Parra and José Luis García Juárez -although themselves too young to vote, had been active in the electoral campaign on behalf of the FDN. After the election they were also active in a popular protest movement which grew out of allegations of electoral fraud. Police and government authorities discounted any political motive for the killings and attributed them to a "traffic incident". Other reports indicated that they had been premeditated and carried out professionally. Witnesses said that the young men's car was intercepted by two vehicles and that Ernesto del Arco was pulled from the driver's seat by his hair and then shot. His friends, they said, were forced into one of the other vehicles. The four young men were found dead in their car some distance
THE AMERICAS / MEXICO / NICARAGUA
away, each with at least three wounds from bullets fired at point-blank range. Amnesty International was seeking information about investigations into the killings at the end of the year.
New evidence emerged that many people who "disappeared" in custody during the 1970s and early 1980s had been executed extrajudicially by government security forces. In March Zacarías Osorio Cruz, a former member of the parachute brigade, alleged at an immigration hearing in Canada that between 1978 and 1983 he had taken part in military operations in the states of Guerrero, Sinaloa and Chiapas. He said that during these operations individuals were detained and either summarily executed or transported to Military Camp No. 1 in Mexico City. He also said that he had been part of an execution squad which regularly escorted hooded prisoners from the military base to a firing-range where they were shot. Although he did not know the identity of any of the victims, he said that they included many political detainees. The orders to carry out killings, he alleged, had been received from the highest levels of military command.
As far as Amnesty International is aware, the government made no public comment on Zacarias Osorio Cruz's allegations. However, a statement from Mexican diplomats in Canada suggested they were based on "fantasy". The allegations appeared to corroborate to some extent Amnesty International's information about prisoners who "disappeared" in the years in question after they were reportedly moved to Military Camp No. 1.
On two occasions Amnesty International wrote to the state authorities of Chiapas expressing concern at the killing and ill-treatment of peasants in the course of evictions by the police and soldiers. In October the organization expressed concern at the alleged ill-treatment of a prisoner held on drugs charges.
Amnesty International representatives visited Mexico in October to carry out research on torture, extrajudicial executions and the situation of individual prisoners.
