CAMEROON
Ten prisoners of conscience were known to be held during the year. At least 40 other political prisoners were still held in connection with an attempted coup in 1984, most of them after trials which did not meet international standards. Some were held after the end of their sentences. There were reports that conditions in a number of prisons were harsh and that many prisoners had died of malnutrition. At least 14 people were sentenced to death. It was not known whether any executions took place.
A number of prisoners of conscience arrested in previous years, one of whom had been tried and convicted and others detained without trial, remained in prison throughout the year. Only Augustine Kong, a lehovah's Witness, had been tried; he received a two-year prison sentence in June 1987 for practising a banned religion. Frédéric Batoum and Samuel Zézé were arrested in 1985, apparently for supporting the banned opposition party
AFRICA / BURUNDI / CAMEROON
Union des populations du Cameroun (UPC), Union of Cameroonian Peoples. They were released in August 1986 and rearrested shortly afterwards. Both were believed still to be in prison without charge at the end of 1988. The UPC sought official recognition in 1985 and was refused on the grounds that Cameroon was a one-party state. Membership of the UPC and other unofficial political parties remained a punishable offence, although in practice members of such groups have been detained without charge rather than prosecuted.
At least seven other people were reportedly detained without trial during 1988 on account of their non-violent political views or activities. In February two men were detained, apparently in connection with an article critical of former French President Valéry Giscard d'Es-taing. Joseph Benyimbe, a journalist working for the weekly magazine Le Combat-tant, and Samuel Zong Desjoies, director of the magazine, were released without charge four months later. Also in February the editor of Cameroon Magazine, Francis Emile Mbounja, and a journalist on the publication, Paul Nlend, were arrested after an article appeared in the magazine alleging police corruption. They were released without charge in April. In all four of these cases it seemed that short periods of imprisonment without reference to the courts were used to intimidate journalists and persuade them not to publish material which did not meet with government approval.
In a similar case in May, a singer, Koko Ateba, was arrested after performing in the presence of the wife of President Paul Biya. One of her songs was evidently interpreted as insulting Mme Biya and although no reasons for arrest were made public Koko Ateba was detained for over two weeks.
Albert Mukong, a writer and long-term opponent of the government, was arrested in June. He had taken part in radio interviews with the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) in December 1987 and May 1988, in which he discussed his detention in the 1970s. He spoke of detainees tortured under the previous government, the organization of recent elections, and alleged corruption among present government officials. He was charged with insulting the Head of State, an offence which carries a sentence of up to five years'
AFRtCA/CAMEROON
imprisonment. He was still held at the end of the year.
In July Dr Joseph Sende was detained for a few days and then released without charge. He had been detained without trial for some five months in 1985 (see Amnesty International Report 1986) and was believed to have been detained once again for supporting the UPC.
The government did not give reasons for the detention of those held without trial, nor clarify the legal basis for their imprisonment. Under ordinary criminal law, suspects must be referred to the courts or other judicial authorities within a few days of arrest. Under emergency powers which have been in force continuously since 1961, however, anyone suspected of threatening public order may be detained without charge for indefinitely renewable periods of two months. The courts have no jurisdiction over such detentions.
In December 1987 the security forces clashed with University of Yaounde students over the authorities' failure to pay student grants. Some 300 students were arrested. Most were released shortly afterwards, although about 50 were reported still to be held at the end of January 1988. A newspaper report quoted a Cameroon Government spokesperson to the effect that they would be released after questioning but a number of them appeared to be held for several months before their release without charge.
Some 40 prisoners arrested after an unsuccessful coup attempt in April 1984 were believed still to be in prison in 1988. Most had been convicted in trials which did not meet international standards. Abdoulaye Mazou, a judge and former Secretary-General of the Ministry for Education, had been tried in camera in
1984	by a military court without right of appeal and sentenced to five years' imprisonment. There were reports that political pressure had been put on the presiding judge to convict him. Abdoulaye Mazou was reported to be in poor health as a result of harsh prison conditions.
Some 12 people acquitted in 1984 or
1985	of offences relating to the coup attempt, then redetained, were still held without trial in 1988. Alain Touffic Oth-man, a businessperson acquitted by a military tribunal in 1984, was reportedly held at a labour camp in Voko. Others continued to be held after the end of their
sentences. For example, Ali Youssouffa, a former airline official due for release in August 1986, was believed to be detained throughout 1988.
According to reports received in 1988, more than 40 prisoners died from malnutrition and lack of medical attention in December 1987 in Nkondengui Prison. Many political prisoners were held at this prison in Yaounde, the capital. The food there was nutritionally inadequate and prisoners were held in cramped, overcrowded and insanitary conditions with virtually no opportunities to receive visits from friends or relatives. Medical care was inadequate for the many prisoners suffering from tuberculosis and other infectious diseases. A high death rate reportedly continued at the prison throughout 1988. Many inmates at New Bell Prison in Douala also reportedly died as a result of disease, lack of medical care, overcrowding and inadequate food.
Twelve Chadians detained in Cameroon since April 1987 were reported to have been released. Although the Camer-oonian Government had given no information about the reasons for the detentions, the Chadians were apparently suspected of opposing the Government of Chad. Amnesty International remained concerned that asylum-seekers returned to Chad might be summarily executed.
At least 14 people were sentenced to death during the year. A criminal court in Douala convicted eight of them in March on charges of aggravated theft. It was not known whether an appeal was heard in these cases. Also in March a military court in Yaounde convicted six civilians of aggravated theft and illegal possession of arms and ammunition. They were sentenced to be executed by firing-squad in public. Military courts were given jurisdiction in 1987 to try both military personnel and civilians in cases involving the security of the state, subversion and firearms offences. Those convicted had no right of appeal. It was not known whether any executions took place.
Amnesty International appealed for the unconditional release of prisoners of conscience and for the fair trial or release of those detained without trial, tried unfairly or held beyond the end of their sentences. It also appealed to the authorities to commute all death sentences.
AFRICA / CAPE VERDE /CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
