TAIWAN
Three prisoners of conscience were released in an amnesty in April but at least five others remained in prison at the end of the year. There were allegations of ill-treatment of detainees in police custody. Twenty-two people were executed and at least 26 death sentences were imposed.
On 20 January the Law on Assembly and Demonstration During the Period of Communist Rebellion was promulgated. This relaxed the ban on all demonstrations which had been in force for 38 years. The new law permitted demonstrations to take place provided police authorization had been obtained and that they did not oppose the constitution or advocate communism or Taiwan's independence from mainland China. Violations of the new law are to be punished by up to two years' imprisonment. Throughout the year a number of people were arrested for holding demonstrations without police authorization.
Following President Chiang Ching-kuo's death in January, he was succeeded as head of state and chairperson of the ruling Nationalist Party (Kuomintang) by Vice-President Lee Teng-hui. An amnesty that took effect on 22 April was granted to commemorate his death. It resulted in the release or reduction in sentence of more than 22,000 prisoners, including 28 who had been convicted of sedition, 16 of whom were released in April. The 16 included at least three prisoners of conscience - Pai Ya-tsan, held since 1975, Chang Hua-min, held since 1979, and Wang Ching-hsiung, who had been arrested in 1981. The amnesty also provided for a reduction of the sentences of prisoners arrested for offences committed
before 30 January whose trials had not yet been completed.
Shih Ming-teh, a prisoner of conscience, had his life sentence reduced to 15 years' imprisonment under the April amnesty. He had been arrested in 1980 in connection with his leading role in organizing a demonstration on 10 December 1979. Suffering from poor health, he went on hunger-strike the day the amnesty came into effect, when the authorities refused to release him on medical grounds. He was forcibly fed and eventually ended his hunger-strike on 1 November. At the end of the year he remained imprisoned at the Tri-Services Military Hospital in Taipei.
Two prisoners of conscience, Tsai Yu-chuan and Hsu Tsao-teh, were sentenced to 11 and 10 years' imprisonment in January. They were convicted of sedition for including in the charter of the Formosan Political Prisoners' Association a sentence in support of Taiwan's independence. (Expression of this view is banned by the government, which regards Taiwan as a province of China to be reunified with the mainland under the political doctrine of Sun Yat-sen.) The trial was completed in a single session lasting about 12 hours but the two were later retried by order of the Supreme Court. The second trial resulted in their sentences being reduced. These were further reduced under the terms of the amnesty - Tsai Yu-chuan's to seven years four months and Hsu Tsao-teh's to four years eight months.
Cheung Ki-lok, a resident of Hong Kong, was also jailed for sedition. He was arrested in January and accused of planning to overthrow the government - an offence which carries a mandatory death sentence - and with belonging to the Chinese Communist Youth League (of the People's Republic of China) in his student days. In October he was acquitted of the first charge but convicted of the second. He received a five-year sentence which was automatically reduced to three years four months under the April amnesty. In December the Supreme Court ordered a retrial but the grounds for its ruling were not made public. Cheung Ki-lok was believed to be a prisoner of conscience.
There were several allegations of torture or ill-treatment of suspects in police custody, particularly after a violent demonstration by farmers in May. Several people who died in police custody were alleged by
ASiAANDTHEPACIFIC/TAIWAN/THAILAND
their relatives to have been assaulted by police. In two cases police officers were charged with assault on the prisoners, although it is not known to Amnesty International if any were given prison terms.
At least 26 people were sentenced to death for crimes that included murder and kidnapping. In June the judicial authorities instructed courts to impose death sentences for kidnapping, even if the abductors had not injured their victims. Twenty-two executions were officially reported.
Amnesty International continued to urge the release of those prisoners of conscience who were not freed in the April amnesty and investigated the cases of six other possible prisoners of conscience. It also appealed for commutation of all death sentences.
In May and June an Amnesty International observer attended two hearings of the retrial of Tsai Yu-chuan and Hsu Tsao-teh.
In February Amnesty International sent a memorandum to President Lee Teng-hui detailing its concerns in Taiwan. It called for the release of prisoners of conscience and for the government to initiate a judicial review of the cases of civilians convicted of political offences by military courts during the period of martial law (1949-87), on the grounds that the trials had been unfair. It also urged the government to change current laws which permit the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and which impose restrictions on released political prisoners, to improve safeguards against the torture and ill-treatment of detainees and to abolish the death penalty.
The authorities responded to Amnesty International in August. They denied that those convicted of sedition included prisoners of conscience or that it was necessary to amend the laws on sedition. They said that political prisoners would be released once they met parole requirements. They considered that the procedures for individual applications for retrial were adequate and rejected Amnesty International's recommendations for a government-initiated review of the political trials under martial law. The authorities indicated, however, that amendments to the employment restrictions imposed on former prisoners were under consideration. They stressed that torture and ill-treatment of prisoners was forbidden, that any official who committed such abuses would be
punished and that tape-recording and video-taping of interrogations had been introduced. They reiterated their view that the death penalty was a necessary deterrent for the maintaining of social order.
