EQUATORIAL GUINEA
About 30 people, some of whom may have been prisoners of conscience, were arrested for political reasons in August. Nine of them were convicted after an unfair trial by a military court in September. Death sentences imposed on two of the defendants were commuted to prison terms. Other political prisoners continued to serve sentences imposed after unfair military trials in previous years.
At least 28 people, including military personnel and civilians, were arrested in
AFRICA/EQUATORIAL GUINEA
August in the capital, Malabo, on Bioko Island, and in the mainland towns of Bata and Ebeblyin. Four of those detained had been in exile in Spain and had returned to visit Equatorial Guinea a few months before their arrest. One of them, ]osé Luis Jones Dougan, is a lawyer and Secretary General of an opposition party in exile, the Partido del Progreso de Guinea Ecuatorial, Equatorial Guinea Progress Party. He had returned in June apparently to try to seek official recognition of the party, although a 1986 law established the Partido Democrático de Guinea Ecuatorial, Democratic Party of Equatorial Guinea, led by President Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, as the nnlv Iftpal nnlitiral nartv.
and 16 years' imprisonment respectively. The other five sentences ranged from 12 to 24 years' imprisonment. Specific charges against these seven defendants were not known. However, José Luis Jones Dougan's efforts to have his political party recognized were apparently considered to amount to a form of treason.The defendants were tried by "most summary" procedures from which there is no right of appeal (see Amnesty internationai Report 1988). However, the two death sentences were immediately commuted by presidential decree to life imprisonment.
At the end of the year at least seven political prisoners were still serving sen-
tRTiCf^R imnn«AH in rtrAviniis VAArs »ftpr
49
Amnesty International Report 1989 ERRATA
Work with international organizations
Page 22, lines 12-13 should read: bringing the total to 43
Page 22, line 18, should read: only 10 had ratified
Page 22, line 19, should read: 11 of the 43 states
Page 26, line 27, should read: Nine member slates of the Council
of Europe—Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Malta
Africa
Page 68 (Mauritania), first column, Une 27: detainees should read defendants
Asia
Page 181 (Kampuchea/Cambodia), first column, line 19: September should read July
Page 193 (Pakistan), second column, lines 2-3 delete: and one by the Federal Shari'a Court
otjpiBuium' uii uiiai'gt;» ui aimiapiiu^ lu overthrow the government, espionage, dereliction of duty and fraud. No details of the alleged coup attempt were reported at the time and few details of the trial were published. Two military officers, Sergeant Joaquin Elema Boringue and Second Lieutenant Francisco Bonifacio Mba Nguema, were convicted of attempting to assassinate the head of state and sentenced to death. José Primo Esono Micá and José Luis Jones Dougan were sentenced to 30
mimary cuuri iruui wmcu uitsre wouiu ue a right of appeal to a higher court. The delegates were told that commissions had been set up to draft new military penal and procedural codes to replace Spanish military laws dating from 1945 which were retained in Equatorial Guinea after independence and which contain few guarantees for the defence. The authorities expected these new codes to conform to the provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to which
AFRICA / EQUATORIAL GUINEA / ETHIOPIA
Equatorial Guinea acceded in December 1987. The delegates were also told that laws were to be drafted to give effect to the rights of habeas corpus and amparo which are both proclaimed in Equatorial Guinea's 1982 Constitution. However, none of these reforms had come about by the end of 1988.
In November Amnesty International sent a memorandum to the government reminding it of recommendations the organization had previously made regarding unfair military trials. The recommendations included the setting up of an independent commission to inquire into reports that defendants tried in 1986 had been tortured or ill-treated while held incommunicado in military custody. The report had also recommended that prisoners still serving sentences after unfair trials be given the opportunity to appeal to a higher court against their convictions and sentences. Amnesty International expressed concern that the trial in September had not conformed to internationally recognized standards and it investigated the cases of those convicted. It considered that José Luis Jones Dougan, José Primo Esono Micà and others might have been imprisoned on account of their non-violent opposition to government policies rather than for any recognizably criminal offence.
