SIERRA LEONE
Twelve people, including a former Vice-President, had their death sentences for treason confirmed on appeal. Their further appeal to the Supreme Court had not been heard by the end of the year. A judicial commission of inquiry into the prison system heard reports of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment of prisoners over several years.
In March and again in November the government renewed the state of "economic emergency" which had originally been imposed in November 1987 in an attempt to solve the country's severe economic problems. It empowers the authorities to order the preventive detention
without charge or trial of any person in the interests of public safety.
In September the Court of Appeal in the capital city of Freetown rejected the appeals of 12 of the 16 people sentenced to death in October 1987 (see Amnesty International Report 1988). They had been convicted of treason and murder in connection with their alleged involvement in a plot to overthrow the government in March 1987.
Among the 12 whose appeals were rejected were Francis Minah who, at the time of his arrest, was Vice-President, Minister of Justice and Attorney General, and Mohamed Kai Kai, former Assistant Superintendent of Police. All 12 lodged appeals with the Supreme Court which had not been heard by the end of the year. Two others sentenced to terms of imprisonment in connection with the conspiracy also appealed.
The four defendants whose appeals were upheld were acquitted and released from custody. One of them, Kazim Allie, a Lebanese national, was immediately expelled from the country.
No other death sentences and no executions were reported in 1988.
One person was known to have been arrested on account of the views he had expressed. Foday Fofana, a correspondent for the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), was arrested after reporting on tensions between the Saudi and Lebanese communities in Sierra Leone. He was released uncharged after 24 hours following protests from local journalists.
The Commission of Inquiry, which was appointed by the government in September 1987 to investigate the administration
*%%%&&&***)%%%
AFRICA/SIERRA LEONE/SOMALIA
of Sierra Leone's prisons, continued its work in 1988. It had not reported its findings by the end of the year. Headed by Mr Justice M.E. ToIIe Thompson, the commission was set up after persistent reports over several years of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment of criminal suspects and sentenced prisoners. Pademba Road Prison in Freetown was mentioned frequently in such reports (see Amnesty International Report 1987).
During 1988 the commission was told that large amounts of government supplies and funds had been stolen by suppliers and Prisons Department officials. It was also told that as many as 100 people arrested during the disturbances in Pu-jehun District in 1983 and 1984 (see Amnesty International Report 1984 and 1985) may have died in police cells and prisons from inadequate food and medical care. One witness told the commission that he had been in prison with several relatives and that six of them had died inside. Others said they had been forced to sleep on the ground without blankets and had been denied adequate food, medical care and washing facilities. Between 1983 and 1987 Amnesty International had repeatedly called on the government to investigate the high rate of prison deaths from malnutrition and disease.
Amnesty International appealed to President Joseph Momoh to commute the 12 death sentences confirmed by the Court of Appeal in September if they should be upheld by the Supreme Court.
