SINGAPORE
Two prisoners of conscience, one of whom had been held continuously since 1966, were detained without charge or trial throughout the year under the Internal Security Act (ISA). Nine former untried detainees who had been released in 1987 but were still under restriction orders were redetained without charge or trial after they alleged publicly that they had been ill-treated while in the custody of the Internal Security Department (ISD) in 1987. Two lawyers engaged to represent them were also detained, although both lawyers and three of the nine had been released from detention by the end of the year. However, with one exception, on release their freedom of movement and of association were restricted and they were still regarded as prisoners of conscience. At least seven people were sentenced to death and there were four executions.
The two prisoners of conscience detained without trial throughout 1988 were Chia Thye Poh, a former opposition member of parliament, and Vincent Cheng Kim Chuan, who was secretary of the Catholic Church's Justice and Peace Commission in Singapore at the time of his arrest in
1987. Both men were held under two-year detention orders issued by the Minister of Home Affairs under the ISA. The act empowers the Minister to authorize detention without charge or trial for renewable periods of up to two years of anyone deemed a threat to national security.
Chia Thye Poh had been held continuously under a succession of detention orders since October 1966, when he was arrested and accused of being a member of the banned Communist Party of Malaya (CPM), an accusation he has consistently denied. He remained in detention throughout 1988 for what was believed to be his continued refusal to sign an admission of guilt.
Vincent Cheng was arrested in May 1987, one of 22 people held in connection with an alleged "Marxist conspiracy to subvert the existing social and political order", and served with a two-year detention order. The other 21 had been released from detention by the end of 1987. although all but one were still restricted (see Amnesty internationai Report 1988).
In April eight of the former detainees were rearrested the day after they issued a press statement in which they denied that they had been involved in any conspiracy and alleged that they had been ill-treated in detention in 1987. Patrick Seong, a lawyer representing some of those detained, was also arrested and in May a ninth former detainee was rearrested. Following the April arrests the government announced that a commission of inquiry would be appointed to investigate the detainees' allegations of ill-treatment although the government publicly denied that any of them had been tortured or assaulted. However, in April, by which time those arrested had again been subject to incommunicado detention and lengthy interrogation, the authorities announced that they had obtained "statutory declarations" from the detainees in which they were said to have retracted the contents of their press statement and that there was "no longer a need" to proceed with a commission of inquiry.
Seven of those rearrested, and their detained lawyer Patrick Seong, sought to contest detention by applying to the High Court for writs of habeas corpus. Their cases were heard in May but were dismissed, with the detainees ordered to pay
ASIA ANO THE PACIFIC /SINGAPORE / SRI LANKA
all costs. While the action was still in progress Francis Seow, a former Solicitor-General representing two of the detainees, was himself arrested and detained under the ISA. accused by the government of having colluded with a senior Western diplomat to encourage opposition to the government. He was released from detention in July but his freedom of movement and of association were severely restricted.
Although the detainees' habeas corpus applications were unsuccessful, Patrick Seong and two others were released within hours of the court decision by order of the Minister of Home Affairs. The other four detainees, lawyers Teo Sob Lung and Kevin Desmond De Souza, dramatist Wong Souk Yee and lecturer of English Chng Suan Tze, lodged appeals against the High Court ruling to the Court of Appeal, which ruled in early December that the four should be released. Despite this ruling, delivered by Chief Justice Wee Chong Jin, the four were released briefly from custody but immediately served with new detention orders under the ISA. They were still held at the Whitley Road Detention Centre at the end of the year. Two other rearrested detainees. Chew Kheng Chuan and Kenneth Tsang Chi Seng, who had not sought habeas corpus, also remained in detention.
Seven people were sentenced to death by the High Court after being convicted of drug-trafficking, which carries a mandatory death penalty, bringing the number of people under sentence of death for such offences to at least 14. No prisoners sentenced for drugs offences were known to have been executed in 1988 but two women and a man, together convicted of murder, were hanged in November after the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in the United Kingdom upheld their sentences. One other man was executed in December after being convicted of murder. At least three people sentenced to death for murder were awaiting the outcome of appeals at the end of the year.
Throughout the year Amnesty International continued to press for the unconditional release of Chia Thye Poh, Vincent Cheng and other prisoners of conscience detained without trial under the ISA and for the lifting of restrictions imposed on Francis Seow and the two other detainees who had been released in 1988. In May an
Amnesty International observer attended the habeas corpus hearings brought on behalf of eight of the detainees. In August the organization published details of alleged physical and psychological torture and ill-treatment to which ISA detainees had been subjected in 1987. Amnesty International also drew these allegations to the government's attention and urged that the authorities should investigate alleged abuses by five Internal Security Department officers named in testimonies from the detainees with a view to prosecution. However, there was no response and no such investigation was known to have taken place by the end of 1988.
