FRANCE
Conscientious objectors to the national service laws, including many Jehovah's Witnesses, continued to be imprisoned throughout 1988. Several trials were held in the Courts of Assize, established in 1986 to try people accused of seriously disturbing public order through intimidation or terror. Some defendants tried in these courts had spent several years in preventive detention and had alleged torture and ill-treatment in police custody. In the overseas territory of New Caledonia there were allegations of torture and ill-treatment and reports of extrajudicial executions by French security forces in operations against separatist groups. In a major initiative on New Caledonia, Prime Minister Rocard negotiated the "Matignon agreement" which included granting an amnesty to most detainees accused of crimes relating to the resolution of the territory's status.
In presidential elections held in May, President François Mitterrand, the Parti Socialist {Socialist Party) candidate, was re-elected. A cabinet under Michel Rocard of the Socialist Party took office in June. In July it introduced an amnesty law which covered a wide range of offences including several against the national service laws. However, these were subject to
certain conditions.
In a major initiative on New Caledonia, Prime Minister Rocard negotiated the "Matignon agreement" with the separatist and loyalist parties in the territory. This was endorsed in a national referendum in November. The agreement established a program for New Caledonia's self-determination by 1998. Until then, the territory is to remain part of France. An important feature of the "Matignon agreement" was the provision to amnesty those detained for offences relating to the establishment of the Constitution of New Caledonia and the land rights of the territory, committed before 20 August. The amnesty did not apply to people who "by their direct and personal action, have been the principal authors of the crime of premeditated murder". Those accused of premeditated murder were released provisionally while judicial proceedings in their cases continued.
From May the number of Spanish Basques expelled under the administrative procedure of "absolute urgency" decreased significantly. The procedure had been used since 1986 to expel nearly 200 Basques, including asylum-seekers, many of whom claimed that they were at risk of torture or ill-treatment in Spain (see Amnesty Internationa] Report 1988). Eighteen requests by the Spanish authorities for extradition were under judicial consideration and three of these resulted in people being returned. In October the French Office for the Protection of Refugees and Stateless Persons declared that refugee status would not be granted to Spaniards in future because Spain was a democratic state where personal and public freedom of expression was guaranteed.
Numerous conscientious objectors to the national service laws were prosecuted and sentences of up to 15 months' imprisonment were imposed. Not all objectors began serving their sentences in 1988, some because they were awaiting the outcome of appeals lodged with higher courts, others because rulings on the validity of their call-up orders were pending.
Alternative civilian service is twice the length of ordinary military service. Amnesty International considers that it is therefore not an acceptable alternative and that those imprisoned for refusing to undertake it are prisoners of conscience.
Several conscientious objectors who
EUROPE/FRANCE
were imprisoned had not been offered the alternative of civilian service as their applications had been rejected on the grounds that they had been made after their call-up orders were issued. Nicolas Dubourg had been arrested and charged with "insubordination" in December 1987 following his refusal to perform military service. In September, after spending seven months imprisoned in military barracks with extensive periods in solitary confinement, he was sentenced to six months' suspended imprisonment. In a similar case, Olivier Mathon began serving a second prison sentence for "insubordination" in November 1987. He had been released from prison in July 1987 after serving nine months of a one-year sentence for the same offence. Soon after his release his call-up order was renewed. When he again refused to put on military uniform and perform military service, he was sentenced to a further eight months ' imprisonment. Amnesty International considered Nicolas Duborg and Olivier Mathon prisoners of conscience on the grounds that individuals should be able to seek conscientious objector status at any time, both up to and after the issuing of call-up orders.
Several hearings were held in the specially constituted Courts of Assize established in 1986 to try offences which caused a serious breach of the peace through intimidation or the use of terror. The courts consist of a presiding judge and six other judges who act as assessors. The judicial investigation is normally carried out in Paris regardless of where the alleged offences were committed.
Two Corsican nationalists, Félice Tomasi and Charles Pieri, were tried in the Court of Assizes in Bordeaux in October. They had been arrested in March 1983 and charged with the murder and attempted murder of two Foreign Legionnaires during a raid on a military camp in Corsica. At their trial both acknowledged their sympathy with the aims of the Front de libération nationale de ia Corse (FLNC), Corsican National Liberation Front, an independence movement, but denied the charges. Félice Tomasi also denied having participated in the raid, but Charles Pieri admitted it.
The judicial inquiry was opened under an examining judge in Corsica. However, for fair trial and procedural reasons the
trial was moved to Bordeaux. The law introduced in September 1986 allowed the case to be heard by the specially constituted Court of Assizes; a further amendment to the law was made in December
1986	which enabled the hearing to take place in Bordeaux, rather than Paris.
Amnesty international was concerned at the serious procedural delays in bringing these cases to judgment and at the five and a half years F§lice Tomasi had spent in preventive detention awaiting the hearing. This appeared to breach guarantees in the European Convention on Human Rights that all defendants should be brought to trial within a reasonable time. Furthermore, after their arrest, both detainees had made judicial declarations alleging ill-treatment while in police custody in Corsica.
Both defendants were acquitted of the murder charges but Charles Pieri was sentenced to one year's imprisonment for illegal possession of a weapon. Amnesty International observers attending the trial considered that the defendants' allegations of ill-treatment while in police custody had been established beyond doubt. The allegations had been the subject of a separate investigation during the judicial examination of the charges, but the examining judge in Bordeaux decided that there was no case to answer. The appeal against the decision, which had begun in 1987, was continuing at the end of the year,
A number of prisoners from armed groups such as Action Directe, FLNC, a Basque separatist group called Iparretar-rak, and some Spanish Basques awaiting extradition hearings alleged that their "cellular isolation" - being kept separate from other prisoners with restricted access to visitors - constituted cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.
Four leaders of Action Directe imprisoned since February 1987 began a three-month hunger-strike in December
1987	in support of their demands for "all political prisoners ... to be held together under a statute for political prisoners" and the "immediate closure of high security isolation blocks". Amnesty International takes no position regarding special status for political prisoners but it was concerned by reports that various Action Directe prisoners had spent prolonged periods in isolation. There were also reports that access to their lawyers, visitors, corres-
EUROPE/FRANCE/GERMANDEMOCRATICREPUBLIC
pondence, reading material and radio and television had been severely restricted. Amnesty International believes prolonged isolation can have a detrimental effect on the physical and mental health of prisoners and may in certain circumstances amount to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.
In February Amnesty International sought clarification from the Minister of Justice regarding the conditions of imprisonment of Action Directe prisoners. It also sought assurances that the safeguards of the Code of Penal Procedure for prisoners placed in isolation were being observed. The Ministry replied in March with specific assurances that the safeguards of the code were being met and that the prisoners' treatment was in accord with Council of Europe recommendations on the treatment of dangerous prisoners and the jurisprudence of the European Commission of Human Rights. The authorities rejected altogether the allegations of severe restrictions regarding access. The hunger-strike ended on 25 March.
The months preceding the "Matignon agreement" saw the worst period of violence in the recent history of New Caledonia. In April 23 gendarmes and a Deputy Prosecutor were kidnapped in Ouv6a by Kanak separatists. Four gendarmes were murdered during the kidnapping. The hostages were released on 5 May after an armed assault by French forces on the cave where the hostages were held. Nineteen Kanaks and two gendarmes were killed in the action. Reports stated that at least three of the Kanaks who died may have been extrajudicially executed after their surrender. A later report suggested that a fourth person may also have been extrajudicially executed. On 30 May the Minister of Defence announced that an internal military investigation had established that "acts contrary to military duty have unfortunately been committed". One squadron commander of the gendarmerie was suspended.
Allegations of torture and ill-treatment by French security forces were made by the Kanaks arrested in connection with the Ouvea incident. In November all the Kanaks held in connection with this incident were released under the terms of the agreement.
Amnesty International appealed for the
release of prisoners of conscience imprisoned as conscientious objectors and wrote to the government in May requesting full autopsies and a judicial inquiry into the deaths of the three Kanak separatists in Ouv6a. In June the organization welcomed the decision to hold a judicial inquiry into three of the cases but urged, in the light of further reports, that the circumstances of all the deaths should be investigated.
On 10 August Amnesty International made a statement to the United Nations Special Committee on Decolonization regarding its concerns in New Caledonia.
In October Amnesty International observers attended the hearing in the Court of Assizes in Bordeaux of the two Corsicans charged with murder and attempted murder.
No progress was made in the judicial investigations opened in previous years into killings of important Kanak political activists (see Amnesty International Report 1988).
