DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
Several people were reported to have been beaten in detention after being arrested during mass demonstrations. There were new reports that Haitians were indiscriminately rounded up by the army and forced to work on sugar-cane plantations. The authorities failed to clarify the fate of two people who "disappeared" in previous years.
Violent protests against the economic policies of the government of President
THEAMERICAS/ DOMINICAN REPUBLIC/ ECUADOR
Joaquin Balaguer took place throughout the country in late February. At least six people were reported to have been killed and many injured. Hundreds of people, including leaders of trade unions and political organizations who had played a leading role in organizing the protests, were arrested over a three-week period. Several, including Victor Gerónimo, Isidro Torres, Vinicio Nin, Frank Valdés and Johnny Portorreal, were reportedly beaten in detention and held without charge for over two weeks before being released.
There were new reports that Haitians, many of whom live illegally in the Dominican Republic, were indiscriminately rounded up by the army and forced to work on sugar-cane plantations against their will and in harsh conditions, apparently with the acquiescence of the Dominican authorities. Some who refused to work were said to have been beaten by soldiers and plantation employers.
In December, Etienne Paul, a Haitian doctor who had been working for several years with the Centre Bon Somaritain, Good Samaritan Centre - an unofficial organization providing medical assistance to Haitians working on the plantations -was arbitrarily arrested by the State Security Police and held for two nights without charge before being deported to Haiti. No reason was given for his arrest and expulsion but it appeared to be connected with his humanitarian activities on behalf of Haitian migrant workers. Later in the month the Haitian authorities announced that the Government of the Dominican Republic had decided to rescind the expulsion order.
Amnesty International expressed concern to the government about reported ill-treatment of people detained in connection with the February protests and continued to urge the government to clarify
the fate of Pablo Liberato Rodríguez, who "disappeared" in 1974, and Luis Samuel Roche, a recognized Haitian refugee who "disappeared" in 1982. There was no response.
