MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA/ YEMEN (ARAB REPUBLIC)/ YEMEN (PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF)
were released during the year at the end of sentences imposed for membership of illegal organizations. They were Mazen al-As'ad, who had served a three-year sentence, and four alleged members of the Palestinian Communist Workers' Party, who had served 10-year sentences. Four alleged members of the PFLP were also released after completing prison sentences ranging from three to five years. 'Azmi al-Khawajah, a prominent PFLP member who had been detained without charge or trial since January 1987, was also released in June.
There were new reports of torture and ill-treatment of political prisoners. At least 65 untried detainees were held at gid Headquarters in Amman and at least six untried military conscripts were held for several weeks at Military Intelligence Headquarters. Detainees were said to have been subjected to /alaqo (beating on the soles of the feet); /arruj (suspension from a pole or pipe placed under both knees with the wrists bound to the ankles, accompanied by beating); famrin (forced standing on the toes while leaning against a wall supported only by the index fingers); sha-bih (a form of sleep deprivation consisting of handcuffing the victim to the gate of the cell for days, with short breaks for food and use of the lavatory); and long solitary confinement. In at least one case a detained military conscript was reported to have been tortured with electric shocks at Military Intelligence Headquarters.
Victims of torture and ill-treatment included suspected PFLP members arrested in December 1987 and January 1988. They were taken in small groups from al-Juwaydah Prison in the suburbs of Amman to CID Headquarters and most, possibly all, appear to have been tortured during interrogation, particularly with /alaqa. One detainee who was interrogated by the GID in Irbid about the whereabouts of his brother, a suspected Palestinian guerrilla believed to be in hiding in Jordan, was reported to have been severely injured as a result of having undergone/arruj and been dropped on his back.
Seven political prisoners were reportedly beaten by prison staff in October after they protested against conditions in al-Swaqa Prison south of Amman, to which they had been moved from other prisons. One of them is said to have sustained serious eye injury and another to
have been punished by the infliction of 28 lashes.
Following his release in June 'Azmi al-Khawajah gave Amnesty International a detailed description of his ill-treatment in GID Headquarters the previous year, including how he was tortured with /alaqa, kept in solitary confinement for seven months and held incommunicado for almost the entire period. In 1987 the government had strongly denied that 'Azmi al-Khawajah was being tortured.
In January rape of girls aged under 15 was made a capital offence and in March a new law on drugs was adopted which significantly extended availability of the death penalty for drug-related offences. Six people were sentenced to death by the Martial Law Court for crimes such as premeditated murder in the course of armed robbery; five of them were executed in January and July, the sixth had his sentence commuted by King Hussein bin Tal-al. None of those sentenced to death by the Martial Law Court were able to appeal against conviction and sentence, contrary to the requirements of international safeguards on the death penalty. Two others were reported to have been executed in April, one a soldier said to have been tried by a military court without right of appeal.
Amnesty International expressed concern to the government about the detention without charge or trial of political prisoners, including possible prisoners of conscience, and called repeatedly for them to be tried promptly and fairly on recognizably criminal charges or to be released. Amnesty International remained concerned that trials of political prisoners before the Martial Law Court failed to meet internationally recognized standards of fair trial and continued to raise with the authorities the need to prevent torture of detainees, notably by the GID. Amnesty International also appealed for clemency for prisoners under sentence of death. In October Amnesty International representatives visited Jordan to investigate alleged human rights violations.
The government responded to Amnesty International's appeals and inquiries on a number of occasions. In January it stated that suspected PFLP members arrested in December 1987 and January 1988 posed "a potential threat to the security of the state" and would be "interrogated and then either tried or released". However, by the
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA/ YEMEN (ARAB REPUBLIC)/ YEMEN (PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF)
end of the year no charges had been brought against them, and 22 were still detained without charge or trial.
In December 1987 Amnesty International had submitted a memorandum to the government detailing reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees at GID Headquarters. The government responded in January, stating categorically that torture did not occur in Jordan and accusing Amnesty International of believing "the rumours, allegations and accusations of a small group of people who have made a profession out of lying and attempting to deceive anyone they can". The government's response contained no substantive rebuttal of the points made in the memorandum.
In November Amnesty International brought to the government's attention several cases in which it was alleged that detainees had been tortured during 1988. The allegations were consistent with reports and testimonies received in previous years and raised with the government. Amnesty International again called on the government for urgent and effective measures to stop such practice but received no response.
