SWAZILAND
Eleven people were detained without charge or trial for political reasons under renewable 60-day administrative detention orders but all were released before the end of the year. Ten others were convicted of treason and related offences after an unfair trial but then had their sentences cancelled under a royal pardon.
At least two people were sentenced to death for murder but it was not known if there were any executions.
Two journalists employed by the Times of Swaziland were imprisoned under 60-day detention orders in February after the newspaper reported that anti-government rebels in Mozambique were seeking refuge in Swaziland. Hanson Ngwenya and the newspaper's acting editor, Mashumi Twala, were both held without charge for 60 days and then released. They were believed to be prisoners of conscience.
Nine people, including several members of the royal family, were arrested in April and detained also under 60-day orders. The arrests appeared to be in connection with the 1983 deposition of Queen Regent Dzeliwe in favour of Queen Regent Ntombi, mother of King Mswati III. One was released within a few weeks but the others were held until 21 June, when they too were freed.
A major treason trial arising from the deposition of Queen Regent Dzeliwe, which had begun in November 1987, ended in March. Two of the accused were acquitted and released during the course of the trial but 10 others, including former Prime Minister Prince Bhekimpi Dlamini and Chief Mfanawenkhosi Maseko, formerly a member of the disbanded Liqoqo (Supreme Council of State), were convicted and sentenced to prison terms ranging from three to 15 years. The trial took place before a special tribunal established by royal decree in November 1987 and was conducted in camera throughout. The defendants were not permitted legal representation and were denied any right of appeal.
5544298542
AFRICA / SWAZI LAN D / TANZANIA
Following the announcement of the court's findings in March, the convicted defendants began serving their sentences. However, in July King Mswati granted a royal pardon which resulted in nine of the 10 being released immediately. The exception, Prince Mfanasibili Dlamini, remained in prison serving an earlier sentence imposed for obstructing justice.
At least two people were sentenced to death for murder but it was not known if there were any executions.
Amnesty International was concerned about the detentions of journalists and others under 60-day detention orders and about the imprisonment of 10 people after an unfair political trial, although it welcomed their early release. Amnesty International was also concerned about use of the death penalty.
