GUINEA BISSAU
About 30 political prisoners, some of them possible prisoners of conscience, continued to serve sentences imposed after an unfair trial in July 1986. One long-term political prisoner was released early in the year. There were further reports of torture and one prisoner was alleged to have died as a result of severe beating.
Rafael Barbosa, who had spent many of his 61 years in prison, was released early in the year. After his most recent arrest in June 1985 (see Amnesty International Report 1986) he had been banished under the terms of an administrative restriction order to an island in the Bijagos Archipelago where he remained until early 1988.
The government stated that Emilio Costa, who was reportedly arrested in December 1986 in connection with an alleged plot to overthrow the government led by former Vice-President Colonel Paulo Correia, had never been detained. However, there were further reports that he had been detained and later released.
Four people who had served over half the sentences imposed on them after an unfair trial in July 1986 were released to mark the 40th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Thirty others convicted at the same trial continued to serve sentences of between six and 15 years' imprisonment. They had been convicted of collaborating in the plot led by Paulo Correia. who with five others
was sentenced to death with no right of appeal against conviction or sentence, and executed in 1986. Further information was received indicating that in a number of cases evidence produced at their trial was insufficient to prove the defendants' guilt. The court reportedly admitted as evidence statements which had been extracted from defendants under duress. Several defendants stated at the trial that they had been tortured and one, Viriato Rodrigues Pá, who was subsequently sentenced to death and executed, showed the court a urine sample containing blood as evidence that he had been ill-treated. The court apparently failed to investigate these claims or to establish whether statements made by defendants in custody had been reliable. Those sentenced to terms of imprisonment were entitled to appeal to the Supreme Court of Justice but apparently none did. It appeared that some of them might be prisoners of conscience held because of their personal or professional association with leaders of the alleged plot against the government, rather than because they had taken part in a conspiracy and used or advocated violence. The conditions in which prisoners served their sentences on an island in the Bijagos Archipelago were reported to be harsh, but few details were available.
In early 1988 one of these prisoners, N'fono Tchuda Nalagna, a former presidential bodyguard, was reported to have died in custody the previous year at about the time his one-year sentence was due to expire. No official inquiry is known to have been carried out to establish the cause of his death.
Braima Mané, a member of the Presidential Guard, who had been arrested in September 1987 on charges of stealing a large sum in foreign currency, reportedly died on 7 January as a result of severe beatings inflicted in custody. No inquest was known to have been held to determine the cause of his death or that of another detainee, Mandu Fati, who died in custody in February 1987 (see Amnesty International Report 1988). Other reports of torture received in 1988 related to the years 1985, 1986 and 1987. They mostly concerned people arrested for political reasons and held in the Comando Operacional-2 (COP-2), Operational Com-mand-2, a detention centre in Bissau. Torture was reported usually to have con-
AFRICA / GUINEA BISSAU / KENYA
sisted of repeated severe beatings with sticks, truncheons and electric cable, sometimes while the victim was tied to a table. Prisoners were alleged to have been kicked and burnt with cigarettes and sometimes suspended by the feet or tied in other painful positions. One typical testimony relating to incidents in 1987 concerned a prisoner suspected of being in contact with government opponents — he said he was subjected to beatings which continued for hours, for over a week, and on one occasion subjected to electric shocks. His torturers were two masked guards who often smelt of alcohol and were in charge of him whenever interrogating officers left the room.
In August 1987 Amnesty International had sent the government a memorandum detailing its concerns about long-term detention without trial, the unfair trial of Paulo Correia and others in July 1986, allegations of torture or ill-treatment, deaths in custody and the use of the death penalty. Amnesty International recommended that an independent commission of inquiry should be established and given full powers to investigate reports of torture and deaths in custody and to make its findings public. No such inquiry had been set up by the end of 1988 and the government had not responded to the memorandum.
Amnesty International took up the cases of 14 of those sentenced in July 1986; on the basis of information obtained since their trial the organization believed they might be prisoners of conscience.
