AUSTRIA
One prisoner of conscience was held for refusing to perform military service. Reports of ill-treatment in police custody continued.
In April Peter Burtscher, a psychology student from Salzburg, was imprisoned after applying unsuccessfully to perform alternative civilian service instead of military service. He had been active in the
peace movement and said that his conscience did not allow him to perform military service. In May his case was reopened by the Higher Alternative Service Commission on the basis that his acceptance of punishment for his beliefs justified a re-examination of whether he would suffer a "severe moral dilemma" as a result of using weapons. He was released in May and the following month he was recognized officially as a conscientious objector.
Reports of ill-treatment included the case of Wilhelm Sommer. He was arrested in September, according to the police after having ignored a red signal to stop while driving a motorcycle. Wilhelm Sommer claimed that he was made to stand against a police car and that for 10 minutes, while his hands were handcuffed behind his back, two police punched the upper part of his body, his face and head, kicked him and pulled his hair. A clinic which examined him and found injuries consistent with his allegations, submitted its findings to the Graz procuracy, which at the end of the year was still investigating the case.
In June the first court hearing took place to examine charges of attempted coercion and bodily harm brought against a police officer, alleged by Christian Schindler to have assaulted him. According to Christian Schindler, the police officer attempted to extract a confession of breaking and entering by punching and kicking him, pulling his hair and pushing his head into a basin of water. The incident was said to have taken place in November 1987. A hospital was reported to have confirmed that injuries had been caused to Christian
EUROPE/AUSTRIA/BULGARIA
Schindler through blows. By the end of the year no court decision had been reached, reportedly due to the absence of a key witness.
In many cases of ill-treatment brought to the attention of Amnesty International in recent years it has been alleged that the ill-treatment took place during the first 48 hours, often with a view to extracting confessions or other information. People arrested for offences contained in the penal code may be held for up to 48 hours by the police before being handed over to the custody of a court. During this time they do not have the unrestricted right to inform their family or friends or to see a lawyer. People detained for the less serious offences regulated by the Administrative Offences Code enjoy the right, introduced into the code in July, to contact a family member, legal adviser or other person whom they trust "without unnecessary delay".
Amnesty International appealed for the release of Peter Burtscher. It asked to be informed of the outcome of any investigations into allegations of ill-treatment.
