MALI
At least 10 people were detained during the year for the non-violent expression of their political views. In September the head of state ordered the release of a number of political prisoners and the commutation of six death sentences. The remote prison at Taoudénit, where many prisoners have died in the last 20 years, was closed. Seven death sentences were passed but no executions were reported.
In early March eight students from the Ecole normale supérieure (ENSUP), the higher teachers' training college, were arrested after a peaceful march to the Ministry of Education in the capital, Bamako. They were protesting at the suspension of a teacher and trade union leader, Issa Ndiaye, after teachers had gone on strike over four-month delays in the payment of salaries. Charles Danioko and Komakan Keita, heads of department at the ENSUP and trade union members, were also
AFRICA/MALI/MAURITANIA
arrested. By law, their cases should have been referred to the procuracy and the two formally remanded in custody or released within 48 hours of arrest. However, they were detained until the end of March, when they were released uncharged.
In September President Moussa Traor6 granted clemency to 78 prisoners to mark the 28th anniversary of Mali's independence. The closure of the desert prison at Taoud6nit in northern Mali, in which many political and criminal prisoners have died in the last 20 years, was announced as part of the act of clemency.
Among those who benefited from the presidential order were former senior government officials who were released before the end of their prison terms after being held at Taoudenit since the late 1970s. These included Lieutenant-Colonel Karim Demb6l6, Major Alou Mahamane Traor6 and Captain Yacouba Coulibaly - who had been among 27 people convicted in October 1978 of conspiring to overthrow the government - and Captain Nouhoum Di-awara, who had received a death sentence, subsequently commuted to life imprisonment, following the trials in 1979 of government officials linked to the 1978 conspiracy and who were accused of corruption. The two leaders of the alleged plot died at Taoud6nit in 1983; others sentenced in the 1978 trial died there in 1980 and 1987 apparently as a result of the harsh conditions and of inadequate medical care (see Amnesty International Report 1984 and 1988).
One death sentence was passed by the Special Court of State Security in July and a further six in December, three of them in absentia, all following convictions for embezzlement. This military court was established in 1976 with the power to impose the death penalty for offences against the security of the state and for embezzlement of state property above a certain value; in 1988 that amount was believed to be 10 million CFA francs (US $36,000). The court is presided over by civilian judges and armed forces officers. It allows no right of appeal to the Court of Appeal but those convicted may appeal to the Supreme Court on questions of law.
In the September clemency order, six death sentences were commuted, four of them to hard labour for life. It was not known when and on what charges the four had been convicted. Two prisoners con-
victed by the Special Court of State Security, whose death sentences were believed subsequently to have been commuted to life imprisonment, were granted remission of the rest of their sentences: these were Alhadji Djir6, convicted of treason in March 1981 on charges of involvement in a coup attempt in December 1980; and Tiecoura Sidiki Traor6, convicted of embezzlement in November 1987. At each of their trials, two others had also been sentenced to death and it remained unclear whether their death sentences had also been commuted.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience and for deaths sentences to be commuted. The organization also expressed concern about the deaths which occurred at Taouddnit prison in previous years and called for a full and independent inquiry into reports that these were the result of ill-treatment and harsh prison conditions.
At least 100 supporters of the Ba'ath party were detained in August and many of them were tortured. Twelve were later brought to trial. More than 20 black opponents of the government who had been convicted after unfair trials in 1988 and 1987 remained in prison. Four convicted political prisoners died as a result of harsh prison conditions and many others suffered serious illness. The release of six untried detainees who had spent four years in custody and included the former head of state, Mohamed Khouna Quid Haidalla, was announced in December.
2299385442
