TUNISIA
Over 200 political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, were released during the year. About 70 alleged supporters of an Islamic movement, some of whom were believed to be prisoners of conscience, remained in prison, some detained without trial. A number of others previously tried and sentenced in absentia by the State Security Court, and who had returned from exile or emerged from hiding, were retried and sentenced to imprisonment but immediately released. Two people were sentenced to death although no executions took place.
In September Tunisia ratified the United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA/ YEMEN (ARAB REPUBLIC)/ YEMEN (PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF)
Since the change of government in November 1987 more than 8,000 criminal and political prisoners have benefited from presidential amnesties. These included over 200 political prisoners released during 1988 following amnesties declared in May, July and November by President Zine El-Abidine Ben Ali. Among those released were Rachid Ghannouchi and 42 other alleged supporters of the Mouvement de ia tendance islamique (MTi), Islamic Tendency Movement, who had received sentences ranging from two years' imprisonment to life imprisonment in September 1987 after an unfair trial before the State Security Court. They had been convicted on charges of committing crimes intended to change "the nature" of the state, incitement to violence, and for other offences (see Amnesty International Report 1988).
The amnesty declared in early November, the first anniversary of the change of government, saw the release of all but six of the prisoners sentenced in September 1987. The six, including Mohamed Chem-mam, a teacher, and Ali EI Zraoui, a civil servant, were still in prison at the end of the year.
In September Abdel Fattah Mourou, Secretary General of the MTI, and 11 others who had been tried in absentia at the September 1987 trial and given heavy sentences, were retried by the Criminal Chamber of the Appeal Court. They were convicted of membership of an unauthorized association and sentenced to five years' imprisonment but the sentences were not enforced and they were allowed to go free. They were among those who benefited from the amnesty declared in November.
Khemais Chamari, Secretary General of the Ligue tunisienne des droits de I'homme (LTDH), Tunisian League for Human Rights, was tried in January by the Court of First Instance in Tunis on charges of disseminating false information likely
to disturb public order and with offending "the person" of the former prime minister but was acquitted. Evidence brought against Khemais Chamari included tape recordings of telephone conversations, interviews given to foreign journalists and his contacts with international human rights organizations. He had been arrested in April 1987 during the administration of former President Habib Bourguiba but had been released a month later on grounds of ill health. His trial had been postponed repeatedly.
A group of about 150 alleged MTI supporters, including military, police and security personnel arrested in late 1987 (see Amnesty International fieport 1988), remained in detention at 9 Avril Prison in Tunis until November, when 70 were released by order of President Ben Ali. It was acknowledged that the 70 had "neither advocated nor planned violence". Those remaining were apparently suspected of committing offences against national security but none of them had been brought to trial by the end of 1988. They included Professor Moncef Ben Salem, chairman of the mathematics department at the Ecole nationale d'ingénieurs in Sfax.
The Tunisian authorities did not disclose full details of the investigation into the death during incommunicado detention in December 1987 of Mohamed El Mansouri (see Amnesty international Report 1988). In February, following foreign press reports suggesting that he had died after torture, and after calls for an official investigation into his death the Tunisian Ambassador to France issued a statement in which he said a medical examination had found no evidence of torture and attributed the death to heart failure.
At least two people were sentenced to death - one for murder and arson, the other for rape - but there were no executions. In January President Ben Ali commuted to life imprisonment the death sentence imposed in October 1987 on Mohamed Ben Ibrahim Ben Amara, an Algerian national who had been convicted of premeditated murder.
Amnesty International welcomed the release of a number of prisoners and other measures taken to improve human rights but continued to press for the fair trial or release of untried political detainees and political prisoners serving sentences after unfair trials. Amnesty International also
MIDDLE EASTAND NORTH AFRICA/TUNISIA/UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
continued to urge impartial investigation of all torture allegations. In March an Amnesty International delegation visited Tunisia to discuss human rights with the government and had meetings with President Ben Ali, Prime Minister Hédi Bac-couche, the Ministers of Justice and Interior, and other officials.
