UNITED KINGDOM

Three unarmed members of the Irish Republican Army (IRA) were shot dead by British soldiers in Gibraltar. An inquest found that they had been lawfully killed. A police inquiry found evidence that police officers in Northern Ireland had conspired to pervert the course of justice in connection with the killing of six unarmed people in 1982. The government said that the police officers would not be prosecuted because of "national security" considerations. A coroner's inquest in Northern Ireland, begun six years after the deaths of three IRA members, was adjourned while its procedures were reviewed in higher courts. Some suspects detained under anti-terrorist legislation in Northern Ireland alleged that they had been ill-treated by the police. The results of a police inquiry into the treatment of those arrested in connection with disturbances in 1985 at a London housing estate had still not been made public. The Court of Appeal rejected a request for leave to appeal by three of these people convicted of murdering a police officer. The Court of Appeal upheld the convictions of six people sentenced in 1975 to life imprisonment for the bombing of two pubs in Birmingham.
In June the United Kingdom Government ratified the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. In December it ratified the United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
In March three unarmed members of the
IRA - Mairead Farrell, Daniel McCann and Sean Savage - were shot dead in Gibraltar, a colony of the United Kingdom, by plainclothes members of the Special Air Service (SAS) regiment of the British army. Immediately after the incident eye-witnesses stated that the three had been killed without first being challenged and that no attempt had been made to capture them. The government said that the three had planned a bomb attack on soldiers in Gibraltar and were thought to have been armed. The IRA stated that before the killings they had been in possession of explosives; these were later found in Spain. The coroner's inquest into the deaths took place in Gibraltar in September. The jury decided by a verdict of nine to two that the three had been lawfully killed.
In January the government announced that the findings of the police inquiry into six killings by the security forces in Northern Ireland in 1982 would not be made public. The inquiry was originally led by Deputy Chief Constable John Stalker and was completed by Chief Constable Colin Sampson after John Stalker had been removed from duty (see Amnesty International Reports 1987 and 1988). The government stated that although the inquiry had revealed evidence that police officers had conspired to pervert the course of justice or had attempted to do so, the Director of Public Prosecutions for Northern Ireland had decided not to prosecute those allegedly responsible because of "national security" and "public interest" considerations.
Three of the six killed in 1982 - Eugene Toman, Sean Burns and Gervaise McKerr, all members of the IRA - were unarmed when they were shot by an undercover anti-terrorist police unit. The coroner's inquest into their deaths, which began in November, was adjourned after three days. The coroner stated that the police officers allegedly responsible for the killings would not testify. However, as Coroner's Rules allow such officers to be absent, he accepted their written statements as evidence. This decision was contested by lawyers for the families of the deceased who said that the police officers should be present for cross-examination, and one lawyer applied for judicial review by the courts. The High Court then ruled that the coroner's decision to allow the officers' written statements as evidence was lawful.
EUROPE/UNITED KINGDOM
In December the Court of Appeal overruled the High Court and decided that the police officers should testify at the inquest and should be cross-examined.
Allegations continued to be made by some people arrested under anti-terrorist legislation in Northern Ireland that they had been ill-treated by the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) while in police custody. In January Arthur Forbes and Brian Gillen were arrested. Both claimed that during the interrogation which followed they were ill-treated, as a result of which each sustained a perforated eardrum. They were released without charge and soon afterwards were examined on behalf of Amnesty International by a Dutch police surgeon. He concluded that the injuries were compatible with the alleged ill-treatment. He also stated that he did not believe injuries to the eardrums had been self-inflicted.
Arthur Forbes and Brian Gillen had been arrested under Section 12 of the Prevention of Terrorism Act, which allows the police to detain suspects for up to seven days before they are charged or released. In December the European Court of Human Rights ruled that the detention of four people held under Section 12 for periods varying from four days, six hours to six days violated the European Convention on Human Rights, as none of the four had been brought promptly before a judge following arrest. The government gave notice of intention to derogate temporarily from those articles of the European Convention and of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights which regulate detention.
In February Amnesty International published a report about the fairness of trials that followed the murder of a police officer during a riot on Broadwater Farm housing estate in London in 1985. The disturbances occurred after a black woman died of a heart attack following a police raid on her home. Many of the hundreds arrested, including juveniles, were denied access to lawyers and to their families during lengthy periods of police interrogation. Some were allegedly tricked by the police into signing documents which waived their rights. Amnesty International was concerned about allegations that suspects were threatened and coerced into making admissions.
In many of the trials of those charged
with serious offences during the Broadwater Farm events prosecution evidence was based on admissions which had later been contested by defendants. Amnesty International was dubious about the safety of convictions based on statements made in the absence of a lawyer and called on the government to review these cases (see Amnesty international Report 1988). The organization also called for measures making it mandatory that police tell suspects of their right to have access to lawyers and to have someone outside the place of detention informed of their arrest.
On several occasions Amnesty International wrote to the Home Secretary to express its concern about allegations made by those who had been arrested and interrogated after the Broadwater Farm events. The organization also said it was concerned that only five complaints against the police about the treatment of Broadwater Farm suspects were being investigated and that there had been a long delay in these investigations. Amnesty International said it considered the government responsible for ensuring that this serious pattern of allegations was investigated and the results made public without delay. By the end of the year results of the police investigation into these complaints, which was being supervised by the Police Complaints Authority, had still not been made public.
In December three judges of the Court of Appeal rejected an application by three people convicted of the murder of the police officer at Broadwater Farm for leave to appeal against their convictions.
In January the Court of Appeal upheld the convictions of six people sentenced in 1975 to life imprisonment for pub bombings in Birmingham which killed 21 people and injured 162 (see Amnesty International Reports 1987 and 1988). There was new evidence concerning ill-treatment of the accused prior to their confessions but the Court did not consider it cast sufficient doubt on the original convictions as to render the jury's verdict "unsafe or unsatisfactory". In April three House of Lords judges rejected the prisoners' petition for a full hearing of their case by the House of Lords, the highest appeal court in the United Kingdom.
New evidence was presented during 1987 and 1988 in the cases of four people who had been convicted of pub bombings
EUROPE/UNITED KINGDOM
in Guildford and Woolwich in 1975. At the end of the year the Home Secretary had not made a final decision on whether to refer their cases to the Court of Appeal.
In March Amnesty International wrote to Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher requesting clarification about the circumstances in which the three IRA members had been shot dead in Gibraltar. The letter outlined some of the eye-witness accounts which had been published in newspapers at that time and which appeared to contradict the official version. In April the government replied that the facts concerning the killings would be considered at an inquest. The government also stated that it found the terms of the letter "offensive" and "prejudiced".
Amnesty International sent observers to the Gibraltar inquest to collect information about the incident, to assess whether the aim of the army and police operation had been to kill the three rather than to arrest them, and to assess the effectiveness of a coroner's inquest in bringing to light all the relevant facts. The government introduced Public Interest Immunity certificates which blocked the presentation of evidence about the planning of the operation. As a result insufficient evidence was presented to allow an assessment of whether there was a government policy to kill members of armed opposition groups rather than to arrest them. Amnesty International believed that the inquest demonstrated the inadequacy of this mechanism for revealing all the significant facts in controversial incidents.
Amnesty International wrote to the government in February concerning the investigation into the 1982 killings in Northern Ireland. The organization stated that a refusal to publish the findings of the Stalker/Sampson investigation and the decision not to prosecute police officers who had allegedly committed offences would contribute to allegations of official involvement in deliberate planned killings. In his reply the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland stated that he was "satisfied that steps have been taken to ensure that the events that resulted in the Stalker/ Sampson investigation will not occur again". In lune Amnesty International published a report on killings by the security forces in Northern Ireland since 1982. The organization continued to call for an independent judicial inquiry into the
effectiveness of investigative procedures and the laws regulating the use of lethal force. The organization said that an independent judicial inquiry was a vital first step towards preventing future unlawful killings and towards instituting procedures to ensure that all disputed killings were fully and promptly investigated and the facts publicly clarified.
Amnesty International sent observers to the inquest which started in November into the deaths of three suspects in Northern Ireland in 1982 and to the judicial review which followed. The organization had previously expressed concern that particular restrictions on coroners' inquests which were applicable only in Northern Ireland made such an inquest an inadequate mechanism to bring out the full facts in cases of disputed killings.
Amnesty International sent an observer to the appeal hearing concerning the convictions of six people for pub bombings in Birmingham. Even though, according to the court, the prisoners' convictions were based on their confessions, the testimony of every fresh witness supporting their allegations of ill-treatment was dismissed as "dishonest", "mistaken" or "irrelevant". The Court did not deal specifically with the cumulative effect of the testimony supporting the allegations. Amnesty International considered that the judgment of the Court of Appeal rested on an assessment that the six prisoners failed to prove that they had been ill-treated. Under the law of England it is for the prosecution to prove that confessions alleged to have been obtained by ill-treatment were not so obtained.
Amnesty International considered that the most grave doubt remained regarding official denials that these prisoners had been ill-treated while in police custody, and therefore about the safety of convictions based on confessions. In March Amnesty International wrote to the government stating that the allegations of ill-treatment should be subject to further review. In April the government replied that these matters were for the courts to determine, without government interference or comment.
