TANZANIA
Three prisoners of conscience continued to be restricted to remote areas of the country. In semi-autonomous Zanzibar a journalist was imprisoned after reporting an incident in which police shot dead two demonstrators. Twenty-three people arrested after the same demonstration awaited trial at the end of the year. A prisoner of conscience received a two-year jail sentence in Zanzibar for tearing up a photograph of a senior politician.
James Mapalala and Mwinyijuma 0th-man Upindo remained restricted throughout the year to remote areas to which they had been banished in 1987. They had been detained without trial in October 1986 after they had circulated a petition calling for Tanzania to become a multi-party state.
Lawyers petitioned the High Court for their release but in mid-1987, before the case could be heard, their detention orders under the Preventive Detention Act were annulled and they were redetained under the 1921 Deportation Ordinance, which allows the President to banish anyone deemed "dangerous to peace and good order". There is no appeal against a warrant issued under this law - an apparent violation of Tanzania's Bill of Rights. James Mapalala and Mwinyijuma Upindo were then deported to Mafia Island in the Indian Ocean and Ukerewe Island in Lake Victoria respectively, where they remained throughout 1988. James Mapala-la's health was reported to have deteriorated significantly as a result of his detention and banishment. In June 1988 the government sent a doctor to examine him, since the rudimentary medical facilities on Mafia were inadequate. However, when an Amnesty International delegate visited James Mapalala in October he had still not received treatment.
Joseph Kasella Bantu, a former senior government official and political detainee, was also restricted throughout 1988. He returned to Tanzania in March 1987 after several years in exile and after receiving official assurances of his safety, only to be placed under house arrest. In March the house arrest was lifted but he continued to be restricted to Njombe area in southwestern Tanzania.
In June Kwenda Kote Mukungu from Pemba, an island which is administratively part of Zanzibar, was sentenced to two years' imprisonment for tearing up a photograph of former President Julius Ny-erere. Throughout the year there were expressions of separatist sentiment in Zanzibar, many of which were directed against former President Nyerere, who remained Chairman of the ruling party, Chama Cha Mapinduzi, Party of the Revolution, after his resignation from the presidency in 1985.
In May 1988 Ali Saleh, a correspondent for the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), was arrested after he had reported that the police had shot dead two Muslim demonstrators in Zanzibar. He was held for several weeks on a charge of riotous assembly, although he has been disabled since childhood and did not take part in the demonstration.
The protest had been called in response
AFRICA/TANZANIA/TOGO
to criticisms of certain Islamic practices by a senior official of the ruling party. Major discrepancies between official and eyewitness accounts of the killings led to concern that they may have been extrajudicial executions. A government-appointed commission of inquiry into the killings had reported by the end of the year but its findings had not been made public.
Twenty-three people arrested after the demonstration were on bail facing criminal charges at the end of the year. The court refused to let them be represented by the first lawyer they chose, himself a former prisoner of conscience, and it seemed likely that if convicted and imprisoned they would become prisoners of conscience for exercising their right to free religious and political expression.
Amnesty International learned that four people were sentenced to death after being convicted of murder. No executions were reported in 1988, as has been the case for several years.
Amnesty International appealed for the immediate and unconditional release of prisoners of conscience, for prompt and fair trials for those arrested as a result of the demonstration in Zanzibar in May and for an impartial inquiry which would report publicly on the killing of demonstrators by police.
