GUATEMALA
There was an escalation in human rights violations against suspected critics and opponents of the government. Hundreds of people were "disappeared" or extrajudicially executed and scores of others faced death threats from the security forces, sometimes acting in uniform, sometimes clandestinely in the guise of "death squads". Civil patrols formed under military orders and operating under them were also allegedly responsible for such abuses.
In May a group of armed forces officers led a coup attempt against the government of President Vinicio Cerezo Ar6valo. There were a number of arrests but those involved were released under an amnesty in July. Several other coup attempts were reported during the year. There was also evidence of increasing action by the military against people it considered "subversive". Human rights abuses occurred despite the present government's ratification of a number of international human rights conventions. In May the government acceded to the Interna-
THE AMERICAS / GUATEMALA
tional Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
it was difficult to assess the full extent of human rights violations, not least because of the manner in which many were carried out - often by armed men in plain clothes using vehicles with darkened windows and no licence plates. The gross human rights violations which occurred during military rule in the early 1980s had destroyed organizations that were trying to carry out human rights work and also made victims and witnesses reluctant to come forward and report violations for fear of the consequences.
Nevertheless, during the year information was received about numerous cases in which peasants living in areas aff'ected by conflict between government forces and armed opposition groups were abducted and either "disappeared" or were found dead. In January in separate incidents in the Santiago Atitlán, Sololá area, brothers José Mecia Ramirez and Antonio Mecia Ramirez were reportedly forced off buses by armed men in plain clothes who witnesses believed were soldiers. The abductors singled out the brothers by name. They were found dead five days later with two other peasants irom the area who had been seized by armed men in plain clothes at about the same time. Also in January, Mariano Xoch Tsorin, a vegetable merchant and community worker from Panajachel, Sololá, was found dead several days after he was taken from a bus by heavily armed, masked men who witnesses believed were soldiers. He had worked with the widows of men killed in military operations in the area; his own parents had been killed in 1982 in one such operation.
Many university staff and students have been the victims of arbitrary arrest, torture, "disappearance" and extrajudicial killing. In February Ana Elizabeth Paniagua Morales, a former economics student who
was working as Sports Director at the Autonomous University of San Carlos (USAC), was abducted by heavily-armed men in plain clothes who beat her and forced her into a white van with darkened windows. Her mutilated body was found two days later. In the following weeks the white van, which gained notoriety as "la pdnel de Ja muerte" or "the death van", was used in several other abductions.
In March a National Police squad led by Police Chief Julio Caballeros Seigné stopped the van as it was about to be used to abduct a businessperson. According to the Minister of the Interior the van was being used by six uniformed members of the Treasury Police. In June the National Police reportedly presented to the investigating judge 300 pages of documentation implicating the Treasury Police agents in at least eight "death van" killings but in July both the Interior Minister and the National Police Chief were replaced. On 20 July the judge handling the investigation into these killings was seized by eight heavily-armed men immediately after announcing that he had ordered the arrest of some 27 Treasury Police agents for kidnap and murder. Later he said he had been taken to a private house and interrogated for 52 hours before being released. A friend who had reportedly tried to warn him of the planned abduction was seized on 21 July and found dead shortly afterwards. Fellow judges stated that they believed the intelligence division of the army was responsible for these incidents, which one judge described as a "warning to the entire judiciary". The "death van" case was assigned to another judge but in August it was announced that the Treasury Police agents accused had been "released for lack of evidence".
People campaigning for investigations into human rights violations were themselves the victims of such abuses. Members of the newly formed Consejo de Comunidades Etnicas ("RunujeJ 7unam"J (CERJ), Council of Indigenous Communities ("We are all Equal"), faced death threats issued in the name of so-called death squads, "disappeared" or were apparently extrajudicially executed. In September, two months after the group was formed, Valerio Chijal, one of its local organizers, was shot dead in his home. He was killed shortly after he had reported receiving threats from local civil patrol and military officials because of his membership of CERJ. In the same month

THE AMERICAS / GUATEMALA
Pedro Cumes Pérez, also a local CERJ organizer, "disappeared" after being seized by uniformed soldiers. The group's founder, teacher Amilcar Méndez, has received a series of death threats.
Members of the Grupo de Apoyo Mutuo por el Aparecimiento con Vida de Nuestros Familiares (gam], formed in 1984 to campaign for inquiries into the whereabouts of relatives who had "disappeared", also received death threats. In August gam members Juan Ajanel and Sebastiana Ramos, who had been pressing for the exhumation of the bodies of three relatives summarily killed and buried clandestinely in the early 1980s by members of the local civil patrol, were reportedly threatened with death by local military officials in Pachoj village. El Quiché. The bodies were eventually exhumed in June but no eft'orts were made to bring to justice those responsible for the killings or for threatening the dead men's relatives. Similarly, death threats against Father Ventura Lux Herrera, a Roman Catholic priest, after he held a mass in May for the widows of people who had "disappeared" in the area, were not officially investigated. Father Lux Herrera felt obliged to go into hiding because of the threats.
Trade unionists attempting to revive Guatemala's trade union movement, which dining the late 1970s and early 1980s was disrupted by "disappearances", extrajudicial executions and the enforced exile of some of its leaders, were also at risk. However, the authorities attributed the "disappearance" or killing of individual trade unionists to internal disputes within the unions or to the activities of "extremist groups out of government control". In October Carlos Martinez Go^oy was shot dead in front of his two children aged seven and five, by men in plain clothes. He was Disputes Secretary of the union at the Banco Internacional, International Bank, and a member of the bank and insurance employees' trade union. Shortly before his murder he had said that his union was likely to support a strike by workers of the Army Bank. Guatemalan officials blamed the killing on a personal dispute, but the bank workers' union denied this and pointed out that the killing of Carlos Martinez came after death threats against trade unionists by state and army security bodies. Leaders of the bank workers' union told visiting Amnesty International representatives in July that its leadership had been subjected to
constant threats and harassment.
The apparent impunity with which those responsible for attacks on trade unionists were able to act, the information and armaments to which they had access, and the targeting of individuals active in organizations critical of government policies, suggested official responsibility or acquiescence.
Journalists who reported human rights violations also came under threat. In May Julio Godoy, a journalist on the new independent newspaper La Epoca, published an article alleging that the government had agreed to a series of demands from the military in order to remain in office after the May coup attempt and disclosed information linking the military to human rights violations. Shortly afterwards he was abducted, drugged, and, after 24 hours, released. La Epoca was forced to close down some two weeks after this kidnapping when its offices were fire-bombed by men who witnesses said wore military boots and had military-style haircuts.
Various official mechanisms established to investigate human rights violations since the present government came to power in 1986 continued to prove ineffective. Judge Olegario Labbé, who was appointed Executorial Judge in 1986 to investigate writs of habeas corpus lodged with the Supreme Court on behalf of "disappeared" people, disclosed that he had ceased to perform this function in May 1987 when he considered that his mandate had expired. The Human Rights Attorney provided for in Guatemala's 1985 Constitution, but only appointed in August 1987, and the Presidential Advisory Commission announced at the end of 1987, also failed to resolve adequately cases in which official involvement was alleged. The case of Luis Fernando de la Roca, a student who "disappeared" in 1985, was closed despite evidence that he had been abducted by people using vehicles with licence plates which had been traced to security units. The President of the Supreme Court, human rights agencies and leading members of the judiciary said the case could proceed no further because the military commander of the security units concerned had stated that the vehicles were stolen before the abduction and therefore could not have been used by his men. However, no such theft was reported to the police.
In another case six police officers were
THE AMERÎCAS/GUATEMALA/GUYANA
reportedly sentenced to 30 years in prison in 1988 for abduction and murder. The case concerned two USAC agronomists, Danilo Sergio Alvarado Mejia and René Haroldo Leiva Cayax, who had been killed in October 1987. The arrest of the six had been announced in December 1987 by the Interior Minister, and their sentences were imposed in July. However, international delegations which sought to interview the police officers in prison were not permitted to do so.
In other cases police investigations into alleged abuses appeared to have been stalled by the intimidation of judicial personnel conducting the inquiries and the refusal of police and military units who were implicated to cooperate.
In addition, the amnesty granted to those involved in the May coup attempt, as well as previous amnesties declared by the military authorities shortly before President Cerezo took office and under the 1987 Central American Peace Agreement, had the effect of making the identification and prosecution of those responsible for past human rights violations unlikely.
Throughout the year Amnesty International drew the government's attention to reported human rights violations and repeatedly called for concerted action to ensure full protection of and respect for human rights. In July Amnesty International's delegation was able to visit Guatemala to conduct on-the-spot investigations and to bring the organization's concerns once again to the authorities' attention. Amnesty International expressed its concern that the series of amnesties announced in recent years may have led those responsible for human rights violations to believe they could act with impunity and had thus created a climate conducive to further violations.
In March Amnesty International provided information on human rights violations in Guatemala to the United Nations Human Rights Commission and urged that the situation in Guatemala should continue to receive the Commission's close attention.
