ZAIRE
Many prisoners of conscience were de-tained during the year, most for short periods, for supporting the leader of an opposition political group. These and other political prisoners were held without charge or trial, mostly incommunicado, and many were beaten and ill-treated. Some prisoners of conscience were released. It was not known whether new death sentences were imposed but six prisoners under sentence of death were reportedly executed in August.
The government's Department for the Citizen's Rights and Liberties continued investigating human rights violations and abuse of power by government officials. In June it established 32 regional and sub-regional offices in addition to those already existing in Kinshasa. Most complaints examined by the department concerned land disputes, disagreements between employers and employees and non-implementation of court rulings.
Most people known to have been arrested for political reasons were suspected supporters of Tshisekedi wa Mulumba. Secretary General of the opposition Union pour la démocratie et Je progrès social (UDPS), the Union for Democracy and Social Progress. There were also reports of the detention of Jehovah's Witnesses and the arrest and torture of suspected supporters of armed government opponents in North Kivu region, near the border with Uganda.
Four Jehovah's Witnesses arrested in Goma in November 1987 were released uncharged in April. They had been detained by the national security service
without being referred to the procuracy. Gaston Jonas Kouvibidila, a journalist from the People's Republic of the Congo arrested in Kinshasa in December 1987 while collecting information for his doctoral thesis, was released uncharged in June. He had been accused of spying and held by the Agence nationale de documentation (AND), the National Documentation Agency, but had not been charged or brought to court. He was freed in an exchange with the People's Republic of the Congo for over 20 Zairians suspected of committing criminal offences in the Congo.
Although some leading members of the UDPS had signed an agreement with the government in 1987 to cease political activities outside the ruling party, one of them, Tshisekedi wa Mulumba, and his supporters, continued to criticize government policies and call for political reform. Many were arrested in Kinshasa in January during a public rally convened by Tshisekedi wa Mulumba, and there were further detentions in March and April after he had called for a boycott of national assembly elections in the Kinshasa area. The detainees were held for periods varying from a few days to several months, although the Code of Penal Procedure requires that all suspects normally be charged or have their cases referred to the procuracy within five days. Such detentions were usually carried out by the National Gendarmerie, the Civil Guard, the Service d'action et de renseignements militaires (SARM) - the Military Action and Intelligence Service - and the AND.
The only person to be charged was Tshisekedi wa Mulumba, who after his arrest on 17 January was charged with threatening national security, insulting the head of state and disturbing public order. The case was referred to the State Security Court for prosecution. The authorities suspended proceedings a few weeks later, however, alleging that he was mentally unstable and would have to undergo psychiatric examination. Later, a government spokesperson claimed that psychiatrists had found Tshisekedi wa Mulumba to be mentally disturbed but unofficial sources suggested that the psychiatrists concerned had been put under pressure by the authorities to make such a diagnosis.
Tshisekedi wa Mulumba was released untried in March but placed under house arrest in Kinshasa. He was rearrested in
98
AFRICA/ZAIRE
April after he had called for a boycott of national assembly elections in the Kinshasa area in protest against the government's refusal to allow multi-party democracy and against recent political detentions. Other prominent UDPS members arrested with him included Birindwa ci Birhashirwa and Bi-janu Mutunda, both of whom had been detained repeatedly in previous years. Several others, including Kanana Tshiongo, another founder-member of the UDPS, and Kyungu Mukange, had been arrested in Tshisekedi wa Mulumba's home in March. Kyungu Mukange was reportedly severely beaten by members of the security forces at the time of his arrest. Those detained were held in Kinshasa, incommunicado and without charge, in detention centres at B2 -the headquarters of the National Gendarmerie, at the headquarters of SARM and the AND, and in Makala Prison.
After a few days' detention in Kinshasa, Birindwa ci Birhashirwa was restricted to the town of Kampene in eastern Zaire. Tshisekedi wa Mulumba was banished to the northern towns of Isiro and Dungu, near the Sudanese border, and then in June to Monga, a remote town near the border with the Central African Republic. While in Monga Tshisekedi wa Mulumba reportedly went on hunger-strike to protest against his detention. He apparently met President Mobutu Sese Seko in Gbadolite, Equateur region, and was released in mid-September.
Most of Tshisekedi wa Mulumba's political supporters who had been detained or banished were reported to have been released by November. Birindwa ci Birhashirwa and Bijanu Mutunda were released in June and July. Sita Nsoni, banished to Bon-gandanga in Equateur region, was released with several others in October.
Former army chief of staff General Muko-bo remained in internal exile after being held briefly in the Deuxième cité de I'OUA detention centre in Kinshasa in July 1987. He was reportedly initially detained on suspicion of planning a coup and later accused of obtaining weapons for his headquarters without Defence Department permission. These accusations were not tested in court and he was banished from Kinshasa without a formal banishment order.
Reports of torture were less numerous than in the past but political prisoners continued to be beaten, especially at the time of their arrest. In January Kamba Omer, a UDPS supporter, was badly beaten at the
time of his arrest at Tshatshi military camp. He was taken to hospital at Kokolo military camp and then to the University Clinic where he underwent an operation. At the end of the year he was reported still to be convalescing. In May at least 12 UDPS members detained at B2 were severely beaten by members of SARM. There were reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners detained by the military in North Kivu region in connection with armed opposition to the government. According to the testimony of one prisoner, he was detained by soldiers in 1986 and ill-treated while held incommunicado in Beni and Goma, near the border with Uganda. He was not allowed treatment for a leg wound and soldiers beat him with metal bars and stabbed him with bayonets. When his wounded leg became gangrenous it was amputated with a machete by the soldiers. He remained in detention without trial until 1988. There was no news during the year about other prisoners known to have been detained in the Beni area since late 1986 (see Amnesty InternaiionaJ Report 1988).
Six prisoners under sentence of death were reportedly executed in Bukavu Prison in August; six others were reportedly held there pending execution. It was not known on what charges these prisoners had been convicted.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience and investigated the cases of many political detainees to establish if they were prisoners of conscience. The organization asked the Department for the Citizen's Rights and Liberties about numerous detainees and received responses to some of its queries. It was not clear whether the department intervened to end long-term detention without charge or trial of political prisoners or to ensure the release of prisoners of conscience; however, the department did communicate with branches of the security forces responsible for detaining political and other prisoners.
In May Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Zaire to the United Nations procedure (under Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728F/1503) for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations.
AFRICA/NAMIBIA
