Mexico
Amnesty International's primary concerns in Mexico continued to be irregular procedures for arrest, detention and trial. Reports were received during the year of deaths in custody, in some cases apparently as a result of torture, and also of "disappearances" and kil^ lings of prisoners.
The Mexican authorities did not ad-mitto holding political prisoners. However, Amnesty International was concerned that the arrest and imprisonment of many people convicted on criminal charges were politically motivated and stemmed from their activities in trade unions or peasant groups. Many campesinos (peasant farmers) involved in land disputes and leaders of trade unions or slum-dwellers' associations were charged with offences such as murder, robbery or damage to property on the basis of confessions allegedly obtained under torture in incommunicado detention during the initial phase after arrest In a number of cases confessions were retracted when proceedings entered their public phase and the detainee was represented by defence counsel. The courts often accepted such confessions in evidence and regarded them as sufficient proof to convict on criminal charges and impose long prison sentences.
Estimates of the number of such cases varied, since some prisoners were held in unacknowledged detention and details of the grounds for arrest of Indian peasant farmers in remote rural areas were difficult to obtain. In December the independent campesino organization Coordinadora Nacional Plan de Ay ala (CNPA), National Coordinator Plan of Ayala, estimated that there were at least 600 campesino prisoners in Mexico, imprisoned for their support for peasant organizations formed in opposition to the officially recognized local
153
groups. Some were said to have been held for up to six years without charge. Amnesty International was investigating these reports.
Many thousands of prisoners were freed in recent years under state and federal political amnesties. However, such amnesties were apparently applied unevenly. Certain prisoners were freed while others accused and convicted on the same charges were still held. For example, all but one of a group of six prisoners held at Cuemavaca prison, Morelos, were freed by the end of 1981. All had been convicted on charges of "armed assault, robbery, homicide and criminal association". The prisoners claimed that they had been imprisoned for their role in a land dispute. Amnesty International had been investigating their cases, and continued to work on behalf of the remaining prisoner.
Throughout 1981 Amnesty International urged the Mexican authorities to provide information about a number of "disappeared" people whose cases were being investigated by the organization. These included three members of the Mexican Communist Party arrested with nine others in Naucalpán, in the state of Mexico, in February 1981 ; trade union leader Arnulfo Cordova Lustre, arrested in March; two students and a teacher arrested in Ciudad Obregón, Sonora, in April; a group of seven students arrested in June; chauffeur Juan Ignacio Mendoza García, arrested in July; and Roque Reyes Garcia, a worker at the National University and an active member of the university's trade union, arrested in September by the security forces.
The Mexican organization Comité Nacional Pro-Defensa de Presos, Perseguidos, Desaparœidos y Exiliados Políticos {Ct^DWDE?), the National Committee for the Defence of Prisoners, the Persecuted, Disappeared and Political Exiles, headed by Rosario Ibarra de Piedra, claimed that over a 10-year period some 500 people had " disappeared" after arrest. Rosario Ibarra de Piedra received a series of death threats; on 22 April Amnesty International appealed to the President to guarantee her physical safety. The committee believed that at least some of the "disappeared" were held at Campo Militar Número 1, Military Camp No. 1, on the outskirts of Mexico City, the headquarters of the so-called Brigada Blanca, White Brigade. Although the government consistently denied the existence of the brigade, some "disappeared" people who later reappeared gave highly detailed testimony about their detention and ill-treatment by this unit, and attested to seeing other" disappeared" people in custody in its headquarters.
The authorities did not respond to Amnesty International's repeated requests during 1981 for information about several recently "disappeared" people, who were feared by friends and relatives to be
154
held at the camp. One such case was that of José Esequial Reyes Carrillo, who was removed from the Red Cross hospital in Polanco on 31 December 1981. According to the police he had been wounded during an attempted robbery the previous day. His relatives alleged that he was shot and then abducted because of his activities as leader of the Valley of Mexico supporters of the Coordinadora Nacional de Trabajadores de la Educación (CNTE), National Coordinator of Education Workers, which was attempting to form a teachers' union outside the control of the official teachers' union.
Misael Núñez Acosta, another leader of the Valley of Mexico group and a national leader of the CNTE, was shot and killed on 30 January 1981. Groups in Mexico pressed the government to take action on allegations by those accused of the killing that they had been hired by officials of the government-sponsored teachers' union. The Brigada Blanca was alleged to be responsible for several other deaths in 1981, including that of Rodrigo Carrasco López, Assistant Director of Public Works in Juchitán, who was found shot dead and marked by torture on 10 October 1981.
Amnesty International has been studying repeated allegations that a number of regular national and state police units were also responsible for arbitrary detentions, torture and killings. In May the Policía Judicial Judicial Police, was named as responsible for the killing of Hilario Ramírez Morales, a student leader in the state of Guerrero. In June the Attorney General of the state of Mexico, Carlos Kuri Assad, said that there were "illegal" police groups operating in the state. He maintained that although they were "illegal" they were "not unconstitutional", as they were "useful" to society. In mid-1981 social worker Florentino Espinoza Gutiérrez, who had been arrested in Oaxaca in May, testified that he had been tortured in police custody.
Amnesty International continued to receive reports of arbitrary detentions, torture and killings by regular army units, acting in conjunction with local landowners and unofficial paramilitary units. Among the victims of such abuses were pobladores (slum-dwellers) on the outskirts of Mexico's major cities, and peasants.
Amnesty International appealed on behalf of several members of the Toztzil community of Venustiano Carranza in Chiapas arrested by the army in April 1981. Clashes at the Venustiano Carranza community appeared related to attempts by the authorities to stop campesinos from reclaiming land which they claimed had been legally granted to them in 1965. Conflict erupted again in 1981 after an alleged attempt by the officially-supported campesino group in Chiapas to impose their own people at the head of a local cooperative. Among those arrested was CNPA supporter Candelaria Mendoza,
155
held with her two sons aged five months and five years. She was accused of damage to property after she had participated in a protest at the killing of a friend. Replying to Amnesty International's requests for information about those arrested, state officials wrote that one of the group, Professor Arturo Alborés Velasco, a member of the School of Architecture at the Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM), National Autonomous University of Mexico, was held in Tuxtia Gutierres prison and had been charged with criminal offences. When Professor Alborés and other members of the group held in the same prison went on hunger-strike in July to protest against their continued detention, they were removed to a cellar in the prison where they were reportedly tortured. People who went on hunger-strike in support of the group were arrested in states throughout the country, including Veracruz, Michoacán, San Luis Potosí, Chiapas, Hidalgo and Puebla. Some were believed to be still in detention at the end of the year. Others were later reported to have "disappeared" including 16 campesinos detained in Puebla on 16 July.
In the state of Veracruz regular army units were repeatedly cited as responsible for human rights'violations including the killing of nonviolent demonstrators and villagers living on land claimed by large landowners or businesses.
Amnesty International was also concerned about reports from Oaxaca, where the Triqui Indian Association reported that at least 26 innocent campesinos had been jailed in Juxtlahuaca, Putla and Oaxaca after disputes with forestry companies who wished to take the peasants' land for lumbering. In November the Triqui's negotiator. Juan Martinez of the CNPA-supported Movimiento de Unificación y Lucha Triqui Movement for the Unification and Struggle of the Triquis, "disappeared" as he was returning from talks with the Minister of the Interior in Oaxaca.
During the year Amnesty International appealed for information on the whereabouts of peasant farmers Andrés, Natalio and Paulino Hernández Cerecedo, missing since their abduction by the army in May 1981 in Chapaltepec, municipality of Calnali, in the state of Hidalgo. Three other peasant farmers released from Huejutla prison in the state of Hidalgo in June all reportedly bore marks of torture.
In June the bishop of Tehuantepec, Oaxaca, Arturo Lona Reyes, declared the excommunication of all people who directly or indirectly practiced torture. Archbishop Méndez Arceo of Cuernavaca had similarly excommunicated torturers on 17 April.
Amnesty International was seriously disturbed by reports of the mass expulsion back to Guatemala of Guatemalan refugees who had fled the violence there to seek asylum in Mexico. Following inter-
156
national protests at the expulsion in April of 475 Guatemalans, a number of Mexican officials publicly stated that future applications for asylum from Guatemalans would be dealt with on an individual basis. Nonetheless, a further mass expulsion of 1,855 Guatemalans was reported in July. On 25 August, and again on 25 September, Amnesty International wrote to the Mexican Government about these expulsions. It noted that one person had reportedly been killed on returning to Guatemala, and called on the Mexican authorities not to send people back to countries where Amnesty International believed they faced torture or death. Amnesty International also asked for information about the precise status and treatment of some 50 Guatemalans who had been allowed to remain in Mexico, but were reportedly confined in isolation in Cuautla, Morelos.
Amnesty International also expressed concern during 1981 at the treatment of a number of other foreign nationals in Mexico. On 31 July former Venezuelan guerrilla leader Douglas Bravo was arrested by tht Policía Federal de Seguridad {WS), Federal Security Police. After his release Douglas Bravo, then a leader of a legally-recognized Venezuelan political party, displayed to a news conference marks which he said were the result of torture by the PFS. He stated that he had been tortured while being interrogated about the reasons for his visit to Mexico and about guerrilla activities throughout Latin America On 18 November Amnesty International asked the authorities to assure the physical safety of a group of detainees which included Argentine Roberto Guevara and Julio Santucho. They claimed that they had been tortured with electric shocks after being detained on charges of having planned and participated in the attempted kidnapping of the niece of a Mexican presidential candidate. These accusations were categorically denied by all but one of the detainees.
On 23 March 1981 Mexico deposited instruments of accession to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, subject to a number of interpretations and reservations.
157
