Peru
Amnesty Intemationars conceras included reports of ill-treatment and torture of prisoners; inhumane prison conditions; and the arbitrary arrest of members of lawful opposition parties, trade unionists, students, and members of highland Indian communities. Most prisoners of conscience were detained on charges under Decree 46 of 10 March 1981. This penalizes a wide range of actions which " affect st|ate security", and the decree defines such acts as terrorism. By the end of 1981 no one had been convicted under this law but over 1,000 people were believed to have been detained on terrorism charges, and about 300 were in detention awaiting trial.
1981 saw a series of dynamite attacks, primarily on state-owned property; the authorities blamed a small extreme left-wing group called Sendero Luminoso, Luminous Path, and Peru's criminal narcotics underworld.
A consistent pattern of arbitrary arrest emerged during the year. Left-wing candidates elected to local government, trade unionists supporting strike action, participants in rural education projects, and Indian peasants engaged in land conflicts with private landowners were arbitrarily detained as terrorists. The Indian peasantry, because of their ethnic origin and because many spoke only the indigenous language Quechua, and not Spanish, the language of government, appeared to have been denied the full protection of the law.
Four campesinos (peasant farmers) were wounded and detained on 2 October 1981 in a Civil Guard Action in the Tambo Grande region of Piura department They were held on terrorism charges. Civil Guards had moved into the area to forcibly expel campesinos from an estimated 15,000 hectares of farm land. The land was claimed by the owners of large cattle ranches in the area, although reportedly it had been allotted to the campesino communities — which hold land in common — by the agrarian reform program of the previous government Amnesty International was investigating their cases.
In January accusations by local landowners of terrorist activity led to a night raid on the Indian community of Mollebamba, Ayacucho department Civil Guards shot Reymundo Mitma dead in his house, wounded others, and detained seven people including Reymundo Mitma's 64-year-old mother. The seven were accused of "attacking the police with firearms or explosives". A court ruled in
165
October 1981 that the charges were without merit
In December 1981 Amnesty International appealed on behalf of five campesinos from Chota, C ajamare a. They were reportedly tortured by officers of the Peruvian Investigative Police (PIP), who demanded that they implicate their community leaders in terrorism. The five men were reportedly stripped naked and held bound to wooden beams in an open courtyard without food or water for over a week. Chota journalist and editor David Briones was himself briefly detained by the PIP on terrorism charges when he denounced this as "crucifixion".
Reports of torture were particularly numerous in the department of Ayacucho, where a state of siege was in force from 12 October to mid-December. A pattern of torture was reported of prisoners in the custody of the PIP or Civil Guard accused of terrorism. They were reportedly stripped naked, drenched with cold water, systematically beaten, suspended by the wrists or the feet and nearly suffocated by wet rags placed over the nose and mouth or submersion in water. In November 1981 a report by two members of Peru's parliamentary Commission on Human Rights on "Anti-Terrorist Police Operations" in Ayacucho was made public. It cited interviews and official medical reports and concluded that torture was considered by the police to be "the most effective means to obtain self-incriminating statements". The report found that Carlos Alberto Huamán Fernández, aged 25, detained by the Civil Guard, had been severely beaten, his nose broken, and he had been held blindfolded for two nights while periodically drenched with cold water. Medical evidence examined by the two members of parliament — Javier Diez Canseco of the United Left coalition, and Julio César Galindo Moreano of the governing Acción Popular, Popular Action, party — tended to corroborate the claims of torture; the names of alleged torturers were given in the report.
Several cases of torture became national issues in Peru. Student Edmundo Cox Beuzeville was detained on 26 May 1981 by the Civil Guard at the Sicuani, Cuzco, command post and abused. He was then refused medical attention. Requests that he be hospitalized were overruled by the prosecutor in the case until a Roman Catholic church organization, the Comisión Ecuménica de Acción Social (CEAS), produced medical evidence of torture.
Student Antonio Ayerbe Flores, a member of the political party Alianza Popular Revolucionaria Americana (APRA), American Popular Revolutíonary Alliance, was detained by the "Special Services Unit" ofthe Civil Guard in the city of Cuzco on 23 October. He was severely beaten about the head and body with riot sticks in a police cell with other student prisoners. Several hours later he died of
166
a cerebral haemorrhage. A general strike was held throughout Cuzco department to protest at the death and on 27 October Minister of the Interior José María de la Jara resigned in protest at the brutality of the police forces.
Those working closely with the peasantry in educational programs also suffered human rights violations. One of the best-known cases was that of adopted prisoner of conscience Nicolás Matayoshi, poet, novelist and educator. He specialized in the introduction and development of simple technology appropriate for poor and isolated villages, and the preparation of educational materials for children speaking only Quechua; he was also a member of the private National Human Rights Commission. He was detained at 1.30 am on 27 May 1981 at his home in Huancayo. The regional Civil Guard commander. Major Angel Zapata, later told the press that Nicolás Matayoshi was an "intellectual terrorist", the mastermind of the group Sendero Luminoso, and responsible for dynamite attacks. The public prosecutor stated that his writings had infringed Article 6 of the terrorism law, which concerns those who encourage the "commission of any of the acts that comprise the crime of terrorism". Orders for his conditional release by lower courts were overruled, apparently through the intervention of central government authorities. The Minister of Justice ordered the prosecution of left-wing members of parliament who expressed concern about delays and irregularities in the case on the grounds that they were interfering with the process of justice. Nicolás Matayoshi was held in Huancayo jail until 24 December 1981 when he was cleared of all charges.
Peasant education projects supported by the Roman Catholic Church in the highland department of Puno were attacked with dynamite and threatened: Puno church authorities protested at the failure of the government to investigate the attacks. On 19 September 1981 the offices of the Apostolic Administrator of Juli were partially destroyed in a bomb blast and in October the Juli Institute of Rural Education was dynamited. Monseñor Alberto I. Koenigsknecht of Juli denounced the attacks and told the press that he had received an anonymous letter expressing disapproval of the work of the church" in favour of the poor" and threatening him and his collaborators in rural education projects with death.
Many members of left-wing political parties in local government were arrested on terrorism charges. In Puno department, where local government leaders and the parliamentary representative were members of the coalition of left parties Izquierda Unida (lU), seven lU leaders were detained in April 1981 on terrorism charges. This followed a department-wide general strike protesting against central government neglect of the region. When local lU Vice-President
167
Ronaldo Bustamante was arrested at his home on 17 April police claimed to have discovered several sticks of dynamite on a table. A court later ruled that the police had placed the dynamite there themselves. Amnesty International inquired into the case. The seven were only released after about two months' imprisonment.
lU municipal council member Homero Trejo González of Huanta, Ayacucho, a journalist, teacher and member of the teachers' union, was arrested at his home on 21 October by a unit of the Civil Guard They reportedly placed two sticks of dynamite on a bedside table as a pretext for the arrest; Amnesty International was investigating the case. The a/caWe( mayor) of Huanta province, Simón Sánchez Torres — also an lU member — was detained on 15 September by Civil Guards who referred to the lU-dominated provincial government as "a nest of terrorists". He was severely beaten at the Civil Guard post at San José, Huanta, and transferred to the departmental capital accused of terrorism. He was released after mass protests at his arrest Virtually every lU supporter holding local public office in Ayacucho department spent some time in detention accused of terrorism.	'
Trade unionists were frequently detained on terrorism charges during strikes. Although they were held for relatively short periods some were ill-treated or tortured. Eight leaders of the Cuzco Sindicato de Construcción Civil, Union of Construction Workers, including their Secretary General Roberto Rojas Grajeda, were detained on 11 April 1981 in the wake of a department-wide general strike. Two of them later stated that they had been tortured by the PIP. Initially charged with a series of dynamite attacks, all had been released by June 1981. Some 60 members of the national teachers' union Sindicato Unico de Trabajadores de la Educación del Perú (SUTEP), many of whom had been imprisoned in connection with teachers' strikes under the previous government, were detained as terrorists during the year. Amnesty International was investigating some of their cases.
Amnesty International appealed several times for medical attention to be given to prisoners held in Lurigancho penitentiary in Lima. Over 5,000 prisoners were held in extremely overcrowded conditions — the prison was built for 1,800 — with insufficient water and contaminated food. Tuberculosis, dysentery and hepatitis were endemic. Amnesty International also appealed on behalf of five leaders of a prisoners' rights committee at Q'uenccoro prison in Cuzco. They had been removed on 8 May during a night raid by prison guards. Together with dozens of other prisoners they were severely injured in beatings with iron bars — the customary weapon of guards at Q'uenccoro. Political prisoners at the Ayacucho prison
168
suffered a similar attack on 2 June. They were badly beaten by prison guards and subsequently confined to punishment cells; two members of an inmates' committee reportedly suffered broken bones. Amnesty International called for a full inquiry into the two incidents but received no response from the Peruvian authorities.
Amnesty International was working on behalf of 25 prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience in Peru.
