Guyana
145
Amnesty International continued to follow the case of Dr Rupert Roopnarine and Dr Omawale, leading members of the opposition Working People's Alliance, who were charged with arson after the destruction by fire of a government ministry and offices of the ruling People's National Congress party in July 1979. Their fellow-defendant, Dr Walter Rodney, died in a bomb explosion on 13 June 1980 (see Amnesty International Report 1981). On 30 May Chief Magistrate Fung-kee-Fung dismissed the charges against the two, stating that the prosecution had not established a prima facie case. The prosecution appealed against this ruling.
On 23 July Amnesty International appealed to Minister of Justice and Attorney General Mohamed Shahabuddin for an independent inquiry into the death of Walter Rodney. The organization referred to an earlier appeal for such an inquiry made to President Forbes Bumham on 18 June 1980 and the fact that no independent investigation of the death appeared to have taken place. Amnesty International noted that Donald Rodney, the brother of Walter Rodney, who had been injured in the explosion which killed his brother, was to be tried on a charge of unlawful possession of an explosive device. Amnesty International planned to send an observer to the trial of Donald Rodney, but because of adjournments it had not taken place by the end of 1981.
In April 1981 five defendants in a treason trial (see Amnesty International Report 1981) were rearrested immediately after charges against them had been dismissed They were held for four days on the same charges before being released on bail. In August Magistrate Anthony Singh was instructed by the Director of Public Prosecutions to reopen the case against four of the five defendants. On 21 August the magistrate again dismissed the charges and the four men were released. On the same day one of them, Ivan Sookram, was rearrested and arrest warrants were issued for the other three. They were still at large at the end of 1981. On 26 August the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions issued a statement saying that the magistrate "had no power to again discharge the four accused persons" and that "the matter should commence de novo, that is, that a new charge should be instituted and a fresh preliminary enquiry held". The trial of Ivan Sookram was adjourned several times and had not taken place by the end of 1981.
Haiti
Amnesty International concerns focused on the continuing detention of prisoners of conscience, detention without trial, irregular trial procedures in political cases, and allegations of ill-treatment of political detainees. Amnesty International worked for the release of 26 adopted prisoners of conscience and was investigating the cases of some 50 others.
Many of these prisoners were arrested during 1980 but some had been detained without trial since 1978. The 1980 arrests included virtually all independent journalists, broadcasters, human rights activists, and members of the Parti démocrate chrétien haïtien (PDCH), Haitian Christian Democrat Party, including its founder Sylvio Claude. Amnesty International believed that the reason for the arrests was their increasing criticism of government policies.
Twenty-six prisoners arrested in 1980, including several members of the PDCH, were brought to trial on 25 August 1981 in Port-au-Prince. Although the trial was in. public and by jury, Amnesty International was concerned about major irregularities in the proceedings. The 26 defendants were given no access either to independent lawyers of their choice or to the 26 defence lawyers appointed by the state only four days before the trial began. According to reports only five of the state-appointed lawyers, two of whom were not fully qualified, presented themselves in court on the day of the trial. Several independent lawyers attended the trial on their own initiative and were able to participate, but they had had no access to the defendants or time to prepare the case. No witnesses were called on behalf of the accused and virtually no evidence was presented by the prosecution to substantiate the charges. It was alleged that not all the members of the jury could understand French, in which the proceedings were mainly conducted (most Haitians speak only créole) and that some had connections with court officials or with the Volontaires de la sécurité nationale (VSN), the militia commonly known as tontons macoutes. The trial began at 10.00 am and the verdict was pronounced at 5.00 am the next morning. All 26 prisoners were found guilty of arson and plotting against the internal security of the state. Twenty-two were sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment with hard labour. The other four were sentenced to one year's imprisonment and were reportedly released in September 1981.
On learning of these sentences. Amnesty International cabled President-for-Life Jean-Claude Duvalier on 28 August It urged the
147
immediate and unconditional release of Sylvio and Marie-France Claude and the other prisoners of conscience in the group. Amnesty International also called for other political prisoners to be brought to trial or released. Those sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment with hard labour immediately appealed to the Gourde cassation. Appeals Court Reports indicated that after the trial the government continued to deny the defendants access to their lawyers.
Amnesty International received reports that a number of political prisoners were detained in Port-au-Prince in November 1981. Among those arrested were Rock Charles Derose, a 41-year-old mechanic, and Robert Lops. Rock Charles Derose was reportedly tortured in the Casernes Dessalines, a military barracks in Port-au-Prince. The government refused to acknowledge their detention. Amnesty International appealed on their behalf.
Persistent allegations of poor prison conditions, torture and ill-treatment of prisoners, and inadequate medical facilities continued to reach Amnesty International. In July 1981 several political prisoners held in the Pénitencier national. National Penitentiary, went on hunger-strike to demand better conditions and to be told the charges against them. They included Roosevelt Blaise Moïse, a painter. A Haitian, he had been living in exile in the Dominican Republic and was arrested in Haiti in January 1981. He was sent back to the Dominican Republic, where he was held in secret detention for more than 70 days, then deported back to Haiti and imprisoned without charge. Three other prisoners — Berthony Pierre Paul, Berthaud Robillard and Gabriel Hérard — of the Comité des prisonniers. Prisoners' Committee, who supported the demands of the hunger-strikers, were reported to have been tortured On 31 July Amnesty International appealed to the government for independent doctors to be allowed to visit the prisoners to treat them, and for all political prisoners held without trial to be brought to trial or released.
Amnesty International received reports that Sylvio Claude was badly beaten by prison guards at the Pénitencier national on 28 September after asking for treatment for severe conjunctivitis. Reports indicated that doctors were denied access to him on several occasions. On 6 October Amnesty International urged the government to treat all political prisoners in accordance with the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners.
Amnesty International was investigating reports that people trying to leave Haiti — many for fear of political persecution — were imprisoned
Amnesty International submitted information documenting its concerns in Haiti to the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United Nations, the Inter-American
148
Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States, and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
