Singapore
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the release or trial of political prisoners held in preventive detention under the Internal Security Act(ISA), 1963, andforthe commutation of all death sentences. Several long-term prisoners of conscience were released in 1981.
Under Section 8(l)(a) of the ISA a person may be detained if the President believes it necessary " with a view to preventing that person from acting in any manner prejudicial to the security of Singapore or any part thereof or to the maintenance of public order or essential services therein". These preventive detention orders cannot be challenged in the courts; they are valid for up to two years and may be renewed indefinitely. Upon release prisoners were usually served
239
with a restriction order under Section 10 of the ISA, limiting their freedom of movement, association and participation in political, trade union or cultural activities. Those who broke these restrictions were liable to rearrest
On 1 June 1981 the Ministry of Home Affairs announced the release under restriction orders of Lee Tze Tong, Ho Toon Chin, also known as Ho Piao, and Chua Sea Kea. Lee Tze Tong, aged 49, was a former member of parliament for the opposition Barisan Sosialis, Socialist Front, and a trade union leader. Ho Piao, aged 43, was a former Secretary of the National Seamen's Union. Both had been detained without charge or trial since 1963. In February 1980 Lee Tze Tong was released from prison and exiled under a restriction order to a small island off the main island of Singapore. Chua Sea Kea, aged 32, a Chinese high school student leader at the time of his arrest, had been held since 1970. The three prisoners had been adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience. The government stated that the releases followed the assessment by the Internal Security Department that the three prisoners were " no longer a security threat". On 4 June 1981 Amnesty International sent a cable to Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew welcoming the releases, and asking for them to be made unconditional. It urged the government to review the cases of all prisoners held under the ISA, Section 8( 1 )(a) and Section 10. It also called for the unconditional release of all those detained for the non-violent exercise of their right of freedom of expression and association.
The government maintained that those detained under Section 8(l)(a) of the ISA were held because of their support for the Communist Party of Malaya (CPM). In most past cases detainees were released only after they publicly renounced their alleged communist convictions or condemned the CPM. This condition was imposed on several political prisoners arrested in April 1981 for allegedly belonging to pro-communist organizations. They were released in June and July 1981. However Lee Tze Tong, Ho Piao and Chua Sea Kea were released without making such statements.
Amnesty International sought to confirm reports that other political prisoners held under Section 8 of the ISA for several years had been released. It learned that Tan Kim Oh, a student at Nanyang University detained since 1966, was released in Decemberl980(see Amnesty International Report 1981).
Several former political prisoners were reportedly rearrested for breaking the restrictions on association and political activities imposed on them upon their release. Amnesty International was not able to confirm details of these cases. One person was detained for a further nine months and then released
240
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the unconditional release of Dr Lim Hock Siew, former Secretary General of the Barisan Sosialis, arrested in February 1963, He was under a restriction order on the island of Pulau Tekong Besar. Other prisoners of conscience still detained included: Chia Thye Poh, a former member of parliament for the Barisan Sosialis, editor of the party's newspaper and assistant lecturer at Nanyang University, detained since 1966; Chng Min Oh, former Chairman of the Singapore Gold and Silversmiths Union and a member of Party Rakyat, a small opposition party, detained since 1970; and Dr Poh Soo Kai, first arrested in 1963 when he was assistant Secretary General of the Barisan Sosialis, released in 1973, and rearrested in 1976. Dr Poh Soo Kai's health was of particular concern to Amnesty International. After receiving reports that his health had been deteriorating for two years and that he was in a critical condition, Amnesty International wrote on 20 May 1981 to Minister of Health Goh Chok Tong. It asked for information about his condition and for him to be given adequate medical care. Amnesty International later learned that Dr Poh Soo Kai had an operation for a sinus infection in early April 1981 and a second operation shortly after. On 20 June 1981 Amnesty International cabled the Minister of Health expressing concern that Dr Poh Soo Kai had been sent back to prison while reportedly still in need of treatment. Further details were not available.
Other prisoners arrested under the ISA in the years 1975 to 1977 were believed to be still in detentioa Among them were Chieu Tuan Sin, Ho Koon Kiang and Chow Tien Pao. Amnesty International had little information about them but was concerned about their prolonged detention without charge or trial.
Amnesty International learned of three executions in 1981. They were mandatory death sentences for drug trafficking offences. Ong Ah Chuan was hanged in February 1981. In a cable to President Sheares on 6 March 1981 Amnesty International expressed concern at the execution. It also urged him to commute the death sentence on Koh Chai Cheng, who had exhausted all court appeals. It did not learn whether this sentence was commuted On 27 October 1981 Amnesty International wrote to the new President, C. V. Devan Nair, deploring the executions of Tan Ah Tee and Low Hong Eng earlier that month. Amnesty International drew the President's attention to recent international and national moves to abolish the death penalty and urged him to commute all future death sentences. At least eight prisoners were under sentence of death.
241
