Malawi
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about the use of detention without trial, and the lack of effective safeguards against ill-treatment of political detainees. Information from diverse sources suggested that political detainees received harsh treatment, often being isolated completely and denied contact with relatives.
Amnesty International was unable to verify these reports or estimate the number of political detainees. Information on individual prisoners or developments affecting human rights was difficult to obtain. In May 1981 the Deputy Speaker of Parliament was reported to have said that hundreds of people had been arrested for possession of "subversive letters" distributed by "infiltrators masquerading as religious leaders". He warned that people who received such letters should hand them to the authorities or face "rotting in detention".
The government did not publish the names of political detainees or provide other informatioa Nor was it known to have permitted any international humanitarian organization or agency to visit Malawi's prisons. There was no response to a request by Amnesty International to send a trial observer to Malawi in early 1981. The trial was of two defendants, Gwanda Chakuamba, a former cabinet minister, and Sofiliano Faindi Phiri, formerly one of 15 nominated members of parliament They were jointly convicted of sedition by the Southern Region Traditional Court at Blantyre in March 1981. In addition, Gwanda Chakuamba was convicted on several other charges under the Public Security Regulations. He was sentenced to 22 years' imprisonment with hard labour. Sofiliano Faindi Phiri was jailed for five years with hard labour. He was subsequently adopted as a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty International. Amnesty International believed the defendants had not received a fair trial (see Amnesty International Report 1981).
In July 1981 President Banda announced the release of a number of prisoners, including several who had been held in prolonged detention without trial, to mark the 17th anniversary of independence. Those freed were believed to have included Fern Sadyalunda, a former member of parliament
In November 1981, when President Banda paid an official visit to the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG), the FRG Section of Amnesty International appealed to him to release all prisoners of conscience and to review all cases of prolonged detention without
57
trial. Amnesty International also called on the government to initiate a full inquiry into prison conditions and to allow inspection of Malawi's prisons by an international humanitarian organization.
On 24 December 1981 Malawi security forces arrested Orton Chirwa, a former government minister and leader of the Malawi Freedom Movement (MAFREMO), one of three extern ally-based political organizations opposed to President Banda's government His wife, Vera, and 26-year-old son, Fumbani Chirwa, were also detained. The government claimed that all three were arrested in Mchinji district in Central Region while attempting to return to the country illegally from Zambia. Other sources challenged this version of events. They alleged that they had been forcibly abducted by Malawi security agents from Chipata in eastern Zambia, an area to which the Malawi Government has laid territorial claim. The Chirwas had apparently gone there to visit a relative. A former Minister of Justice and Attorney General, Orton Chirwa left Malawi after the post-independence cabinet crisis of 1964. He subsequently formed MAFREMO in exile in Tanzania where he worked as a lawyer and became president of the Tanganyika Law Society.
In March 1981 it was reported that MAFREMO and two other exile political groups — the Socialist League of Malawi (LESOMA) and the Congress for the Second Republic (CSR) — were attempting to form a united front against President Banda's government In early April President Banda reportedly told a political rally at Lilongwe that Dr Attati Mpakati, the LESOMA leader, would be "shot on sight" if he returned to Malawi. Dr Mpakati had earlier been seriously injured in February 1979 by a letter-bomb allegedly sent to him by Malawi security agents.
