Pakistan
The imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and torture increased as the remaining powers to protect human rights were withdrawn from the civihan courts. Thousands of people were arrested during 1981 solely for expressing their opinions, many tried by military courts applying summary procedures, and dozens sentenced to floggings. Sentences of amputation and stoning to death were imposed but not carried out Several prisoners died in custody allegedly as a result of ill-treatment Many executions took place, including those of two political prisoners.
On 17 November 1981 Amnesty International presented a report to the government describing a consistent pattern of gross violations of human rights in Pakistan. In the report, Pakistan: Human Rights Violations and the Decline of the Rule of Law, Amnesty International observed a steady deterioration in respect for human rights over several years, but especially since the beginning of 1981. A series of constitutional and legal amendments made under the previous and present government had eroded the powers of the judiciary. This culminated in the promulgation on 24 March 1981 of the Provisional Constitution Order (PCO). The order effectively annulled the 1973 Constitution and its guarantees for fundamental rights. It also marked the end of the independence of the judiciary by requiring judges to swear an oath barring the highest courts ftom scrutinizing any action taken by the military authorities or from reviewing military court proceedings. Three Supreme Court judges, including the Chief Justice of Pakistan, resigned and 16 High Court judges did not swear the new oath. The PCO removed the long-established supervisory powers of the Supreme and High Courts to enforce and protect human rights and stay executions ordered by
223
military courts or sentences of flogging imposed on political prisoners. As a result of the order political prisoners lost the right to habeas corpus.
All major political parties were proscribed and all political and trade union activities banned. Critics of the government (and sometimes their relatives) were arrested without warrant, without being informed of the grounds for arrest, and often their families were not told where they were being held They were detained without trial or tried by military courts using summary procedures, with no right of appeal. Reports of arbitrary arrests and detentions increased sharply during the year.
In early January some 50 alleged members of the Pakistan People's Party (PPP) — mainly students and journalists — were arrested in connection with plans to observe former Prime Minister Bhutto's birthday. Irshad Rao, publisher of the pro-PPP newspaper Al-Fatahy was arrested with five other journalists on I January, On 30 September a military court sentenced him to one year's imprisonment and 10 lashes for "printing objectionable literature and creating unrest among the masses and disaffection against the armed forces of Pakistan". Amnesty International, which called for his release as a prisoner of conscience, learned that he needed medical attention following ill-treatment during detention in Karachi police station. Some 30 rank-and-file PPP members were arrested between 5 and 10 January under the Army Act allegedly on suspicion of passing "secrets" to a "foreign country". Several were reportedly held incommunicado in Attock Fort and Lahore Fort
Hundreds of prisoners of conscience were arrested after the formation on 6 February of the Movement for the Restoration of Democracy (MRD), an alliance of nine opposition parties including the PPP, the centrist Tehrik-i-Istiqlal i\\Q Jamiat Ulema Islam and the Muslim League. More than 200 members and sympathizers of the MRD were arrested in Multan and Lahore between 16 and 26 February, including students, lawyers and journalists who supported the movement's demands for general elections, the ending of martial law and the lifting of press censorship. On 26 February Amnesty International cabled President Mohammad Zia-ul-Haq urging the detainees' immediate release.
Thousands of members of all major opposition parties were arrested after the hijacking on 2 March of a Pakistan International. Airiines aircraft which resulted in the release of 54 political prisoners. T]\qAI-Zulfikar organization claimed responsibility. Headed by former Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto's son, Murtaza, it was reported to be based in Afghanistan. The government maintained that Al-Zuijlkar was the armed wing of the PPP although to Amnesty
224
Internationars knowledge no evidence of any link between the PPP and Al-Zulfikar was produced. In March alone 6,000 political prisoners were reported to have been arrested. Amnesty International believed that the majority were prisoners of conscience. On 7 and 8 March leading members of the PPP were arrested in Karachi, Peshawar, Lahore and Rawalpindi. Begum Bhutto and Benazir Bhutto, the wife and daughter of the former Prime Minister, were arrested on 8 March; Begum Bhutto was released on 22 July but at the end of 1981 Benazir Bhutto was still detained
Although many of those arrested were released after short periods, more political prisoners were arrested throughout the year. However, when asked about the thousands of political arrests in early 1981, the government denied that it was holding any political prisoners at all and was reported as saying that "there are no political prisoners in its jails".
More than 100 students were arrested during widespread demonstrations at the time of the execution of Abdul Hameed Baluch, a leader of the Baluch Students Organization, on 11 June. In November Amnesty International appealed on behalf of four students — Manzoor Qadir Baluch, Dawood Hasan Baluch, Abdul Wahid Baluch and Abdul Hafeez Baluch — arrested on 11 June during a demonstration against Abdul Hameed Baluch's execution. On 13 July they were sentenced by a military court to nine months' imprisonment, 10 lashes and a fine for "damaging government property and spreading disaffection against the armed forces". Amnesty International urged the government to retry the students before an ordinary civilian court with full legal safeguards and expressed concern about the fioggings.
At least 17 trade unionists were arrested on 16 August, after the government promulgated Martial Law Regulation No. 52 dissolving all trade unions for employees of Pakistan International Airlines. Trade union sources put the figure at 150.
In August 1981a civil disobedience movement against local taxes organized by the main political parties in Azad Kashmir (the part of Kashmir which is administered by Pakistan) was soon accompanied by demands for general elections. Political workers, students and traders were arrested. Most were reportedly released later. However, at the ?nd of 1981, Chaudhry Noor Hussain, President of the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Muslim Conference, and Abdul Khaliq Ansari, President of the Jammu and Kashmir Plebiscite Front, were still detained without trial under the Azad Kashmir Defence Rules Act Both had been released for brief periods in October and November and rearrested Amnesty International adopted them as prisoners of conscience.
225
On 25 September Chaudhry Zahur Elahi, a leading government supporter, was shot dead in Lahore, and the former Chief Justice of the Lahore High Court, which had sentenced former Prime Minister Bhutto to death, was injured Reports in the Pakistan press suggested ^?XAI-Zulfikar might have been responsible. On 20 November Lala Asad, a student claimed by the police to be a cell leader of Al-Zuljlkar, was killed when the police raided his Karachi flat A wave of arrests followed. On 29 November the Punjab Inspector General of Police was quoted as saying that about 100 people in his province had been arrested since September for links Al-Zulfikar. Amnesty International was investigating reports that among the hundreds of alleged	members and supporters arrested in November
and December were a number of people detained simply for holding views critical of the government
In November Amnesty International appealed on behalf of three such prisoners whom it had adopted as prisoners of conscience: Jamil Omar, Tariq Ahsan and Mohammad Saleem. Lecturers at the Quaid-e-Azam University in Islamabad, they were arrested on 3 and 4 November reportedly for "distributing literature supporting destructive activities in the country" {Jang, Karachi, 6 November 1981). Jamil Omar was charged with sedition under Article 124A of the Pakistan Penal Code. All three were charged with "illegal activities" under Martial Law Regulations Nos. 13 and 33 which ban all political activity and criticism of the armed forces. Before being transferred to Rawalpindi Jail where, at the end of 1981, they were awaiting trial, the three men were held at Lahore Fort There Jamil Omar was reportedly held incommunicado and tortured
Among the other prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International was Nawabzada Nasrullah Khan, leader of the Pakistan Democratic Party. He was arrested twice in 1981: in March for his role as a spokesperson of the MRD, and on 1 November when he was placed under house arrest for three months for speaking against the formation of a federal advisory council announced by the President in October.
At the end of December 1981 Amnesty International was working for 41 adopted prisoners of conscience and investigating the cases of 19 possible prisoners of conscience.
Many political prisoners were arrested and detained without trial either under the Maintenance of Public Order Ordinance or under Martial Law Order No. 78 of 1980. Martial Law Order No. 78 removed earlier safeguards, for example the requirement to inform detainees of the grounds for their detention. Although the maximum period of detention allowed by law was 12 months (Martial Law Order No. 27) Amnesty International knew of prisoners held for far
226
longer. For example, as of December 1981, Air Marshal (Retired) Asghar Khan, adopted as a prisoner of conscience, had spent 25 months in detention without trial under martial law; except for the weeks between 18 April and 29 May 1980 his detention was continuous. Relatives were often not told why a person had been arrested or where he or she was held Many political prisoners arrested in 1981, especially those taken to Lahore Fort and Attock Fort, were held incommunicado for many weeks. Some 30 PPP members arrested between 5 and 10 January 1981, apparently under the Army Act, were reportedly held incommunicado for many weeks. Some were allegedly tortured to extract "confessions". Dr Aslam Khan Nam, a member of the PPP Central Committee, was arrested on 7 April 1981, held incommunicado in Lahore Fort and only allowed visits by his relatives on 30 June. Amnesty International urged the authorities to improve the conditions of his detention. At the end of 1981 he had still not been charged or tried and as far as Amnesty International was aware the authorities had not disclosed the law under which he was being held
In August Amnesty International urged the government to disclose the whereabouts of and charges against Sher Ali Bacha and Imtiaz Alam, former leaders of the left-wing Mazdoor Kiss an party, Peasants and Workers Party, who were arrested on 3 July 1981 in Mardan, North West Frontier Province. Amnesty International later received reports — which remained unconfirmed — that the two men had been charged with "illegal activities" and were detained in Haripur Jail.
Throughout 1981 Amnesty International received a growing number of reports that political prisoners, especially those held incommunicado, had been tortured These allegations were described in detail in the report presented to the government in November. The evidence included signed statements by released prisoners and their relatives, legal affidavits from lawyers of political prisoners and accounts published in the Pakistan press. It was alleged that people had been suspended upside-down, beaten on the soles of the feet and on the head, given electric shocks, burned with cigarettes and deprived of sleep and food for several days. In the report Amnesty International concluded that torture was used systematically in Pakistan. The torture allegations charged both the army and police, and those received in 1980 and 1981 identified the army in particular. Medical examinations of several released political prisoners, conducted by Amnesty International, corroborated their testimony that they had been tortured in the years 1979 to 1981. Most of those allegedly tortured were students, political party workers, trade unionists and lawyers belonging to political parties. In 1981, for the first time,
Ill
Amnesty International received press reports that four women political prisoners had been tortured: Nasira Rana and Begum Arif Bhatti, the wives of PPP officials; Farkhanda Bukhari, a PPP member; and Mst. Safooran, mother of six. On 13 April Amnesty International cabled the Minister of the Interior, Mahmood A. Haroon, expressing concern at reports that two PPP members, Qamar Abbas and Yahya Bakhtiar (who was later released), had been tortured in custody in Peshawar Jail and assaulted in Quetta Jail respectively. The government replied on 5 August that Qamar Abbas "was not subjected to any torture". Anmesty International remained concerned about his health as reports from several sources stated that he had been tortured under interrogation when in incommunicado detention in Warsak Camp near Peshawar. At the end of 1981 he was still detained with no regular contact with the outside world and Anmesty International had not received the medical reports it requested from the government in August.
The Amnesty International report described the cases of 10 prisoners, including three political prisoners, who died in custody allegedly as a result of torture between January 1980 and August 1981. Several fresh reports of deaths in police custody of people arrested for criminal offences appeared in the Pakistani press during the year. On 21 December Amnesty International wrote to the governor of Punjab Province, expressing concern at a report in the daily Mashriq that Mohammad Arif, alias Abbu Shah, had died as a result of ill-treatment in police custody at the police station. North Lahore cantonment.
Amnesty International was concerned at the lack of legal safeguards for political prisoners tried by military courts using summary procedures with no right of appeal. Such military courts do not allow legal representation. Many prisoners of conscience were tried under Martial Law Regulations 4, 5, 13,18 and 33 which prohibit virtually every form of political and trade union activity. Amnesty International was concerned at reports that several political prisoners were tried in camera. On 5 March the organization cabled the Minister of the Interior and the Home Secretary for Sind province expressing concern about reports that seven alleged members of the Communist Party of Pakistan — Jam Saqi, Badar Abroo, Shabir Shah, Jamal Naqvi, Kamal Warsi, Sohail Sanghi and Amar Lai — were being tried by a special military court in Karachi Jail. The newspaperi)^^« (1 April 1981) stated that they were "involved in clandestine printing, publishing and distribution of subversive and anti-state materials". Amnesty International received reports that all had been tortured. In May Amnesty International appealed for them to be tried in open court with full legal safeguards and expressed concern at
228
allegations of torture. In mid-1981 it was reported that the trial had been moved from Karachi Jail to a military court in the city where relatives apparently had limited access to the trial proceedings. It was still in progress at the end of the year.
Amnesty International was concerned that political prisoners continued to be sentenced to be flogged by military courts. In the first six months of 1981 at least 30 sentences of flogging were imposed for martial law offences. The Amnesty International report lists details of 192 political prisoners sentenced to imprisonment and flogging since 1977. Two sentences of amputation were passed during the year and Amnesty International appealed for them to be commuted. Amnesty International learned of 22 prisoners sentenced to amputation since the present government took power in 1977 but was not aware of it having been carried out
On 23 March the Federal Shari'a (Islamic law) Court declared death by stoning, introduced as a punishment for adultery in February 1979, "repugnant to the injunction of Islam". However, on 1 September Allah Bux, a bus driver, was sentenced to be stoned to ''death for committing adultery with a young student This was the first time such a sentence had been imposed. The couple were also sentenced to 100 lashes each. At the end of 1981 the Shari'a Court had not confirmed the sentence passed by the lower court
Amnesty International remained concerned about the large number of death sentences and executions in 1981. An increasing number were imposed by military courts applying summary procedures without the right of appeal Amnesty International did not know of a single instance of the President granting clemency. The government did not issue statistics on executions, but official statements indicated hundreds of executions each year in the past few years. The Home Secretary of the Punjab stated that "there were 1,250 condemned prisoners in death cells" in that province {Dawn, 23 August 1981).
Two prisoners were known to have been executed for politically motivated offences during 1981. When the PCO was promulgated the High Court judges who had stayed their execution were replaced and the executions carried out Nazir Ahmed had been sentenced to death for attempting to hijack a plane in 1978. The Sind High Court stayed his execution when he challenged his conviction by a military court His appeal was dismissed on 27 May by the newly constituted Supreme Court of Pakistan and he was hahged in Khairpur District Jail on 9 June. Abdul Hameed Baluch, a 21-year-old student leader, was sentenced to death by a special military court after having been convicted of murder. During the trial the charge sheet was altered twice when the alleged victim proved to be alive. The Baluchistan High Court stayed his execution in December 1980 and ordered him
229
to be tried by a civilian court However, when the Baluchistan High Court was reconstituted after the promulgation of the PCO it dismissed the stay order but allowed an appeal to the Supreme Court Before the Supreme Court could hear the appeal Abdul Hameed Baluch was hanged in Much Jail in Quetta on 11 June. During the year Amnesty International appealed on behalf of 39 condemned prisoners; 21 were civilians sentenced to death by military courts without the right to appeal. It learned of 32 executions.
The Amnesty International report included detailed recommendations to the Pakistan Government among them the release of all prisoners of conscience; the restoration of basic rights guaranteed in the 1973 Constitution and the restoration of the independence of the judiciary and of its powers to protect the rights of political prisoners; the repeal of legislation providing for preventive detention and of martial law regulations prohibiting the non-violent exercise of human rights. It recommended that details of arrests and releases of political prisoners be published, that the practice of incommunicado detention be ended and that all detainees be granted immediate and regular access to their lawyers. It urged the government td abolish the practice of trying political prisoners before military courts and to restore full legal safeguards, including the right of appeal to an independent court and the right of defence by a lawyer. It urged the abolition of torture and recommended preventive measures including the establishment of independent machinery to investigate allegations of torture, impartial investigations of the deaths in custody described in the report, and full publication of the outcome; it urged the abolition of the death penalty and the punishments of flogging and amputatioa It also recommended that the government accede to the international human rights covenants.
