Central African Republic
Amnesty International was concerned about the incommunicado detention without trial of members of opposition political parties accused of politically motivated crimes, and the use of the death penalty.
1981 saw a series of political changes in the country. In February a new constitution was adopted which allowed for a multi-party political system. In March a presidential election was held President David Dacko, who assumed power after the overthrow of Emperor Bokassa in September 1979, was confirmed in office. However, opposition candidates contested the result and four people were reportedly killed during violent demonstrations in Bangui A state of siege was declared, but was lifted after 10 days at the end of March 1981.
In May 1981 President Dacko announced that the parliamentary elections scheduled to take place in June were being postponed for a
24
year. Two months later, on 14 July, a bomb exploded at a crowded cinema in Bangui. Three people were killed and some 32 injured. The Mouvement centrafricain de libération nationale (MCLN), Central African National Liberation Movement, publicly claimed responsibility for the explosion. It stated that it was a protest against the delays in introducing parliamentary democracy and the continuing presence of French troops in the country.
Shortly after the bomb explosion a state of siege was declared. President Dacko announced that a special court (tribunal d'exception) was being set up to try those involved. He banned the MCLN and another political party, the Front patriotique oubanguien-Parti du travail (FPO-PT), Oubangui Patriotic Front-Labour Party. (The MCLN leader had been a member of the FPO-PT until 1980.) He also suspended the activities of the largest opposition party, the Mouvement de libération du peuple centrafricain (MLPC), Central African People's Liberation Movement. Eight members of the MCLN and 13 members of the FPO-PT were arrested and accused of complicity in the bomb attack. At the end of July the state of siege ended, and both the ban on the FPO-PT and suspension of the MLPC were lifted. The special court remained in existence, however, and began its inquiries into the cases of the 21 people who had been arrested. On 7 August some of those detained went on hunger-strike. They were protesting against their conditions of detention and demanding to be informed about the progress of the pre-trial inquiries. Less than a week later, on 13 August, six of the prisoners, all members of the FPO-PT, were released uncharged.
On 1 September 1981 President Dacko was overthrown in a bloodless miUtary coup. He was replaced by General André Kolingba, Commander-in-chief of the armed forces, who established a military government the Comité militaire de redressement national, Military Committee for National Recovery. He suspended the activities of all political parties, but no new arrests took place. However, the 15 FPO-PT and MCLN detainees remained in custody. Their cases continued to be investigated by the Premier avocat général de la République, Deputy Procurator General, under military supervision.
The eight detained members of the MCLN were reportedly held incommunicado at the headquarters of the Compagnie nationale de sécurité (CNS), National Security Company, in Bangui. They had not been brought to trial by the end of 1981.
Maurice Gouandjia, a member of the FPO-PT, was also detained at the CNS headquarters. The other members of the FPO-PT in detention were held at Kassai military camp. They too had not been brought to trial by the end of 1981. The FPO-PT denied that its members were involved in the bomb attack. Amnesty International
25
took up the cases of Marc Nditifei Boysembe and the six other detained FPO-PT members for investigation. Those at Kassai military camp were reportedly held incommunicado in harsh conditions. They were not allowed visits from lawyers and were reportedly denied adequate medical attention although some were said to be suffering from skin and stomach ailments.
Six former officials convicted of having committed murder under the rule of Emperor Bokassa were executed by firing-squad in January 1981. Their appeals and requests for clemency had been refused. Amnesty International had appealed for the sentences to be commuted. In July 1981 a former senior member of the security forces, Jean-Pierre Inga, was convicted of murdering two children during demonstrations in January 1979 and was condemned to death. He had already been sentenced to death in February 1980, but his first conviction was annulled by the Supreme Court in August 1980. He was not known to have been executed by the end of 1981.
In May 1981 the government ratified the International Covenant on Economic, Social and" Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, together with the Optional Protocol to the latter which allows individuals to present complaints to the Human Rights Committee. The two covenants and the Optional Protocol came into force in the country in August 1981.
Chad
Fighting continued throughout 1981 between the forces of the coalition government led by President Goukouni Oued-dei and the Forces armées du nord (FAN), Armed Forces of the North, led by the former Defence Minister, His-sene Habre. There was also conflict between different factions supporting the coalition government. Amnesty International was unable to obtain accurate information about prisoners said to have been captured by the different parties to the conflict. It was consequently unable to verify several reports of summary executions carried out in the east of the country, where the fighting with the FAN was heaviest.
In the capital, N'Djamena, life gradually began returning to normal after the fighting which had disrupted the town in 1980.
26
However the administration of justice remained summary and sporadic. In May 1981a Special Criminal Court was established to try the cases of Hissene Habre and five of his close colleagues in their absence. After summary hearings all six defendants were convicted on charges of armed rebellion, treason, murder and contacts with foreign governments. Hissene Habre was sentenced to death and the five others to long prison terms.
In July 1981 the government announced an amnesty for all Chadian refugees. No returning refugees, it said, would face criminal charges for their part in the fighting against the government. Only the six people convicted in May 1981 were excluded from the amnesty. The Special Criminal Court was subsequently abolished.
A number of Chadian and foreign journalists were known to have been detained without charge or trial. For example, Salem Galeh, a journalist who had returned to N'Djamena not long before, was arrested by military police on 19 September 1981, apparently because of a dispatch he was trying to send out of the country. Detentions were also reported in the south of the country in September 1981, following mutinies by soldiers at Doba, Koumra, Moundou and Sahr.
A court martial was set up in August 1981 to try government soldiers accused of kidnapping and murder. Two soldiers were tried in N'Djamena by this court on 28 August 1981 and were sentenced to death. They had no right of appeal and were both publicly executed by firing-squad on 1 September 1981.
