Bahrain
Amnesty International's concerns were the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, detention without trial and reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners.
At the end of 1981 Amnesty International was working for the release of three adopted prisoners of conscience. They were Abbas Hillal, a lawyer and clerk at the dissolved National Assembly; Abdullah Muhammad Rashid, an airline employee; and Hassan Bu Allai. All three had been detained without trial since November 1976 when many people were arrested after the murder of a magazine editor. Although three men were convicted and hanged for the murder many others remained in detention under a state security law which provides for detention without trial for up to three years.
During 1981 Amnesty International learned of the release of five adopted prisoners of conscience, four of whom had been held without trial for over five years.
Amnesty International was also following the cases of three trade unionists sentenced in April 1981 to prison terms of three to seven years. Opposition sources claimed that they were arrested because of their trade union activities. The government stated that they had been charged under a provision of the Bahraini Criminal Code which defines as a crime the establishment of an organization which" aims at overthrowing or changing the political, social or economic system of the country... whenever violence, threats or other illegal methods are used". Amnesty International was seeking further information to determine whether the three were prisoners of conscience.
Reports of arrests of political activists, particularly from among the Shi'a community, continued to reach Amnesty International (see Amnesty International Report 1981). On 13 December 1981 the government announced that it had foiled an attempt to stage an "Iranian-supported Islamic fundamentalist revolution" which was to have taken place on 16 December, Bahrain's National Day. The government later reported that it had arrested 60 people alleged to be members of the Islamic Front for the Liberation of Bahrain. They included 12 Saudi Arabians, an Omani, a Kuwaiti and 45 Bahrainis. Opposition sources claimed that over 1,000 people had been arrested and that suspects held for investigation were being tortured. These allegations of torture were of particular concern to Amnesty International in view of the frequent reports of ill-treatment of political detainees in Bahrain. Six deaths in custody had been reported over the previous five years.
319
