Iraq
327
Amnesty International's work concerned the arrests of real and suspected opponents of the government, summary trials of political'prisoners, torture, "disappearances" and executions.
Dissident groupings from the Shi'i and Kurdish communities in Iraq became more active inside and outside Iraq during 1981. Several alliances between banned parties were forged soon after the outbreak of the Iran-Iraq war. These included the Iraqi Communist Party (ICP), the Kurdish Democratic Party (KDP), the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK), AlDa'waAlIslamiya (the Islamic Call), and the Syrian wing of the Arab Ba'ath Socialist Party. Increasing political activity ranged from anti-government demonstrations, speeches and the distribution of leaflets to attacks on government officials and property. The government responded by systematically arresting many suspected opponents, deporting tens of thousands of Iraqi Shi'is whose loyalties were suspect across the border into Iran, and passing numerous death sentences.
Amnesty International continued to ask the Iraqi Government for information about a number of prisoners whose cases were being investigated by the organization. These included two members of the ICP — Dr Safa al-Hafidh and Dr Sabbah al-Durrah — who "disappeared" after their arrest on 8 February 1980.
The fate and whereabouts of three scientists — Dr Hussain al-Shahristani, Dr Hassan al-Rajai and Dr Ja'afar Dhia Ja'afar— who were arrested at the end of 1979, also remained unknown. On 2 April 1981 the London journal New Scientist stated that "Dr Shahristani has been killed while in custody." The Minister of Religious Endowments {AwqaJ), Nuri Faisal Al Shahir, was reported in the Toronto Globe and Mail of 31 August to have said of Dr Shahristani: "that nobody with such a name had ever worked for the Atomic Energy Commission or as an adviser to President Saddam Hussain, that Dr Shahristani was not an Iraqi name but an Iranian name...". Amnesty International received no reply from the Iraqi Government to its repeated inquiries about the fate of Dr Shahristani.
Amnesty International was also investigating the cases of 31 former government officials of the ruling Ba'ath Party. Arrested in July 197 9 they were convicted of being party to, or withholding information about, a conspiracy against the government They were sentenced to up to 15 years' imprisonment after a trial before a
328
Special Court in August 1979, in which procedures fell short of internationally recognized standards for a fair trial. As far as was known there was no defence counsel present nor was any appeal against the verdict allowed
Amnesty International learned of the arrest of several members and supporters of the ICP, after a house-to-house search by security forces in the Sulaimaniya area in February 1981. The whereabouts of those arrested and the charges against them were still unknown at the end of 1981.
Amnesty International viewed with concern reports that four Iraqi Kurdish school children aged 12 and 13 from the village of Kalar, Sulaimaniya Province, had been arrested in February 1981. They were members of the Students Union of Kurdistan. Their families had no word of their fate or whereabouts after their arrest; opposition sources stated that they had been executed On 9 November 1981 Amnesty International wrote to President Saddam Hussain urging him to investigate the fate of the four children.
On 29 April Amnesty International published Iraq: Evidence of Torture, a report documenting continuing and widespread torture in Iraq. It contained medical findings and other evidence of the torture of political prisoners. A panel of Amnesty International doctors interviewed and examined 15 Iraqi exiles who alleged that they had been tortured in the custody of Iraqi security forces between September 1976 and August 1979. In every case it found that the resuhs of the physical examination were consistent with the tortures described In the report Amnesty International recommended an end to incommunicado detention; allowing lawyers, family and doctors prompt access to prisoners; and bringing people to court without delay after arrest It called on the Iraqi Government to honour its commitments under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which Iraq ratified in 1971 and which prohibits torture.
On 27 April 1981 the government responded to the report and described it as "without foundation". The 1,500-word government response emphasized that torture was banned by the nation's constitution and laws. However it did not reply in detail to the specific allegations of torture in the report and did not allay Amnesty International's concern.
After the report was published Amnesty International continued to receive renewed allegations of torture. Twelve-year-old Ali Hama Salih, an Iraqi Kurd school-boy from the village of Ja'aferan in Sulaimaniya Province, died in custody reportedly as a result of torture. He was arrested on 25 February and detained for interrogation in the headquarters of the security forces in Karadagh. On 5 March his body was returned to his family reportedly severely marked by
329
torture. On 9 November Amnesty International wrote to President Saddam Hussain urging him to investigate the death of Ali Hama Salih but received no reply.
Amnesty International was deeply concerned about the growing number of executions in Iraq. Reports indicated that more than 350 executions took place in 1981. Offences for which people were executed included alleged plots against the government, political activity in the armed forces, membership of or association with illegal political parties, and other illegal political activities. In addition, a new capital offence was established by Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) Resolution No. 1140 which stipulated that "Whoever returns to commit a crime of desertion from the Military Service during the War, after handing over himself to the competent authorities or after being captured, shall be punished with the Capital Punishment"
In June 1981 Amnesty International appealed to President Saddam Hussain to commute the death sentences passed by the Special Military Court in Kirkuk on 27 Iraqi Kurds, all alleged members and supporters of the banned Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK). On 20 June 1981 Amnesty International appealed to the PUK to release five nationals of the Federal Republic of Germany taken hostage by the PUK in retaliation against the 27 death sentences. Amnesty International learned later that 14 of the 27 Kurds had been executed, but that all five hostages had been released by the PUK on 23 July and 19 August A further 140 members and supporters of the PUK in detention were reportedly executed in Abu Ghraib prison at the end of September.
On 16 March 1981 the Syrian daily newspaper^iZ-Sa'aiA reported that 176 members of the Iraqi armed forces had been executed by the Iraqi authorities. Amnesty International was unable to verify this report In the first week of October 1981 the international press and opposition sources reported that 38 pro-Syrian Iraqi Ba'athists were executed on 26 September after the arrest of Idam A1 Hadithi, a senior Ba'ath Party official from Kirkuk. The arrest was said to have led to the uncovering of a conspiracy against the Iraqi Government The executions were denied by an Iraqi spokesperson in London.
Amnesty International submitted information on Iraq to the United Nations under the procedure to investigate reports of "a consistent pattern of gross and reliably attested violations of human rights".
330
