Paraguay
Amnesty International's concerns were arbitrary arrest, detention without trial, torture and "disappearances". Amnesty International knew of some 25 political prisoners at the end of 1981. Most were either detained without charge under state of siege legislation or had been charged with offences under the anti-subversion Law 209, Defence of Public Peace and Liberty of Persons, passed in 1970. A number of political prisoners were detained on ordinary criminal charges. In the capital city, Asunción, a state of siege had been in force since General Alfredo Stroessner took power in 1954. It had also been applied in other parts of the country. Under Article 79 of the constitution the state of siege suspends constitutional guarantees.
In September 1981 Alfonso Silva Quintana and his wife Maria Saturnina Almada de Silva, prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International, were given prison sentences of four years and 10 months and three years respectively, under Law 209. They had been imprisoned from 1968 to 1978 without trial and rearrested in May 1979. The charges against them dated from before 1968 and their period in detention was not taken into account
In August 1981 Amnesty International appealed on behalf of Remigio Giménez, who had been held without trial since his arrest by Brazilian police in December 1978 in Foz de Iguazú, Brazil, where he had lived in political exile since 1960. After being handed over to the Paraguayan authorities, he was held for 15 months at the police Investigations Department in Asunción, where he claimed to have been tortured. In July 1981 he was reportedly interrogated again in the presence of Brazilian police agents and severely beaten. The following week he went on hunger-strike with another political prisoner, Francisco Ramos Britez, who had been held for more than two years without trial, following a land dispute. Francisco Ramos Britez was released on 17 August After more than 30 days on hunger-strike Remigio Giménez was brought to court for the first time on 9 September. He was charged with car theft, robbery, drug trafficking and homicide, and participation in guerrilla activities in 1959. He denied all the charges and questioned the court's impartiality. At the end of 1981 Remigio Giménez was held at the national penitentiary at Tacumbú.
In February 1981 Amnesty International learned of the arrest of five journalists working for national Paraguayan newspapers: Juan
162
Andrés Cardoso, Eduardo Rolón and Luis Alberto Guaico of La Tribuna, and Rolando Chaparro and Hernando Sevilla, an Argentine, of Hoy. Another journalist, Félix Ruiz Sánchez of Ultima Hora, was declared a fugitive from justice; his cousin, Eduardo Himbert, was arrested and held until 1 May. By the end of May all of the journalists had been released except Hernando Sevilla, who remained in incommunicado detention at the military prison Guardia de Seguridad. He was tortured after his arrest and his health was said to have deteriorated rapidly. He was not charged. He was adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience.
Many opposition politicians were harassed and briefly detained during 1981. On 24 June Amnesty International appealed on behalf of Professor Luis Alfonso Resck Haiter, university philosophy lecturer and Chairperson of the Partido Demócrata Cristiano (PDC), Christian Democrat Party. He was arrested by plain clothes police at his home after a meeting of the Acuerdo Nacional, National Accord, a coalition of opposition parties. Although not illegal in Paraguay the Christian Democrat Party did not have electoral recognitioa Professor Resck was held incommunicado at the police Investigations Department, where he refused to eat or drink. On 29 June he was deported without judicial process to Clorinda, an Argentine town near the Paraguayan border.
On 30 June 1981 Perla (Nadimy Graciela) Yore Ismael was arrested with four other members of the Yore family during a combined police and army raid. Among those arrested was Noyme Yore Ismael, a lawyer working for the Comité de Iglesias Para Ayudas de Emergencia, Church Committee for Emergency Relief, who was released on 18 August Perla Yore Ismael was detained incommunicado in the police Investigations Department and committed for trial under Articles 5 and 8 of the anti-subversion law, Law 209. A 31-year-old psychology student and student leader at the Catholic University, she was accused of possessing subversive literature following the confiscation of books and personal documents from her home. She was subsequently transferred to the Casa del Buen Pastor women's prison. The Partido Liberal Radical Autèntico, Authentic Liberal Radical Party, of which Perla Yore Ismael was a member, was legal in Paraguay but not officially recognized as an opposition party. Its President, Dr Domingo Laino, had frequently been detained and at least 14 of its members were detained for short periods during 1981. Perla Yore Ismael's defence maintained that Article 8 of Law 209 referred to the "printing, stockpiling and distribution of material deemed ' subversive' ", but did not prohibit the possession of personal copies. Numerous student groups and other bodies, including the university authorities, appealed for her release.
163
On 1 November she went on hunger-strike in protest against the appeal court's refusal to grant her lawyer's request for bail. She ended it on 17 November only after receiving assurances from the Justice Minister that she would either be promptly brought to trial or released On 28 December she was granted provisional freedom pending court proceedings. She was adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience.
Angel Eustacio Rodriguez Benitez, a bricklayer and trade unionist, was arrested on 30 May 1980 when returning from Clorinda, Argentina, to Asunción. Seven police officers forced him into a car and took him to the police Investigations Department He was held there secretly for several months and reportedly tortured before being transferred to Tacumbú National Penitentiary. In August 1981 he was brought to trial under Law 209 and accused of being a communist In October 1981 he was sentenced to three years' imprisonment Amnesty International was investigating his case.
In March 1980 a small group of peasants commandeered a bus to draw attention to land title problems (see Amnçsty International Report 1980 and 1981). Four prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International were among 14 still awaiting trial on criminal charges in connection with the incident Ramón Paiva Acosta, the brothers Andrés and Luciano Centurión Dávalos, and Eliodoro Giménez were held in Tacumbú National Penitentiary.
In June 1981 a member of the Paraguayan chamber of deputies. Ligia Prieto de Centurion, asked the Argentine authorities for information on the whereabouts of 43 Paraguayan citizens who had "disappeared" in Argentina since 1976. The fate of these people remained unknown. Reports received by Amnesty International claimed that Antonio Maidana Campos, Secretary General of the banned Communist Party, and Emilio Roa Espinosa, a 65-year-old trade unionist who had been a legal resident in Argentina for 22 years, had been returned to Paraguay after being abducted in Buenos Aires in August 1980, and were being held in secret detention. The Argentine authorities furnished no information about their alleged arrest and the Paraguayan authorities denied that they were being held in Paraguay.
164
	
	J
