Argentina
Amnesty International's main concerns continued to be the unresolved question of the "disappeared" prisoners, and arbitrary detention without trial.
On 29 March 1981 Amnesty International wrote to the new President, General Roberto Viola, urging him to implement a series of measures to restore respect for human rights. These included accounting for all the prisoners registered as "disappeared"; releasing or bringing to trial all those detained without charge a la disposición del Foder fjecutivo Nacional (PEN), at the disposal of the executive power.
110
under the state of siege (known as the PEN detainees); and reviewing the convictions of prisoners sentenced by military tribunals. The organization also expressed concern that government agents were continuing to make arrests without following legal procedures. This led to fears that the illegal practices of the pohce and security forces which occasioned large numbers of" disappearances" in the past were still being used.
Although the government did not reply there were indications that the release of PEN detainees'would be accelerated. On 4 September 1981 the Minister of the Interior, General Horacio Liendo, stated that 844 detainees were held under PEN but that there were releases each week. He said that many detainees were declining the option of leaving Argentina, preferring to wait for the possibility of being released unconditionally or placed in libertad vigilada, restricted liberty. PEN detainees have a constitutional right to go into exile as an alternative to imprisonment During 1981 more than 40 prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International were released or placed in restricted liberty. However, during the year many PEN detainees applied for the right of option and had their requests rejected According to a recent study by Argentinian lawyers, over the past five years less than five per cent of such petitions have been granted. In August 1981 certain Amnesty International national sections raised with their own governments the recommendations of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe of 25 November 1980 (endorsed by the Committee of Ministers in March 1981) concerning 80 PEN detainees with visas for European countries. The Parliamentary Assembly had invited these governments "to bring pressure to bear, using all appropriate means at their disposal, on the Argentinian authorities to allow these detainees to leave the country as soon as possible".
The right of the executive to hold PEN detainees indefinitely was being challenged in the courts and there was mounting pressure on the junta from political parties, the church and the Bar Association, to revoke the state of siege which had been in force since 1974. The immediate effect would be the release of most political prisoners and the return to Argentina of many exiles.
In May 1981 the Supreme Court set a potentially important precedent by upholding the decision of a court of appeal in Bahía Blanca. The court had ruled that the prolonged detention under PEN of Benito Alberto Moya was unreasonable and instructed the executive to let him leave the country. The Supreme Court modified the order and allowed the government 15 days to choose between compliance with the right of option order and placing him in restricted liberty. Benito Alberto Moya was 19 years old when he was arrested
Ill
in 1975. He was held under PEN and only four years later brought to trial accused of belonging to a subversive organization. The case a^nst him was dismissed for lack of evidence but he was not released. His repeated applications for the right of option were rejected On 9 June 1981 Áe executive authorized his release into restricted liberty.
However, the Supreme Court did not modify its position that the implementation of the state of siege was constitutional. This was in contrast to the view of the Federación Argentina de Colegios de Abogados (FACA), Argentine Federation of Bar Associations. On 23 February it expressed concern that the government was ignoring the hmitations on the power of the executive established by Article 23 (rfthe constitution: "an arrest or transfer by virtue ofthe state of siege may not be converted by its duration or the nature of its application into a real punishment or sentence".
A collective petition of habeas corpus on behalf of 329 PEN detainees was lodged on 23 September 1980 by lawyers from the Centro de Estudios Legales y Sociales {CEL^), Centre for Legal and Social Studies, a human rights organizatioa By April 1981 the court had rejected the petition in all cases and on appeal this decision was upheld The CELS lawyers then took the cases to the Supreme Court However, during 1981 the executive authorized the unconditional release of 40 of the plaintiffs and the restricted liberty of 39 others.
In October 1981a second collective petition of habeas corpus was presented on behalf of 155 other PEN detainees. The Federal Court in Buenos Aires decided to examine each case individually, but by the end of 1981 had declared itself incompetent to proceed with a number of cases because the plaintiffs were not detained in the capital. The petition contended that the prolonged detention of the prisoners -from four to seven years - had come to constitute a punishment imposed by the executive, in clear violation of the Argentine Constitution. Some of the plaintiffs in both collective habeas corpus actions were adopted prisoners of conscience.
In August 1981 the adopted prisoner of conscience Jorge Taiana, Minister of Education in the government of Maria Estela Martinez de Perón, was removed from the military prison of La Magdalena where he had been held since 1976 and placed under house arrest Señora de Perón, who had been accused of abuse of authority, was granted parole on 6 July 1981. She left Argentina for exile a few days later.
Amnesty International remained concerned about reports that prisoners were not receiving adequate medical treatment and that the prison regime was causing psychological disturbances particularly among long-term detainees, some of whom had never been charged. During 1981 Amnesty International organized appeals on behalf of
112
34 prisoners with serious medical problems. Five of them, including Eduardo Foti, were released into restricted liberty by the end of the year (see Amnesty International Report 1981).
On 4 December Amnesty International appealed on behalf of 19 people arrested in Buenos Aires following police raids on the offices of the Communist Party. Amnesty International was disturbed by a report that a woman student was beaten by the police and then suspended by her feet from a third floor window. After a week all were released
In October 1981, as part of its worldwide campaign on "disappearances", Amnesty International drew particular attention to the cases of 67 missing children in Argentina Some had "disappeared" with their parents after raids by the security forces, others were born in captivity to women pregnant at the time of their abduction. Amnesty International appealed to the authorities for information on their whereabouts. Since 1978 four children have been found.
On 15 October 1981 the seven human rights organizations in Argentina for the first time held a joint demonstration in the Plaza de Mayo in Buenos Aires. They presented a petition to the government calling for the ''aparición con vida de los detenidos-desaparecidos", "the reappearance, alive, of the'disappeared' prisoners". The police cordoned off the square and arrested some of the demonstrators for a few hours.
On 17 October 1981 in the newspaper Clarín the Commander in Chief of the Army, General Leopoldo Fortunato Galtieri, issued a statement denying that the government had any intention of issuing a list of "disappeared" persons. He stated that these cases were "closed". On 22 December General Galtieri replaced General Roberto Viola as President.
There were few reports of "disappearances" during the year. Around midnight on 23 March 1981 Gerardo Maria Brugo, a 39-year-old taxi driver, was seized on his way home in Buenos Aires by a group of men whose appearance and actions were characteristic of agents of the security forces. His family heard no further word of him. They laid an official complaint about his arrest and"disappearance" at the 23rd Federal Police Station and filed a petition of habeas corpus. As was the case with almost all such petitions filed since 1976, the petition was rejected by the courts. In November 1981, after ali other channels had failed, the family presented the case to the nongovernmental organization, the Permanent Assembly for Human Rights in Buenos Aires. Amnesty International sent appeals after receiving information about nine other abductions during 1981. Two Chileans "disappeared" in the Andes in February. They were believed to have been handed over to the Chilean authorities. Six
113
victims were released after having been tortured, apparently by agents of the police and security forces. Horacio Castro was seized by agents of the Federal Police in April 1981 and his dead body discovered two days later.
On 29 May 1981 the Latin American human rights organization Servicio Paz y Justicia, Peace and Justice Service, issued a news release detailing a series of incidents of intimidation of human rights activists, including threats against one of the group's leaders, the Nobel Peace Prize winner, Adolfo Pérez Esquivel; he was also said to have been kept under surveillance by armed men. At the end of June 1981 three lawyers who had defended human rights cases took court action, alleging that their personal liberty had been threatened They each presented a writ of habeas corpus preventivo, "preventive" habeas corpus. They said that they had received anonymous telephone calls at home and at work threatening that they would be "arrested or eliminated" if they continued their human, rights activities.
In May 1981 Amnesty International made a submission to the United Nations for consideration under the confidential procedures set up to examine allegations of a "consistent pattern of gross and reliably attested violations of human rights". The submission referred to29 political prisoners convicted by military tribunals in proceedings which failed to conform to internationally recognized standards.
Amnesty International was working on behalf of 109 prisoners of conscience and investigating a further 197 cases of possible prisoners of conscience.
