Honduras
In August 1981 an Amnesty International mission visited Honduras. The principal purpose was to interview Salvadorian refugees about human rights violations in El Salvador. The mission also aimed to raise Amnesty International's concerns in Honduras with officials. These included the treatment of Salvadorian refugees, and increasing reports of arbitrary arrest and detention, torture and "disappearances" of both Honduran and foreign nationals. Both regular Honduran security forces and newly-prod aimed Honduran paramilitary groups and "death squads" reportedly linked to the government had been named as responsible for these abuses.
In its official meetings the Amnesty International mission welcomed the fact that Honduras had accepted thousands of refugees, including Salvadorians, Guatemalans and Nicaraguans. However, it expressed concern about reports that Salvadorian and Honduran troops had cooperated in obstructing would-be refugees from El Salvador from entering Honduras at their common border. Amnesty International was also concerned about reports that Salvadorian agents, military and paramilitary, had repeatedly been allowed to enter Honduras to harass, and in some cases abduct, Salvadorian refugees. Some refugees were reportedly killed outright; others were allegedly returned to El S alvador and their dead bodies seen by fleeing refugees. Still others remained missing.
The Amnesty International delegation interviewed witnesses and survivors of the May 1980 Sumpul River massacre, in which local priests asserted that at least 600 people died as the result of a combined Salvadorian-Honduran troop action. Witnesses confirmed that Salvadorian troops had killed would-be refugees as they attempted to cross the Sumpul River and stated that Honduran troops had established a cordon on the Honduran side of the river to prevent the refugees from gaining asylum in Honduras. Survivors declared that they had received death threats from Honduran troops in
149
attempts to prevent them giving evidence to the many foreign delegations that visited the border area during the year. Witnesses and survivors of a similar operation at the Lempa River on 18 March 1981, in which an estimated 200 people died, also reported constant attempts by Honduran and Salvadorian soldiers and paramilitary agents to keep them from testifying about the incident
Refugees and relief workers stated that a number of Salvaaorian refugees who had been wounded by troops as they entered Honduras had been removed from the hospital in Santa Rosa de Copan, where they had been taken for treatment and were now missing. The Amnesty International delegation observed that Alejandro Gómez, one such refugee, was held under armed guard in that hospital at the time of its visit After appeals for his physical safety Amnesty International learned that he had been discharged from the hospital on 19 November and was reported to be in the care of Honduran and international relief agencies.
After its mission to Central America in August Amnesty International continued to receive reports of Salvadorian refugees being removed from refugee camps and killed. It also learned of the murder of a number of Honduran relief workers in such incidents. On 16 November foreign nationals at La Virtud refugee camp in the department of Lempira physically restrained Salvadorian miHtary and paramilitary agents who had seized Salvadorian refugees and were taking them back to El Salvador with the help of Honduran troops. However, in simultaneous raids nearby, seven refugees were removed from Guajiniquil and La Cuesta refugee camps and taken towards El Salvador. The bodies of the two removed from La Cuesta were later reported to have been seen in El Salvador. The others were still missing. Elfidio Cruz, the Honduran coordinator at La Virtud for CARITAS, the international Roman Catholic aid agency, was taken into custody by the Honduran army during the 16 November raids. His bullet-ridden body was found nearby two days later. On 7 December another Honduran CARITAS worker, Lucio Aguirre, was reportedly shot and killed by a Salvadorian soldier as he tried to prevent the abduction of refugees from the camp at La Virtud. On both occasions Amnesty International appealed to Üie Honduran authorities for an investigation into the abductions and killings. It also called on Salvadorian officials to protect the refugees when they were returned to El Salvador.
Several groups of foreign nationals, including Salvadorians, "disappeared" in the capital, Tegucigalpa, after being arrested by Honduran security agents from the Departamento Nacional de Investigaciones (DNI), National Department of Investigations. Fourteen Salvadorians and two Hondurans were arrested on 22 April. All were
150
members of a christian community who followed the teachings of the late Archbishop Oscar Romero of San Salvador. A Dutch agricultural specialist testified to the Amnesty International delegation that he had witnessed the forcible detention of several members of the group, including four children, one aged only three, by the Honduran security agencies. On 25 May Honduran newspapers reported that the children and the grandmother of one of the children had been handed over to Salvadorian officials at the border post of El Amatillo under other names. Their documents, which were made available to Amnesty International, stated that they had been abandoned in Honduras. A relative was told by Honduran officials that none of the missing people had ever been detained. However, she eventually located the grandmother and grandchild in El Salvador. The other three children had been placed for adoption in El Salvador, but were identified and returned to relatives. On 22 June Amnesty International informed the Honduran Foreign Minister Colonel César Elvir Sierra that it had been disturbed to learn of the arrests and subsequent reports that the Salvadorians might have been deported back to El Salvador. It pointed to some of the discrepancies in the official version of events. Later, during its mission to Honduras, the Amnesty International delegation met Minister of the Interior and Justice, Lie. Oscar Mejia Arellano. He stated that if the missing people had been arrested legally they would have been processed by the courts under his responsibility. He suggested that Amnesty International raise the case with the army, in particular with Colonel Adolfo Alvarez Martmez, then commander of the Honduran Public Security Force, FUSEP. Colonel Alvarez refused to discuss the matter with the Amnesty International delegation.
While the Amnesty International delegation was in Honduras a group of foreign nationals "disappeared" in similar circumstances. Amnesty International interviewed relatives who provided evidence that the DNI had detained the missing people, who included two young Salvadorian children. The children were later reportedly placed in the care of a Honduran family, but eight others, including Yamira Villalta and Jorge Manuel Morales, were still missing.
Throughout the year a succession of similar "disappearances" took place. They included a number of Nicaraguan and Costa Rican citizens who were passing through Honduras. In several cases Nicaraguan officials provided documents registering the exit of the missing people from Nicaragua at Nicaraguan-Honduran border crossings. However, the Honduran authorities asserted that the records of the Honduran officials at the same border crossings did not register their entry. Despite repeated inquiries by Amnesty International, Honduran officials continued to deny that the missing
151
people ever entered Honduras, even in cases where eye-witnesses attested to having seen the missing people in Tegucigalpa, or to having spoken to them in custody in Honduras.
Honduran officials repeatedly denied the arrest in San Pedro Sula of Salvadorian opposition leader Facundo Guardado Guardado who was detained on 18 January. However, he was among those whom the government was forced to release after a guerrilla group hijacked a Honduran airliner on 17 March.
Amnesty International was disturbed by reports of the detention and subsequent "disappearance" of a number of Hondurans in 1981. They included trade union leader Fidel Martinez and teacher and journalist Tomás Nativi, missing since 9 June 1981 when they were taken into custody by unknown mea Fidel Martinez was reportedly wounded during the incident Amnesty International had appealed on behalf of Tomás Nativi on a number of occasions in the past when he had been detained After a few days in detention in December 19 80 he had sustained serious injuries and claimed publicly that he had been tortured. Following their seizure in June Amnesty International repeatedly appealed for information as to the whereabouts of Fidel Martinez and Tomás Nativi but despite eye-witness reports that their captors were acting with the complicity of the security services the authorities continued to deny any knowledge of the affair.
In similar cases "disappeared" Hondurans whose detention was originally denied were released following appeals on their behalf. Former Vice-Rector of the National University and congressional candidate for the Honduran Socialist Party Lie. Virgilio Carias was detained on 12 September together with Lie. Rogelio Martmez Reyna. Released nine days later. Lie. Carias called for similar appeals for the other "disappeared" people of Honduras, who numbered, he stated, nearly 100. Seventeen members of the leftist alliance, the Honduran Patriotic Front, who had been arrested on 21 November shortly before the Honduran elections of 29 November, had also been released.
Amnesty International continued to monitor events at the Isletas banana cooperative. Since 1974 workers and the army had repeatedly clashed over alleged attempts by the army to impose its own leadership on the cooperative.
Amnesty International was also concerned that priests, both foreign and Honduran, who helped refugees and tried to protect relief workers were themselves constantly harassed. Father Fausto Milla was arrested for a short period on 13 February as he was returning from a conference in Mexico on the problem of Salvadorian refugees throughout Central America. Amnesty International learned that after his detention he and other priests in the northwest continued to
152
be harassed by the Honduran army.
Amnesty International brought its concerns to the attention of international bodies during the year, particularly the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances.
