Rwanda
Amnesty International was concerned about prisoners detained in connection with offences against state security in 1980 and 1981, and about the treatment of other political prisoners who had been imprisoned since 1974.
A group of 50 soldiers and civilians were brought to trial in September 1981. Most were charged with complicity in a plot to overthrow the government in March 1980. They were tried by the State Security Court at Ruhengeri, in the northwest of the country. The principal defendant was Théoneste Lizinde, a former head of the Security Police. He was arrested in April 1980 and accused of being the leader of a conspiracy against the head of state, General Juvenal Habyarimana. Some of the other defendants had been arrested in April or May 1980 and were detained for long periods before they were formally charged. Others were arrested during the following months. For example, Hassan Hamud, a businessman of Omani nationality, was arrested in July 1980 and accused of financing the assassination of President Habyarimana. Other businessmen were arrested at the end of 1980. There were further arrests in May 1981 when Major Jacques Maniraguha, the Head of Protocol at the Presidency, was detained Some 15 other suspects were released uncharged at about this time.
68
Some defendants, including Théoneste Lizinde and Alphonse-Marie Kagenza, a former ambassador to Uganda, were charged with plotting to kill the head of state. However, many others were charged with involvement in the distribution of leaflets circulated in Kigali during March 1980. Many of the leaflets complained about President Habyarimana's policies but they did not advocate his overthrow. The authorities said complicity in their production or distribution was an offence under Article 166 of the penal code, which makes it a crime to distribute information which might incite people against the authorities or otherwise cause disturbance.
The trial took place before the State Security Court, which was established in 1975. It started on 17 September 1981 and was heard in two sessions which lasted for a total of five weeks. The hearings were public and many people followed them on the radio or over a loudspeaker outside the court house. Although the defendants had the right in law to appoint defence lawyers, none was defended by a lawyer. Lawyers were reported to have refused to take on these cases because they felt it would be dangerous.
The court announced its verdicts on 24 November 1981. Out of 50 defendants, 26 were convicted and 24 acquitted. The public prosecutor had asked the court to impose the death penalty on 22 defendants; Théoneste Lizinde and Alphonse-Marie Kagenza were sentenced to death. Nine others were given sentences of 10 years or more, while 15 people were sentenced to between two and eight years' imprisonment Sixteen of those sentenced were convicted solely of distributing documents under Article 166 of the penal code.
Amnesty International was investigating the cases of a number of the defendants before the trial. It had been concerned by reports that some of the detainees were ill-treated during their incommunicado detention in a special unit for political detainees at Ruhengeri prison. Several defendants alleged at their trial that they had been beaten or tortured in custody. The allegations were dismissed by the court because the prisoners could not show any scars or other physical signs of ill-treatment.
After the trial ended in November 1981 Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to allow the two prisoners who had been condemned to death to appeal. It was not known whether the cases had been taken to appeal, but by the end of 1981 the death sentences had not been carried out The organization also continued to investigate the cases of some other défendants, particularly those convicted under Article 166 of the penal code, in the belief that they might be prisoners of conscience.
During 1981 Amnesty International received information about prisoners who were arrested in March 1974 and convicted in June
69
1974 for having tried to overthrow the government The prisoners were almost all former senior officials in the government of President Kayibanda, who was overthrown by General Habyarimana in July 1973. The, verdicts of the June 1974 trial were never made public and the convicted prisoners were subsequently held incommunicado in Ruhengeri prison. Since 1974 about 30 of these prisoners were reported to have died in prison, but no official information was made available about their fate. In 1981 the families of many of the prisoners did not know if they were alive or dead
Sao Tome and Principe
Amnesty International was concerned about detention without charge or trial and unfair trials of political prisoners.
Amnesty International learned of the release of Miguel Trovoada, an adopted prisoner of conscience (see Amnesty International Report 1980), and of several other political prisoners. It continued to investigate the cases of five convicted prisoners.
The former prime minister Miguel Trovoada was released in July 1981 under an amnesty to mark the sixth anniversary of the country's independence. He had been held without charge or trial at Sao Tome's central prison for 21 months after his arrest in October 1979.
Three other prisoners of concern to Amnesty International were also released in July 1981. One was Antonio Almeida, detained without trial since November 1980 when he was arrested and accused of trying to overthrow the government Two Portuguese nationals arrested at the same time were reportedly released in late 1980.
The other prisoners of concern to Amnesty International released in July 1981 were Leonilde Seita Diogo and Manuel Gomes da Silva. They were convicted by a special court in November 1977 of complicity in the so-called "Cobra 77" conspiracy to invade both Angola and Sao Tome and Principe. Amnesty International beheved that they had not been given a fair trial. It remained concerned about the continued imprisonment of three other people convicted at the same time and was investigating their cases.
Amnesty International also continued to investigate the cases of Alcino de Lima and Albertino Neto. They were convicted of
70
conspiracy against the government in March 1979 and sentenced to 22 and 21 years' imprisonment respectively. Three others convicted at the same trial were released in 1980. Amnesty International believed that the trial in March 1979, like the one in November 1977, was unfair. The defendants were convicted on insufficient evidence and had no adequate opportunity to defend themselves.
In December 1981 demonstrators on the island of Principe protested against the shortages of essential goods on the island. They claimed there was a relative abundance of food and other supplies on the island of Sao Tome. Government forces intervened to suppress the demonstration and shot and wounded several demonstrators. An unknown number of demonstrators were arrested, but by the end of the year Amnesty International did not know if they had been released or if some remained in detention.
