Laos (the Lao People's Democratic Republic)
Amnesty International's main concern remained the continuing detention without trial of several thousand Laotians detained for their beliefs, political activities or fonctions underthepre-1975 government Most ofthem had been held for more than six years without charge or trial in "re-education" camps since the change of government in 1975. Amnesty International was particularly concerned at the length of their detention and at the total lack of legal safeguards for those detained on political grounds. However, a significant nuijiber of detainees were released in 1981, especially in the first half of the year, although precise figures were not available.
Amnesty International worked on behalf of about 100 political detainees adopted as prisoners of conscience or whose cases were being investigated Some of these prisoners were released in 1981. Many were former civil servants and professionals detained without trial since the change of government which marked the end of the "neutralist" coalition in Laos in 1975. Most high-ranking civil servants and military officers sent for "re-education" at that time went to camps in Houa Phan ( S am Neua) province, in the northeast of the country near the border with Viet Nam. A number of these cases were described in Political Prisoners in the People's Democratic Republic of Laos, published by Amnesty International in April 1980.
Among those adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International was Khamsing Ngonvonarath, a public works engineer. When the government changed in 1975 he reportedly chose to remain in Laos " in order to work for his country". He spent several weeks at a "political seminar" at the Ecole pédagogique, teachers' training college, ofDongDok near the capital, Vientiane. On 1 August 1975 he was sent to "re-education" Camp 05 M Sam Teu in Houa Phan province. Khamsing Ngonvonarath was released and returned to Vientiane on 4 January 1981.
Another prisoner of conscience adopted by Amnesty International, Padab Pangnarind a military doctor, was also released in early 1981. He had been summoned for "re-education" in October 1975. Although he had the rank of colonel in the army, he was a military doctor by profession and was reportedly never involved in fighting. He returned to Vientiane in early 1981 after more than five years'
215
detention in Camp 05 in Houa Phan province.
As far as Amnesty International was aware those released in 1981 had been held in various camps in Houa Phan province, including camps 04, 05 and 06. Some were reported to have been reintegrated into the civil service and others to have applied for administrative posts. Still others were said to have been released because of their old age or ill-health. Although precise details were not available Amnesty International received reports that more than 100 people were released in January and February 1981. The releases are reported to have been based on an official assessment, in each case, of whether the detainees could be reintegrated into society in view of the degree to which they had "re-educated" themselves and of their technical skills. Although detainees continued to be released from the northeast in small groups during the first half of 1981, it appeared that the number of releases was much smaller in the second half of the year. Amnesty International remained concerned that those who were not considered to have "re-educated" themselves sufficiently might be detained without charge or trial indefinitely.
In letters to the Prime Minister, Kaysone -Phomvihane, of 17 March and 22 October 1981 Amnesty International welcomed the releases. It asked if they could be regarded as part of a continuing process which would in time benefit all those detained in "reeducation" camps because of their opinions or functions under the former government With its letter of 17 March Amnesty International submitted a list of 99 people believed to be still detained for political reasons. It stressed that there seemed to be no justification for their continuing detention without charge or trial. They included Viboun Abhay, Phom Bounlytay, Houphan Norasing and Vannavong Rajk-houn, all former members of the National Coalition Consuhative Council who in November 1975 were asked to go to Viengsay in Houa Phan province for a meeting of the council but were then detained in Houa Phan. A few members of the council were released in 1976 but the others remained in detention. Phom Bounlytay was rumoured to have died in detention.
Also on the list were five medical students who were in the fourth or fifth year of their studies and in their early 20s at the time of their arrest Prasongsith Boupha, Siphong Vongmuongsong, Keovilaysack, Bounlay and Santiphad had been working as military doctors and in October 1976 had asked to return to civilian status. They reported at Chinaimo military camp on 11 October 1976 expecting to have their status changed but were arrested early the next day. They were later reportedly detained in a "re-education" camp at Phou Leng-Phou Khoune near Phounesavanh in Xieng Khouang province. Amnesty International adopted all five as prisoners of conscience.
216
Amnesty International continued to work for the release of other adopted prisoners of conscience. They included Prince Sisouphan Manoreth who, like many members of the former administration, had been sent for "political re-education" in October or November 1975. Prince Sisouphan, aged 38, a member of the Laotian royal family, was a dental surgeon and Director of the Dentistry Service ofthe Ministry of Health at the time of his arrest Detained without charge or trial for six years, he was believed to be held in Houa Phan province. Amnesty International also renewed its appeals for the release of Khamking Souvanlasy, aged 52, former Director of Education in the Ministry of Education and held since Novemberl975 inCamp05 inHouaPhan province; andDrTiaoSouckthivong, aged48, former chief surgeon of the First Military Region working in Luang Prabang hospital with the rank of colonel, sent for "re-education" in 1975 and believed to be held in a camp at Ban Soppane, near Viengsay in Houa Phan province.
In a report to the Supreme People's Council (SPC) on 26 December 1979 the Prime Minister called on the Justice and Interior Ministries to draft laws on arrest and detention for enactment and promulgation by the SPC. He stressed that "those arrested with complete evidence should be brought to court for trial immediately" while "those arrested without valid evidence must be freed". Despite this, no legal provisions against arbitrary arrest and detention had been made public by the end of 1981. Since the Prime Minister's announcement the existence of governmental decrees and regulations had been reported but these were not published and their nature and content were unknown. Although a national Congress of People's Representatives appointed the Supreme People's Council to draft a new constitution, this task was not completed and no new laws had been adopted since 1975.
217
