France
Amnesty Intemationars concerns abated in the second half of 1981 following legislative changes introduced by the new administration of Prime Minister Pierre Mauroy, under President François Mitterrand who was elected in May 1981. Amnesty International had written to all the presidential candidates on 10 April 1981 about French laws which it believed contravened the standards of international law ( see Amnesty International Report 1981). President Mitterrand, in his reply dated 6 May 1981, told Amnesty International that he intended to introduce reforms in all the areas mentioned. Since May 1981 the death penalty has been aboUshed and the Court of State Security closed. Proposals to revise the laws relating to summary trials, conscientious objection and military courts were being considered by the government at the end of December 1981.
One of Amnesty International's main concerns remained the imprisonment of conscientious objectors to military service. The law restricts exemption from military service to those who object to the personal use of arms on rehgious or philosophical grounds and numerous applications for conscientious objector status were refused each year. During 1980 and 1981 Amnesty International adopted more than 50 conscientious objectors sentenced by military courts to up to two years' imprisonment on charges of insoumission (insubordination) for refusing military service (see Amnesty International Report 1981).
A presidential amnesty covering a wide range of offences, including insoumission, came into effect on 5 August 1981. It applied to offences committed before 22 May 1981, the date of the presidential inauguration. Objectors charged with offences committed before this date were released The amnesty did not, however, absolve unrecognized objectors from a future obligation to perform military service and several were later rearrested for disobeying renewed call-up orders.
Before the elections President Mitterrand had stated his intention to bring conscientious objector legislation into line with the standard adopted by the Council of Europe. Resolution 337 (1967) of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe called for exemption from armed service " for reasons of conscience or profound conviction arising from religious, ethical, moral, humanitarian, philosophical or similar motives". On 23 October 1981 the Minister of Defence,
268
Charles Hernu, announced that the government was drafting a bill, to be presented to parliament in the first half of 1982, which aimed to broaden the grounds for recognizing conscientious objection to military service. Pending its introduction the minister ordered the suspension of all prosecutions of unsuccessful applicants for conscientious objector status and the release of such people from prison.
However, objectors who had not applied for conscientious objector status did not benefit from these measures and remained in prison. Many objectors did not apply, either because they failed to submit their applications within the stipulated 30 days from the date of call-up, or because they objected to the alternative civilian service for recognized objectors. The length of alternative service was twice that of military service and Amnesty International considered it to be punitive. It was also concerned about the short time allowed for claiming conscientious objector status.
On 18 December 1981 Bernard Corbel and Hervé Kerrain, members of a Breton pacifist nationalist movement, were sentenced to two years' imprisonment for insoumission by the Tribunal permanent des forces armées (TPFA), Permanent Tribunal of the Armed Forces, at Rennes. They had first been called to do military service in 1977 but refused on grounds of conscience, although they did not apply for conscientious objector status. They left France and were sentenced in their absence to one year's imprisonment After the election of President Mitterrand they returned to France. Although their sentences were remitted under the amnesty, they were recalled to join their regiments. On 5 October they presented themselves as requested at the military barracks in Rennes but refused to wear a uniform. They were immediately placed under arrêts de rigueur (close arrest).
Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Defence on 16 December 1981 appealing for their release until the revised legislation on conscientious objection was introduced It also expressed concern that they were to be tried before the TPFA, since a bill abolishing these courts in peacetime was then being considered by the government. This was part of a government proposal to abolish courts of exception and to use the ordinary courts for most offences, including insoumission. The TPFA were criticized for their lack of impartiality and because defendants had fewer rights than under civilian law. Three of the five judges were officers of the armed forces, nominated by their military superiors, as was the prosecutor ('Com m wiaire du gouvernement)-, there was no right of appeal except on procedural grounds. People tried by these cou^ could be held for up to 60 days' incommunicado military custody. Àt the end of 1981 Bernard Corbel and Hervé Kerrain were still in prison.
269
A bill was passed by parliament in July 1981 abolishing the Cour de sûreté de l'Etat (Court of State Security), a special court set up in 1963 to try offences affecting the security of the state. Amnesty International had previously expressed its concern that the procedures in this court deviated from international standards for a fair trial. In January 1981 Amnesty International sent an observertoatrial before this court Seventeen Corsican nationalists were accused of participating in an armed group intending to usurp the authority of the state and of kidnapping. Amnesty International's observer criticized the use of the special court and its procedures in this case (see Amnesty International Report 1981).
A law abolishing the death penalty for all offences, both civil and military, came into effect on 10 October 1981. It was passed by parliament in September. On 7 August Amnesty International had written to the Minister of Justice and French deputies and senators urging abolition.
The last execution in France was in 1977. Most sentences passed since then had been commuted to life imprisonment by the president However seven people were under sentence of death when the death penalty was abolished.
A law "reinforcing and protecting the liberty of persons", which was introduced by the previous government in February 1981, changed the law in several areas of concern to Amnesty International. It was known as the loi sécurité et liberté ( law of security and liberty). Most imp>ortant were provisions widening the use of the special summary judicial procedure relating to flagrants délits (blatant misdemeanours) so that it would apply to a wider range of offences. The law introduced a new summary procedure known as saisine directe {àivQct referral to a court). This allowed a public prosecutor to send people accused of misdemeanours for immediate trial in a summary court without referral to an examining judge. This decision could be taken by the prosecutor without the defendant's lawyer being present Amnesty International had previously expressed concern ihaXihsflagrants délits procedures had been used to prosecute people arrested during demonstrations and charged with offences under the loi anti-casseurs (anti-wreckers law), solely on the basis of police testimony which conflicted with that of the accused. In Amnesty Inlemational's opinion the use of summary courts to give rapid judgments in cases where the facts were in dispute could prejudice a fair trial.
InNovember 1981 a commission set up in July 1981 to advise on reform of the penal code presented proposals for the repeal of the loi sécurité et liberté. The resultant bill was expected to go before parliament in 1982. It recommended the abolition of saisine directe.
270
If this proposal were adopted, people accused oiflagrants délits could only be sent for immediate trial by a magistrate (juge du siège) and only with the agreernent of the defence counsel.
On 2 October 1981 France made the declaration under Article 25 of the European Convention on Human Rights, giving individuals the right to submit complaints to the European Commission of Human Rights regarding human rights violations.
