Benin
The main concerns of Amnesty International were the detention without trial of suspected political opponents, unfair trials of political prisoners, and the ill-treatment of prisoners.
Amnesty International continued to seek the release of 22 students and teachers detained without charge or trial for aUeged involvement in protests against government education policies. They were all arrested between March and November 1979. During 1981 three more students — Boniface Koundou, Rafael Agboton and Mathias Dognon — arrested in connection with the 1979 protests, were adopted as prisoners of conscience.
Following Amnesty International appeals for the release of student Urbain Sossouhounto government officials informed the organization that he was detained "in conformity with the laws and regulations in force in the Popular Republic of Benin". They also stated that the authorities "could not tolerate that individuals took part in subversion and anarchy with impunity while taking refuge behind so-called human rights". No further information on the reasons for his detention was provided Amnesty International received no response when it pointed out that hi s rights, enshrined in the constitution of Benin, known as the Loi fondamentale, had been violated. This guarantees the rights to freedom of conscience, expression and association, to freedom from arbitrary arrest and to defence counsel.
Since the military coup which brought Colonel Mathieu Kerekou to power in October 1972 political trials had not been heard before the courts. Instead they usually took place before an executive body, the Conseil national de la révolution (CNK), the National Council of the Revolution, which was convened as a Revolutionary Tribunal in 1975, 1976 and 1979. Judicial functions were also assumed by the Council of Ministers, known as the Conseil exècutifnationaliCE^), and the Comité central du parti révolutionnaire du peuple béninois. Central Committee of the Revolutionary Party of the People of Benin. Both sentenced individuals to prison for political offences. Individuals tried by these executive bodies were not allowed to be present at their hearings, and were denied the rights to defence counsel and to appeal Many were not officially informed of the sentences passed on them.
Amnesty International sought the release of Benoît Hounsou and Bamabé Dohounon who were among 13 people arrested in 1975 and
20
convicted of participation in attempts to overthrow the government They were not allowed to attend their trial. There were serious shortcomings in their trial, including the absence of defence counsel and denial of the right of appeal.
Amnesty International was investigating the cases of six former officials, including Pascal Chabi Kao, Théophile Paoletti and Michel Bamenou Toko, all former ministers in the deposed government of Hubert Maga, who had been held without charge or trial for more than eight years. The cases of Colonel Alphonse Alley, Major Jean-Baptiste Hácheme and Paul Kponou, arrested in May 1973 after the alleged discovery of a plot to overthrow the government, were also being investigated. They were reportedly tried in their absence and sentenced to terms of imprisonment of between 10 and 20 years by the Central Committee of the government They were allowed neither defence counsel nor the right to bring forward evidence or witnesses in their own defence.
In early January 1981 Amnesty International appealed publicly for the release of about 100 individuals arrested in late 1980 in a clamp-down on alleged dissident officials and supporters of an unofficial trade union. They were all believed to have been released by April 1981. The appeal called for the release of all other political detainees held without trial in Benin and drew attention to prisoners convicted in unfair trials.
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the release of three former presidents — Hubert Maga, Sourou Migan Apithy and Justin Ahomadegbe — held under house arrest without charge or trial since October 1972. In late April 1981 they were released and shortly afterwards authorized to leave Benin if they wished.
Amnesty International was concerned by reports of harsh prison conditions and ill-treatment of political detainees held in the capital, Cotonou. In the Central Prison detainees were held in overcrowded and poorly-ventilated cells and the standards of sanitation and hygiene throughout the prison were low. Unconvicted political detainees, including 12 of the students and teachers arrested in 1979, received no food from the authorities, and were dependent on other prisoners or on their families. There was severe overcrowding at the Commissariat	(central police station) in Cotonou. Up to 30
detainees were held in a cell known as la grille (the cage) approximately three metres wide by four metres long. As many as eight detainees were often held in cells measuring only three metres by one-and-a-half metres. Only a few detainees had room to lie down and others were forced to remain standing. Standards of hygiene were also unacceptably low. Some detainees were reportedly subjected to a form of ill-treatment known as la rodèo{\ht rodeo) in which they were
21
forced to run or crawl carrying heavy weights until exhausted, and to stare at the sun for long periods. In both the prison and the police station medical facilities were grossly inadequate.
