Grenada
An Amnesty International mission visited Grenada in January 1981 to discuss Amnesty International's concerns with Prime Minister Maurice Bishop, in particular the continued detention of over 100 people without charge or trial (see Amnesty International Report 1981). Some detainees had been held since Maurice Bishop and the New Jewel Movement came to power in March 1979.
More people were detained during 1981. On 21 July Amnesty International wrote to the Prime Minister asking the reason for the detention of Lloyd Noel, Leslie Pierre, Tilman Thomas and Stanley Roberts on 13 July. The first three were shareholders in the company which published a newspaper, iho-Grenadian Voice, which had been banned after its first issue in June 1981. Lloyd Noel, a former member of the New Jewel Movement, had been Acting Attorney General and Minister of Legal Affairs in the People's Revolutionary Government until his resignation in June 1980. In a reply from the Office of the Prime Minister on 17 November Amnesty International was informed of " conspiracy on the part of Noel, Thomas, Pierre and Roberts to perpetrate and incite violence and destabilization". By the end of 1981 the four men were still detained withdut charge.
On 31 December the government announced the release of 24 detainees, including Herbert Preudhomme, who was deputy prime minister in the previous government and had been detained since the March 1979 coup. A government spokeperson said that after the releases there were fewer than 100 people held in detentioa In December 1981 Amnesty International was investigating the cases of 77 detainees in Grenada.
Allegations that some detainees had been ill-treated were raised
139
with the Prime Minister by the Amnesty International mission in January. On29 September Amnesty International wrote to the Prime Minister asking if any official investigation had taken place into allegations of ill-treatment made by Layne Phillip, charged with involvement in a bomb explosion, who alleged that he had been beaten, burned with cigarettes and given electric shocks to make him confess. No reply had been received by the end of 1981.
Grenada has a mandatory death penalty for murder. The Terrorism (Prevention) Law, 1980, also provides for a discretionary death sentence for causing death by explosives or by acts of terrorism. The Amnesty International mission asked the Prime Minister whether the new legislation constituted an extension of the death penalty and appealed to him to abolish the death penalty. There were no prisoners under sentence of death at the end of 1981 and no executions had taken place since October 1978.
