Guinea-Bissau
Amnesty International was concerned about detention without trial of officials of the deposed administration of former President Luis Cabrai and of suspected political opponents of the government Immediately after the coup on 14 November 1980 led by Major Joào Bernardo Vieira, Luis Cabrai and some 20 former officials of his administration were arrested The new authorities promptly announced the discovery of mass graves allegedly containing the corpses of as many as 500 people secretly and illegally executed on the orders of the previous government They also claimed that the previous administration was corrupt and had mismanaged the economy. Conflicting statements were made by the new government as to the judicial position of the arrested officials. They suggested alternately that all would be released or that some would be brought to trial for "monstrous crimes".
In late February 1981 some 200 students were arrested in Bissau, the capital, after demonstrations against proposed educational reforms and the arrest of four other students. All had been released by early March 1981.
In late March 1981 Rafael Barbosa, former President of the Partido Africano da Independència da Guiñé e Cabo Verde (PAIGC), the African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde, the country's sole political party, was arrested with several other people for alleged anti-government activities. He had been released at the time of the November 1980 coup after spending more than five years in prison for alleged treason. In late April and again in July 1981 Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to try or release all the political detainees held in Guinea-Bissau, including Rafael Barbosa and the former senior officials arrested in November 1980. No answer was received
In mid-November 1981,12 of the former officials were released on the orders of the Central Committee of the PAIGC. Former President Luis Cabrai was released on 31 December 1981 and went into exile. Amnesty International remained concerned about the fate of seven other former officials, including Umaru Djalo, former Minister of Defence, and Constantino Teixeira, former Minister of the Interior, who remained in detention without trial. According to government reports two others died in prison; former Army Chief of Security André Gomes was reported to have committed suicide in prison in
46
late December 1980, and Lay Seek died in prison in September 1981, reportedly from heart failure.
