Hungary
Amnesty International's concerns were the existence and application of legislation restricting freedom of expression, the imprisonment of conscientious objectors and the use of the death penalty. Amnesty International was also concerned about the case of a person forcibly confined in a psychiatric hospiiai as a result of his non-violent exercise of fundamental human rights.
Amnesty International did not know the number of people imprisoned for political crimes in 1981. The Chief Public Prosecutor, Karoly Szijarto, stated on 25 February 1981 that in 1980 there had been 65 cases of "criminal offences against the state, peace and mankind". A " large majority" of these, he said, had taken the form of verbal incitement, very ofien under the influence of alcohol Under Article 148 of the criminal code dealing with "incitement", people
274
who incite others to hatred of Hungary's constitutional order or Hungary's allies, as well as those who incite to national, racial or religious hatred, may be imprisoned for terms of one to five years. If the act is committed before a large public, or as a member of a group, or "leads to the disturbance of the international connections of the Hungarian People's Republic" it is punishable by two to eight years' imprisonment Reports received by Amnesty International indicated that convictions for "incitement" include(f people imprisoned for having exercised, non-violently, their right to freedom of expression.
Amnesty International learned that several Roman Catholic conscientious objectors were imprisoned for refusing conscription. This offence is punishable under Article 347 of the criminal code with one to five years' imprisonment (in wartime with 10 to 15 years' imprisonment or death). Military service is compulsory and the law does not allow for any exemption or alternative service for reasons of conscience. It was reported, however, that since 1979 conscientious objectors of the small Nazarene (Christian) sect had been allowed to do alternative service. In September 1981 the issue of conscientious objection was brought to public notice when Cardinal Laszlo Lekai, primate of the Roman Catholic church, suspended a priest. Father Laszlo Kovacs, from his Budapest youth congregation and sent him to a rural parish for six months. Father Kovacs had stated in a sermon that he personally approved of conscientious objection.
Amnesty International adopted as a prisoner of conscience the Roman Catholic conscientious objector Imre Besze, aged 21, who was sentenced to 30 months' imprisonment and two years' loss of civil rights by a military court in Kaposvar in December 1981. It was also investigating the cases of Istvan Pinter from Szekesfehervar and Jozsef Merza from Budapest both Roman Catholics who were reported to have been convicted under Article 347 for refusing military service for reasons of conscience.
In October 1981 Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to release from psychiatric confinement Tibor Pakh, a 5 7-year-old lawyer and former prisoner of conscience. Dr Pakh was stopped at the Hungarian border on 4 October reportedly while travelling to a congress of the independent trade union Solidarity in Poland. His valid passport was taken from him and he was sent back to Budapest On 6 October he went on hunger-strike at Budapest university church in protest at this infringement of his basic rights. Asa result he was forcibly confined in the State Institute for Mental and Neurological Diseases on 9 October after refusing to sign a statement voluntarily confining himself. On 13 October his confinement was confirmed by court order. The following day he was reported to have been forcibly fed and heavily drugged with sedatives, including haloperidol. By 26
275
October Dr Pakh had been released, after appeals on his behalf by Hungarian intellectuals and considerable publicity abroad
Information available to Amnesty International suggested that the case of Tibor Pakh was not unique and that the Hungarian authorities had in certain other cases forcibly confined people to psychiatric institutions for the non-violent exercise of their fundamental rights (see Amnesty International Report 1978).
The criminal code retains the death penalty for a number of political and military offences as well as for aggravated cases of murder. In March 1981 Amnesty International appealed to the Chairman of the Presidential Council, Pal Losonczi, to commute a death sentence imposed on Lajos Nagy, aged 45, for having stabbed three people to death after a drinking bout; Amnesty International did not learn whether this death sentence had been carried out According to press reports Ferenc Morvai, aged 25, was executed on 5 September 1981 after the Supreme Court had upheld a death sentence passed by a court in Keczkemet Ferenc Morvai had been convicted of murdering a citizen of the German Democratic Republic and of attempting to rape his victim's wife.
Ireland
A government bill to abolish the death penalty was introduced in October 1981. It was passed by the Senate (Upper House) on 5 November 1981. At the end of 1981 it had not yet been debated in the Dail (Lower House). The Criminal Justice Bill (1981) provides for the abolition of capital punishment for all offences, civil and military, including in wartime, and for its replacement by a 40-year prison sentence.
Until this bill becomes law, the death penalty is retained under the Criminal Justice Act (1964) for several crimes, including treason, the murder of police or prison officers acting in the line of duty, and the murder of foreign diplomats. Peter Rogers, sentenced to death in March 1981 for murdering a policeman, had his sentence commuted to life imprisonment by the President on 1 July 1981. The last execution was in 1954.
Amnesty International had no adopted prisoners of conscience
276
during the year. However, it remained concemed about the trial of Nicholas Kelly, a member of the Irish Republican Socialist Party, convicted in 1978 by the Special Criminal Court, Dublin, of a mail train robbery. His conviction was based solely on a confession made while held incommunicado for a prolonged period in police custody. Two co-defendants had their convictions quashed by the Court of Criminal Appeal. Itmled that the Special Criminal Court(anon-jury court) had erred in law in mling their confessions to be voluntary (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1981). Nicholas Kelly applied to the Appeal Court for an extension of time in which to lodge an appeal. He had absconded during his trial and retumed to Ireland only after the period for lodging an appeal had expired The Appeal Court refused his application in December 1980 on an apparent technicality. However, it granted him leave to appeal against this decision to the Supreme Court on a "point of law of exceptional public importance". The Supreme Court had not given a decision on this appeal by the end of 1981.
