Switzerland
The imprisonment of conscientious objectors to military service and the lack of any alternative civilian service remained the main concern of Amnesty International.
Under Article 81 of the mihtary penal code all conscientious objectors are sentenced to prison, even when the military tribunal recognizes a severe conflict of conscience on religious or ethical grounds. If the objection to military service is considered to be primarily political, a longer term of imprisonment is imposed.
293
Amnesty International adopted as a prisoner of conscience Thierry Saunier, who was sentenced to five months' imprisonment on 4 June 1981. On 2 November he began his sentence in Bellechasse prisoa The military tribunal of Nyon considered that his arguments against military service were based on a"personal" conception which did not stem from morality or religion. He therefore was not allowed to benefit from the system of arrêts répressifs. Under this system a prisoner is allowed to do prescribed woric outside the prison boundaries, but must return to prison in the evenings and for the weekends. Amnesty International also worked for the release of Pierre Krummenacher, a student, Evence Grobetty, a shepherd, and Patrick Fritschy, a mechanic, who were all sentenced to five months' imprisonment in the form of arrêts répressifs, and began their sentences between November 1981 and January 1982.
Daniel Bemardoni was imprisoned on 2 November 1981 after being sentenced to a prison term of eight months by the military tribunal of Lausanne. The court found that he had acted "principally on the basis of motives of a moral and political nature in the wide sense of the term" but that "one could not discern any indication that his conscience had been tormented to a point where it caused a grave internal conflict".
Ernesto Bolliger, an architect^ was sentenced to eight months' imprisonment on 11 June 1981 by the military tribunal of Locarno. The court found his pacifist views to be primarily political. Bruno Dumont was taken into prison on 17 December 1981 after an appeal hearing on 23 June 1981 sentenced him to eight months' imprisonment but exempted him from further military service. Bruno Dumont went on hunger-strike in protest at the prison sentence. He had offered to work for 18 months in some form of public service as an alternative to military service. Pierre Crevoisier was similarly sentenced to eight months' imprisonment The military tribunal of Neuchâtel stated in its judgment of 16 December 1980 that the defendant's views were " essentially intellectual and very theoretical". He had offered to work for a year in a specialized institution for delinquents as a substitute for military service and appealed on 26 November 1981. The appeal court reduced the sentence to five months' imprisonment in the form of arrêts répressifs.
Amnesty International also adopted Daniel Tiboldi and Martin Buhler as prisoners of conscience. Martin Buhler had already served 380 days as a corporal in an army medical corps and began a five-month sentence in Bellechasse prison on 3 August 1981. Daniel Tiboldi began a seven-month prison sentence in Saxerriet prison on 2 November 1981.
In letters to Amnesty International the Swiss authorities stated
294
that they were aware of the problem posed by conscientious objection in Switzerland. However in December 1977 an amendment to the constitution which would have established an alternative civilian service was rejected in a referendum, and the authorities stated that it would be premature to say when a new proposal would be drafted
