Madagascar
Amnesty International was concerned about prisoners of conscience, the detention without trial of political prisoners, and alleged torture and ill-treatment of prisoners.
In February 1981 university staff and students demonstrated in Antananarivo, the capital, against the appointment of the new rector and over other academic issues. The demonstration was followed by riots in which at least six people were killed Several people were arrested, including four members of the Syndicat des enseignants et chercheurs de l'éducation supérieure (SECES), the Union of Teachers
55
and Researchers in Higher Education, which had participated in a strike at the university. Among the detainees charged with endangering state security was Professor Randriamampandry, professor at the Faculty of Medicine and President of the Madagascar Human Rights Committee. He and three other detainees were adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience.
One of the demands of the student demonstrators was the release of Monja Jaona, leader of the Mouvement national pour l'indépendance de Madagascar {MONlisJiA), the National Independence Movement of Madagascar. He was arrested in November 1980 and held under house arrest at a remote army camp near Ihosy, following demonstrations in ToUary by MONIMA supporters. He was released in March 1981 when MONIMA rejoined the National Front for the Defence of the Malagasy Sociahst Revolution (the coalition of all permitted political parties).
Professor Randriamampandry and the three other prisoners adopted by Amnesty International were released into provisional liberty on Independence Day, 26 June 1981. The charges against them were not dropped, but no fUrther judicial proceedings took place. Amnesty International investigated the cases of six other people arrested at the same time who were also charged with endangering state security. They were released in November 1981 without having been tried
Amnesty International continued to investigate the cases of three long-term detainees: Richard Andriamaholison and Jean-Astier Rakoto-Abel, both senior police officers, and Marson Rakotinirina, an army officer. They were arrested in October 1977 and later charged with endangering or plotting against state security. No trial date had been set by the end of 1981. Amnesty International's repeated appeals for them to be tried or released, and inquiries about the reasons for their prolonged detention without trial, met with no response.
Amnesty International received allegations of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners in the security police headquarters. Direction générale de l'information et de la documentation {DGID), by means of electric shocks, beatings on the body and feet, and denial of food Conditions in other prisons in Madagascar, where some prisoners were held on charges of endangering state security, were characterized by severe overcrowding, poor hygiene and diet, inadequate medical attention, and frequent ill-treatment of prisoners.
An Amnesty International mission sought to visit Madagascar in April 1981 for talks with government officials but no visa was granted
56
