Liberia
The concerns of Amnesty International were the detention without charge or trial of political prisoners, the ill-treatment of detainees, and the death penalty.
Amnesty International sought the release of some 80 former high-ranking officials, senior officers and businessmen. Most were detained at the time of the coup in April 1980 which brought Master-Sergeant Samuel Doe and the People's Redemption Council (PRC) to power. Although most of the detainees were not formally charged the PRC stated shortly after taking power that officials of the former administration would be charged with "high treason, rampant corruption, misuse of public office and abuse of civil and human rights". By the end of 1981 all but four had been released In April 1981,19 political detainees were freed including six former ministers or deputy ministers. Three generals were released in May 1981. In early September 1981,39 more political detainees were freed These were mainly senior officials of the administration of the late President TolberL They also included Brigadier General Rudolph Kolako and five other high-ranking officers, arrested in May 1980 and accused of plotting to overthrow the PRC, who had been sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment in July 1981. The other soldiers released were General Frank Senkpeni and Colonels Taylor and Coleman who, until their arrest in December 1980, had presided over Liberia's Supreme Military Tribunal. In May 1981 the authorities announced the lifting of all restrictions on the freedom of former political detainees to travel overseas. On 23 Decemberl981 the remainingl9 political detainees were freed In a public statement on 23 December Head of State Samuel Doe revealed that two of the prisoners arrested in 1980 had died in detentioa Two others — A.B. Tolbert, son of the iate president and a former member of parliament, and Vamey Dempster, former chief of police — had been removed from prison and were "presumed dead". The responsibility for these extra-legal executions was attributed by the Head of State to the late Major General Thomas Weh Syen, who had been Vice-Chairman of the PRC between April 1980 and August 1981. Head of State Samuel Doe also declared a general amnesty for Liberians living in exile and the abolition of the "wanted list", published in September 1980.
The authonties continued to restrict the right to freedom of speech throughout 1981. In a clamp-down on student political activity in late
53
June 1981, the authorities banned Conmany Wesseh, a student leader and member of Liberia's Constitutional Commission, from making public statements and having contacts with the press and from travelling overseas. Shortly afterwards, when letters protesting against this ban appeared in the independent Daily Observer newspaper, editor Kenneth Best and 10 journalists and employees of the paper were arrested, as was Conmany Wesseh. The 10 journalists and employees were freed after several days in detention, and Kenneth Best and Conmany Wesseh one week later. The ban on Conmany Wesseh's rights was rescinded.
On 20 November 1981 the government announced that some 300 foreigners had been arrested in an operation against "illegal aliens". They also announced that as many as 40 Guineans resident in Liberia, termed "undesirable aliens without any means of support", had been deported back to Guinea. Amnesty International was concerned by reports that this group included three leading members of a political group called the "Concerned Citizens of the Republic of Guinea", one of whom was Cheik Mohamed Kone, who were reportedly detained on arrival in Conakry (the capital of Guinea) and held without trial. Their forcible repatriation to Guinea, where they could justifiably fear imprisonment for their expressed political beliefs, contravened a fundamental principle of international reftigee law.
During the year the authorities claimed to have uncovered two attempts by soldiers to overthrow their administration. In early June 1981,14 lower-ranks soldiers were arrested and accused of plotting to overthrow the government and to assassinate several of its leading members. After a summary trial in June 1981, without defence counsel, 13 of the soldiers were sentenced to death. Amnesty International appealed to the Head of State for commutation of their sentences. The authorities did not reveal the fate of the 13 soldiers. According to several reports all 13 were secretly executed in the Post Stockade prison, Monrovia. Three civilians, including the Vice-President of the University of Liberia, Professor Patrick Seyon, were also arrested in early June in connection with this alleged plot, but were released on 11 June after appearing before the Supreme Military Tribunal. On 10 August 1981 Head of State Samuel Doe publicly accused PRC Vice-Chairman Major General Weh Syen and four PRC members of plotting to assassinate him and other members of the PRC. The Supreme Military Tribunal was convened to carry out an in camera "fact-finding investigation" before a trial with defence counsel. On 13 August 1981, however, the tribunal sentenced the five accused to death and they were executed the following morning. Two civilians received 10-year prison sentences for allegedly withholding
54
information about the plot Amnesty International expressed its concern to the authorities about the summary execution of the five, whose trial did not conform to international standards of fairness, and appealed to the Head of State to exercise his powers of clemency in all death penalty cases.
Detainees were reported to have been badly beaten and ill-treated by soldiers. During his detention in June 1981 in the Post Stockade prison Professor Patrick Seyon was believed to have been repeatedly struck with rifle butts, and to have suffered serious internal injuries. In July 1981 police officers reportedly administered 25 lashes of the whip to suspects arrested after an alleged theft. Conditions at the remote Bella Yallah prison were believed to be extremely harsh, making imprisonment there a brutal punishment Although overcrowding at the Post Stockade and the South Beach prisons, both in Monrovia, was believed to have lessened, conditions were insanitary and the food insufficient and of poor quality. Medical care was inadequate, and visits by friends and relatives sometimes banned.
In March 1981 seven people sentenced to death for murder before the April 1980 coup were executed. On 15 June 1981 Private Peter Worlubah was sentenced to death after being convicted of murder by the Supreme Military Tribunal. It was not learned whether he was executed On 7 August 1981 three soldiers — Privates Antony Juteh, Eugene Sirleaf and Joseph Weah — were executed after being found guilty of murder. Amnesty International appealed to the authorities for the cessation of all executions.
