Iran
Amnesty International's major concern was the large number of executions. On 16 December 1981 Amnesty International stated that it knew of more than 3,800 people who had been executed since the revolution of February 1979. Of the 2,616 executions known to Amnesty International which took place in 1981, 2,444 occurred after President Abolhassan Bani-Sadr left office on 20 June 1981. These figures were based on reports which became known outside Iran and must be regarded as minimum figures. Some executions known to Amnesty International were not announced by the authorities and there were indications that the number of unannounced executions increased towards the end of 1981. The sharp increase in executions from June 1981 was accompanied by growing conflict between supporters of the ruling Islamic Republican Party and its opponents, including organizations such as the Mujahideen-e-Khalq. Many government ministers and officials were assassinated. The opposition claimed their deaths were in retaliation for executions.
Most of those executed were members of organizations actively opposed to the authorities, including the Mujahideen, the Kurdish Democratic Party and people described as monarchists. Many others were executed for drug offences, sexual offences, collaboration with the Iraqi forces, murder, robbery, "Zionism" and alleged espionage. The method of execution was usually hanging or shooting, but in at least one case a man was stoned to death. Among those executed in
324
June 1981 were Said Soltanpour, a left-wing poet and playwright, who had been adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience when he was imprisoned for opposition to the Shah, and Ali-Asghar Amirani, proprietor and editor-in-chief of the political journal Khandaniha (see Amnesty International Report 1981). On 26 July the execution was announced of Mohammed Reza Sa' adati, a leader of the Afw/aA/iieen, previously sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment (see .4m ww/y International Report 1981). In December 1981 Shokrollah Paknejad was executed He was Secretary General of the Association of Former Political Prisoners and one of the founders of the National Democratic Front which was established after the revolution with the avowed aim of protecting democratic freedoms and rights in Iran. Amnesty International, which had appealed in 1971 for the commutation of a death sentence passed on Shokrollah Paknejad when he was imprisoned for opposition to the Shah, appealed again on his behalf following his arrest in September 1981 when it was feared he might be executed
In the second half of 1981 Amnesty International received many reports that children were being executed In December 1981 two such reports were supported by documentary evidence which established the ages of Fariborz Khatibi, a 15-year-old boy, and Fatemeh Mesbah, a 13-year-old girl, both described as supporters of the Mujahideen. The position of the Iranian authorities on «the execution of children varied On 24 June a judge, Ayatollah Gilani, reportedly denied that children aged 13 and 14 were among those executed and said that "None was less than 17. But anyhow, on the basis of Islam, a nine-year-old girl is considered mature. So there is no difference for us between a nine-year-old girl and a 40-year-old man, and it does not prohibit us from issuing any kind of sentence" {The Guardian, London, 24 June 1981). On 20 September Assadollah Lajevardi, the Tehran Prosecutor-General, reportedly said "Even if a 12-year-old is found participating in an armed demonstration, he will be shot The age doesn't matter" {The Times, London, 21 September 1981). On7 December the headoflran's Supreme Court Ayatollah Mossavi Ardibili, told a news conference that death sentences were not passed on people under 18, although Islamic law said that people could be sentenced to death from the age of 16 {Reuters, 7 December 1981).
Many people appeared to have been executed without having been charged or tried Even where trials did take place the guarantees necessary for a fair trial were lacking: that is, trials were summary and the accused had very restricted, if any, rights of defence and no possibility of appeal. Amnesty International had no reason to believe that the procedures of Islamic Revolutionary Tribunals had changed
325
since tiie publication of its report Law and Human Rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran in May 1980 (see Amnesty International Report 1980 and 1981).
During 1981 Amnesty International received hundreds of allegations of torture of political prisoners, in particular in Evin Prison in Tehran. Some were supported by photographs and medical reports. The methods of torture described in these reports included beating, kicking, whipping with cables, banging heads against walls, burning with cigarettes, burning with an iron and mock executions. One report described a special room at Evin Prison called autog-e autoo (ironing room) in which prisoners were tied to a bed and their backs, buttocks and the soles of their feet were burned with an iron. In another place in Evin Prison called zir-e zamin-e haqiqat (basement of truth) it was alleged that prisoners were burned with cigarettes during interrogation.
In June Amnesty International received from the Iranian authorities the English version of the report of the Torture Probe Commission, assigned by Ayatollah Khomeini to investigate previous allegations of torture. This report concluded that although some prisoners had been ill-treated, torture was not systematic. On 7 December Amnesty International wrote to Prime Minister Housein Mousavi urging "a new investigation into allegations of torture" and "a public, unequivocal condemnation and prohibition of torture from the highest level". It stated that" on the basis of the information available to us, there is reason to believe that torture is now being carried out as a routine practice in some Iranian prisons, in particular Evin Prison." Amnesty International also referred to allegations that some prisoners who had died as a result of torture had been hanged after their death to make it appear that the cause of death was hanging.
The number of prisoners of conscience was not known to Amnesty International. In most cases it was impossible for Amnesty International to establish whether a given prisoner was a prisoner of conscience: either the person was not charged; or the charges were phrased in such general terms that Amnesty Internationa! could not ascertain whether they included a specific offence; or the lack of a fair trial made it impossible to assess the validity of a conviction. In November Amnesty International attempted to send an observer to the trial of Abolfazl Ghassemi, Secretary General of the Iran Party (see Amnesty International Report 1981). He was charged with publicizing the views of a Kurdish theologian, having links with former Prime Minister Dr Shapur Bakhtiar and having collaborated with SAVAK (the former National Intelligence and Security Organization). The trial, which lasted two days and was held in camera, ended before the Amnesty International observer could reach Tehraa
326
The death sentence passed on Abolfazl Ghassemi was commuted to life imprisonment on grounds of age and ill-health. Amnesty International considered him to be a prisoner of conscience.
Other prisoners of conscience included members of the Baha'i religion, many of whom were executed during 1981. The B aha'is were the only substantial religious minority not recognized in the Iranian Constitution. By December 1981 a total of 97 Baha'is had been officially executed since the revolution of February 1979. However, other Baha'is "disappeared" after being arrested and it was feared that they might have been killed. Nine members of the National Spiritual Assembly of the Baha'is of Iran and two other Baha'is, arrested in August 1980, had not been heard of by the end of 1981 (see Amnesty International Report 1981). Baha'is were usually charged with "Zionism" and espionage on behalf of Israel, apparently because Baha'i world headquarters are in Israel. Amnesty Inter-nationd did not believe that these charges were justified, and some Baha'is were apparently executed without having been charged or tried.
In October Amnesty International asked Ayatollah Madavi-Kani, then Prime Minister, to allow an Amnesty International delegation to discuss the organization's concerns with him and other authorities. In a reply received from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on 22 October the government insisted that Amnesty International meet certain conditions before they would receive a delegation. Amnesty International stated publicly that it was not the organization's policy to undertake missions subject to conditions laid down by governments. On 3 November it wrote to the new Prime Minister, Housein Mousavi, explaining the guidelines for Amnesty International missions and reiterating its wish to discuss human rights violations in Iran with him and other government ministers. Amnesty International pointed out that the Iranian Government had agreed to accept its obligations as a State Party to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights during a session of the Human Rights Committee on 26 April 1979. It drew to his attention the United Nations General Assembly Resolution 35/172, which urges member states "to respect as a minimum standard the content of the provisions of Articles 6,14 and 15 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights [the right to life, the right to a fair trial and the right not to be subjected to retroactive criminal charges or punishment] and, where necessary, to review their legal rules and practices so as to guarantee the most careful legal procedures and the greatest possible safeguards for the accused in capital cases".
