Albania
Albania, although a member of the United Nations, has not signed or ratified the» international human rights covenants. Its laws explicitly limit the exercise of certain human rights in the name of defending the socialist state and the Albanian Workers' Party from "socially dangerous acts", in particular "manifestations of bureaucracy and liberalism". For instance Article 55 of the criminal code deals with "anti-state propaganda and agitation". Its broad formulation makes it possible to penahze the non-violent expression of dissent or religious belief, with 10 years' deprivation of liberty (not less than 10 years or death in particularly serious cases or in time of war). Similarly Article 53, which deals with"sabotage", allows for excessively wide application It refers to: "An action or absence of action intended to undermine state activity or that of the Workers' Party of Albania, the socialist economy, the organization and direction of the state and society" and also carries a penalty of not less than 10 years' deprivation of liberty, or death.
An article about "sabotage" in the official legal journal Dr^yi^sza Popu//ore (Popular Justice) No. I of January/March 1981 revealed that people from all the main areas of public life had been prosecuted for ¿is offence in recent years. "Thus all the hostile groups which were uncovered, especially during the recent years in the military, in the field of state administration and economic management, in the fields of arts and culture and so forth, tried to realize their hostile objectives entirely through sabotage in the various spheres of our political, ideological, military, economic and administrative life."
Very few Albanian citizens were officially allowed to travel abroad. People who attempted to leave the country without official authorization were liable under Article 127 of the criminal code to a sentence of up to five years' deprivation of liberty for "illegal passage across the borders of the state". Under Article 47 they could be sentenced to 10 to 25 years' imprisotmient or death for "flight from the state and refusal to return to the fatherland on the part of a person sent on service or allowed temporarily to leave the state". Amnesty International was informed of a number of people sentenced during the 1960s and 1970s to up to 25 years' imprisonment under these articles or similar provisions in the former (1958) criminal code.
Since 1967, when Albania was officially proclaimed an atheist state, all places of worship have been closed and religious leaders of
257
the Muslim, Orthodox and Roman Catholic faiths have been prohibited from carrying out religious duties. Those who did were reportedly severely penalized by the authorities. It was alleged by emigre religious sources that over 20 Roman Catholic priests and members of religious orders were serving prison sentences in 1981. At least two — Bishops Fishta and Coba — were reported to have died in detention in the late \ 910s{sqq Amnesty International Report 1981). Amnesty International learned of the arrest of Father Ndoc Luli in mid-1980 for having baptized the children of a relative. Their mother was apparently sentenced to eight years' imprisonment. Father Luli was reported to have been tried and sentenced in camera; Amnesty International did not however learn details of his sentence.
In past years Amnesty International received reports of serious deficiencies in criminal procedure both during pre-trial detention and trial. It was alleged that psychological and sometimes physical pressure was used during investigation to obtain statements from the accused and witnesses. Some defendants were held in solitary confinement without access to family or lawyer for up to six months during pre-trial investigation. Where defendants were permitted defence counsel, these appeared to have been state-appointed and to have provided only nominal services. Some defendants did not see their defence counsel before the trial itself, which was frequently held behind closed doors.
Amnesty International could not, on the basis of the information available, estimate the number of political prisoners in Albania. However, reports indicated that in the late 1970s up to 2,000 political prisoners were held in the prison camps of Ballsh and Spaci alone. Many of them were reported to have been convicted for expressing dissatisfaction with economic or political conditions in Albania, or for attempting to leave the country without authorization.
Conditions at Spaci camp, with an estimated prison population of over 500 political prisoners, were described as particularly harsh. According to reports, prisoners mined copper in eight-hour shifts, six days a week, with little protective clothing. Production targets were described as excessive and prisoners who failed to meet these targets faced extra work hours or solitary confinement. Ballsh camp reportedly held some 1,400 political prisoners, and there were also camps at Ballsh for ordinary criminal prisoners and for foreigners. Conditions, although apparently less harsh than at Spaci, were also reported to be very poor. According to these reports, prisoners slept in unheated barracks, on straw mattresses on wooden platforms. At both camps food was deficient in quality and quantity. It had to be supplemented with parcels from prisoners' families and with food produced on farms attached to prison camp sites bought from the prisoners' wages.
258
Medical care, provided by ^aff mainly recruited from among the prisoners, was inadequate. Prisoners punished by solitary confinement were kept in unheated, concrete cells approximately two metres by one metre, with neither bed nor mattress. It was also reported that guards punished prisoners by stripping them to the waist and beating them with rubber hosing filled with sand or gi^vel.
Political prisoners were also held in other prisons, such as Burreli, and employed in labour camps in many parts of the coimtry to construct factories and housing, and work on marsh-drainage and mining. Other political or religious dissenters were administratively interned or banished. Under Decree No. 5912 of 1979 people may be administratively interned or banished, without trial(in contravention of Article 56 of the constitution), for unspecified periods. This measure may also be used against "members of the family of fugitives living inside or outside the state" — that is, as a reprisal against people who have not themselves necessarily violated Albanian law.
On 28 March 1981 the National Assembly passed a law which laid down the procedure for granting pardons to convicted prisoners. Amnesty International learned of one political prisoner, a foreign national, who was granted a pardon and released during 1981.
The criminal code lists 34 crimes, 23 of which are political and military crimes, punishable by the discretionary death sentence.
