Mali
Amnesty International's main concerns were political imprisonment, the detention and banishment without charge or trial of prisoners of conscience, poor prison conditions, and the death penalty.
Amnesty International continued to work on behalf of 46 teachers and a student arrested between July 1980 and March 1981 for alleged involvement in autonomous trade union activities (see Amnesty International Report 1981). Twelve teachers arrested in July 1980 had served short prison
58
sentences for "opposition to tiie legitimate authority" by November 1980, and were put "at the disposal of the Ministry of the Interior" and banished in early December to remote administrative outposts. Amnesty International also appealed ^for the release of Ibrahima Samba Traore, a teacher who had lived in France, and was held without trial in Bamako, the capital, from September 1980. Twenty teachers arrested in Bamako in mid-November 1980 were also banished in early December 1980 to the Gao region. Mamadou Lamine Kanoute, also a teacher arrested in November 1980, remained in detention in a Bamako police station. Between January and March 1981, 12 more teachers and a student were arrested and held without trial in police stations in Bamako. In April 1981 the teachers arrested in November 1980 and in 1981 and Ibrahima Samba Traore were charged with "secret association". This carries a penalty of one to three years' imprisonment and a heavy fine.
On 10 July 1981 President Moussa Traore announced an amnesty for the detained or banished teachers. According to the official statement "the teachers who had been transferred . . . will be allowed to return to their functions... [ and]... all the teachers held in preventive detention will be freed". All the teachers and the student detained in Bamako were released, and the teachers arrested in July 1980 and in 1981 allowed to return to their jobs. The restrictions on the freedom of movement of the 20 teachers sent to Gao were also lifted. However, this group was later informed that they would not be able to return to their teaching posts in Bamako, and the majority received postings in Gao and other rural areas.
Amnesty International continued to work for the release of Dr Mamadou Gologo and Idrissa Diakite, convicted on charges of "insulting the head of state". They were sentenced to four years' imprisonment in October 1979 after the distribution of leaflets criticizing the government Dr Gologo was allowed to remain in hospital throughout the year for the treatment of an eye ailment
Conditions of detention in several of Bamako's police stations were reported to be harsh, with detainees being held in dark, poorly-ventilated and overcrowded cells. Standards of sanitation and hygiene were very low. Conditions at the Prison centrale (Central Prison) were reportedly poor, with frequent overcrowding and inadequate food. The Taoudenit" Special Re-education Centre" was used to hold political prisoners. Its extreme Saharan temperature and the severity of the regime made imprisonment a brutal punishment The food provided was of low nutritional value and many prisoners were reported to be forced to march barefoot some 20 to 40 kilometres a day.
In early February 1981 Amnesty International publicly appealed
59
to delegates attending an extraordinary congress of the country's sole political party, the Union démocratique du peuple ma/ie« (UDPM), the Democratic Union of the Malian People. It called for the release of all prisoners of conscience in the country, an end to torture (see Amnesty International Report 1981), and an improvement in prison conditions. No reply was received. In mid-March 1981 Amnesty International representatives met the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Blondin Alioune Beye, and reiterated their concerns.
In mid-March 1981 the Special State Security Court imposed three death sentences, one in absentia, on three gendarmes allegedly involved in a plot to assassinate President Traore on New Year's Eve 1980. These death sentences were not believed to have been carried out in 1981.
