Ivory Coast
Amnesty International's concerns were detention without trial, the forcible conscription of trade union activists, the forcible repatriation of exiles, and gross ill-treatment of detainees.
Eighteen journalists and technicians at the Radio- Télévision ivoirienne ( RTI), the national broadcasting agency, and the Agence ivoirienne de presse (AIP), the national press agency, were arrested in December 1980 and then forcibly conscripted into the army and sent to the mihtary camp at Séguéla. About 100 other workers were locked out and threatened with dismissal. Staff at the RTI and AIP had gone on strike in late 1980 for salary increases and improvements in training programs. Conscription in the Ivory Coast was not universally applied, and in this case as in others in the past was used to punish critics of the government. Also arrested in early December 1980 were eight white-collar workers suspected of holding an unofficial union meeting and possessing Marxist hterature. They were accused of "subversive activities, threatening the internal and external security of the state, and insulting the President of the Republic". They were not charged or brought to trial. After two months' detention at the Commissariat central (central police station) they were held in an underground cell at the headquarters of the Sûreté nationale (National Security Agency) in the capital, Abidjan, without access to family or lawyers. In its appeals to the authorities in January and April 1981 Amnesty International called for the immediate release or prompt trial of all these individuals. No answer was received
After a public appeal by Amnesty International in mid-May 1981 for their release. Minister of Information Amadou Thiam denied that any prisoners of conscience were held in the Ivory Coast He stated that only six journalists had been forcibly conscripted and claimed that they were doing military service which was obligatory for all Ivorians. He also stated that all the trade unionists arrested in December 1980 had been released after 48 hours in custody. In a second public statement Amnesty International reiterated its appeal
47
for the release of the 18 journalists conscripted for political reasons and of the eight trade unionists detained without trial in Abidjan. In mid-June 1981 a disciplinary commission of the Ministry of Civil Service opened hearings on the case of the journalists and technicians who had been conscripted or locked out On 4 September 1981 the authorities announced a full pardon and the 18 conscripted journalists and technicians were allowed to return to their jobs in Abidjan. On 23 December 1981 the eight trade unionists who had been held without trial for more than a year were released.
In May 1981 Amnesty International expressed its concern to the Ivorian authorities about the reported refoulement (expulsion or forcible return of refugees to territories where their life or freedom would be threatened) of three Guinean exiles in mid-April 1981. They were flown from Abidjan to Conakry (the capital of Guinea), where they were detained. Two of them were returned to the Ivory Coast after three weeks' detention. However, truck driver Barry Mouctar continued to be held without trial in Guinea.
In March 1981, 46 people died of suffocation in a small, badly ventilated cell axthqgendarmerie{\>o\\qq station) at Agban, a suburb of the capital. Most were Ghanaians, who were among several hundred foreign workers arrested during an operation purportedly to suppress urban crime. Although President Houphouet-Boigny was reported to have condemned these deaths and to -have ordered an official inquiry, there were no reports of proceedings being instituted gendarmerie officials responsible. Amnesty International was concerned by reports that migrant workers from neighbouring west African states, particularly from Upper Volta, had been singled out for arbitrary arrest and ill-treatment in detention. According to reports, migrant workers were systematically and regularly beaten in the Commissariat central and the Ecole de police (police training school) at Cocody. Conditions were extremely harsh in several detention centres in Abidjaa At the Commissariat central detainees were held in overcrowded, insanitary and frequently flooded pens, and were brutally treated by guards. At the Sûreté nationale some detainees were held in overcrowded and insanitary conditions in two underground cells, and were denied visits from relatives.
In July 1981 the National Assembly of the Ivory Coast abolished the death penalty for political offences.
48
