El Salvador
Amnesty International continued to receive reports of arbitrary arrests, abductions and subsequent "disappearances", torture, and extra-legal executions. Persistent reports of the involvement of the official security forces in these violations of human rights led Amnesty International to send a fact-finding mission to Central America in August 1981. Testimony from refugees in Honduras, Costa Rica, Mexico and the United States of America confirmed accounts received by Amnesty International that identified regular security and military units as responsible for widespread torture, mutilation and killings of non-combatant civilians from all sectors of Salvadorian society.
Eye-witness reports received by Amnesty International consistently implicated the paramilitary unit ORDEN in human rights abuses. Formally dissolved after the 1979 coup ORDEN continued to operate under another name, the Frente Democmtica Nacionalista. A number of former officials testified that this unit had been responsible for abductions, torture and extra-legal executions. For example, a former doctor in the Salvadorian army testified to the US Congress on 29 April that
"It is a grievous error to believe that the forces of the extreme right, or the so-called death squads, operate independently of the security forces. The death squads are made up of members of the security forces and acts of terrorism credited to these squads, such as political assassinations, kidnappings and indiscriminate murder, are, in fact, planned by high-ranking military officers and carried out by members of the security forces."
In a context of widespread civil conflict the rural population in areas contested by military forces suff'ered indiscriminate violence in reported attempts to clear such zones of all potential support for the opposition. People trying to flee from such military operations were also killed.
Although denied by Honduran and Salvadorian officials, accounts
134
given to Amnesty International by survivors and witnesses corroborated two instances of Honduran troops barring the way as Salvadorian troops pursued would-be refugees. Individual survivors confirmed detailed information collected by local priests that at least 600 people had died in May 1980 when thousands of Salvadorians fleeing areas of armed conflict tried to cross into Honduras at the Sumpul River. Other witnesses present at a similar crossing at the Lempa River in March 1981 told Amnesty International that only the presence of foreign aid workers and medical personnel kept the number of dead lower on that occasion. One foreign relief worker told the delegation: "The helicopter came very low one time — almost touching the tree tops — we could see the face of the man at the machine-gun. There is no way he couldn't have seen that he was firing at women and children."
The Amnesty International mission was given details of Salvadorian refugees being removed from refugee camps by Salvadorian military and paramilitary units and then forced to return to El Salvador. The killing of some of these people was confirmed. Others remained missing. Further we 11-documented reports of the forced return and killing of Salvadorian refugees and the murder of Honduran relief workers implicated Honduran troops. On 25 November 1981 Amnesty International asked President José Napoleón Duarte to guarantee the security of seven Salvadorian refugees reliably reported to have been abducted from Honduran refugee camps on 16 November, and forcibly returned to Salvadorian territory by Salvadorian soldiers. Protests were also directed to the Honduran authorities.
Reports of Salvadorian troops killing large numbers of civilians as they tried to make their way from areas of fighting to refuge in Honduras continued. In November reports were received that the new Atlacatl brigade had carried out a sweep of an area in northern El Salvador in which at least 250 would-be refugees were killed Witnesses stated that the would-be refugees had been positioned between the army and the opposition forces at some distance from the opposition. They categorically rejected the government explanation that the 250 casualties had occurred in clashes between government and opposition forces. In December 1981 the Atlacatl brigade was again named as responsible for the massacre of hundreds of non-combatants, mainly women and children trying to reach Honduras from Morazán.
C oncem at the possible impact of military assistance, including the training of the Atlacatl brigade, on the human rights situation in El Salvador prompted Amnesty International to write to US officials several times to urge the USA not to provide military and security
135
assistance to El Salvador which could be used to perpetrate human rights violations. Following an exchange of correspondence on this subject with the new administration of President Ronald Reagan, which Amnesty International made public with a news release on 11 June 1981, Amnesty International raised its concerns with representatives of the Department of State in Washington on 9 October 1981
Amnesty International also wrote to US Attorney General William French Smith on 31 July and 8 December about the standards and procedures followed by the US Government in dealing with applications by Salvadorians for asylum in the USA. Amnesty International was concerned that the US Government appeared to be pressing Salvadorians to opt for "voluntary return" to their country of origin in spite of danger to their lives there. Twenty-four-year-old Santana Chirino Amaya was deported from the USA in June 1981 after having been refused refugee status. His decapitated body was found on 28 August in Amapulapa Antonio Husman returned to El Salvador after 10 years in the USA to obtain a document which the US Immigration and Naturalization Service told him he needed to regularize his presence in the USA. He was arrested on 24 April 1981 and was still missing by the end of the year.
In May 1981 the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees stated that conditions in El Salvador were such that all Salvadorians who had left their country should be considered prima facie refugees. In its letters to Attorney General William French Smith Amnesty International urged the US Government to grant all Salvadorians in the US extended voluntary departure status, permitting them to stay as long as the danger to life in their country continued. Amnesty International also submitted information to US officials relevant to the consideration of the cases of individual Salvadorians applying for asylum where it considered that they faced danger if returned to El Salvador.
Amnesty International was concerned that displaced persons inside El Salvador (internal refugees) had been removed from apparently secure church-run asylum centres, and had" disappeared" or been summarily executed. On 11 August Amnesty International wrote to President Duarte asking for assurances as to the safety of some 2,000 people, primarily women and children, who had reportedly been removed from La Bermuda refugee centre on 4 July and transferred to prisons, and requesting information about 25 people who "disappeared" during the move. No reply was received.
In no instance during 1981 was a satisfactory explanation given to 65 queries from Amnesty International on behalf of555 people taken into custody by the security forces, nor any satisfactory report given
136
regarding the deaths of those killed
Figures varied as to how many people were actually killed The US Embassy calculated that 7,372 had died since it began tabulations in September 1980. Minister of Defence General José Guillermo Garcia told the press in November 1981 that 30,000 had died since 1979; he said that 24,700 of them were "people who had nothing to do with the conflict". The Minister had earlier publicly promised to investigate reports from a Mexican journalist that 83 young people and children found decapitated outside Santa Ana in August 1981 had been beheaded by security agents in the Quality Meats processing plant at Ateos. However, no inquiry was ever initiated and the journalist left the country after receiving death threats. In 1981, as in previous years, the government did not take effective measures to investigate or prevent the many killings which could not be attributed to armed conflict
In April officials had promised to investigate the killing on 7 April of more than 20 young people in a suburb of the capital. Officials stated that the victims had died in an exchange of fire with the Treasury Police. Amnesty International pointed out that eye-wit-nesses had reported that many of the dead had been killed in cold blood after being roused from their beds. Others were bound and led away by Treasury Police agents and their bodies found later. Amnesty International later expressed its concern about killings and "disappearances" in which the Treasury Police had been implicated which occurred in May, June, July and September 1981. Amnesty International did not learn of any investigations into these violations of human rights by the Salvadorian Government
Investigations into the murders of two US labour advisers killed in January 1981 along with Rodolfo Viera, head of El Salvador's agrarian reform institute, also stalled. Two Salvadorians from prominent families arrested in connection with the case were released Rodolfo Viera's murder took place shortly after he had publicly denounced fraud in the institute.
The investigation of the kilUngs in December 1980 of four American church women also made slow progress, although there was clear evidence to implicate the security forces. After the US Congress stipulated in December 1981 that additional military assistance depended on evidence that El Salvador was making serious efforts to investigate the murders of certain US citizens, there were reports that indictments were imminent
The human rights violations in El Salvador were committed in the context of special emergency legislation. During 1981 this legislation was renewed and extended. A state of siege was declared for 30 days on 6 March 1980, and reimposed regularly thereafter. On 10 January
137
1981 martial law was declared and a curfew was imposed Evidence soon emerged that troops were ordered to kill anyone breaking the curfew. From 12 January to 19 February alone, the Legal Aid Office of the Archbishopric of San Salvador compiled a list of 168 people killed as alleged curfew breakers. In October 1981 Amnesty International launched an urgent appeal for José Orlando Castellanos, found shot in the head in a ditch on 13 October. Hospital staff at first denied that he was at Rosales Hospital, a centre from which patients have been abducted and murdered in the past, but later acknowledged his presence. Officials stated that he had been shot as a curfew violator.
Throughout 1981 people monitoring government abuses such as journalists, church activists, political activists and trade unionists were intimidated, arrested and killed (see Amnesty International Report 1981). Many staff members of the Salvadorian Human Rights Commission had been killed, "disappeared" or forced into exile since 1970. On 15 December 1981 Amnesty International initiated urgent inquiries about three men working for the commission who were reportedly abducted on 4 December. On 15 May Amnesty International inquired about the whereabouts of Ana Margarita Gasteazoro and two other members of a social democratic party. The government initially denied that they had been arrested but. after widespread protests presented Ana Margarita Gasteazoro on national television to prove that she had not been ill-treated in custody.
In March a number of people on whose behalf Amnesty International had appealed were located in Santa Tecla prison by a foreign journalist. Among the few known to have survived arrest by the Salvadorian security forces, they were able to offer unique testimony concerning arrest and detention procedures, and prison conditions. They included trade unionists, journalists, university staff and teachers who told of being subjected to electric shocks, beatings and the use of hallucinogenic drugs in attempts to obtain confessions of support for the opposition. Photographs of one young teacher, Rafael Cari as Flores, who like the others had not been charged, showed large areas of burnt and scarred flesh on his arms, legs, face, trunk and testicles where he said his interrogators had thrown sulphuric acid.
Throughout the year the grave human rights situation in El Salvador led Amnesty International to continue to submit information to relevant regional and international bodies. In October an interim report to the United Nations General Assembly on the situation of human rights in El Salvador, prepared by the Special Rapporteur appointed by the UN Commission on Human Rights, concluded that there had been a consistent pattern of gross violations of human rights in El Salvador since the ruling junta took power in
138
1979, and that the executive and judicial branches of EI Salvador's Government had adopted an attitude of passivity and inactivity toward the violations. In its 1981 report to the General Assembly of the Organization of American States held in December, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights singled out El Salvador as one of two countries where the commission considered that the most serious violation of the right to life took the form of summary execution. In this context it declared that states could not employ state terrorism to combat subversive terrorism.
