Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
Amnesty International was concerned about the continuing conviction of prisoners of conscience under criminal legislation which explicitly restricts the non-violent exercise of human rights. Most prisoners of conscience were charged with political offences such as "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda", "circulation of fabrications known to be false which defame the Soviet state and social system" (often referred to as "anti-Soviet slander") or with violating the "legislation on cults" which restricts religious activity. Many prisoners of conscience were also convicted on criminal charges which bore no ostensible relation to their dissenting activities, and which Amnesty International believed to be without foundation and politically motivated. Trials frequently fell s^iort of internationally accepted standards. Prisoners of conscience in penal institutions continued to suffer from chronic hunger, inadequate medical care and difficult, often dangerous, compulsory labour. Those detained in psychiatric hospitals were deprived of virtually any protection against ill-treatment Some Soviet citizens who exposed and protested against these and other human rights violations were imprisoned or sent into internal exile in remote ai"eas of the USSR.
Towards the end of 1979 the authorities launched a major drive against all forms of dissent ( see Amnesty International Report 1980 and 1981). 1981 saw this drive continue. Amnesty International learned of approximately 200 people arrested solely for expressing views — political, religious or nationalist — disapproved of by the authorities. It knew of more than 20 people who were forcibly confined in psychiatric hospitals for political rather than authentic medical reasons in 1981. Amnesty International also received information about the harassment intimidation, short-term detention and, in some cases, physical ill-treatment of many other dissenters. In the course of 1981 it worked on behalf of about 500 prisoners adopted as prisoners of conscience, or being investigated as possible prisoners of conscience.
In 1981 Amnesty International learned of the acquittal of Eduard Kuleshov. Amnesty International had not previously known of anyone being acquitted by a Soviet court of a political or reUgious
298
offence. Eduard Kuleshov was arrested in December 1978 after signing a letter in defence of the Byelorussian prisoner of conscience Mikhail Kukobaka. Charged with "anti-Soviet slander", he was reportedly beaten during pre-trial investigation and sentenced the following June to three years' imprisonment In October the Supreme Court overruled the verdict and opened a new investigation into the case. In December 1980, two years after his arrest, he was released, reportedly because of "failure to prove the charge". Amnesty International did not know whether this decision was reached by a retrial or by judicial review.
About half the new cases taken up by Amnesty International in 1981 were of rehgious believers. Most were members of unregistered Baptist, Seventh Day Adventist and Pentecostalist congregations. They reject the restrictions imposed by the state on their freedom to choose their own church leaders, bring up their children according to their own religious convictions and openly preach their beliefs. The authorities regard these unregistered communities as illegal. The imprisonment of these religious believers took place against a background of widespread official harassment This included homes being searched for unauthorized religious literature, and the disruption of prayer meetings. In July Amnesty International issued "Imprisonment of Religious Believers: A Background Paper" which contained a cross-section of cases.
Most of the religious believers known to have been imprisoned were Baptists. During 1981 Amnesty International learned of the arrest and trial of about 75 Baptists. They included 60-year-old Pastor Dmitry Minyakov, a leader of the unregistered Baptists, who went on hunger-strike for several months in protest against his arrest In August he was sentenced in Tallinn to five years' imprisonment for " infringement of the person and rights of citizens under appearance of performing religious ceremonies" and his 15-year-old son was placed in a state orphanage. Larisa Zaitseva served a three-year prison sentence from 1977 for circulating unauthorized religious literature. In September 1981 the 30-year-old Baptist was again arrested and charged with "infringement of residence regulations".
At least 20 Seventh Day Adventists and 20 Pentecostahsts were known to have been imprisoned. Two Seventh Day Adventists, Olga Kharitonova and Tatyana Taranyuk, were searched during a train journey and discovered to be carrying unauthorized religious literature. In May they were sentenced in Voronezh to two-and-a-half years' imprisonment each. In December the Pentecostalist writer Pavel Akhtyorov was sentenced in Donetsk to a total of 12 years' imprisonment and internal exile for attempting to send an autobiographical work abroad
299
Two leading figures of the unregistered Pentecostalist Church were imprisoned Ivan Fedotov and Vladimir Murashkin. Both were sentenced in July in Maloyaroslavets to five years' imprisonment Nikolai Bobarykin, a deacon in an unregistered Pentecostalist congregation in the Krasnodar Territory and father of eight children, was reported to have been sentenced to six years' imprisonment and five years' internal exile.
A number of Roman Catholics were also imprisoned In Lithuania two members of an unofficial group monitoring Soviet observance of the 1975 Helsinki Final Act — Mecislovas Jurevicius and Vytautas Vaiciunas — were imprisoned for organizing religious processions. Charged with "organization of, or active participation in, group actions which violate pubhc order", they were sentenced in June to three and two-and-a-half years' imprisonment respectively. In the Ukraine two recently ordained priests of the outlawed Ukrainian Catholic or Uniate Church — Roman Yesip and Vasyl Kovaltsiv — were reported to have been arrested in Lvov shortly before Easter. Earlier in the year Amnesty International received reports that a priest from Latvia, Father Vladislav Zavalnyuk, had been forcibly confined for a short period in a psychiatric hospital because of his religious activities.
Other religious believers arrested during the year included Velio Salum, an Estonian Lutheran pastor, who was for a short time compulsorily detained in a psychiatric hospital for allegedly expressing nationalist sentiments in his sermons and writings.
A number of reUgious believers were among those imprisoned in 1981 for refusing to do military service for reasons of conscience. They included Baptists and Pentecostalists. Others were imprisoned for refusing to do military service on grounds of conscience other than religious conviction. These included Johannes Rauf, a German would-be emigrant and Vladimir Sichko, a young student whose father and brother were imprisoned for membership of the Ukrainian Helsinki monitoring group.
The authorities continued to imprison members of non-Russian nationalities who protested against what they considered an official policy of "Russification", discriminating against national minorities, or who advocated political independence for their nations. Many based their protests on Article 72 of the USSR Constitution which proclaims that "each Union Republic has the right freely to secede from the USSR".
Ten Armenians seeking political independence for Armenia by non-violent means were arrested or tried in Erevan between February and April 1981. All were charged with "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda" and most were also charged with "participation in an
300
anthSoviet organization". Five were accused of organizing a nationalist group known as the "Union of Young Armenians". The two alleged leaders, Marzpet Arutyunyan andlshkanMkrtchyan, were both given 12-year sentences of imprisonment and internal exile, and their three colleagues received sentences of between three and eight years.
Others imprisoned for "nationalist" activities included the Lithuanian Algimantas Andreika, arrested in May and charged with "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda" and the Latvian poet Alfred Zarins, who in September was sentenced to three years' imprisonment
During 1981 at least 12 Jews campaigning for the right to emigrate to Israel or for the preservation of Jewish culture were arrested or tried Alexander Paritsky in Kharkov and Vladimir Tsukerman and Osip Lokshin in Kishinev were given three-year sentences for "anti-Soviet slander". In September two unofficial Hebrew teachers, Lev Shefer and Vladimir Yelchin, were arrested in Sverdlovsk and charged with the same offence. In Amnesty International's opinion several Jewish activists appear to have been convicted in 1981 on false criminal charges.
A number of ethnic Germans were among those arrested for seeking to emigrate from the USSR. Yevgeny Antsupov, a Russian historian and dissenter from Kharkov who had unsuccessfiilly sought permission to emigrate, was sentenced in August to a total of 11 years' imprisonment and internal exile ostensibly for "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda".
Amnesty International learned of the imprisonment of Vyacheslav Cherepanov, a Lithuanian, who had been returned to the Soviet Union on 21 July 1981 by the Finnish authorities after attempting to leave the USSR without permission. Vyacheslav Cherepanov, who was reported to have been imprisoned for political reasons in the late 1960s, was charged with "treason" intheformof"ffightabroad". He was tried in May in Vilnius by the Lithuanian Supreme Court and sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment and three years' internal exile.
Members of unofficial groups monitoring Soviet observance of the 1975 Helsinki Final Act continued to be imprisoned InMarchl981 two Lithuanian Helsinki monitors, Mecislovas Jurevicius and Vytautas Vaiciunas, and one Ukrainian, Ivan Kandyba, were arrested At the beginning of April Tatyana Osipova, a member of the Moscow Helsinki monitoring group, was convicted of "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda" and sentenced to five years' imprisonment and five years' internal exile. In August her husband, Ivan Kovalyov, also a member of the Moscow group, was arrested and charged with the same offence. In July Ivan Kandyba, a former lawyer and prisoner of conscience, previously imprisoned from 1971 to 1976 for membership of
301
an unofficial group seeking Ukrainian independence, was tried in Lvov. As a second offender, the court designated him " an especially dangerous recidivist" and sentenced himto 10 years' imprisonment in "special regime" corrective labour colonies — the most severe category — and five years' internal exile. Towards the end of the year the Georgian monitor Merab Kostava was arrested shortly before the expiry of a five-year sentence of imprisonment and internal exile, charged with "resisting a policeman", and sentenced in December to a further five years' imprisonment Amnesty International believed the motive behind the charge to be political.
In September the author, human rights activist and former prisoner of conscience Anatoly Marchenko was sentenced to a total ofl5 years' imprisonment and internal exile for"anti-Sovietagitation and propaganda". Also convicted under this charge was Raisa Rudenko, the wife of the imprisoned Ukrainian Helsinki monitor Mykola Rudenko. She was given an eight-year sentence of imprisonment and internal exile for sending information abroad about her husband and other prisoners of conscience.
Many prisoners of conscience faced further charges before the expiry of their sentence which resulted in their detention being extended For example, the Byelorussian human rights campaigner Mikhail Kukobaka was not released in October at the end of a three-year sentence. He was reportedly charged with conducting "anti-Soviet slander" in his place of imprisonment The Armenian national rights campaigner Paruir Airikyan was sentenced to an additional three years' imprisonment He was alleged to have bribed a guard to smuggle items in and out of the corrective labour colony in which he had almost completed the first part of a 10-year sentence of imprisonment and internal exile.
Amnesty International also adopted as prisoners of conscience or investigated as possible prisoners of conscience several Latvians imprisoned for their association with the outlawed Latvian Social Democratic Party; Konstantin Azadowsky, a scholar from Leningrad, convicted on a criminal charge in circumstances indicating that the motive behind the charge was political; Vsevolod Kuvakin, a campaigner for workers' rights; and Alexei Myasnikov, whose private writings, confiscated during a search of his home, were disapproved of by the authorities.
Throughout the year Amnesty International received further evidence of the forcible confinement of dissenters in psychiatric hospitals for political rather than authentic medical reasons. Several prisoners of conscience were reported to have been confined indefinitely in "special" psychiatric hospitals. These are the strictest psychiatric hospitals, intended for people who "represent a special
302
clanger to society". The prisoners included Nikolai Samkharadze, a Georgian nationalist, Alexei Nikitin, a workers' rights campaigner, and Teofils Kuma, a Latvian Pentecostalist Internment in ordinary psychiatric hospitals was more, commoa Cases of concern to Amnesty International included: Vladimir Titov, who had circulated an open letter stating that the KGB (Committee of State Security) was trying to recruit him as an informer, Mikhail Zotov, a dissenting artist and member of an unofficial trade union group; Yury Temopolsky, an architect who had tried to hold an unauthorized meeting with a foreign journalist; and Mikhail Utemov, a would-be emigrant Many of those forcibly hospitalized in 1981 for political reasons were confined for relatively brief periods ranging from a few days to several months.
Amnesty International continued to receive reports of prisoners of conscience being ill-treated in psychiatric hospitals, particularly with powerful drugs. At the beginning of November it was reported that Alexei Nikitin was being given "massive doses of drugs" by doctors in Dnepropetrovsk Special Psychiatric Hospital. As a result of this treatment his eyesight had seriously deteriorated. Amnesty International also learned of prisoners of conscience whose psychiatric confinement was extended even though doctors recommended their release. Anatoly Lupynos, a Ukrainian, had been interned in psychiatric hospitals since 1971 for publicly reading his own uncensored poems. Medical commissions recommended his release at least seven times but were overruled by the courts. At the end of 1981 he was interned in Oryol Special Psychiatric Hospital.
During 1981 the authorities tried the last members of the "Working Commission to Investigate the Use of Psychiatry for Political Purposes", an unofficial group actively opposed to political abuses of psychiatry. Dr Anatoly Koryagin, a psychiatrist, examined, at their own request, 16 dissenters who had been forcibly confined in psychiatric hospitals or threatened with such internment In each case he concluded that there had been no medical justification for compulsory hospitalization. He was arrested in February 1981. In June he was convicted in Kharkov of "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda" and sentenced to a total of 12 years' imprisonment and internal exile. Two other members, Irina Grivnina and Felix Serebrov, were tried in July and sentenced to five years' internal exile and nine years' imprisonment and internal exile respectively.
There was no improvement in the harsh conditions in which prisoners of conscience served their sentences. Amnesty International also received many reports of prisoners of conscience being punished for protesting against these conditions. Among such prisoner confined for long periods within corrective labour colonies were
303
Anatoly Koryagin, Yury Orlov, Oleksa Tykhy, Kirill Podrabinek and Alexander Podrabinek. Others, for example Anatoly Shcharansky and Arkady Tsurkov, were transferred from corrective labour colonies to even harsher conditions in Chistopol prison. On 10 October at least 300 prisoners, most of them prisoners of conscience, were reported to have gone on hunger-strike and to have refused to do compulsory labour in protest against their conditions and in support of poUtical prisoner status.
Reports of the hardships facing prisoners of conscience sentenced to internal exile in remote areas reached Amnesty International throughout the year. The 76-year-old Ukrainian Helsinki monitor Oksana Meshko, for example, was sentenced to five years' internal exile in the Khabarovsk Territory in the far east of the USSR, some 9,000 kilometres from her home in Kiev.
Amnesty International continued to campaign for the release of prisoner of conscience Dr Andrei Sakharov, who remained in enforced exile in the city of Gorky. On 7 December it appealed to President Brezhnev pointing out its belief that exile had been imposed on Andrei Sakharov by the Soviet authorities "directly on account of his public activities in defence of human rights". Amnesty International stressed that this contravened international human rights instruments ratified by the Soviet Government which guarantee the right to freedom of conscience.
During the year Amnesty International learned of about 20 death sentences, most for murder or war crimes. However, several people were sentenced to death for non-violent crimes. For example, it was reported in the Soviet press in October that A. Ashirov, the director of a cotton-cleaning factory in the Kirghiz republic, had been sentenced to death for defrauding the state of more than a million roubles. When Amnesty International learned of death sentences before they had been carried out it appealed to the authorities to commute them.
