Sudan
Amnesty International's concerns were p.	the detention without trial of govern-
ment opponents, unfair trials, and poor prison conditions.
Many political opponents of the government were detained indefinitely without charge or trial under the State Security Law. In March 1981 Saad Bahar, a retired army brigadier, and Saddig Ballo, a former member of parliament, were among 11 people of different opposition groupings arrested and accused of planning to overthrow the government. Amnesty International's investigations yielded no response from the authorities and the prisoners were still detained without charge at the end of the year.
81
A member ofthe southern regional parliament, Gabriel Mathiang Rok, the deputy chairman of the Sudanese parliamentary group, was arrested on 1 June 1981. He was charged with inciting students in the south to demonstrate against the government's decision not to site an oil refinery there, near the oil-fields. He was released uncharged after two months in detention.
In June 1981 hundreds of trade unionists were arrested after a strike by the 43,000-strong Sudan Railway Workers Union — Sudan's largest official trade union — over the dismissal of 20 union members and soaring prices. All strikes were banned on 16 June. When the strike continued. Abbas al-Khidir, President of the Railway Workers Union and a nominated member of parliament, was detained with the union's entire Executive Committee. Many members of the railway union and allied unions which joined them on strike were also detained President Gaafar Mohamed Numeiri decreed an amendment to the State Security Law imposing the death penalty or life imprisonment on anyone convicted by the State Security Court of organizing or participating in a strike. Amnesty International appealed for the release of the detained trade unionists on the grounds that they were prisoners of conscience. It protested strongly against the threat to execute people for trade union activities under the retroactive decree. On 6 July President Numeiri released Abbas al-Khidir and the Railway Workers Union leaders. The other trade unionists were later released without being tried, but many were dismissed from their jobs. The amendment to the State Security Law was dropped.
An unprecedented series of arrests of" aliens, tramps, pedlars and criminals" began in July 1981 and continued for some months. Thousands ofthe urban poor and unemployed were detained as the government faced increasing protests at rising prices of basic commodities. The government alleged that those arrested belonged to a clandestine Libyan-backed organization planning to overthrow the Sudanese Government Details ofthe arrests were difficult to obtain and Amnesty International could not verify this figure. Amnesty International asked the government the grounds for the arrests and the legal status of the detainees. It expressed concern at reports that many were held incommunicado in harsh conditions, some in newly designated detention areas-such as football stadiums, without adequate food or shelter. The government replied that the majority of those arrested had been released and that others were to be charged. It denied the allegations of ill-treatment
In November 1981 about 20 members of the banned Democratic Unionist Party were detained, including a former adopted prisoner of conscience Osman el-Hag Omer, a lawyer. Amnesty International was investigating their cases.
82
Towards the end of December 1981, 21 prominent southern politicians were detained after being called to Khartoum by President Numeiri to discuss the contents of a letter they had written to him under the name of "The Council for the Unity of Southern Sudan". The letter protested at the decision to divide the south into three new regions. It claimed that this violated the 1972 "Addis Ababa Agreement" which had ended the civil war and given considerable regional autonomy to the south. Most of the 21 were soon released but five of the group's leaders remained in detention — Samuel Aru Bol, Clement Mboro, Joseph Oduho, Martin Majier Gai, and Michael Wal. The first four were elected members of the southern regional parliament until its dissolution on 5 October 1981. Amnesty International expressed its concern to the government that they appeared to have been arrested for the expression of non-violent political views and inquired about their legal status and treatment in Kober Prison. The government later stated that they would be charged with attempting to establish an illegal political organization. Amnesty International adopted them as prisoners of conscience.
Many of the 170 prisoners adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience had been in detention since 1979 or 1980, when many known members or alleged supporters of banned political parties were arrested They included about 30 members of the Arab Ba' athist Socialist Party, arrested in March 1979 for opposition to the government's support for the peace treaty between Egypt and Israel. Several were released during 1981, including Youssif Himat Hassan, a bank manager, on whose behalf Amnesty International had appealed on medical grounds.
Over 120 members or alleged sympathizers of the Sudan Communist Party, detained during demonstrations and rioting against the government in 1979, remained in detention at the end of 1981. Very few were released during the year. Those still detained at the end of 1981 included Mohamed Murad, a lecturer in history at the University of Khartoum, Youssif Hussein, a member of the party's central committee and Mokhtar Abdullah, a trade unionist
Six members of the Democratic Unionist Party, arrested with about 50 others in May 1980 and accused of involvement in a coup conspiracy, were released in 1981. They had not been charged or tried. They included Seif Alawala Abdel-Majid, a doctor on whose behalf Amnesty International had launched a medical appeal. A number of teachers and students arrested in the south in August 1980, after demonstrations and protests against working conditions by teachers' and students' unions, were also released towards the end of 1981 without having been charged or tried.
During 1981 Amnesty International received information from
83
various sources, including a letter from a prisoner in Kober Prison, contradicting information from the Sudanese authorities that certain prisoners of concern to Amnesty International had been released Amnesty International wrote to Attorney General Hassan el-Turabi seeking clarification, but received no response.
A small number of political detainees were charged and tried by State Security Courts for membership of an illegal political organizatioa The only permitted political party in Sudan was the official Sudanese Socialist Union. In the cases known to Amnesty International the charges made no reference to the use or advocacy of violence. Those convicted were often detained under the State Security Law after the expiration of sentences of from six months' to a few years' imprisonment Defendants in State Security Courts had the right to legal defence but no right of appeal.
A special court was established for the trial of el-Tigani el-Tayeeb, a member of the central committee of the Sudan Communist Party, and Abdu Hashim Hamdallah, a businessman not known to have been involved in political activities. They were arrested in November
1980.	El-Tigani el-Tayeeb was charged with treason and inciting war on the government, which carries a mandatory death penalty. In preliminary hearings during 1981 the charges carrying the death penalty were dropped the remaining charges included various political offences. The trial had not yet begun at the end of 1981. Amnesty International was investigating the cases.
Amnesty International was concerned about prison conditions for political prisoners. Most political detainees were held in Kober Prison in Khartoum, where detainees went on hunger-strike on 28 February
1981,	protesting at worsening conditions under a new prison governor. The strike ended after three days when the authorities restored family visits and reading material and improved the prison diet and medical treatment Amnesty International was investigating allegations of ill-treatment of certain foreign prisoners in Kober Prison, and ill-treatment by military interrogators of political prisoners held in Dabak Detention Centre, a few kilometres north of Khartoum.
84
