Viet Nam
The continuing detention without charge or trial of thousands of members of the former South Vietnamese administration in"re-edu-cation" camps remained Amnesty International's principal concern in the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. The majority of those still detained were former soldiers or police officers. However, due to the wide interpretation of the legislation governing "re-education", the detainees also included former members of the South Vietnamese National Assembly, the judiciary, military chaplains and doctors, lawyers and academics. In addition. Amnesty International was concerned about inadequate medical care in "re-education" camps, continuing arrests on political grounds and the absence of adequate legal safeguards for those arrested or detained An apparent tendency by Vietnamese courts in the second half of 1981 to make greater use of the death penalty also caused concern to Amnesty International
In June 1981 Amnesty International published the Report of an Amnesty International Mission to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. The report contained an exchange of memoranda between Amnesty International and the Vietnamese Government which followed an Amnesty International mission to the country in December 1979. In a memorandum following that visit Amnesty International pointed out that it had consistently opposed prolonged administrative detention without trial of individuals because of their political beliefs throughout the world and that such detention
250
contradicted Article 9 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Amnesty International recommended the Vietnamese Government to close "re-education" camps and abolish the system of detention without trial. Amnesty International urged the government to establish an independent commission with full power to examine the grounds for detention in each individual case. In cases without sufficient grounds for criminal charges the individual should be immediately released. The decisions ofthe commission should be binding on the executive.
By the end of 1981 the authorities had made no substantial moves in this direction. Nearly seven years after the end of hostilities in South Viet Nam thousands of people were still in detention. Despite indications in 1980 that the government was considering resolving the problem of mass detention there were no large-scale releases or major legislative changes affecting detention. However many individuals were released in 1981. The authorities never disclosed the number of detainees held, the number of "re-education" camps, or the total number of releases. Moreover the government did not make clear its intentions towards those still held Amnesty International believes that an individual should not be detained indefinitely because of his or her rank or position in a former administration. Those who formerly held certain positions could not be said, because of that fact alone, to be"guilty of national treason" or of"war crimes" as the Vietnamese authorities suggested in their replies to Amnesty International. It is an important principle of international law that no one should be punished for an act not designated a crime at the time it was committed
The writer Duyen Anh, detained since 1975, and Dr Vu Quoc Tuong, former Dean of the Faculty of Law of Saigon University, were released in 1981 (see the Report of an Amnesty International Mission to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and Amnesty International Report 1981). Also released in February 1981 was the writer and journalist Nguyen Tran Huyen (Cao Giao), detained without charge or trial since 1978 in Chi Hoa Prison in Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon.
Among those detained since June 1975 who were adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International were 67-year-old Tran Trung Dung, a former senator and cabinet minister in the 1950s, and 60-year-old Mai Van An, a former judge of the Supreme Court. Both were detained without charge or trial in " re-education" camps in northern Viet Nam and were reported to be in poor health. Visits to the camps by relatives were believed to be rare because of the great distance from Ho Chi Minh City.
In its report of June 1981 Amnesty International expressed
251
concern about inadequate medical care in the "re-education" camps. Article 7 of the Provisional Revolutionary Government Policy Statement on Re-education (No. 02/CS/76) of May 1976 explicitly states that detainees suffering from serious diseases should be released into the custody of their families. Medical treatment in "reeducation" camps appeared to be deteriorating with acute shortages of drugs and little access to hospital facilities. In 1981 Amnesty International appealed for proper medical care for a number of prisoners including Le Huu Cuong, a retired army major who had had one leg amputated and suffered from a liver complaint, and 62-year-old Vo Van Hai, a former ministerial adviser with a weak heart Other prisoners were known to have tuberculosis, asthma, high blood pressure and advanced cataracts.
Some political detainees known to Amnesty International were detained after 1975. In early 1978, a time of deteriorating relations between China and Viet Nam, many Vietnamese of Chinese origin were arrested One such was Diep Hong Chieu, a former school teacher and accountant No grounds for his detention were revealed and he was presumed to be held under Resolution 49-NQ/T VQH of 1961 which allows for indefinite detention without trial.
Other people suspected of opposition to tl\e government were arrested at the same time. These included several prominent intellectuals who were adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International. Among those arrested in 1978 were 70-year-old Pham Van Tam, a former senator and Secretary General of the Vietnamese League of Human Rights, and the lawyer Vu Ngoc Truy. Vu Ngoc Truy was detained for more than three years without charge or trial in Chi Hoa Prison without proper access to relatives, in direct violation of the laws on arrest and detention.
1981 saw several further arrests of concern to Amnesty International. At the beginning of the year five Jesuit priests of the Dac Lo church in Ho Chi Minh City were arrested and accused of "anti-government behaviour". No formal charges were laid to Amnesty International's knowledge and they were believed to be detained in Chi Hoa Prison. Amnesty International also learned of the arrest of two other Roman Catholic priests in June 1981.
In its Report of an Amnesty International Mission to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam of 1981 Amnesty International noted the existence of legislation providing for the death penalty but stated that it had received few reports of death sentences or executions. However, Amnesty International was disturbed to leam of an apparent tendency by the Vietnamese courts to pass death sentences more frequently. In the second half of 1981 at least 14 death sentences were passed by the People's Courts. In July 1981 the trial
252
opened of Le Tin and Ngo Tung Due. They were sentenced to death for organizing opposition to the government in the central highlands. Appeals were pending before the Supreme Court for these two defendants and some others. It was not known if any of these death sentences had been carried out
