Taiwan
Amnesty International appealed for the release or retrial of more than 120 prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience, 20 of whom had been held for more than 30 years.
On27 February 1981 Amnesty International submitted a memorandum to the government. It contained recommendations arising from its mission to Taiwan in February 1980 and from its observation of the trial in March 1980 of eight defendants charged with sedition after a demonstration in Kaohsiung on 10 December 1979. Amnesty International called for the release of its adopted prisoners of conscience and for the country's legislation to be amended to bring it in line with international standards on interrogation, trial and detention procedures. In particular Amnesty International recommended the abolition of provisions under which people can be imprisoned for the non-violent exercise of their right to freedom of expression and association; a precise legal definition of the offence of sedition; an end to incommunicado detention and other conditions that facilitate ill-treatment in custody; and the introduction of procedures to investigate complaints of ill-treatment and compensate victims.
On 5 August 1981 Amnesty International published the text of its memorandum together with a reply from the government and Amnesty International's response. The government rejected the Amnesty International recommendations as interference in its internal affairs. It said that the violence at the Kaohsiung demonstration was planned in advance by eight of the prisoners and that their allegations of ill-treatment had been investigated by the court and found to be groundless. It stated that the purpose of the legal provision that pretrial investigation "shall not be public" was "to protect the human rights of the suspects", "safeguard the person's reputation and guard
245
against false accusation". In its response Amnesty International reaffirmed that it had not been proved that the defendants convicted of sedition had planned the violence that erupted during the demonstration. Regarding prisoners' complaints of ill-treatment, Amnesty International stressed that the isolation of suspects during interrogation facilitated ill-treatmenL It also made it difficult for defendants to prove their complaints to the courts, and for the government to disprove them. In its memorandum Amnesty International expressed disquiet at reports that one of the prisoners who had spoken to its delegates visiting Green Island military prison in February 1980 (see Amnesty International Report 1980) had been punished as a result Amnesty International noted that the government denied this and reiterated its recommendation that an independent body be set up to deal with prisoners' complaints. Amnesty International repeated its belief that the definition of the offence of sedition was imprecise. It was concerned that charges of sedition had been used to imprison people critical of the government whom Amnesty International regarded as prisoners of conscience.
During 1981 the government did attend to some of the matters on which Amnesty International had made recommendations. The Minister for Legal Affairs, Li Yuan-tze, was reported to have said in March 1981 to the Legislative Yuan (Assembly) that the right of a suspect to have access to counsel during investigation would be given serious consideration during the forthcoming revision of the code of criminal procedure. On 1 July 1981 the government promulgated a State Compensation Law. Under this a plaintiff may claim compensation for damages caused by government employees in the course of their duties. On 7 October 1981 Amnesty International wrote to the Minister for Legal Affairs welcoming this measure.
Dr Chen Wen-cheng, an assistant professor at Carnegie-Mellon University in the USA, was found dead in Taipei on 3 July 1981, the day after he had been interrogated by the Taiwan Garrison Command about his political activities in the USA. The authorities said that he had been escorted home the night before. On 8 July 1981 Amnesty International cabled the government expressing concern about Dr Chen Wen-Cheng's death and asking for information about the circumstances. The government sent Amnesty International copies of the reports by the prosecutor's office and by two members of the Control Yuan (the elected assembly which has the power to impeach and censure public functionaries). The first concluded that the death was the result of suicide or accident; the second, that it was probably accidental. A US expert in forensic medicine who examined the body at the request of Chen Wen-Cheng's employer found no evidence of systematic torture and concluded that he had been murdered The
246
official inquiry continued Amnesty International noted that in their report the Control Yuan members also concluded that "the procedures of interrogation by the Taiwan Garrison Command should be studied and improved". This was publicly recognized in early August 1981 by the government's spokespersoa
Amnesty International adopted as prisoners of conscience Chang Chun-nan and Liu Feng-sung, both sentenced to three-and-a-half years' imprisonment in separate trials in March and April 1981 (see Amnesty International Report 1981). They were accused of spreading seditious ideas during their election campaigns for the Legislative Yuan and the National Assembly in December 1980 and charged under the Pubhc Officials' Election and Recall Law (May 1980). Both were active members ofthe opposition. There was no evidence that they had used or advocated violence.
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the release of 20 people arrested in the early 1950s for alleged pro-communist activities. Among them were Wu Yueh-ming and four co-defendants serving life terms in Green Island Military Prison. In August 1981 Amnesty International urged the authorities to give Wu Yueh-ming proper medical care for his impaired visioa Subsequent reports indicated that he was receiving treatment.
Amnesty International launched special appeals for the release of two journalists, Li Ching-sun, detained since 1975, and Li Ching-jung, arrested in December 1979, both adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience (see Amnesty International Report 1981).
On 18 February 1981 Amnesty International wrote to the Minister for Legal Affairs about prison conditions for the prisoners tried on criminal charges related to the Kaohsiung incident (see Amnesty International Report 1981). It had received reports that some were held in solitary confinement, not allowed daily outdoor exercise, and that their reading material was very restricted Amnesty International also asked for a thorough inquiry into complaints of ill-treatment under interrogation by the military authorities. Most of these complaints had been made in court
In its memorandum of 27 February 1981 Amnesty International expressed concern at the number of death sentences imposed and carried out every year. Between July 1979 andJune 1980, 57 death sentences had reportedly been passed It recommended the suspension of all executions and the abolition of this punishment The government replied that death sentences were imposed with extreme care and that they were automatically referred to a higher court It also said that in practice few people were executed: seven in 1978, two in 1979 and five in 1980. On 3 July 1981 Amnesty International wrote to the
247
government outlining its work against the death penalty and international moves for its abolition. Amnesty International learned of 15 death sentences imposed in 1981 and seven executions.
