Colombia
123
Amnesty International concerns included the arbitrary detention of prisoners of conscience, unfair trials of civilians by army courts-martial, the systematic use of torture, and the summary execution of suspected collaborators with guerrilla opposition groups in rural areas under army control.
At the end of 1981, 16 prisoners were adopted as prisoners of conscience or being investigated as possible prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International. Eleven othere had been released during Üie year.
In an August 1981 letter to President Julio César Turbay Ayala Amnesty International expressed its concern about arbitrary detentions, torture and summary executions attributed to the Colombian army in rural areas. It asked for information on measures to investigate the specific cases raised in the letter. No response was received.
In November 1981 Amnesty International released a 12-page document entitled The Army in Rural Colombia: Arbitrary detention, torture and summary execution. Itdescribed human rights violations related to the "militarization" of extensive isolated regions to combat guerrilla groups operating there, and to other special security measures imposed to control the local population. Freedom of movement in these areas was strictly controlled, and supplies of food, clothing and medical goods limited to deprive guerrilla forces of material support. Controls were enforced through the threat of arbitrary detention, interrogation and torture at local army posts or temporary bivouacs, and death.
The report detai led cases of people detained on suspicion of aiding guerrillas and then killed by army units. Others were killed after routinely reporting to a local army post to have their safe-conduct passes stamped as required The report included eye-witness accounts of the detention of three farmers in Caquetá department by uniformed troops on 26 April 1981, and the discovery of their badly mutilated bodies later the same day: "Don Fabio Herrera was lying on his side with his intestines spilled out. . . All three men were bruised, black and blue, and Señor Duque [aged 70] had had his throat cut Don Ramón had a wound on his back, a cut of about a jeme [about 20 centimetres]." A relative noted that "they had bashed in the head of the old man, Don Gilberto, and peeled his face; that is, they took off all his skin". The army subsequently denied that the men had been detained and claimed that they died in an exchange of gunfire when the three attacked an army patrol.
124
The report described the detention of young people and unexplained deaths in custody. Josias Landazabal, the 16-year-old son of a cam/7ejmo (peasant farmer), was detained by uniformed soldiers on 1 April. His body was found 11 days later. The army issued a news bulletin saying that he had "died in a confrontation between the army and the guerrillas". On 16 April 1981 the Roman Catholic Bishop of Bucaramanga, Santander, wrote an open letter of protest about this killing, stating that the army's claim was patently false, as the boy had been helpless in army custody.
Joaquin Artunduaga Paz of the hamlet La Solita, Caqueta, was ordered to report to the local army post on 27 March 1981. He was then detained and accused of aiding the guerrillas. For four days he was left bound in full view of his neighbours, without food and water and exposed to the sun and rain; on 1 April he was shot dead Community members were shown a report written by the sergeant in command, whose name is in the possession of Amnesty International. It said that he had been killed "because he had a carbine he did not turn in, because he [was] a guerrilla and helped the guerrillas".
Indian groups, such as the Coreguaje people living along the Caqueta and Orteguaza rivers in rural Caqueta department, were also the target of human rights abuses. Letters from leaders of Coreguaje communities to government Indian affairs officials, copied to Amnesty International, complained of frequent arrests, torture and threats by army troops sent into the area in the first months of 1981.
"They are torturing us very badly these soldiers, they caught two of us in San Luis and gave them poison, these two are close to dying. In Hericha three others and one of them very sick, in Agua Negra two people. It's for that I'm asking you... to help
release these prisoners____They have them without clothing and
are kicking them and hitting them with sticks and whips..(15 November 1981).
A letter of 19 November, signed by the leaders of all the Coreguaje communities along the rivers, protested against the systematic beating and torture of several men who were bound by their necks to trees and nearly suffocated by towels which were repeatedly soaked with water placed over their faces; most of the population subsequently fled into the forest to hide. This statement also referred to a"poison" used by the troops, a substance that they were forced to inhale which rendered them unconscious. The Coreguaje leaders stated that "the army believes that all of the Indians are subversives", and expressed their fear that as a consequence, "the soldiers may kill us and bum our houses as they say they will". Amnesty International was investigating the cases of six Coreguaje community leaders who were detained on
125
14 November. They included Constantino Figueroa, a teacher from San Luis, and Luis Piranga of Herichá, reportedly badly injured and vomiting blood during his interrogation when he was lx)und by the neck and dragged while being kicked, whipped and beaten. All were believed to be held in the capital of Caquetá, Florencia.
Amnesty International also took action on behalf of members of Indian communities detained in relation to land disputes. Cauca Indian leader Anatolio Quirá and 13 other members of the Purace, Cauca resguardo (a term used for Indian communities and their surrounding communally-held land) were detained on 13 January on charges of illegally occupying private land This charge was refüted by resguardo leàders who claimed to hold valid 19th century titles to the land in question. Although the 14 campesinos were subsequently released, charges brought by private landowners against them were not dismissed proceedings were pending before three different criminal courts in Popayán, Cauca. Amnesty International urged the government to ensure the fìlli protection of the law for Indian communities and to monitor closely arrests ordered by local authorities relating to land disputes. Amnesty International appealed in December 1981 for information about the arrests of Guillermo Quilindo, Governor of the Coconuco, Cauca resguardo, and campesinos Juho Hernández and Abraham Calambas. They were detained on 25 November and taken to the Third Army Brigade headquarters in CaH.
Most political prisoners were detained on suspicion of involvement with one of the several active guerrilla groups in the country. Under the state of siege, in force for most of the previous 30 years, they were held for trial by military courts-martial. 1981 saw the end of several mass trials of civilians held since 1978 and 1979 and charged with membership of the guerrilla groups M-19 or Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC), Colombian Revolutionary Armed Forces. The courts-martial passed sentences for rebeUion {rebelión) and related offences of up to 23 years' imprisonment At the Model Prison of Bucaramanga 16 were convicted; at army headquarters in Pasto, Nariño, four were convicted; and at the military police headquarters in Bogotá, 39 were convicted. The largest court-martial still in progress at the end of 1981 opened at La Picota prison in Bogotá in November 1979. A total of 166 defendants were accused of membership of the M-19 group, and an estimated 115 remained in custody awaiting its conclusion. Sergio Betarte, one of the eight La Picota prisoners whose cases were being investigated by Amnesty International, was released on 31 December when charges against him were dropped after three years' imprisonment Almost all the political prisoners tried in these courts-martial reported systematic
126
torture during the initial stages of their detention. These claims were to a large extent corroborated in the 1980 Amnesty International report Informe de una Misión de Amnistia Internacional a la República de Colombia.
Between 15 April and 19 May a court-martial in Ipiales, Nariño, convicted 66 prisoners of rebellion. After summary proceedings the defendants were sentenced to four to six years' imprisonment These prisoners were detained in March 1981 in the Colombia-Ecuador border area. Forty-eight had surrendered to the Ecuadorian authorities before they were handed over to the Colombian army. In a similar summary trial in late 1981 at the Tolemaida army base in Melgar, Tolima, 11 prisoners were convicted of rebellion and sentenced to five to 16 years' imprisonment The hearings lasted only four days. In both courts-martial the rights of the defence were reportedly severely restricted Defence lawyers were not allowed access to the Tolemaida army base and the court.
Amnesty International appealed on behalf of several prisoners awaiting trial by court-martial who needed urgent medical attentioa They included Guillermo Bobadilla, held in the Cárcel Modelo (model prison) in Bogotá, who was seriously wounded at the time of his detention in September 1979. Although surgery was ordered by prison doctors and scheduled at a Bogotá hospital, he was refused permission to leave the prison. Amnesty International appealed for him to be given treatment on 4 February, and on 19 February he was taken to hospital and his right kidney removed On 1 December Amnesty International called for 55-year-old peasant farmer José Antonio Cardona from the"militarized" zoneofTame, Arauca, tobe transferred to a hospital which could treat a brain tumour. On 22 December his release from Villavicencio prison, Meta, was ordered on humanitarian grounds by a military court José Antonio Cardona was one of six peasant farmers from the same community detained in November 1980 and charged with having aided a guerrilla group by giving food Their cases were being investigated by Amnesty International.
Amnesty International made several appeals on behalf of trade unionists detained because of strike action or accused of collaborating with guerrilla groups. A general strike was called on 21 October to protest against government policies. The government declared it " subversive" and illegal under state of siege provisions. An estimated 150 trade union leaders were arrested before the strike, and some 1,000 striking trade unionists during and after it Amnesty International called for the release of prisoners charged only with having supported the strike, and most of the detainees were released after 10 days' administrative detention.
127
Trade unionist José Germán Toro Zuluaga, a member of the national executive of the Federación Colombiana de Educadores (FECODE), Colombian Federation of Educators, was kidnapped by the army on 28 September. He was forced into a white Toyota jeep and " disappeared". For 10 days his detention was denied During this 10-day period of secret detention he was reportedly held in a house away from official military installations and interrogated under torture; he was reportedly forced to remain standing at all times; repeatedly drenched with cold water, systematically beaten and kicked; threatened with death and assaults on his family; and nearly suffocated by a plastic bag placed over his head, and by a cloth placed over his face on which water was poured (This last method of torture was reported in many cases in 1981, in contrast to the technique reported in previous years of submerging the head in a bucket or water trough.) He was forced to sign a document stating that he had received "good treatment" before being transferred to an officially recognized detention centre, where he was still being held at the end of the year. Amnesty International was investigating his case; his detention appeared to have been solely because of his activities as a national teachers' union leader.
In several similar cases in December 1981 trade unionists "disappeared" after being detained by men who identified themselves as officers of army intelligence, B-2. Army representatives attributed these "disappearances" to an allegedly independent group called Muerte a Secuestradores (MAS), Death to Kidnappers, despite evidence that army personnel carried out the detentions. Luis Javier Cifuentes Cifiientes, leader of the union of workers of the Compañía Colombiana de Tabaco, Colombian Tobacco Company, was detained on 31 December and later found dead, his body heavily bruised and his face mutilated with acid. His death was the first to be attributed to the MAS. At least 20 other leaders of trade unions that had supported the banned 21 October general strike received anonymous death threats -in some cases in the form of condolence cards - during the last weeks of December. Death threats also reached imprisoned guerrilla group leaders in December 1981. They were warned in an unsigned duplicated letter on Ministry of Defence stationery that killings of army personnel by guerrilla forces would be answered by reprisal killings of jailed guerrillas. Amnesty International issued appeals on behalf of four "disappeared" trade unionists in which it called for the full protection of the law to be accorded all political prisoners in Colombia, whether formally detained under court order or held in secret detention by army intelligence or other security forces.
