Ghana
Amnesty International was mainly concerned about the continued imprisonment of people arrested after the 1979 coup who were not given a fair trial.
Throughout 1981 prisoners convicted of "economic crimes" during the rule of the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council (AFRC), between June and September 1979, tried to get their sentences revoked by the courts (see Amnesty International Report 1980). Habeas corpus applications submitted by at least 27 prisoners, who had received sentences of between five and 95 years' imprisonment after hurried trials without defence counsel, were referred to the Supreme Court by Accra's High Court in September 1980. Also before the Supreme Court was a writ submitted by B.S.K. Kwakye, former Inspector General of Police. He asked the court to state that his 25-year prison sentence, imposed in his absence by the AFRC, wasunlawftil. Duringl980 and 1981 various high courts had freed a number of individuals sentenced by the AFRC and quashed some prison sentences passed in the absence of the defendants. However, a ruling on whether Ghana's courts were empowered to reverse AFRC decisions was still awaited Some 30 individuals sentenced by the AFRC and its courts remained in prison, and sentences passed in
41
their absence were in force against more than 60 others. Debate in political and judicial circles centred on the interpretation of Article 15(2) of the "Transitional Provisions" of Ghana's 1979 Constitution. This forbade the courts to grant "any remedy or relief in respect of any "executive, legislative or judicial action taken or purported to have been taken by the AFRC". In mid-November 1981 the Supreme Court rejected the writ submitted by B. S.K. Kwakye, and ruled that it had no power to intervene in "judicial or purported judicial" actions taken by AFRC courts. The government swiftly ordered the rearrest of all those sentenced by the AFRC and its courts who had been released since the return to civihan rule in September 1979. No information was available to Amnesty International about the number of arrests.
In August 1981 the Accra High Court refused to issue an injunction to bar Ghana's Military Intelligence from following Captain Kojo Tsikata, a close associate of former AFRC leader Flight-Lieutenant Jerry Rawlings. Captain Tsikata had claimed that beatings allegedly suffered during interrogation by Military Intelligence officers constituted inhuman treatment and that his continuous surveillance by Military Intelligence constituted "unlawful interference in his human, constitutional and civil rights".
In late March 1981 Amnesty International appealed for the commutation of death sentences imposed on Harbuna Osmanu and Salifuh Musah, both convicted of murder. It was not known at the end of 1981 whether they had been executed.
On 31 December 1981 the government ofPresidentHilla Li m ann was overthrown in a military coup led by F light-Lieutenant Jerry Rawlings, and the Provisional National Defence Council (PNDC) was formed The constitution was suspended, parliament dissolved and all political activity banned.
