Dominica
InFebruary 1981 an indefinite state of emergency was declared after the kidnapping by Rastafarians of Ted Honeychurch, father of the government's information officer. The kidnappers demanded the release of three men who had been sentenced to death in exchange for their hostage. In March the former Prime Minister, Patrick John, the Commander of Dominica's Defence Force, Frederick Newton, and several others were detained under the emergency legislation, following the discovery of an alleged plot to overthrow the government Amnesty International subsequently received allegations that Rastafarian detainees were being ill-treated by police officers. On 12 June and 21 July Amnesty International raised these allegations with the Minister for Home Affairs, Brian Alleyne; in particular, asking if any investigation had taken place into the death of John Rose Lindsay who was taken into custody by police officers on 13 June and was found dead the following day. On 24 August the Minister replied that the case of John Rose Lindsay was one of those under investigation and on 21 December informed Amnesty International that the coroner's inquest had returned a verdict of "death as a result of physical injuries received in the police station by unknown police personnel". The government then announced its intention of setting up an independent inquiry into the matter.
Dominica has a mandatory death penalty for murder, but no executions have taken place, to the knowledge of Amnesty International, since 1973. In February Amnesty International wrote to the Attorney General and Minister for Legal Affaire, Roland David, about the death sentence passed on 16-year-old Augustus Lloyd on 20 January. Amnesty International pointed out that the laws of Dominica stipulated that" sentence of death shall not be pronounced on or recorded against a person convicted of an offence, if it appears to the court that, at the time when the offence was committed, he was under the age of 18 years". In his reply of 23 February the Attorney General stated that:
"The trial judge erred in law by pronouncing and recording the death sentence against a 16-year-old youth .... This error can only be corrected by the Court of Appeal, and I have been informed that the prisoner's lawyer has filed an appeal to the said court against the said sentence."
By the end of 1981 Amnesty International had received no further information.
Dominican Republic
Amnesty International was concerned about the unacknowledged detention and forcible repatriation of Haitian refugees. The Dominican Republic has traditionally served as a place of exile for refugees from neighbouring Haiti.
Roosevelt Blaise Moi'se, a Haitian who had been living in exile in the Dominican Republic, was arrested in January 1981 in Haiti and sent back to the Dominican Republic, where he was held in secret detention for more than 70 days. He was subsequently deported back to Haiti and detained in the Pénitencier national (National Penitentiary) in Port-au-Prince, the capital. Amnesty International believed him to be a prisoner of conscience.
In the second half of 1981 Amnesty International appealed on behalf of four deserters from the Haitian army who had sought political asylum in the Dominican Republic. The detention of Jean-Baptiste Renaud, Jean-Baptiste Luckner and Jean-Baptiste Paret was brought to light by chance when they were discovered in a cell by Claudio Tavárez, a member of the Liga Revolucionaria de Trabajar dores (LRT), Revolutionary Workers' League, who had been briefly detained in the national police headquarters in Santo Domingo, the capital, during the last week of June. All three had been arrested after crossing the border from Haiti: Jean-Baptiste Paret in August 1979, Jean-Baptiste Luckner in July 1980 and Jean-Baptiste Renaud in September 1980. Since their arrest they had been held incommunicado without charge or trial. There were fears that they might be deported back to Haiti, where under a recent decree they faced a possible death sentence as deserters. A habeas corpus application on their behalf led to a Dominican court ordering their release, but the police refused to comply with the order. Following considerable publicity in the national and international press they were freed on 7 July 1981 and given temporary residence permits by President Antonio. Guzmán Fernández. Amnesty International also appealed on behalf of Maurice Charles, a local leader of the Unión Democrática de los Emigrantes Haitianos (UDEH), Democratic Union of Haitian Emigres, in Cibao. He was arrested in Esperanza on 18 September 1981 with two other Haitian refugees, Jean Augustin Heredia and Robert Baptiste, and held at the Mao military barracks, Santiago province. Maurice Charles had lived as a legal resident in the Dominican Republic since 1976, when he had deserted from the Haitian army. His arrest was thought to be linked with his former political activities as an opponent
133
of the government of President Jean-Claude DuvaUer in Haiti. Maurice Charles, Jean Augustin Heredia and Robert Baptiste were freed at the beginning of October.
