Nepal
Amnesty International continued to be concerned at the imprisonment, in some cases without trial, of political opponents of the government
Amnesty International received reports of numerous arrests in the period around the National Assembly elections of 9 May 1981. It was informed of the names of 146 teachers, political activists and students arrested in the two months preceding the elections. Some sources reported between 400 and 600 arrests in the same period The elections were the first direct elections to be held since the introduction of the "partyless" panchayat system in 1960. Although thepanchayat system had been endorsed by a referendum in May 1980, the King introduced a number of constitutional reforms after the referendum including direct election by adult franchise of most members of the national assembly. Political parties were not allowed to put forward candidates. Although some members of political parties stood as independent candidates, a number of parties, among them the Nepali Congress Party, boycotted the election. During the election campaign Amnesty International received reports of arrests of independent candidates and participants in the boycott movement In addition, large numbers of teachers and students were arrested for participating in strikes and demonstrations both before and after the elections. By the end of May nearly 1,000 students, most of them members of the All Nepal National Independent Students Union (ANNISU), and 350 teachers were reported to be in detention. ANNISU had launched a nationwide strike on 27 March 1981. Among the students' demands were the release of all political prisoners and the repeal of the Organizations and Associations(Control) Act, the Press Act, the Local Administration Act and the Public Security Act (PSA).
The arrested students and teachers were reportedly held under the PSA, which allows for preventive detention under renewable nine-month detention orders up to a maximum of three years. The government also used the Local Administration Act, which empowers Zonal Commissioners and Chief District Officers to arrest people under the
222
provisions of the PSA, and the Treason (Crime and Punishment) Act (the Raj Kaj Act), to detain political opponents.
By the end of 1981 almost all those detained during the election period had been released However further arrests of teachers and students were reported throughout the year. Amnesty International was investigating the case of Durga Pokhrel, a joumaUst and former university lecturer, who had been detained in early June under the PSA.
