Tanzania
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about the Preventive Detention Act (1962), which empowers the President to order the indefinite detention wthout charge or trial of any person held to be "dangerous to peace and good order" or "acting in a manner prejudicial to the defence of Tanganyika or the security of the State". Amnesty International believed that as many as 100 people might have been detained under the acton mainland Tanzania during 1981. It did not know if any were detained on political grounds. Most detainees were believed to be criminal suspects whom the authorities decided to detain without trial rather than charge and take to court
On Zanzibar 16 people were held under Zanzibar's Preventive Detention Act( 1962) at the beginningof 1981. They were arrested in June 1980 and publicly accused of plotting to overthrow the ruling Zanzibar Revolutionary Council (ZRC). Ten were released uncharged on 26 April 1981. The other six were still in detention at the end of 1981.
On 9 December 1981 President Nyerere released 3,745 prisoners in a special amnesty to mark the 20th anniversary of Independence. It was not known if any people detained under the Preventive Detention Acts were freed.
In March 1981 the trial ended of eight senior police and security officers accused of causing the death by torture of two prisoners in 1976. They were convicted and sentenced to prison terms of five to eight years. The charges related to the arrest and torture of hundreds of people in Mwanza Region in January 1976 in a special high-level security operation investigating a wave of murders.
In November 1981 over 20 prisoners in Molo Prison were admitted to hospital with severe eye complaints as a result of nutritional deficiencies. At least two had gone blind permanently. In December 1981 Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Home Affairs, Brigadier Muhiddin Kimario, expressing its concern and calling for special attention to prisoners' diet by prison governors.
Little information was available to Amnesty International on the use of the death penalty. It was believed that the practice of commuting all death sentences in Zanzibar was maintained by the ZRC Chairman, Aboud Jumbe. On 9 December 1981 President Julius Nyerere commuted the death sentences on 48 condemned prisoners as part of the Independence anniversary amnesty. Amnesty International wrote to President Nyerere welcoming this measure and asked him to exercise the presidential prerogative of mercy in all future cases.
