Malaysia
Although a significant number of prisoners of conscience were released in 1981 Amnesty International remained concerned at the continued detention without trial of several hundred Malaysians under the Internal Security Act (ISA) 1960. Amnesty International was also alarmed at the sudden resumption of executions in February 1981, a year after the last executions had taken place in Malaysia.
Amnesty International continued to work on behalf of about 60 Malaysians detained for the non-violent exercise of their human rights, whom it had either adopted as prisoners of conscience or was investigating as possible prisoners of conscience. They were detained under the ISA, which allows people considered by the Minister of Home Affairs to threaten national security, to be detained without charge or trial for renewable two-year periods. As noted in the Report of an Amnesty International Mission to the Federation of Malaysia, published in August 1979, the ISA was used to detain trade unionists, academics, journalists and members of the legal opposition, among others.
In early February 1981 Abdul Samad bin Ismail, the former managing editor of the New Straits Times and one of Malaysia's leading intellectuals, was released He had been held since 1976 for alleged involvement in "communist subversion". Most people detained under the ISA were held in the detention camps of Taiping, Kamunting and Batu Gajah, but Samad bin Ismail was held at an undisclosed Special Branch Holding Centre in Kuala Lumpur, in solitary confinement. In view of these conditions fear for his health was expressed on many occasions to the authorities by Amnesty International. He was released after making a statement on television in which he repK)rtedly renounced his previous beliefs. Late in February Encik Abdullah Majid was released He was a former Deputy Minister for Labour and Manpower who had been arrested in November 1976 together with four other leading politicians after a power struggle within the ruling United Malays National Organizatioa His release followed a public statement criticizing his own previous pro-communist feelings. Both men had been adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International.
On 28 April 1981 Amnesty International wrote to the Prime Minister, Datuk Hussein bin Datu Onn, welcoming these and other releases which had taken place since 1980. It expressed its concern.
218
however, that the releases appeared to depend on the detainee recanting or confessing. Amnesty International also urged the Prime Minister to abolish the practice of serving released ISA detainees with restriction orders, which include limitations on their place of residence and movement, a ban on political activities and the obligation to report regularly to the police. Restriction orders imposed on Dr Samad bin Ismail, Dr Syed Hussein Ali (see Amnesty International Report 1981) and Encik Abdullah Majid were lifted by 3 November 1981.
Datuk Hussein Onn resigned and a new government was formed under Prime Minister Dr Mahathir Mohamed on 16 July 1981. On 29 July the new Home Affairs Minister, Datuk Musa Hitam, announced that 21 people held under the ISA were to be released. Ten of those released were alleged members of the Islamic fundamentalist group Pertubuhan Angkatan Sabillulah (PAS), the Organization of the Warriors of Allah. According to the government the group had been prepared to use violence to create an Islamic state. The cases of four of the alleged PAS members released on 29 July — Ahmad bin Awang, Ismail bin Ahmad, Ismail Jaafar and Ismail Abdul Rahman — had been investigated byAmnesty International Also among those released were four politicians adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International who had been detained since 3 November 1976 for alleged involvement in "a communist united front". They were Abdullah Ahmad, then Deputy Minister of Science and Technology; Kassim Ahmad, Chairperson of the Partai Sosialis Rakyat Malaya, Malayan People's Socialist Party; and two members of parhament for the opposition Democratic Action Party, Chian Heng Kai and Chan Kok Kit
Announcing the 21 releases, the Home Affairs Minister cautioned that the releases did not mean that the government was "weak and soft"; he said "the government will not hesitate to rearrest and detain those released should they be found to have resumed similar activities. This also refers to those released today." {The National Echo, 31 July 1981.)
Amnesty International welcomed the releases in a letterto the new Prime Minister, Dr Mahathir Mohamed, on 17 August 1981. Amnesty International reiterated its concern at the fate of others detained under the ISA and urged that they be granted a fair, prompt and open trial or be released immediately. It called on the government to consider repealing the ISA and, as a first step, to revise it to conform with internationally accepted standards. In particular, independent and effective machinery should be established to review the legality qf detention in every case. On 2 November 1981 the Home Affairs Minister told the Dewan Rakyat (parliament) that 513
219
people were detained under the ISA.
Among the prisoners whose release Amnesty International sought was Goh Kean Seng, a 32-year-old teacher held without trial under the ISA for eight years. He was one of several members of the Chinese Language Society of the University of Malaysia detained in 1974 after the government had accused the society of being partially responsible for fomenting disturbances. This followed a series of anti-government demonstrations by students in Kuala Lumpur, Ipoh and Penang protesting against rural poverty and corruption. Goh Kean Seng was reported to have been tortured at the time of his arrest and to have been held in solitary confinement for 19 months untilNovember 1978 at the Batu Gajah Detention Camp. The authorities produced no evidence of his involvement in any criminal activity. In 1978 Malaysian officials told a visiting Amnesty International mission that no prisoner held at that time in Batu Gajah Detention Camp had used violence.
On 12 October 1981 Abdul Halim Mahmud, aged 35, the editor of the fortnightly newspaper Watan (Nation) waS arrested under the ISA. The manager of ff^a/an, Datuk Abdul Aziz bin Ahmad, aged55, was himself arrested on 17 October 1981. The Home Affairs Ministry alleged that they had allowed the newspaper to be used to spread communist propaganda. Amnesty International appealed to the government to grant them a fair, open and prompt trial or to release them immediately. Datuk Abdul Aziz bin Ahmad was released on 10 November 1981, but Abdul Halim Mahmud was still in detention at the end of 1981. Amnesty International adopted him as a prisoner of conscience.
Amnesty International was concerned about 19 executions which took place in February, March, June and November 1981. Most of those executed or under sentence of death were tried under the ISA or the Narcotics Act Section 59 of the ISA provides a mandatory death sentence merely for illegal possession of firearms. These executions brought the number of people hanged in Malaysia since March 1980, when executions resumed after 11 years, to 30.
On 4 March Teh Cheng Poh, a 31-year-old carpenter, was hanged He had been sentenced to death by the Penang High Court in November 1976 after being convicted under the ISA of possession of a home-made pistol and five rounds of ammunitioa His appeal to the Federal Court was dismissed in March 1977, but the Privy Council in London upheld the appeal in December 1978. It ruled that his trial was null and void, because the regulations under which he was tried were outside the authority of the constitutioa The Federal Court ordered a retrial and he was again found guilty by the High Court Legislation was subsequently enacted which removed the right of
220
appeal to the Privy Council in security cases. His last appeal to the Federal Court was dismissed in January 1980.
About 50 other condemned prisoners were said to be awaiting execution in Pudu Prison in Kuala Lumpur. Among them was Tan Chay Wa, a 31-year-old Singaporean, who was sentenced to death in January 1981 after being convicted under the ISA of possessing a pistol. After his arrest in 1979 he had been served with a two-year detention order for alleged involvement in underground activities and it was only later that he was charged with possession of a pistol Amnesty International wrote to the Prime Minister on 9 March and 8 October 1981 urging the government to commute the sentences of all those awaiting execution.
