Algeria
Amnesty International was concerned about several trials in which reports indicated that individuals might have been sentenced for the non-violent expression of political beliefs. Amnesty International was also concerned about reports that in some prisons conditions and medical care were inadequate, and that prisoners had been ill-treated
Members of movements supporting increased freedom for Berber cultural expression continued to be arrested and convicted Twenty-four people arrested in March and April 1980 in Tizi-Ouzou (the administrative centre of the Berber Kabyle region), who had been released provisionally several months later, still faced charges as far as Amnesty International was aware.
On 19 May 1981 students throughout Algeria commemorated the student strike called by the Front of National Liberation (FLN) 25 years earlier, during the war with France for independence. Many students were arrested in Algiers, Annaba, and Bedjaia after violent clashes between various student groups. According to press reports a group of students armed with iron bars and knives who supported Arab nationalist and fundamentalist Islamic movements attacked a meeting of students calling for the promotion of" popular culture" and institutions to encourage the Berber language and colloquial Algerian Arabic. Amnesty International followed the case of 22 students at Algiers University, all active in the "popular culture" movement, who were arrested on 23 May 1981. After being held incommunicado in police custody (garde d vue) for eight days they were charged inter alia with threats to the internal security of the state, to national unity and to the national personality. They were moved to El-Harrach prison where they remained in preventive detention. Demanding trial or immediate release the 22 went on hunger-strike on 12 October. They ended the strike on 15 October after they had been promised a prompt trial before the Correctional Tribunal in Algiers. They were tried at the end of October four were sentenced to prison terms of one year and the rest were either sentenced to short terms already covered by their period of detention, or acquitted.
317
In another trial in October 1981 in Bedjaia after a similar incident in that city, sentences were heavier supporters of Berber cultural expression were charged with illegal assembly and the distribution of unauthorized printed material, and sentenced to up to four years' imprisonment Judgments on 28 of the defendants were passed in only one day and the rights of the defence appeared to have been severely restricted These prisoners went on hunger-strike on 14 November 1981 to protest against their imprisonment and the trial procedures. They ended the strike on 22 November 1981 when they were promised an appeal. In early December most of their sentences were reduced by half on appeal.
Amnesty International was investigating the cases of four prisoners held in the prison of Tazoult-Lambese. The four — Rabah Benkhellat Abdelmalek Kendour, Sidi Ali Akkache and Mohamed Naamar — were tried by the Military Tribunal at Blida in December 1980. Two were sentenced to three years' imprisonment and two to six years for forming a local cell of the "International Communist Party" and plotting against state security. Mohamed Naamar was released in July 1981 after his sentence had been reduced. The other three were also said to have benefited from a partial reduction of sentence, but Amnesty International did not know when they were due for release. In September 1981 Amnesty International appealed on behalf of Rabah Benkhellat after reports that he was in urgent need of medical treatment and was being denied visits from his lawyer. Amnesty International subsequently learned that he had been moved to a hospital in Batna.
Algeria retains the death penalty for a number of crimes, including crimes against state security, economic espionage and drug smuggling. Amnesty International learned of no executions in 1981. At the end of the year an amendment to abolish the death penalty in Algeria was submitted to the Algerian National Assembly during discussions of a new penal code; the amendment was deferred for future consideration, rather than rejected, but the death penalty was retained in the new penal code.
318
