Philippines
On 17 January 1981 President Marcos lifted the state of martial law in force since September 1972. Amnesty International was concerned that the pattern of human rights violations under martial law had not ended with its lifting. The grounds for this concern were the wide-ranging emergency powers retained by the President, particularly regarding arrest and detention, the prominent role assigned to the armed forces in law enforcement and continuing reports of human rights violations.
An Amnesty International delegation visited the Philippines from 11 to 28 November 1981 to assess the human rights situation after the
231
lifting of martial law. The mission found that, although the number of political detainees had declined, there was firm evidence of a disturbingly high incidence of illegal practices. These included illegal arrests and detention, torture, "disappearances" and killings. Directed against people considered opponents of the government they were committed by members of the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP), the police, the civilian militia(Civilian Home Defence Force, CHDF) and irregular paramilitary groups apparently operating with official sanction. The mission found that despite the clear legal prohibition of such practices, the system for investigating and punishing those responsible was inadequate.
The Amnesty International delegation received details of cases from all but one ofthe country's 12 military regions. In approximately 50 the evidence was sufficient to justify Amnesty International's concern that human rights had been violated During the later years of martial law Amnesty International had received increasingly frequent reports of "disappearances" and political killings attributed to government agents. Many of the incidents investigated by the mission, which had taken place since the lifting cif martial law, were of this type, indicating that the pattern established before 17 January 1981 was continuing.
In 33 cases evidence was presented that individuals or groups of individuals had been illegally killed by government agents. A high proportion were in remote areas where the New People's Army (NPA) was active and the victims were accused of being members of the NPA These areas included the Cagayan Valley of Northern Luzon, the Bicol region of southeast Luzon, Negros Occidental and Samar in the Visayas, and several provinces of Mindanao. The mission found no evidence in any of the cases investigated that the victims were killed in encounters with military or police pereonnel as has sometimes been alleged by the authorities. In many cases the evidence suggested that the victim had been killed after interrogation and torture or after being taken to a place of detention: that is, after being taken into custody. There was also considerable evidence that killings were often arbitrary or due to the victim's involvement in nonviolent activities such as union organizing, participation in the movement to boycott the presidential elections of June 1981, or membership of church-sponsored community organizations.
In one typical case two men, identified as Abon and Timy, were killed and six others illegally detained and ill-treated On 23 July 1981 they were arrested by soldiers of the 20th Mechanised Infantry Battalion of the Philippine Army in Barrio Osmena, Gebarin, southern Samar. The army unit was on a routine operation and apparentiy suspected the men because they were staying overnight on
232
their farms in the mountains. The eight were reportedly taken to Gebarin barracks where they were beaten and humiliated while being interrogated During this interrogation Abon and Timy were reportedly taken out and shot dead The six others were later moved to army general headquarters at Parasanua Their families were not informed of their arrest by the authorities. However, on learning of the arrests they managed to get publicity through a radio station. The six were later transferred to the regional command headquarters at Camp Lukban, Catbalongan, and released on 23 August 1981.
In a number of other cases presented to the delegation the victims had "disappeared". It was feared that they had been killed although their bodies had not been found On 24 June 1981 two union organizers working in the Bataan Export Processing Zone — Antonio Santa Ana and Jemeliana Paguio — were arrested by members of the 176th Company of the Philippine Constabulary (PC) in Orion, Bataaa Antonio Santa Ana was arrested with his wife and seven-year-old daughter. They were taken to the PC provincial headquarters at Camp Tolentino, Balanga, Bataan. Their families were refused permission to visit On 29 June the wife and child of Antonio Santa Ana were released after relatives presented a temporary release order. The order also applied to Antonio Santa Ana but his release was refused. On 7 July relatives of another detainee, Vivencio Santos, reportedly arrested for participation in the movement to boycott the presidential election, visited the camp. They were told that Vivencio Santos, Antonio Santa Ana and Jemeliana Paguio had all escaped earlier that day. On 11 July this was repeated to the wife of Antonio Santa Ana After the alleged escape none of the three contacted relatives. The families wrote to President Marcos on 19 July expressing doubt that they had in fact escaped, especially since they were all eligible for release. The three had still not reappeared by November and it was feared that they had been killed
Another case which Amnesty International was investigating involved the "disappearance" of Epifanio Puebla He was last seen on 22 April 1981 riding in a jeep with members of the PC and the CHDF, and security guards, on an estate in Toril, Davao City. Epifanio Puebla had led a one-week strike on the estate which ended on 19 April 1981 when a PC platoon had been called in. On 8 May 1981 Amnesty International issued an appeal to the authorities. Epifanio Puebla had not reappeared by the end of the year.
Very few people taken into custody were presented with a warrant or Presidential Order of Arrest (POA) at any stage. (A POA is a warrant issued by the President under emergency powers retained since the lifting of martial law.) Even in those cases there was evidence of procedural irregularities. Most people arrested were
233
detained illegally: in some cases they were held incommunicado in secret places of detention, known in the Philippines as "safehouses"; in others the authorities refused to acknowledge their detention and grant access to families and legal counsel; in others there was a delay in delivery of the detainee to the proper judicial authority. Delay in delivering the detainee to the proper authority was sometimes justified by a "waiver of detention" signed by the detainee, in which the prisoner had agreed to continued detention and waived the right to a judicial hearing within the time prescribed by law. The Amnesty International delegation received evidence that this procedure had been abused and that detainees had been coerced into signing "waivers of detention" which were sometimes backdated
In a number of these cases complaints had been made to the military or civil authorities either directly or by lawyers or church members. In some instances investigations were undertaken by the AFP or by the civil prosecutors. No such investigation was known to have resulted in a prosecution or administrative reprimand The delegation did leam of instances where military personnel accused of abuses had been transferred to other duties.
The delegation also investigated two well-publicized killings where action against the alleged perpetrators had been initiated. These were the killing of the Kalinga tribal chief, Macli-ing Dulag, in April 1980 and the killing of seven people in Kabankalan, Negros Occidental, in March 1980 (see Amnesty International Report 1981). In both cases charges were brought in the civil courts after official investigations. In neither case had military personnel charged with the killings been brought to trial and by November 1981 it was believed that they were again on active duty. Prosecution through the civil courts of military personnel for illegal acts committed in the performance of their duties was made more difficult by Presidential Decree No. 1832, dated 16 January 1981, which ordered such cases to be heard in military courts.
Despite the lifting of martial law the powers retained by the President were extensive. The President could arrest and order the preventive detention of people under martial law regulations still in force. Letter of Instruction (LOI) 1125-A, issued on 25 May 1981, required reference to an investigating officer before the President would issue a POA or Presidential Commitment Order (PCO). However practice suggested that the authorities did not interpret this as requiring reference to the civil judiciary. Proclamation No. 2045 lifted martial law. It provided that the suspension of the "privilege of the writ of habeas corpus", introduced under martial law, would continue with respect to security offences. The only martial law decree or order known to have been revoked on the lifting of martial
234
law was General Order (GO) No. 8. This had created military tribunals with jurisdiction over specified offences including security and public order offences.
In the period around the lifting of martial law the authorities announced the release and amnesty of large numbers of detainees and former detainees. The majority were alleged members of the NPA and the Muslim secessionist Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF) who had already been released, and were then granted amnesties. Others had been convicted of common crimes by military tribunals. On 47 January 1981 it was announced that 341 prisoners would be released. Of them 159 were said to be charged with public order and national security offences. On 20 January 1981 Amnesty International wrote to President Marcos welcoming the announcement and asking for a list of those to be released. No such list was provided and the number of people released who came to Amnesty International's attention was far smaller than had been announced by the government. Amnesty International learned of the release of no more than 46 political detainees between 18 January and 10 May.
On 10 July President Marcos announced the release of a further 152 prisoners charged with public order and national security offences. Amnesty International received reports of four releases in July, including that of Julius Fortuna, who had been detained since October 1974 on rebellion and subversion charges and who had been adopted as a prisoner of conscience.
Amnesty International received fewer reports of arrests for political offences than in previous years. In July 1981 Antonio Carpio and Grace Vinzons-Magana were arrested by POA. They had announced a rally to protest against the government's failure to investigate the deaths of four people and the injury of approximately 20 at an election boycott rally in Daet, Camarines Sur, on 14 June 1981. Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to charge them or release them. Antonio Carpio and Grace Vinzons-Magana submitted a habeas corpus petition to the Supreme Court, arguing that LOI1125 required that their cases be referred to the civil courts. The petition was rejected but the court ordered their release on the recognizance of their lawyers.
In March 26 members of the Tinggian tribe from Bucloc, Abra, Northern Luzon, were arrested on suspicion of giving support to the NPA. Amnesty International was investigating their cases. All but one were released between August and mid-November. The remaining detainee was Victorino Bingcan, who had organized a trade union at the Cellophil Resources Corporation, a government-owned logging and wood-processing company whose activities in the area had reportedly caused much dissatisfaction.
235
In August Father Pepito Bernardo, who had been detained from 26 September to 24 December 1980, was rearrested in Baler, Quezon, for alleged possession of subversive materials. Father Bernardo was detained in Camp Olivas, Pampanga, until his release into the custody of the Bishop of San Fernando in December. He was again adopted as a prisoner of conscience (see Amnesty International Report 1981).
Amnesty International continued to learn of illegal detentions, often involving the temporary "disappearance" of the person arrested. In August Amnesty International appealed to the authorities on behalf of Anita Agustín and Cristeta Fernández, two church lay workers. They had been arrested in llagan City, Isabela, on 15 August and their whereabouts were unknown. One month later Amnesty International learned that the two had reappeared in the PC provincial headquarters, Calamagui, Isabela. In July Amnesty International appealed on behalf of seven Muslims from Manila who had "disappeared" after being arrested in May and June in connection with an alleged plot to assassinate President Marcos. Their whereabouts were unknown until September when their relatives learned that they were in the Maximum Security Unit (MSU), Fort Bonifacio, Manila. At the end of 1981 they were still detained without charge, although a number of the approximately 40 people arrested in connection with the alleged plot had been released. Maria Milagros Lumabi-Echanis, who was arrested with her two-month-old child in August 1980 (see Amnesty International Report 1981), was missing until March 1981 when she was sighted at the MSU. It was only after this that the authorities acknowledged her detention and charged her with subversion.
Amnesty International continued to receive reports that detainees had been tortured after arrest often while held in a "safehouse". Cristina Pargas, a teacher alleged to be associated with the NPA, was arrested without warrant on 28 May 1981 in Munoz, Nueva Ecija, Central Luzon. She was taken toa"safehouse" in the nearby town of San José where she was reportedly beaten and sexually molested for two days before being transferred to Camp Olivas, Pampanga. On 22 June 1981 Amnesty International expressed its concern about Cristina Pargas' continued detention and her physical well-being. On 24 June she was released on bail from Camp Olivas.
In June Amnesty International launched an appeal for Benjamin de Vera, allegedly a leader of the NPA in Mindanao, who was arrested on 10 June by members of the PC in Guadaloupe, Davao City. He was reportedly nearly suffocated and severely beaten for three days. After a period of detention at Camp Catitipan in Davao City where he was visited by his family and lawyer, he was transferred to an undisclosed place on 13 July. Representations by his family to
236
the regional commander brought the response that he had been "borrowed by a higher authority". On6 September he was returned to Camp Catitipan.
On 8 July Amnesty International appealed on behalf of Sampatu Maulana who had "disappeared" after being arrested on 21 June 1981. Amnesty International learned that he had been held in a" safe-house" for four days before being transferred to the MSU. In the " safehouse" he was reportedly punched repeatedly and given electric shocks to his genitals.
After the lifting of martial law it was ordered that prisoners should be transferred from military detention centres to the civilian municipal and provincial jails and the National Penitentiary, Muntinlupa. However, a number of military camps were still used as detention centres, including Camp Olivas in Pampanga, Camp Ibalon Bagong in Legaspi City and Camp Lahug in Cebu City. Detainees were also still held in places administered by branches of the intelligence and security services such as the 4th Regional Security Unit (RSU-4), Camp Crame, Quezon City and the MSU. Detainees transferred to civilian prisons often faced worse prison conditions. In May Amnesty International appealed on behalf of Crispin Mendoza, a detainee transferred from Camp Olivas to the provincial jail in Baguio City, Benguet Amnesty International had learned that after his transfer to the provincial jail he had not received medical treatment for a serious leg wound He was subsequently treated and released The 33 detainees transferred to the National Penitentiary, Muntinlupa, went on a three-day hunger-strike on 16 February 1981 in protest against worse conditions. In the following two months 12 prisoners were released from Muntinlupa and the rest transferred back to the Bicutan Rehabilitation Centre. The centre had been reopened earlier to accommodate three detainees transferred from the MSU.
Prisoners detained in the MSU went on hunger-strike at the same time as those in Muntinlupa. Approximately 20 prisoners were believed to be detained in the MSU at the time in restrictive conditions, including, in some cases, total isolation. Most prisoners in the MSU were held in poorly-lit cells measuring four feet by 11 feet They were not allowed to communicate with their fellow-detainees. Among them were José María Sisón, allegedly Communist Party Chairman, and his wife Juliet Delima Sisón, who were arrested in November 1977. In October 1981 Amnesty International appealed for medical care for Juliet Delima Sisón. She was pregnant and it was feared that her health was endangered by inadequate medical attention and poor prison conditions.
On 5 October 1981 three detainees in the Bicutan Rehabilitation Centre went on hunger-strike. On 3 November, 10 other detainees
237
started an "indefinite fast" after the first three had collapsed Their demands were: the release of a number of detainees on legal and humanitarian grounds; an end to solitary confinement in military intelligence units and "safehouses"; dismantling military tribunals with jurisdiction over civilians charged with public order and national security offences; the restoration of regulations governing prison conditions. The strike ended on 23 November after the government had released three detainees and granted a number of the demands relating to prison conditions. The three detainees who had begun the hunger-strike in October were transferred to Camp Guillermo Nakar, Quezon, on 13 November despite being extremely weak. Amnesty International was investigating the case of one: Benjamin Divinaflor.
Despite the revocation of General Order No. 8, Proclamation No. 2045 of 17 January 1981 provided for military tribunals to continue to hear cases pending before them. A number of such trials reopened before military tribunals during 1981.
All new cases involving civilian defendants brought to trial during the year were referred to the civil courts. However, there was evidence that the armed forces still did not acknowledge the jurisdiction of the civil courts over security and public order cases. Amnesty International learned of instances where members of the armed forces disregarded orders issued by civil courts for the' bail or release of people held in military custody, and where military personnel charged as defendants or subpoenaed as witnesses refused to appear. Rafael Labutin, adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience, was acquitted of subversion by the civil Court of First Instance, Catbalogan, Samar, on 22 December 1981. However, the authorities refused to release him on the grounds that the President had not cancelled the Arrest, Search and Seizure Order (ASSO, the martial law equivalent of a POA) under which he had been arrested in April 1979. The Amnesty International delegation was also informed of instances where military personnel had exerted pressure on civil courts to issue backdated arrest and detention warrants and waivers of detention. Filipino lawyers told the mission of their concern about the introduction of a Judiciary Reorganization Act, which they regarded as a further threat to the security of tenure of judges.
Amnesty International believed that more than 800 people were under sentence of death, most in the National Penitentiary, Muntin-lupa. Most had been on death row awaiting review of their sentence by the Supreme Court for several years. Eleven had been on death row since the 1950s. On 29 January 1981, when it learned that the Supreme Court had rejected his appeal. Amnesty International called for clemency for Exequiel Angeles, a former policeman sentenced to death in 1969. In March 1981 President Marcos commuted his
238
sentence to life imprisonment On 16 July Amnesty International appealed to President Marcos to commute the death sentence on Gilberto Llamoso after learning that a date for execution had been set Executions have been carried out infrequently in recent years, although dates for execution have often been set On 7 August 1981 Amnesty International appealed for the death sentence on Alfredo Celestino to be commuted on learning that his execution had been set for 1 September. His execution date had been set six times between September 1980 and August 1981. He was one of several prisoners held on death row in Muntinlupa who were convicted of offences committed while they were members of the NPA or its predecessor the Hukbong Mapagpalaya ng Bay an. People's Liberation Army, (popularly known as the Huks). On 4 August 1981 five prisoners on death row in Muntinlupa — Alfredo Celestino, Sebastiano del Mundo, Manuel Dimatulac, Alfonso Sabilano and Oscar Santiago — who had allegedly belonged to the NPA or the Huks, went on hunger-strike to demand improved visiiing rights and political status. On 18 August Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to provide proper medical treatment and not to take reprisals. The hunger-strike ended on 21 August when a number of the prisoners' demands were met On 6 May 1981 Amnesty International sent a telegram to President Marcos urging the commutation of death sentences passed on Bernabe Buscayno and Victor Corpuz, both alleged former NPA commanders.
