Swaziland
Amnesty International was concerned about the use of detention without trial and the death penalty, and the kidnapping of a South African refugee.
In February 1981 Dhaya Pillay, a South African refugee resident in Swaziland since 1977, was forcibly abducted and taken into South Africa by a group of armed men apparently because he was thought to be a member of the African National Congress (ANC). He was detained and interrogated by South African security officers but returned to Swaziland on 11 March after international protest and the arrest of four of his alleged kidnappers by Swazi police. Three were reported to be members of a Mozambique opposition group and the fourth a black South African. They appeared in court in early March to face charges relating to the kidnapping. The hearing was conducted in camera and they were granted bail. No further court proceedings were known to have taken place. Amnesty International appealed to South African Prime Minister P.W. Botha to clariiy whether or not Dhaya Pillay was detained and to investigate the incident No response was received. A statement issued subsequently by the South African authorities claimed that Dhaya Pillay had been detained at the border for contravening immigration laws.
Further incidents involving South African refugees occurred later in the year. On 7 December two alleged members of the ANC were killed. They died when the car in which they were travelling was shot at near the border with South Africa. Amid conflicting reports, it was not clear whether they had been killed by Swazi security forces or by South African security agents who had crossed into Swaziland.
In November Amnesty International learned of the detention without trial of Godfrey Sipho Mdhluli, a well-known lawyer who had returned to Swaziland in August after several years in Lesotho. He had left Swaziland in early 1978 when Ambrose Simelane, a business colleague and former leading member of the opposition Ngwane National Liberatory Congress party banned in 1973, was placed under a detention order which resulted in his being detained without trial for two years. After Godfrey Mdhluli's departure the tribunal estabhshed by the Citizenship Order of 1974 stripped him of his Swazi citizenship and effectively rendered him stateless. Godfrey Mdhluli returned to Swaziland in August only after government assurances that he would not be detained. However, he was arrested on
85
29 October and placed under a 60-day detention order. This was renewed for a further 60 days when it expired in late December. Amnesty International appealed to Prime Minister Prince Mabandia DIamini on 17 November 1981 and again on 18 December 1981 to release or try Godfrey Mdhluli.
The death penalty became a major concern in 1981. After four years in which no executions were known to have been carried out, eight people were hanged in July. All were believed to have been convicted of ritual murder. They took place at a time of heightened public concern about this crime and as two new cases of alleged ritual murder were about to go before the courts. One resulted in Philippa Mdluli being sentenced to death in late August In November Superintendent Jeremiah Dube, a senior police officer, and three other people accused of ritual murder were acquitted
Prisoners under sentence of death were excluded from an amnesty granted in September to mark King Sobhuza IPs diamond jubilee which resulted in the early release of more than 650 criminal prisoners.
