Angola
Amnesty International continued to be concerned by reports of the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and by the long-term detention without charge or trial of suspected members of armed opposition groups. It was also concerned about the use of the death penalty.
There were frequent reports of fighting between government troops and amied opposition groups during 1981. South African forces based in neighbouring Namibia also mounted a series of attacks on targets in southern Angola, in Kunene and Huila provinces, during which hundreds of civilians were killed. South African spokesmen said that these attacks were attempts to suppress the activities of South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO) guerrillas.
In the southeast of the country guerrillas belonging to the Uniao Nacional para a Independencia Total de Angola (UNITA), National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, claimed to control
17
large parts of Kuando-Kubango province. UNIT A guerrillas also launched attacks in the centre of the country and in the capital, Luanda. For example, they claimed responsibility for an attack on an oil refinery in Luanda at the end of November 1981. In the north of the country guerrillas belonging to the Frente de Libertaqao do Enclave de Cabinda (FLEC), Cabinda Enclave Liberation Front, were reportedly still active in mid-1981. Armed bands claiming allegiance to the Frente Nacional de Libertaqao de Angola (FNLA), Angola National Liberation Front, were also involved in sporadic fighting in Zaire and Uige provinces. Accurate reports about the treatment of prisoners captured in all these areas of fighting were difficult for Amnesty International to obtain.
Responsibility for internal security rested primarily with the special Ministry for Internal Security created in 1980. However, different units of the security forces, including the army and the militia as well as the Ministry for Internal Security and the criminal investigation police, continued to use independent powers of arrest and detention without charge or trial.
Some suspected members of armed opposition groups were brought for trial before the People's Revolutionary Tribunal, a special court established in 1976 to try prisoners accused of endangering the security of the state or of economic sabotage. However, most people arrested for political reasons were held in custody without charge or trial by branches of the security forces. The People's Revolutionary Tribunal has a detention review commission, comissao de revisao. However uncharged detainees are not necessarily allowed to appeal to this commission to review their cases. They may be held for months or even years without an opportunity to challenge the grounds for their detention. During 1981a number of political detainees were reported to have been released on the orders of the review commission.
Information about prisoners of conscience continued to be difficult to obtain, partly because of the internal armed conflict and the practice of accusing suspected opponents of the government of links with armed opposition movements. However, during 1981 Amnesty International received information about a number of people arrested for criticizing the government without using or advocating violence. It investigated the reasons for the detention of some of these prisoners. For example. Lieutenant Nito, an army officer, was reportedly arrested in early 1980 for protesting against the presence of Cuban soldiers in Angola.
Amnesty International was also concerned about the detention without charge or trial of people accused of links with armed opposition movements. Members of UNITA were reportedly detained at the Casa de Reclusao (detention centre) in Luanda and at Sao
18
Nicolau detention camp, near Mo^amedes. Some of the detainees accused of links with UNITA were arrested during recent years, but others had been held for much longer periods. For example, Godfrey Nangonya, a UNITA provincial commissar, was imprisoned by the Portuguese from 1962 until 1974. He was then held without charge or trial after being rearrested in Kunene province at the beginning of 1976.
Civilians accused of links with the FNLA were also detained without trial, either in Luanda or at detention camps such as Sao Nicolau camp and Tan camp, near Kibala in Kuanza-Sul province. They included former senior FNLA officials who returned to Angola from Zaire under amnesty, such as Kiasonga Manuel Peterson, the head of the FNLA's security unit until 1973. He was arrested in Luanda several weeks after returning to Angola with his family in February 1979. They also included civilians accused oflinks with the FNLA. Landana Manuel Singi, a trade union official, was arrested in May 1980 and detained without charge in Sao Paulo prison in Luanda on suspicion of sympathizing with the FNLA. He had apparently authorized a junior official to visit a neighbouring country and was arrested and accused oflinks with the FNLA when the official failed to return to Angola. Like many others arrested and accused oflinks with the FNLA, he had lived in Zaire as a refugee before Angola became independent in 1975.
Members of the FLEC were reported to be detained at a camp near Malembo, in Cabinda province, where civilian political detainees were also held.
During the first half of 1981 Amnesty International repeatedly appealed to the Angolan authorities to commute death sentences imposed on alleged members of the FLEC or the UNITA convicted of violent offences by the People's Revolutionary Tribunal. In March 1981, 18 suspected members of the UNITA were condemned to death in Huambo and six others given prison sentences for involvement in bomb attacks on civilian targets. In May 1981 six suspected members of the FLEC were sentenced to death in Cabinda for their part in similar bomb attacks: four others were given prison sentences of from two to 20 years. Insufficient information was available about the trial proceedings to assess whether they had been given fair trials. After both trials the condemned prisoners were believed to have been able to appeal to a special appeals tribunal in Luanda. However, in neither case were the appeals reported to have been successful and the condemned prisoners were believed to have been executed by firing-squad
19
