Nicaragua
Amnesty International's concerns focused on prisoners of conscience tried and convicted under a 9 September 1981 law declaring a state of economic emergency and under the Law for the Maintenance of Public Order and Security (called the Public Order Law); on summary procedures in trials under these laws; and on the need for a review of the cases of prisoners associated with the former government convicted of serious crimes by Special Tribunals.
In August 1981 Amnesty International presented a memorandum to the Government of Nicaragua for consideration and comment It incorporated the findings of Amnesty International missions to Nicaragua in January and August 1980 and included a series of recommendations. A 67-page commentary by the Government of Nicaragua was received in November 1981 in response to the memorandum.
The August 1981 memorandum presented a detailed survey of the new legal order established in Nicaragua after the fall of the government of General Anastasio Somoza Debayle in July 1979. This included new penal legislation- such as the Public Order Law-and legislation establishing and governing the proceedings of the Special Tribunals.
The two major concerns outlined in the memorandum were the treatment of people detained immediately after the fall of the Somoza government, most of whom were later tried by Special Tribunals, and the small number of prisoners detained for alleged crimes against public order or security since the present government came to power, who were charged under the Public Order Law and the Law of the State of Economic and Social Emergency (called the Law of Economic Emergency).
Seven to eight thousand people were initially detained for alleged collaboration in criminal actions by the former government Over 1,000 of the detainees were released in the first months of the new government Trials of others opened before the Special Tribunals in December 1979. The memorandum described revenge killings of captured National Guards by local groups during the first weeks after the collapse of the Somoza government and measures taken by the government to halt them, as well as its efforts to clarify the status of people unaccounted for since the end of fighting in July 1979.
Amnesty International expressed concern about the absence of a mechanism for appeal against conviction by the Special Tribunals.
158
The Special Tribunals themselves were dissolved in February 1980 having handed down 4,331 convictions. Amnesty International recommended in the memorandum that the approximately 3,200 prisoners convicted by the Special Tribunals and still in detention should have their cases systematically reviewed so that possible injustices in individual cases could be rectified
The memorandum described Amnesty International's concern about the arrest, trial and imprisonment of some 100 prisoners charged with violations of the Pubhc Order Law since 1979. Among those imprisoned under this law were some accused of violent acts, such as forming illegal armed groups, attacking public buildings and government personnel, and murdering children and foreign nationals participating in a national literacy campaign. Amnesty International's primary concern was the appUcation of the Public Order Law for offences not involving the use or advocacy of violence, such as the prosecution of people alleged to have made statements damaging to the government or the natioa Charges of this nature led to the arrest, trial and conviction of leaders of lawful opposition parties, trade unions, and business associations. In some cases Amnesty International concluded that the prisoners were held solely for the expression of opinions and adopted them as prisoners of conscience. Although most such detentions were relatively short, from two weeks to three months, the memorandum raised fundamental points of principle and questioned summary trial procedures used in the application of the Public Order Law.
On 9 September 1981 a further law governing public order came into force. The Law of Economic Emergency decreed that the nation was in economic crisis and that a state of economic and social emergency was to be in force for one year. Itdefmed a series of crimes punishable by one to three years' imprisonment, elaborating on the provisions of the Public Order Law which already provided punishment for those considered to be undermining the national economy. Under the state of economic emergency the right to strike was suspended. Anyone who "incite[d], assist[ed] or participate[d] in" strike action or workplace occupations was liable to imprisonment, as were those who "promote[d] or participate[d]" in land invasions or occupations of private rural properties. Disseminating information about the economy was made an offence where it was deemed to be false and intended to influence the economy or intended to "incite" foreign governments or international financial institutions to take actions or make decisions that might damage the economy.
The August 1981 memorandum included conclusions and recommendations concerning the special courts, efforts to clarify the status of people unaccounted for since July 1979, the Public Order Law and
159
its application, and the practical application of the remedy of habeas corpus.
The Nicaraguan Government responded to the recommendation that the special summary trial procedure established by the Public Order Law be abolished It informed Amnesty International that it had modified the law to eliminate some of the procedural restrictions criticized in the memorandum. A recommendation that a complete list of prisoners sentenced by the Special Tribunals be made public was answered by the publication of the list in November 1981. On 7 October 1981 an administrative order established a system under which relatives of detainees would be informed immediately of arrests; Amnesty International had recommended that an office for that purpose be established.
The government's reply to the memorandum did not refer to Amnesty International's concern that the Public Order Law, textually and in application, restricted freedom of expression. The recommendation that both public order cases - tried under extraordinary procedures before December 1981 - and cases tried before the Special Tribunals should be systematically reviewed to remedy individual injustices was answered by reference to a new Ley de Gracia, Law of Pardon, that came into force on 2 November 1981. The law established a procedure whereby cases of convicted prisoners could be considered for commutation, reduction of sentence, or pardon. This was, however, an administrative review dependent not on the judiciary, but on the national political authorities. It provided neither for a systematic overview nor for a judicial re-examination of cases. Appeals for review under the new procedure were to be considered by the semi-autonomous National Commission for the Protection and Promotion of Human Rights. This body was created by the government in June 1980 and functioned as an adviser on human rights to the government In the past its good offices resulted in a number of pardons. The National Commission's powers under the Law of Pardon were however limited to making recommendations in response to individual petitions of appeal. Rulings on each case had ultimately to be made by the Council of State, or the government under the Law of Pardon.
On 22 December 1981 the Interior Minister Tomás Borge announced that 500 pardons proposed by the National Commission were not to be granted because of the increase in violent attacks in the border areas and the bombing of a Nicaraguan airliner. The Minister claimed that prisoners previously pardoned had participated in these attacks and concluded: " There will be no pardons for the time being."
Amnesty International adopted as prisoners of conscience seven prisoners detained on 21 October 1981 and sentenced for infringing
160
the Public Order Law and provisions of the Law of Economic Emergency. Four were leaders of the Communist Party and its affiliated trade union Central de Acción y Unidad Sindical {CAJJS) y Organization for Trade Union Action and Unity: party Secretary General Eli Altamirano, Allan Zambrana, Roberto Moreno and Yamilet Bonilla. They received seven-month sentences for having made statements violating the Public Order Law. Eli Altamirano, Allan Zambrana and Roberto Moreno were also sentenced to 29 months' detention for having incited factory occupations and strikes banned by the Law of Economic Emergency. The statement cited as breaking the Public Order Law had criticized the government for "diverting the revolutionary process to a capitalist line" and for having banned strike action, and had called for the ruling junta to be replaced by a "worker and peasant" government. Eleven other Communist Party leaders were detained at the same time and released in December 1981 after serving 60-day sentences under the Law of Economic Emergency.
Also detained on 21 October 1981 and adopted as prisoners of conscience were three leaders of the Consejo Superior de la Empresa Privada (COSEP), Nicaragua's association of chambers of commerce: COSEP's President, Enrique Dreyfus, Benjamin Lanza and Gilberto Cuadra The three were convicted of having broken the Public Order Law and the Law of Economic Emergency by having "undermined the national economy and security" through a signed manifesto issued by COSEP leaders on 20 October that accused the government of leading Nicaragua into an economic disaster through "a Marxist-Leninist adventure". A fourth COSEP member who signed the 20 October manifesto, Jaime Bengoechea Delgadillo, returned to Nicaragua from Costa Rica in December 1981. He was sentenced on 22 December to seven months' imprisonment, the sentence to be served in his home. An appeal by the other sentenced COSEP members and by Communist Party leader Yamilet Bonilla resulted in their seven-month sentences being upheld; as their sentences were of less than one year no further judicial appeal was possible. An appeal by Eli Altamirano, Allan Zambrana and Roberto Moreno in November 1981 resulted in a reduction of their sentences from three years to 17 months. Amnesty International called for the immediate and unconditional release of the seven prisoners.
16i
	
Í >	
	
	A/
	Ijs "«r .....
