SPAIN
Judicial inquiries continued into allegations of a clandestine "dirty war" in the 1980s against the armed Basque group Eiiskadi Ta Askatasuna (cta), Basque Homeland and Liberty. Two prisoners of conscience served prison terms during the year. There were further allegations of ill-treatment by law enforcement officers. Officers charged with torture and ill-treatment were tried. More than 100 Africans, including asylum-seekers, were expelled to countries where some suffered human rights violations, eta continued to commit human rights abuses, including deliberate and arbitrary killings and hostage-taking.
The Popular Party won a narrow victory in the March general elections. In May, José María Aznar was invested as leader of the government, replacing Felipe González of the Socialist Party.
A new penal code came into force in May. In November, Congress voted to discuss a proposal to reform the law on conscientious objection to military service. The text included a proposal to allow conscripts to claim conscientious objector status after entering the armed forces. However, the major political parties indicated that they would be introducing important amendments.
In March, the Eiuropean Committee for the Prevention of Tortmre and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment published reports on its three visits to Spain between 1991 and 1994 and the government's reply. The Committee expressed concern over the continuing ill-treatment of detainees. It remarked that the use of torture and severe ill-treatment was not commonplace, but noted complaints of
such treatment, particularly of those held incommunicado under "anti-terrorism" legislation.
In March, the un Human Rights Committee considered Spain's Fomth Periodic Report on its implementation of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (iccpr). The Committee highlighted its concern that it had received "numerous reports ... of ill-treatment and even torture inflicted on persons suspected of acts of terrorism by members of the security forces"; that investigations into such allegations were "not always systematically carried out by the public authorities": and that members of the seciuity forces found guilty of tortvue or ill-treatment and sentenced to imprisonment were "often pardoned or released early, or simply do not serve the sentence". The Committee emphasized that certain provisions of the legislation were not in conformity with the icxpr and recommended that legislation preventing detainees from choosing their own lawyer be rescinded and incommunicado detention be abandoned. The Committee stated that it was "greatly concerned" that individuals had no right to claim conscientious objector status after entering the armed forces and urged that legislation be introduced respecting that right.
Judicial investigations continued into acts of kidnapping, torture and murder during a "dirty war" between 1983 and 1987 against supposed eta members carried out by a clandestine organization in which senior government officials were apparently involved, the so-called Grupos Antiterroristas de Liberación (gal), Anti-Terrorist Liberation Groups (see Amnesty International Report 1996). Numerous senior officials, including a former minister of the interior, a former secretary of state for security and a general formerly commanding the Civil Guard were indicted on charges related to gal.
Judicial inquiries continued into the kidnapping, tortin-e and murder of two eta members, José Antonio Lasa and José Ignacio Zabala, by gal. The courts also investigated other cases, including the kidnapping of Segundo Marey and the killing of a presumed eta member, Ramón Oñe-derra, in the 1980s. In November, a former intelligence officer and witness in the Lasa and Zabala inquiry was abducted after giving evidence to the investigating judge,
SPAIN
reportedly implicating Civil Guard members. He claimed that armed men took him to a beach near Cadiz and severely beat him, burned him with cigarettes and sodomized him with a blunt instrument. A copy of the judge's order requesting that he be given protection was forced into his mouth. Medical reports recorded 22 cigarette burns and anal injuries.
Two conscientious objectors, José Antonio Escalada and Manuel Blazquez Solis, imprisoned in December 1995 for desertion from the armed forces, were conditionally released in April and May respectively. Both were prisoners of conscience (see Amnesty International Report 1996].
Allegations of ill-treatment by law enforcement officers continued to be received. In January, an inquiry opened into the allegations of ill-treatment by municipal police of Sallam Essabah, a Moroccan national, near Alicante, He claimed that two officers stopped him in December 1995, beat him and left him naked and unconscious. He received medical treatment for multiple injm-ies to the stomach, chest and lumbar region.
Law enforcement officers charged with torture and ill-treatment were tried. Fourteen Civil Guards stationed in Colmenar Viejo were charged in February with torture. They had arrested three young men in October 1994 who claimed they were systematically threatened, punched, slapped and kicked while naked and handcuffed.
In November, two Civil Guards in Barcelona were acquitted of the torture and murder of Jorge Xurigué who had been arrested with another man in August 1994 during an attempted robbery. Jorge Xurigué died of a cerebral haemorrhage following a blow to the temple. The court found that the officers kicked and beat them while they were lying on the ground, but did not accept as proved that the cause of the fatal lesion was a kick from one of the officers, and could not identify with certainty which of the two arresting officers was responsible for the inj\iries to each of the prisoners.
In June, 103 people, including asylum-seekers, from various African countries, were expelled in military aircraft from Melilla and Malaga. Some were given water containing sedatives during the flight and there were reports that some were
beaten by police officers. Fifty of them, including asylum-seekers, were deposited in Guinea-Bissau where they were detained and beaten. In September, one was shot dead and others were injured by police during a violent demonstration (see Guinea-Bissau entry).
eta continued to commit human rights abuses, including attacks on security forces and civilians in which five people were killed. There were bombing campaigns in many regions. In February, Francisco Tomás y Valiente, a former Constitutional Court President, and Fernando Múgica, a lawyer and brother of a former minister of justice, were murdered. At the end of the year eta held two hostages: José Antonio Ortega Lara, a prison officer abducted in January, and Cosme Delclaux Zubiria, a lawyer and businessman kidnapped in November. In April, eta freed José María Aldaya after 11 months in captivity.
In March, Amnesty International published a report, Spain: Comments by Amnesty International on the government's Fourth Periodic Report to the Human Rights Committee, containing details of violations of the rights set out in the iccpr.
Amnesty International expressed concern at the failure to protect witnesses in the gal investigation and urged the government to guard important witnesses.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of Manuel Blázquez Solis and José Antonio Escalada and called for legislation to provide for conscientious objection developed after joining the armed forces. The organization urged the authorities to ensure that all allegations of ill-treatment were thoroughly and impartially investigated £ind that those responsible were brought to justice.
Amnesty International called on the Governments of Spain and Guinea-Bissau to respect their treaty obligations on non-re/ouiemeni of persons to countries where they might suffer serious human rights violations and called for a full inquiry into the allegations of ill-treatment.
Amnesty International repeatedly condemned abuses by armed opposition groups, such as deliberate and arbitrary killings and hostage-taking, as a contravention of international humanitarian standards. The organization publicly called on eta to release the hostages immediately and without conditions.
