SAUDI ARABIA
Hundreds of people, including possible prisoners of conscience, were detained on political grounds. They included over 200 people arrested in previous years. More than a dozen political prisoners were
SAUDI ARABIA
reportedly convicted after unfair trials, four of them being sentenced to death and executed. Reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees continued, and the judicial punishment of flogging was frequently imposed. At least 69 people, including one woman, were executed and at least three prisoners were on death row at the end of the year. Up to 20 possible asylum-seekers were forcibly returned to
Egypt-
The government of King Fahd bin 'Ab-dul-'Aziz maintained its ban on political parties and trade unions. Press censorship continued to be strictly enforced. Information on human rights remained severely limited owing to restrictions on access to the country for international organizations, and lack of communication on these matters by the government.
Hundreds of people, including possible prisoners of conscience, were detained diuring mass arrests, particularly following the bombings of the Saudi Arabian National Guard training centre in Riyadh, the capital, in November 1995 and of the us military complex at al-Khobar in June 1996, which together resulted in 26 deaths. All were denied access to lawyers and many were not allowed family visits for weeks or months after arrest.
Himdreds of people were arrested and detained without charge or trial during the first half of the year in the wake of the bombing of the National Guard's training centre in Riyadh. Those arrested included the so-called Arab Afghan veterans, who had returned to Saudi Arabia after taking part in the armed conflicts in Afghanistan and Bosnia; foreign Arab nationals living
in Saudi Arabia; and about a dozen Saudi Arabian nationals who had been forcibly returned from Pakistan and Yemen. Four of those arrested were summarily executed in connection with the bombing (see below). The others were not known to have been charged with any recognizably criminal offence, and were believed to be detained on suspicion of membership of illegal organizations with political and religious links with the armed conflicts in Afghanistan and Bosnia. Most of them were reportedly held by the al-Mabahith al-'Amma, General Intelligence, in al-Ruwais Prison in Jeddah.
Shi'a Muslim critics or opponents of the government were targeted for arrest throughout the year, particularly after the bombing in June of the us military complex in al-Khobar. The authorities reportedly suspected that the attack had been planned by a foreign force with links with the Shi'a commimity in the Eastern Province. Over 100 people, including more than a dozen leading Shi'a clerics, were arrested in the Eastern Province. Among them was Hojatoleslam Sheikh Habib 'Abd al-'Ali Hamada, from al-Qatif, who was arrested in March but later released. He was rearrested in August, together with other clerics, including Sheikh Ja'far 'Ali al-Mubarak, who had been repeatedly arrested and detained in previous years because of his criticism of government policies (see Amnesty International Report 1996), and Shakir Hajlis, who had been detained and subsequently released in March 1995. Three others arrested with Shakir Hajlis in 1995 - Zuhair Hajlis, Ridha al-Huri and Mahdi Hazam - were believed to have been released after short periods in detention (see Amnesty International Report 1996). It was not known if any of the detainees were charged in connection with the June 1996 bombing, but most were believed to be detained because of their criticism of government policies, and may have been prisoners of conscience.
Scores of suspected Sunni Islamist critics of the government were arrested in various parts of the country and most of them reportedly remained in detention at the end of the year. In August, four relatives of Mohammad al-Mas'ari, a government opponent living in exile, were arrested in Riyadh, including his son, Anmar al-Mas'ari, who had been arrested in 1994
SAUDI ARABIA
(see Amnesty International Report 1995). The precise reasons for the arrests were not known. If they were detained because of their kinship with Muhammad al-Mas'ari, they would be considered prisoners of conscience.
More than 200 people arrested on poHt-ical or religious grounds in previous years continued to be detained without trial, They included Donato Lama, a Philippine national who was reportedly arrested in October 1995 on suspicion of preaching Christianity and detained in al-Malaz Prison in Riyadh. However, the majority of those still in detention were Sunni Islamist critics or opponents of the government. Among them were Sheikh Salman bin Fahd al-'Awda and Sheikh Safr 'Abd al-Rahman al-Hawali, held since 1994, and Dr Nasser-'Umr, who was arrested in March 1995 (see Amnesty International Report 1996). Most were held in al-Hair Prison near Riyadh.
Dozens of so-called Arab Afghan veterans, who were arrested immediately after the bombing in Riyadh in November 1995, were also believed to be still held. It was not knovra whether Sheikh 'Abdul-Rahman bin Muhammad al-Dakhil, arrested in July 1995, remained in detention (see Amnesty International report 1996).
Muhammad al-Fasi, a businessman, whose detention in Saudi Arabia after his forcible return from Jordan in October 1991 was never acknowledged by the government. was released in May.
More than a dozen political prisoners were convicted after unfair trials. They included possible prisoners of conscience such as 'Uthman Bakhash, a Lebanese national, who was arrested in March 1995 in Riyadh and, with several others, charged with membership of an illegal organization. the Hizb al-Tahrir al-'islami, Islamic Liberation Party. All were tried in April or May by the Grand Shari'a Court in al-Taif, following summary proceedings in which they were not allowed access to defence lawyers. Seven were convicted and sentenced to prison terms ranging from eight to 30 months. 'Uthman Bakhash received a 30-month sentence. The eighth defendant, Muhammad al-Ja'bari, was acquitted but not released until October. Four other political prisoners were sentenced to death and executed. They had been detained during the wave of arrests at the beginning of the year targeting the so-called Arab
Afghan veterans (see above). In April, the four gave televised "confessions" in which they admitted having carried out the bombing of the National Guard training centre in Riyadh. Forty days later they were beheaded. Throughout their detention, the four had had no access to defence lawyers and their trial was held in camera. Their confessions, believed to have been the main evidence on which they were convicted, may have been obtained as a result of torture or ill-treatment. The remaining political prisoners convicted during the year were reportedly sentenced to prison terms for activities such as distributing leaflets of opposition organizations.
There were frequent allegations of tor-tme and ill-treatment of political and criminal detainees. Methods included beatings, the use of shackles and threats of sexual assault. 'Uthman Bakhash (see above) was reportedly severely beaten while handcuffed and shackled with his arms and legs tied together behind his back. He was also reported to have been kept in solitary confinement in an underground cell for over a year. Hojatoleslam Ehsani, an Iranian clergyman who was detained while on pilgrimage to Mecca, stated after his release that he had been beaten with sticks. A former detainee released during the year stated that during his detention by al-Mabahith al-'Amma in al-Ruwais Prison, he had been threatened with sexual assault and beaten while shackled and handcuffed.
At least 27 individuals were sentenced to flogging, ranging from 120 to 200 lashes. They included two secondary-school students convicted of assaulting a teacher and 24 Philippine nationals, possible prisoners of conscience, who were reportedly sentenced for homosexual behaviour. All the sentences were believed to have been carried out by the end of the year. However, it was not known whether the sentence of 4,000 lashes passed on Mohammad 'Ali al-Sayyid, an Egyptian national, had been completed by the end of the year (see Amnesty International Report 1996).
At least 69 people were executed, including a woman. All but four (see above) had been convicted on charges which included murder, rape, drug-trafficking, robbery and witchcraft.
At least three people sentenced in previous years, two Philippine nationals and one Kuwaiti national, were reported to be
SAUDI ARABIA/SENEGAL
on death row at the end of the year. They included Sarah Dematera, a Philippine domestic worker convicted of the murder of her employer in 1992. Her execution was suspended until the victim's oldest child reaches the age of 18 and decides whether to accept blood money instead of her execution. New information came to light that 'Abd al-'Aziz Muhammad Isse, a Somali national previously reported to be on death row, was serving a five-year prison term (see Amnesty International Report 1996). No further information was available concerning the change in his sentence.
Up to 20 Egyptian nationals, possible asylum-seekers living in Saudi Arabia, were forcibly handed over to the Egyptian authorities. Most of them were sought by the Eg5^tian Government, possibly solely for their non-violent political activity. They were detained on arrival in Egypt, where they were at risk of torture. They were not known to have been offered any access to asylum procedures in Saudi Arabia. They included Nasr Abd al-Salem, a imiversity lecturer.
Amnesty International requested clarification of the reasons for the arrest and detention of political detainees, and sought assurances that they were being treated humanely and given access to relatives, lawyers and medical care. The organization appealed for the immediate and unconditional release of all political detainees not charged with a recognizably criminal offence, and for those charged to be given a fair trial in accordance with international standards. Amnesty International also called for reports of torture to be investigated and anyone found responsible to be brought to justice, and for the commutation of all death sentences.
Following Amnesty International's statements on the summary execution of the four prisoners after an unfair trial, the Saudi Arabian Ambassador to the United Kingdom stated publicly, "it is regrettable that Amnesty International should compromise its credibility by expressing anger and outrage at the punishment of criminals who were found guilty of terrorism and sentenced in accordance with the law of Saudi Arabia after full due process", but failed to explain why the case was shrouded in secrecy. The government did not respond to any of Amnesty International's communications.
In April, Amnesty International up-dated its previous submissions for un review under a procedure established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728f/1503, for confidential consideration of communications about human rights violations in Saudi Arabia.
