LIBERIA
All parties to the continuing conflict committed gross human rights abuses, including arbitrary detention, torture and ill-treatment, hostage-taking and deliberate and arbitrary killings of civilians.
LIBERIA
Some armed groups punished their members for attacking civihans: at least one combatant was found guilty by a court-martial and executed. Some prisoners of conscience were arrested outside the context of the armed conflict.
On 3 September a civilian Chairperson of the Liberian National Transitional Government, Ruth Perry, was sworn in. She took office after the foreign ministers of the Economic Corrununity of West African States (ecowas) met to oversee the transition to an elected government, in accordance with the terms of the 1995 Abuja peace agreement (see Amnesty International Report 1996). The ecx)was meeting also agreed a revised timetable for the Abuja agreement, envisaging its full implementation by June 1997, and called for an increase in the number of ecowas Ceasefire Monitoring Group (ecomog) troops to monitor the cease-fire and to oversee the disarming of combatants in preparation for elections in May 1997. In November, ecomog began the disarmament process, but by the end of the year few weapons had been handed over. Of the estimated 60,000 combatants only about 5,000 had handed in weapons.
The un Security Council renewed the mandate of the un Observer Mission in Liberia (unomil), sent to Liberia in 1993 to monitor an earlier peace agreement and coordinate with ecomog. The Security Council stressed the human rights aspect of unomil's mandate.
The fighting, which had remained sporadic in rural areas, spread to the capital, Monrovia, in April, when police believed to be allied to the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (npfl) attempted to arrest Roosevelt Johnson, leader of the rival United Liberation Movement of Liberia for Demo-cracy-Johnson branch (ulimo-j). The initial protagonists were the npfl and ulimo-j, but all the other armed groups were later involved in the fighting. The national army, the Armed Forces of Liberia (afl), the Liberian Peace Council (lpc) and ulimo-j fought together against the npfl and its former rival, the ulimo-Kromah branch (uumo-k).
The fighting centred on the Barclay Training Centre military barracks in central Monrovia. Rival armed groups controlled different zones of Monrovia and many civilians fled Liberia or sought refuge in the us Embassy compound and at
the ecomog base. A cease-fire in Monrovia was re-established in May and appeared to be holding, but fighting involving the two factions of uumo, the npfl and the lpc continued in various parts of the coimtry, in particular in Grand Gedeth, Tuzona and Zwedru. Ln June, a new armed group, the Congo Defence Force, believed to be close to ulimo-k, engaged in fighting against ulimo-j in the area around Tubmanburg.
During the first week of fighting in Monrovia, Charles Julue and six other officers serving prison sentences for treason (see Amnesty International Reports 1995 and 1996) were freed when the afl and ulimo-j stormed the prison.
In October, there was an attempt on the life of Charles Taylor, the npfl leader. An investigation by the Liberian Ministry of Justice, unomil and ecomog was begun into the incident.
All parties to the conflict committed gross human rights abuses. During the fighting in Monrovia in April and May, the mutilated bodies of those killed were openly displayed. Elsewhere, fighters from all the warring factions tortured and deliberately killed unarmed civilians suspected of opposing them, as they seized territory or raided another group's territory. All armed groups were responsible for deliberate and arbitrary killings of civilians, although in many cases it was not possible to establish which group was responsible.
All armed groups detained non-combat-ants whom they suspected of being supporters of rival factions. Peace-keeping troops who were detained, as well as civilians, were ill-treated. In January, in the area around Tubmanburg, uumo-j detained 130 ecomog troops who had been engaged in clearing mines and held them for 10 days as a shield against attacks. During the fighting in Monrovia, members of ecomog and other foreign nationals were held at the Barclay Training Centre military barracks by Krahn groups loyal to Roosevelt Johnson. In February, eight aid workers were held for three days by the lpc in southeastern Liberia. In July, aid workers reported that ulimo-k was restricting the movement of civilians in a displaced persons' camp in Suehn and starving the inhabitants to cause food supplies to be diverted to their troops, ulimo-k released some 60 starving children within a few days, but did not permit the evacuation of other inhabitants for a further two weeks.
LIBERIA/LIBYA
In January, the bodies of five civilians were exhumed in Tubmanburg, together with those of nine ecomog soldiers, allegedly killed by ulmo-j. One of the victims had been decapitated and, according to a pathologist, another had apparently been tied up and then shot. Witnesses reported that there were more than 50 other fresh graves, and that residential areas of the town had been devastated by shelling.
Also in January, there were reports that members of the lpc were killing, raping and harassing members of the Grebo ethnic group in southeast Liberia. In March, at least four civilians were reportedly killed when lpc combatants in Buchanan opened fire on them after running over a pedestrian with their vehicle.
In April and May, during the fighting in Monrovia, widespread killings and mutilations of civilians were reported. The body of Benson Wyen, former Managing Director of the Foresfry Development Agency, was found near the police academy in Pay-nesville. He was reportedly killed by the npfl. Fighters loyal to the npfl displayed the head of a ulimo-j fighter who had been shot and then decapitated. In May, five bodies were found in Benson Street, Monrovia. The victims reportedly had their ears cut off or their throats cut before being shot, following fighting between ulimo-j and the npfl.
In late September, dozens of civilians were killed after clashes between ulimo-j and uumo-k. At least 21 civilians were killed in Sinje, Cape Mount County, reportedly by ulimo-k. One of those killed was a baby girl, whose skull had been fractured.
Both the lpc and npfl were reported to have tortured and in some cases summarily executed their members for attacking civilians. In February, Lieutenant Prince Musa of the npfl was killed a few minutes after being found guilty by a court-martial of killing a civilian who refused to hand over money. In March, npfl officials shot two men in the legs after they were found threatening civilians. An lpc official publicly stated that lpc fighters responsible for the killing of three civilians in Buchanan would be executed. In May, Alhaji Kromah, leader of ulimo-k, publicly stated that he would summarily execute any of his men who harassed civilians.
There were some arrests of prisoners of conscience outside the context of the
armed conflict. For example, in March, Bishop Ronald Diggs was arrested and charged with hindering law enforcement when the Inter-faith Mediation Committee of which he was chairperson proposed that a national commission of inquiry be set up to investigate alleged human rights abuses carried out by Roosevelt Johnson and others. The Corrunittee had intervened to mediate in the crisis surrounding the Council of State's attempts to arrest Roosevelt Johnson. Bishop Diggs was released on bail to face trial the day before fighting broke out in Monrovia.
In April, Amnesty International appealed to all parties in the conflict and to the international community to take immediate action to protect civilians. The organization called on all protagonists to release hostages, cease attacks on civilians and allow civilians to leave areas of fighting. In August, Amnesty International urged ecowas to include respect for human rights in any political solution, and in particular to set up a panel of experts to investigate human rights abuses.
