AZERBAIJAN
One prisoner of conscience was released on health grounds, and his trial postponed. Several possible prisoners of conscience were reportedly detained in connection with the Karabakh conflict solely because of their ethnic origin. Reports of torture and ill-treatment in detention continued, and at least one detainee was said to have died as a result of his injuries. The scope of the death penalty was restricted. At least 41 death sentences were passed. At least nine death sentences were commuted. No executions took place.
President Heydar Aliyev met the Armenian President in October as efforts continued to resolve the situation in the disputed Karabakh region (see Amnesty
Internationa! Report 1996], In May, to mark the second anniversary of a ceasefire in the region, over 100 people, described variously by the different sides as either hostages or prisoners of war, were exchanged by Azerbaijan, Armenia and the self-proclaimed Nagorno-Karabakh Republic.
In August, Azerbaijan acceded to the un Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
Prisoner of conscience Tofiq Masim oglu Qasimov, a prominent opposition figure arrested in September 1995 on a charge of complicity in a failed coup attempt, was released pending trial in February, suffering from reactive psychosis. The charge related to a March 1995 rebellion by a special police unit in the capital, Baku (see Amnesty International Report 1996). The trial of Tofiq Qasimov and two co-defendants opened in May, but in June Tofiq Qasimov's case was separated from that of his two co-defendants on medical grounds, It had not resumed by the end of the year. In September, Tofiq Qasimov's co-defendants received long prison sentences.
Reports continued of the detention of civilians in connection with the Karabakh conflict solely because of their ethnic origin (see Amnesty International Report 1996). Asmik Ignoyan, an elderly Armenian, was reportedly detained in Nakh-chivan in February, and held for three months after an unsuccessful attempt to exchange her for three Azerbaijanis captured during fighting. She was released during the May exchange of prisoners. At least six other civilians of Armenian origin were reportedly detained after the May exchange. They included a woman, Larissa Kirakosian; a 17-year-old girl, Irina Kacha-turian; and a 15-year-old boy, Armen Ner-sisian. All were said to be detained at a special holding camp in Gobustan.
There was no news of 17-year-old Za-ven Ramazyan, an ethnic Armenian reportedly held hostage since 1994 by a private individual with the knowledge of the authorities (see Amnesty International Report 1996).
Reports of torture and ill-treatment in pre-trial detention continued; at least one detainee was said to have died as a result of injuries inflicted by law enforcement officials. As in previous years, verification
AZERBAIJAN/BAHAMAS
remained difficult owing to restrictions on access to detainees. Isa Yasar Tezel, a Turkish journalist detained in April, was allegedly beaten by police officers while held at the main police headquarters in Baku, He was released in June. Kenan Gurel, an Austrian businessman of Turkish origin charged with Tofiq Qasimov in connection with the unsuccessful March 1995 rebellion by police (see above), is said to have been beaten in January during pretrial detention at investigation-isolation prison No. 1 (Bayilov). As a result of his injuries he suffered from severe headaches and insomnia. He was sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment in September.
Ilgar Samedov died from injuries sustained at investigation-isolation prison No. 3 (Shuvelyan) in Baku, where he had been taken following deportation from Ukraine on 14 Jime on a charge of drug possession. The following day, he was taken to the prison hospital at Beyuk-shore suffering from serious injuries to the head and body, and on 29 July he died there. Ilgar Samedov's father, Adil Samedov, had applied several times to the investigating official for permission to visit his son in hospital, but had been refused. It is alleged that the death certificate recorded the cause of death as a blow to the head by a blimt instrument, and that photographs taken in the morgue showed evidence of beatings. The authorities attributed his death to injuries sustained while attempting suicide.
An investigation was held into the 1995 death in custody of Rafiq Shaban oglu Ismayilov (see Amnesty International Report 1996). The district court found the acting head of the police department guilty in connection with Rafiq Shaban oglu Ismayilov's death, but he benefitted from an amnesty passed in May. However, following a Supreme Court ruling, the case was referred back for reinvestigation.
In May, parliament voted'to reduce the number of crimes carrying a possible death sentence from 33 to 12, and to exempt from the death penalty men aged over 65.
Official statistics recorded that 41 death sentences were passed during the year. According to official statistics, five death sentences were commuted in April, and four ethnic Armenians under sentence of death were released under the exchange of prisoners negotiated in May.
No executions took place; according to official sources the last execution took place in 1993.
Amnesty International sought further information on several possible prisoners of conscience, and continued to call on all parties to the Karabakh conflict to release anyone held hostage, or held solely because of their ethnic origin. The organization urged that all allegations of ill-treatment by law enforcement officials be investigated promptly and impartially, with the findings made public and any perpetrators identified brought to justice. It also welcomed moves to limit the scope of the death penalty, but throughout the year urged the authorities to commute all pending death sentences and to take steps towards complete abolition.
