AUSTRIA
There were allegations of ill-treatment of detainees by police officers.
In October, the Government published the report of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment on its visit to Austria in September and October 1994. The Committee reported receiving, during its visit, "a considerable number of allegations of ill-treatment of persons by the police", some of which "amounted to torture". The Committee repeated the main conclusion of its previous report, published in 1991, that people detained by the police are "at serious risk of being ill-treated", and made extensive recommendations to remedy the violations.
AUSTRIA
In December, parliament passed an amendment to the Law on Alternative Service increasing the length of alternative service from 11 to 12 months. The length of military service remained unchanged at eight months. The new legislation, effective from 1 January 1997, continued to impose time limits on the period within which conscientious objectors are able to submit applications for alternative service.
In October, Peter Zwiauer was charged with "failing to comply with a call-up order", an offence punishable by up to one year's imprisonment. His application to perform alternative service had been rejected in October 1994 because it had not been submitted within the required time period. His appeal against the decision was turned down and he was ordered to report for military duty in May.
There were allegations of ill-treatment of detainees by police officers. Sabine Geisberger alleged that following a drugs raid on her apartment in Vienna in November 1995, a police officer dragged her by the hair, threw her in a corner and repeatedly kicked her in the genitals. A medical examination the next day reported bruising to the rim of her pelvis, left thigh, and genitals.
In March, Peter Rosenauer alleged that officers at Lambach police station banged his head against a wall three times, kneed him in the testicles and struck him on the shoulders with a baton following his arrest at a demonstration. The detainee stated that he received no medical attention at the station, or at Wels Detention Centre to which he was transferred later the same day. A medical report stated that Peter Rosenauer had a bruised right eye, swelling on the back of his head and pain in the shoulders, wrists and right testicle. On the day of his release, Peter Rosenauer was charged with resisting arrest and assault. A court acquitted him of the charges in June.
In April, Violetta Jevremovi6 alleged that she and her husband, Nicola - both Roma - were beaten by police officers who had come to their Vienna flat to arrest her husband. According to Violetta Jevremovic, the officers beat her husband and turned on her when she asked them what he had done. Medical records showed that Violetta Jevremovic suffered bruising of both elbows, the left wrist, right hand, right thigh and left ankle,
and swelling on the head, upper jaw and upper lip. Both Violetta and Nicola Jevre-movi6 stated that police officers subjected them to racist verbal abuse and asked them when they were "finally going to go home". (They had been living in Austria for 16 years.) In September, Violetta Jevremovic went on trial for resisting state authority and assault,
In February, three officers were charged with assaulting Emad Faltas, an Egyptian national, at a Vienna railway station in 1995 (see Amnesty International Report 1996). Emad Faltas suffered three broken ribs and cuts and bruises to his arms, stomach and face following his arrest in a case of mistaken identity. In April, a court acquitted the three officers. According to press reports, the trial judge ruled that "even schoolchildren have to be sometimes kept in check by their teachers". An appeal by the Public Prosecutor's Office against the judgment was rejected in November.
In October, Wolfgang Purtscheller's complaint of ill-treatment was rejected by the Vienna prosecuting authorities (see Amnesty International Report 1996).
In February, Amnesty International urged the authorities to investigate the alleged ill-treatment of Sabine Geisberger promptly and impartially, to bring to justice those found responsible eind to provide compensation for her injuries. In July, the organization was informed that a judicial investigation into the allegations was in progress.
In June, Amnesty International expressed concern to the authorities that while the police complaint against Peter Rosenauer had been dealt with promptly, his own complaint appeared to have made little progress. In October, the organization was informed that Peter Rosenauer's complaint of police ill-treatment had been rejected because it "was not possible to clarify the exact origin of [his] injuries". In response to allegations that the detainee had been denied medical treatment, the authorities replied that the local physician whom the officers telephoned was on a house call and could only come in an emergency.
Also in June, Amnesty International called upon the authorities to investigate the alleged ill-treatment of Violetta Jevre-movid. In August, the organization was informed that her allegations of ill-treatment
AUSTRIA/AZERBAIJAN
and racist verbal abuse were the subject of an "extensive investigation".
In November, Anmesty International informed the authorities that if Peter Zwiauer was imprisoned for refusing on conscientious grounds to perform military service, the organization would consider him to be a prisoner of conscience and would call for his immediate and unconditional release. Amnesty International also expressed concern that the draft proposal to amend the Law on Alternative Service took insufficient account of the fact that people's conscientiously held beliefs could change over time. In IDecember, the Minister of Defence informed Amnesty Lntemational that Peter Zwiauer was obliged, under Austrian law, to complete his military service.
