HUNGARY
There were reports of ill-treatment of detainees by police officers. One detainee was kept in prolonged isolation. Non-European asylum-seekers were denied adequate legal protection.
In February, the government authorized publication of the report of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment on its visit to places of detention, primarily in the Budapest area, in November 1994, together with the government's response. The Committee stated that it had heard numerous allegations of ill-treatment by the police and concluded that persons deprived of their liberty in Budapest run a not inconsiderable risk of ill-treatment. The Committee also concluded that living conditions in a hostel where illegal immigrants were detained (see Amnesty International Report 1993) were inhuman and degrading and constituted a significant risk to the physical and mental health of the detainees. The government agreed with most of the findings and accepted the recommendations. The Kerepestarcsa Community Hostel was closed and more appropriate accorrunoda-tion provided.
There were new allegations of police ill-treatment. In May, Hamodi Ahmed was reportedly assaulted by police officers outside a Budapest restaurant. The officers pushed him against the wall, handcuffed his arms behind his back and beat him. Later, at the Fifth District Police Station, Hamodi Ahmed was kicked by five or six other officers. The following morning he was released without charge from the Central Police Station, to which he had been transferred, and received hospital treatment for his injuries. His complaint to the prosecutor was reportedly dismissed on the grounds that it was not possible to establish the identity of the police officers involved, who, according to the results of the investigation, did not use excessive force.
In the same month, also in Budapest, Istvàn Nagy was detained when he criticized a police officer who had allegedly shouted at an old man for crossing the
HUNGARY/INDIA
road too slowly. Istvin Nagy was taken to the Eighth District Police Station, where he was reportedly hit in the face, beaten and kicked. He was later admitted to Erzs^bet Hospital, where he was treated for three days for a ruptured ear-drum and injuries to the chest and spleen. Istvan Nagy filed a complaint with the prosecutor and an investigation was in progress at the end of the year.
In January, Christopher Kwaku was detained in Budapest Police Headquarters for illegal entry into Himgary. He was held in virtual isolation for over 10 months after a medical examination established that he was hiv positive. In November, he was released into the custody of a local human rights organization. Amnesty International believes that prolonged isolation may have serious effects on the physical and mental health of detainees and may constitute cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
Hungary operates a geographical limitation to the 1951 un Convention relating to the Status of Refugees, under which it does not recognize non-European refugees. Consequently, non-European asylum-seekers are in danger of being returned to a country where they face serious human rights violations. In Jime, brothers Anthony Zakaria Laki and Samuel Lado Zakaria, two Christians from Sudan, arrived in Himgary from Damascus, Sjria, and sought asylum at Budapest Airport. Both men were returned to Damascus, where they were arrested on arrival and detained before being sent back to Sudan in September. Their subsequent fate and whereabouts were unknown.
In September, Amnesty International urged the Minister of the Interior to arrange a comprehensive medical examination of Christopher Kwaku in order to assess the effects of prolonged isolation on his health. The Minister replied that Christopher Kwaku's isolation had been recommended by medical experts and that he was receiving appropriate medical assistance to "alleviate his psychologic complaints arising from the separation". Amnes^ International further questioned the decision to detain Christopher Kwaku in isolation, particularly in the light of the recommendation of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment to the Hungarian Government
that Hiv-positive detainees who are well should not be segregated.
Amnesty International expressed concern to the authorities that the two brothers from Sudan had been refused effective and durable protection in Hungary.
In December, Amnesty International expressed concern about new allegations of ill-treatment and requested information about the results of investigations.
