Switzerland
Amnesty International's main concern remained the imprisonment of conscientious objectors to military service and the lack of any alternative civilian service.
Under Article 81 of the military penal code all conscientious objectors are sentenced to imprisonment, even where the military tribunal recognizes a severe conflict of conscience on religious or ethical grounds. If the objection to military service is considered to be primarily political, a longer term of imprisonment is imposed.
Amnesty International worked for the release of six conscientious objectors of whom two were Nicolas Taillard and Clément Reymond.
278
Nicolas Taillard, a 24-year-old orthopaedist from Geneva, refused on conscientious grounds to perform military service or present himself at the recruit school on the stipulated date. He was sentenced to seven months' imprisonment on 29 January 1981 by the military tribunal of Lancy. The sentence was confirmed by a military appeal court at Cully on 12 November 1981. A higher appeal to the Tribunal militaire de cassation, military appeal tribunal, was rejected on 21 April 1982. He began serving his sentence at Bellechasse prison on 2 November 1982.
Nicolas Taillard had left Switzerland on 23 April 1980 to work as an orthopaedist with the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) in Angola. He was treating combatants from both sides of the conflict in that country. His stay in Angola was cut short by illness and he returned to Switzerland in August 1980. The first appeal court found that his conscience had allowed him to treat soldiers in Angola but not to serve as an unarmed sanitaire (member of the medical corps) in the Swiss army, and that no serious conflict of conscience prevented him from carrying out military service. Although the court of cassation accepted that he had been motivated by humanitarian ideals, it agreed that no serious conflict of conscience existed.
Clément Reymond was sentenced to eight months' imprisonment by the military tribunal of Montbénon on 21 January 1981. An appeal hearing at La Tour de Peilz on21 May 1981 confirmed this sentence but delayed its execution to allow him to complete his studies in geology at the University of Geneva. He began his sentence at Bellechasse prison on 18 October 1982. Clément Reymond, aged 22, did not present himself for military service on 14 July 1980, having previously written to the military authorities explaining his nonviolent philosophy and advising them of his refusal. The appeal court considered that his philosophy was based on political reasoning rather than moral convictions and therefore sentenced him to prison instead of the lesser penalty of arrêts répressifs. This is a system which allows a person to do prescribed work outside the prison boundaries but requires the prisoner to return in the evenings and at weekends.
