Paraguay
Amnesty International's major concerns were arbitrary arrest, the use of state of siege legislation to detain political opponents for prolonged periods without trial, torture, and the forcible expulsion of detainees. Amnesty International was working on behalf of 11 prisoners of conscience at the end of 1982 and investigating a further 40 cases. Article 79 of the constitution, which allows for a state of siege, continued to be used as a basis for indefinite detention without trial. A state of siege had existed in Asunción, the capital, almost continuously since General Alfredo Stroessner took power in 1954.
Ramón Santiago Moreno, a journalist with the independent newspaper ABC Color, was detained on 17 August in the town of Luque, in Central province, where the state of siege did not apply, and was transferred to Asunción where he was held incommunicado without charge until his release on 24 December.
Urgent appeals were issued by Amnesty International on behalf of Hermes Rafael Saguier, who was detained on 5 September under state of siege legislation. A Paraguayan lawyer, he was living in Argentina where he lectured at the University of Buenos Aires. At the beginning of September he travelled to Paraguay to present a petition of amparo (similar to habeas corpus) on behalf of a group of 14 political exiles who wished to return to the country. Article 77 of the Paraguayan Constitution (1967) allows a petition of amparo to be presented when a person may have been illegally deprived of constitutional rights, and gives judges powers to protect constitutional rights and guarantees. The 14, who were members of Paraguay an opposition parties, had all been forced to leave Paraguay during the past 28 years owing to political persecution. The petition of amparo was rejected by
164
the court and the 14 were refused entry to the country. Hermes Rafael Saguier was held in incommunicado detention without trial until 14 October, when he was deported to Clorinda, an Argentinian town near the Paraguayan border.
Amnesty International was investigating the cases of 38 people arrested between January and March under Article 79 and accused of belonging to the pro-Chinese wing of the Paraguayan Communist Party. Most of those arrested were poor peasants and cultivators of sugar cane and cotton from the Eastern region of the country. Following the presentation of a petition of amparo on behalf of nine of the detainees in May, they were transferred from the Guardia de Seguridad, a military barracks, to regular prisons and charged under the anti-subversion Law 209, Defence of Public Peace and Liberty of Persons. The basis for the charges remained unclear. Independent sources mentioned other factors in connection with the arrests, such as the possible involvement of some of the accused in protests against a reduction in the price of cotton, and disputes over land tenure. The Paraguayan press publicized the case after a news conference on 15 March in the Police Department of Investigations. Police displayed a group of 30 of the prisoners whom they claimed had been held as a result of a police raid on three premises in the San Vicente, Panambiretá and San Lorenzo districts of Asunción.
The initial proceedings were conducted during June. The accused, who numbered 38, included eight people not presented during the press conference in March. Two of these, Roque Ruiz Diaz andMaria Margarita Baez Romero, were arrested in January and February respectively and held for four months in secret detention. At the beginning of June a request by Margarita Baez' lawyer for a medical examination for her and Cristina Estela González Bogado, a minor, was rejected by the judge. Reports were later received by Amnesty International that Maria Margarita Baez Romero was suffering persistent hallucinations and headaches and from disorders of the kidneys and genitals. There were fears that she had been tortured. The lawyer who presented the request, Dr Diego Bertolucci, who worked for the Comité de Iglesias Para Ayudas de Emergencia, Interchurch Committee for Emergency Relief, was later summoned to the office of the chief of the Police Department of Investigations, Pastor Coronel. There he was physically attacked and threatened with expulsion from the country if he persisted with his request. Amnesty International called for an investigation into the incident and appealed to the government to guarantee that defence lawyers be allowed to perform their professional duty without harassment or fear of reprisals. The organization also asked for guarantees for the safety of Maria Margarita Baez Romero and for all necessary medical treatment.
165
Amnesty International received other allegations of torture and ill-treatment of detainees. Hernando Damián Sevilla, an Argentine journalist arrested on 6 February 1981 and adopted as a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty International, was released on 30 September, having been held for more than one and a half years without charge or trial under Article 79. For the first two months he was held incommunicado without access to a lawyer in the Police Department of Investigations in Asunción, where it is alleged that he was tortured. On 9 April 1981 he was transferred to the military barracks, Guardia de Seguridad, where he received medical attention but remained incommunicado. He did not receive regular weekly visits until June 1982. On 30 September he was taken to the airport and put on a plane to Sweden.
Amnesty International continued to receive disturbing reports about Modesto Napoleón Ortigoza, who had been serving a 25-year sentence since 1962, accused of murder. Modesto Napoleón Ortigoza's case had been under investigation by Amnesty International since 1974; Amnesty International had consistently maintained that there were irregularities in the trial proceedings in this case and that the facts had never been clarified. For several years, reports had reached Amnesty International from a number of reliable sources indicating that Modesto Napoleón Ortigoza was experiencing severe mental disturbance and had tried to commit suicide several times. He was being held incommunicado in a small cell in the military barracks of the Guardia de Seguridad in Asunción. In October Amnesty International issued an urgent medical appeal on his behalf, having received reports that he had been severely beaten by prison guards and was being subjected to constant harassment and provocation. Amnesty International believed that he was not receiving appropriate medical treatment and asked for an immediate visit by an independent psychiatrist and medical help, including removal to a suitable hospital if necessary.
On 8 May Maria Saturnina Almada de Silva, a prisoner of conscience adopted by Amnesty International, completed her three-year sentence under the anti-subversion Law 209. She was taken from prison on 17 May and held for a further three days in incommunicado detention in the Police Department of Investigations. On 19 May she was taken by the police to the Brazilian town of Foz de Iguazú near the Paraguayan border where she was left with only the clothing she was wearing. Her husband, Alfonso Silva Quintana, had a further year and 10 months' sentence to serve. Both had previously spent 10 years in detention without trial between 1968 and 1978. Maria Saturnina Almada de Silva later went into exile in Europe.
Amnesty International issued urgent appeals after the deportation
166
of opposition politician and author Dr Domingo Laino to Argentina on 13 December. It was believed that the arrest and deportation were in connection with the imminent publication of his book about the deposed president of Nicaragua, Anastasio Somoza Debayle, which included reference to his assassination in Asunción in September 1980. Police alleged that the book amounted to a justification of a criminal act, an offence under anti-subversion Law 209. Domingo Laino was an outspoken critic of the Paraguayan Government and had been detained frequently in the past. Amnesty International feared for his safety in Argentina. In August 1980 two senior members of the Paraguayan Communist Party, Antonio Maidana Campos and Emilio Roa Espinoza, were abducted in Buenos Aires by agents believed to belong to the Argentinian security forces. By the end of the year there had been no further information about their fate or whereabouts. Both men were adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience.
At the General Assembly of the Organization of American States held in Washington in November, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights reported on human rights violations in Paraguay in its annual report The organization referred to arbitrary detentions under the state of siege, the lack of measures to permit the return of exiles, and the expulsion of Paraguayan citizens. It asked the government to set a date for a visit by the commission which had been agreed in principle in 1977.
A,
r
