Brazil
Amnesty International was concerned about the continued prosecution of civilians by military courts under the Lei de Seguranqa Nacional (LNS), Law of National Security. During the year Amnesty International monitored approximately 20 cases involving over 150 individuals. Among those to face court proceedings were journalists, politicians, trade unionists and church workers. Some resulted in conviction and imprisonment; others in acquittal or suspended sentences. A number of individuals were permitted to await the outcome of further appeals in provisional liberty. Throughout 1982 Amnesty International received reports of the killing and torture by the police of criminal suspects.
In June 1982 Amnesty International sent an observer to the trial of two French priests adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience. Father Aristides Camio and Father François Gouriou. The priests and thirteen posseiros (peasant squatters) had been
116
arrested on 31 August 1981 in Sao Geraldo do Araguaia (see Amnesty International Report 1982). A military court in Belém, Para, found the priests guilty under Article 36 of the LNS of "inciting violent struggle between social classes" and imposed sentences of 15 years' imprisonment for Father Camio and 10 years for Father Gouriou. Twelve posseiros were convicted under Article 31 of the LNS ("using violence for reasons of dissidence or socio-political nonconformity against those in authority") and sentenced to eight years' imprisonment. One, Joâo Matias da Costa, was sentenced to nine years' imprisonment. In a report to the authorities Amnesty International expressed concern at the ruling of the Auditoria Militar, military court, given the lack of conclusive evidence against the priests and numerous irregularities in the case, including reports that the posseiros had been coerced and ill-treated in detention. In Amnesty International's view the hearing failed to meet internationally recognized standards for a fair trial, and contravened the Code of Military Penal Procedure.
An Amnesty International observer attended the appeal lodged by the priests and posseiros in Brasilia in December 1982. In a split vote the Superior Tribunal Militar (STM), Superior Military Tribunal, upheld the earlier convictions but reduced the sentences on Father Camio and Father Gouriou to 10 and eight years respectively. The posseiros' sentences were left unchanged. Amnesty International expressed the view to President F igueiredo on 3 December 1982 that no evidence had been brought during the appeal to indicate that the priests were guilty of the charges and that Amnesty International continued to believe that they were prisoners of conscience. Amnesty International requested the transfer of the posseiros to a civilian detention centre. Since their arrest they have been held in the 1° COMAR {1° Comando Aéreo Regional), First Regional Air Command, barracks in Belém where conditions are reportedly harsh.
Amnesty International appealed on behalf of Juvéncio Mazzarollo, a journalist on the newspaper Nosso Tempo, sentenced by a military court under Article 42 paragraph V of the LNS, (which covers "insults and slanders" against public officials), to one year's imprisonment. Amnesty International also intervened on behalf of journalists imprisoned for writing articles alleging misappropriation of funds by government officials. Three journalists from ^e Rio de Janeiro weekly Hora do Povo - Pedro de Camargo, Ricardo Lessa and Claudio Cardoso Campos - were sentenced to one and a half years' imprisonment under Article 42 paragraph V of the LNS. Their sentences were increased on appeal to two years three months. The Superior Federal Tribimal confirmed the longer sentences in September 1982. The defendants had been at liberty pending the outcome of their second appeal but were detained in October 1982.
117
On 16 April 1982 a military court in Sao Paulo heard a third appeal by 11 trade unionists, including Luis Inacio da Silva("Lula"), against conviction under the LNS resulting from a strike in 1980 (see Amnesty International Report 1982). The STM ruled that the strike had not infringed national security legislation but the case was transferred to the civiHan courts to determine whether anti-strike laws had been broken. The defendants were not in detention. Five of the defendants also faced other charges under the LNS.
In July 1982 Amnesty International intervened on behalf of 13 people arrested on 1 July 1982 during a public meeting in Salvador, Bahia, to launch a magazine investigating "disappearances" in the Araguaia region during the 1970s. All were released after a few days but their lawyer stated that a complaint would be brought against the police in connection with the reported torture of five of the detainees. On 13 December 1982,91 members of the banned Par/ziio Comunista Brasileiro (PCB), Brazilian Communist Party, were arrested in Sao Paulo. All were subsequently released but investigations continued to determine whether charges would be brought.
Amnesty International received reports of killings of criminal suspects. Official figures quoted by the Commander of Military Police, General Arnaldo Braga, put the number of deaths between January and 31 August 1982at363. Most of the killings were said to have happened during arrest but some prisoners reportedly died in custody.
Amnesty International continued to receive reports that ordinary criminal prisoners were tortured and ill-treated in detention. On 4 August 1982 the former director of the Ilha Grande Prison, Captain Paulo Antonio Guedes de Lima, was sentenced to five years' imprisonment for the ill-treatment and torture of prisoners. The Archbishop of Rio de Janeiro, Cardinal Eugenio Salles, had accused Captain Lima of practising brutality and torture on prisoners in the jail (see Amnesty International Report 1982).
Amnesty International also called upon the authorities to investigate a number of political killings in rural areas. Among the victims were trade union leaders and lawyers who had defended peasants involved in local land issues. Amnesty International was concerned about the apparent lack of action by local authorities.
118
