German Democratic Republic
As in previous years Amnesty International's main concern was the imprisonment of large numbers of prisoners of conscience. The majority were would-be emigrants, imprisoned either for leaving the country without permission or for persisting in expressing their wish to emigrate. Cases taken up during 1982 included other people imprisoned for exercising their right to freedom of expression, and conscientious objectors to military service. During 1982 Amnesty International worked on behalf of approximately 200 prisoners of conscience or people thought likely to be prisoners of conscience. However, it believed the actual number to be much higher.
The right to leave one's country is severely restricted for GDR citizens below the age of retirement. To leave the GDR, except for a holiday in other Warsaw Pact countries, requires special permission
255
which is very difilcuh to obtain. Those caught trying to leave the country without this permission face up to eight years' imprisonment for "illegal crossing of the border" {Article 213 of the penal code). Those who seek the help of organizations which assist people to cross the border illegally face additional prosecution for "treasonable activity as an agent" (Article 100 of the penal code). Article 100 carries a prison sentence of up to 10 years. During 1982 Amnesty International worked on behalf of more than 70 people imprisoned for peacefully trying to leave the country.
During the year large numbers of would-be emigrants who sought to leave the country legally were also imprisoned. Applications for exit visas were usually turned down by the authorities and those who pursued the matter risked arrest on a variety of charges. Those who backed up their applications by threatening to go on hunger-strike or making some other kind of public demonstration were prosecuted for "impeding the activity of public bodies" under Article 214 of the penal code. This article carries a maximum sentence of three years' imprisonment. A typical case was that of Kurt John who, after applying in July 1982 for permission to emigrate, travelled on 1 October to Beriin (GDR) and handed his identity card to the border authorities to underline his wish to leave the country. He was arrested that day and sentenced on 9 December 1982 to 10 months' imprisorunent under Article 214. Some would-be emigrants were prosecuted for " anti-social behaviour" under Article 249 of the penal code. Article 249 defines failure to remain in steady employment as one form of anti-social behaviour and provides a prison sentence of up to two years. Erwin Eisbrenner, after several unsuccessful applications to emigrate, refused to work and lived on his savings. He was arrested on 13 July 1982 and sentenced to 22 months' imprisonment for "anti-social behaviour".
Other would-be emigrants, frustrated by repeated rejection of their applications for exit permits, sought the help of foreign organizations in the hope that support or publicity abroad would improve their chances of emigration. Many were arrested and convicted either of "treasonable passing on of information" (Article 99 of the penal code) or "treasonable activity as an agent" (Article 100). Articles 99 and 100 carry prison sentences of two to 12 years and up to 10 years respectively. Article 99 proscribes sending non-classified information "to the disadvantage of the interests" of the GDR to "foreign organizations . . . and their helpers", and Article 100 proscribes taking up contact with such organizations "in order to damage the interests" of the GDR. A typical case taken up during 1982 was that ofChristian Müller and his wife Heidemarie, who were arrested on 6 April 1982 and sentenced on 4 August to prison terms of two years six
256
months (Christian) and three years six months (Heidemarie) under Article 99 of the penal code. Both had been seeking exit permits since January 1981 and the charge appeared to be based on contacts they had made with people in the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG) in connection with their wish to emigrate.
In addition to would-be emigrants, cases worked on in 1982 included imprisoned Marxist dissenters, conscientious objectors to military service and people arrested for expressing sympathy with the Polish trade union Solidarity.
Manfred Wilhelm and Andreas Bortfeld, two members of a dissenting Marxist-Leninist group whose cases were described in the Amnesty International Report 1982, were tried in June and July respectively and sentenced to eight years' imprisonment for "incitement hostile to the state" (Article 106 of the penal code). All the available information indicates that these charges were brought in connection with the production and distribution of literature critical of socialism as practised in the GDR. Other members of the group were also imprisoned.
During 1982 Amnesty International learned of a number of people imprisoned for refusing on grounds of conscience to do military service. GDR law makes some provision for those who object "for religious or similar reasons" to armed military service, by allowing them to work in "construction units" where conscripts perform such tasks as the construction of military installations. However, as there is no alternative service outside the country's military and defence system. Amnesty International adopted four prisoners of conscience imprisoned for refusing to do either form of military service in 1982. Some church members continued to call for the establishment of a non-military alternative service (see Amnesty International Report 1982).
Amnesty International also worked on behalf of a number of people imprisoned for refusing on grounds of conscience to do service in the army reserve. GDR citizens who have completed national service are liable, until they are 50, to be called up to serve in the army reserve for up to three months a year. The total period a man is liable to spend in the army reserve was increased from 21 to 24 months by a new law which came into force on 1 May. A conscript who has completed service in the army but who later develops conscientious objections to armed military service is not able to choose reserve service in the "construction units". During 1982 Amnesty International worked on behalf of three men imprisoned for six to eight months for refusing on grounds of conscience to do armed reserve service.
The arrests of Michael Blumhagen, Roland Jahn and Manfred Hildebrandt, from the town of Jena in the south-west of the GDR,
257
illustrated some of Amnesty InternationaPs concerns during 1982. Before their arrest they had been involved in commemorating the death of their friend, Matthias Domaschk, who died in the custody of the state security service on 12 April 1981. The death was reported to be a suicide but his friends thought this unlikely, above all in pre-trial detention where elaborate precautions are taken to prevent it. Michael B lumhagen, an amateur sculptor, dedicated one of his works to Matthias Domaschk and placed it beside his grave on 9 April 1982 shortly before the first anniversary of his death. A few days later the statue disappeared; Manfred Hildebrandt took a photograph of four men alleged to be from the state security service removing the statue. This photograph was published in the FRG vjQekXy Der Spiegel on 28 June 1982. On 3 June Michael Blumhagen was called up to serve in the army reserve. This he refused on grounds of conscience and was in consequence sentenced to six months' imprisonment. He was released in December 1982. Manfred Hildebrandt was arrested on 23 September and sentenced on 28 December to 16 months' imprisonment for distributing abroad "information which is suited to damage the interests" of the GDR under Article 219 of the penal code and ■■public vilification" (Article 220). These charges were believed to be connected with the photograph of the removal of the statue and other photographs taken by him. His imprisonment might also be connected with a letter he had written on 19 September to Rainer Eppelmann, a pastor in Berlin (GDR). The letter expressed support for a petition calling for the withdrawal of foreign troops from both the Germanics and for non-military alternative service. On 31 August 1982, the second anniversary of the Gdansk Agreement recognizing independent trade unions in Poland, Roland Jahn rode through the town of Jena with a small Polish flag attached to his bicycle bearing the words "Solidarity with the Polish people". He was arrested on 1 September and at the end of 1982 was still in pre-trial detention. Michael Blumhagen, Roland Jahn and Manfred Hildebrandt were all adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience.
In May 1982 Amnesty International submitted the cases of 28 prisoners of conscience in the GDR to the United Nations under the procedure for monitoring human rights violations set up under ECOSOC (Economic and Social Council) Resolution 728F.
Prisoners continued to be released to the FRG after serving only part of their sentence in return for sums of money paid by the FRG Government. Although it welcomed the release of prisoners of conscience. Amnesty International was concerned that conditions were imposed on these releases and sought to remind the GDR Government of its obligations under international law to release prisoners of conscience without conditions.
