Lesotho
Amnesty International was concerned about the use of detention without trial and the government's failure to investigate thoroughly allegations of torture of detainees and alleged extrajudicial executions committed in 1981. The organization was also concerned about the use of the death penalty.
There was a continuing high level of political violence during 1982. Sporadic acts of sabotage and attacks on leading politicians were carried out by the Lesotho Liberation Army (LLA). The LLA is the military wing of one faction of the Basutoland Congress Party (BCP). Its leader, Ntsu Mokhehle, has lived in exile since 1970 when, faced with apparent defeat at the hands of the BCP, the government of Prime Minister Dr Leabua Jonathan cancelled the first post-independence election, declared a state of emergency and retained power. In May the Minister of Agriculture, Peete Peete, was ambushed and injured by LLA guerrillas, and in August Jobo Rampeta, another cabinet minister, was killed with two others in a similar attack. Koenyama Chakela, a former leading member of the BCP, who was granted an amnesty to return to the country from exile in 1980, was assassinated in early July. The LLA reportedly claimed responsibility for his killing. On several occasions Prime Minister Jonathan alleged that the LLA was able to operate in Lesotho because of South African assistance.
In December South African military forces entered Lesotho at night and committed more than 40 extrajudicial executions in the capital, Maseru. Their victims were South African refugees, including officials of the African National Congress (ANC), and at least 12 Lesotho nationals resident in Maseru. According to eye-witness reports most of the victims were unarmed and were killed in cold blood.
New legislation providing for detention without trial was introduced in September. The Internal Security (General) Act replaced an earlier security law which had provided the legal basis for prosecuting
52
a wide range of political offences, and had empowered the authorities to detain any person incommunicado and without charge or trial for renewable periods of 60 days. The new act defined the ofiences of subversion and sabotage more clearly, reduced the existing detention powers and introduced certain safeguards against ill-treatment of detainees. It extended to all members of the police the power to detain any person incommunicado for 14 days, but stipulated that further detention up to a maximum of 42 days had to be authorized first by reference to the Commissioner of Police and second, after 28 days' detention, to the government minister responsible for security matters. The act also required the minister to appoint special advisers to visit and inspect the conditions of detainees held beyond the initial 14-day period and to review their cases on behalf of the minister. However, the new law retained an earlier provision granting members of the police immunity from prosecution for acts committed in the course of protecting state security.
Amnesty International learned of several new detentions during 1982 but was not able to estimate how many people were detained without trial for political reasons. Those whose detention was reported to the organization included Mampela Mpela, an employee of the United Nations who was detained for a week in July, and three Anglican churchmen who were among a number of people arrested in September. One of those detained at that time, Sophie Makhele, was reported to have died in custody. The precise circumstances of her death were not known to Amnesty International by the end of 1982. Earlier, in July, it was reported that Moeli Ts'Enoli, a former detainee, committed suicide by burning himself alive, apparently because he feared being detained again. In November it was reported that Chief Simon Mapetla, father of a former Chief Justice, had been detained.
Amnesty International expressed concern to the authorities about a number of these detentions and, in response, was informed of the unconditional release of Mampela Mpela and John Ralehana, one of the clergymen detained in September. The government indicated that the two other churchmen would be prosecuted for collaboration with the LLA.
The authorities did not, however, respond to a letter addressed to the Prime Minister by an Amnesty International mission delegate in late December 1981. This concerned the findings of two Amnesty International missions to Lesotho in late 1981 to investigate alleged ill-treatment of detainees and a series of political kilUngs of opponents of the government. Amnesty International's delegate notified the Prime Minister that he had uncovered ''prima facie evidence of brutal and potentially fatal systems of interrogation", evidence of cruel and
53
inhuman conditions of detention and evidence which appeared to substantiate claims that there existed a pro-government "death squad" Icnown as Koeeoko. He sought an urgent meeting with Prime Minister Jonathan and prolonged his stay in Southern Africa for that purpose, but no appointment was arranged and the Prime Minister did not respond to the letter.
No further information became available during 1982 concerning the killing of Edgar Motuba and two others in September 1981, and the attack that same month on the home of a leading churchman, Benjamin Masilo, which resulted in the death of his grandson (see Amnesty International Report 1982). Despite Benjamin Masilo's allegation that members of the paramilitary Police Mobile Unit (PMU) had participated in the attack on his home, no official inquiry was known to have been held. Similarly, there was no formal inquest during 1982 into the deaths of Edgar Motuba and those who were abducted with him.
Amnesty International was also concerned about the government's failure to institute a formal inquest into the death of Setipa Mathaba, a political detainee who died in custody in November 1981. The government claimed that his death was due to natural causes but details of post-mortem findings were not disclosed.
At least four people were sentenced to death during the year. They were each convicted of murder. It was not known whether any executions were carried out during 1982.
