Turkey
279
Amnesty International's concerns were large numbers of prisoners of conscience, widespread and systematic torture and ill-treatment of political prisoners, and the death penalty. Ù /tf^^^^ ''	According to official figures issued
'^y Martial Law Headquarters in Ankara, on 30 November 1982 there were 23,752 political prisoners in Turkey. Of these 15,597 had been charged and were on trial or awaiting trial; 7,294 had been convicted, and 861 were detained without charge. Many of these prisoners were charged with or convicted of violent offences. The exact number of those charged with non-violent political or religious activities was not known, but Amnesty International had information about several hundred people it believed to be prisoners of conscience.
Martial law, established throughout Turkey after a military coup in September 1980, continued. A new constitution was approved by referendum on 7 November, which gave General Kenan Evren, the head of the ruling National Security Council, a seven-year term as President. Amnesty International was concerned that some articles of the constitution appeared to restrict rights to political and trade union activity and freedom of expression and might result in the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience. Amnesty International welcomed the prohibition of torture in Article 16 of the constitution, but regretted that the same article allowed the death penalty.
Prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International included 52 leaders of the Confederation of Progressive Trade Unions (DISK), and Ahmet Isvan, former Mayor of Istanbul, charged with supporting DISK. During the year more people connected with DISK were arrested, among them Professor Sadun Aren, economic advisor and member of DISK'S research unit. This brought the number of defendants in this case to 72. The trial, which began in Istanbul on 24 December 1981, continued throughout the year. In January and August Amnesty International sent observers to the trial.
All the defendants in the DISK trial were charged under Article 146 of the penal code; 62 under paragraph 1, which carries a mandatory death penalty, the rest under paragraph 3, which provides for a prison sentence of not less than 15 years. Article 146 prohibits "attempts by force, to alter, modify, or abolish, in whole or in part, the Constitution of the Turkish Republic . . .". However, the 817-page DISK indictment does not state explicitly that the defendants committed or advocated acts of violence, and they were not charged
280
with any specific violent acts. The indictment appears to allege that DISK'S trade union activities, such as organizing general strikes, were intended to bring about a Marxist-Leninist dictatorship of the proletariat, thereby overthrowing the constitution.
In August an Amnesty International observer also attended the trial in Istanbul of 26 leading members of the Turkish Peace Association (TPA) which began in June. The defendants, who were taken into custody in February, included Mahmut Dikerdem, a former Turkish Ambassador; Orhan Apaydin, President of the Istanbul Bar Association; Melih Tumer, Dean of the Istanbul Academy of Political Sciences; Reha Isvan, former deputy head of the Istanbul Department of Education and wife of Ahmet Isvan; Erdal Atabek, President of the Turkish Medical Association; and several former members of parliament. They were charged under Articles 141 and 142 of the penal code, which prohibit forming organizations or making propaganda aimed at achieving the "domination of a social class over other social classes". All the defendants were adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International and urgent appeals were sent to the authorities on behalf of Mahmut Dikerdem, who needed medical attention. He was transferred to a military hospital in July and released, while his trial continued, on 16 December. On 24 December all except five of the remaining TPA defendants were provisionally released. The trial of all 26 continued at the end of 1982.
Articles 141 and 142 of the penal code, which were also applied under civilian governments, were generally used to imprison left-wing political activists, as well as journalists, publishers, writers, translators and academics who disseminated material considered by the authorities to be "communist propaganda". Amnesty Intemational was informed of many prosecutions of journalists and writers during the year under Article 142. In most cases the defendants remained free until legal proceedings were over, and in some cases fines were imposed rather than prison sentences. Two joumalists who did go to prison were Lutfu Ofiaz and Nazli Ilicak. Lutfu Oflaz, who before the coup wrote for the left-wing newspaper Aydinlik, was imprisoned from 21 August 1981 to 10 June 1982. Nazli Ilicak, a columnist for a right-wing daily newspaper, Tercuman, was sentenced to three months' imprisonment for violating National Security Council decision 52 banning public statements on party political matters. She went to prison on 7 October.
Other prisoners of conscience included members of the banned Turkish Communist Party and members of political parties which were legal until the military coup, among them the Turkish Workers' Party (TIP), the Turkish Sociahst Workers' Party (TSIP), and the Turkish Workers' and Peasants' Party (TIKP).
281
The trials of hundreds of Kurds continued throughout the year. Many were charged with violent offences, but Amnesty International worked for the release of Kurds charged under Articles 125, 171 and 173 of the penal code with separatist activities and who were not accused of involvement in violence. Among them were Mehdi Zana, former Mayor of Diyarbakir, lawyers Rusen Arslan and Mumtaz Kotan, and Pasa Uzun, former chairman of an ethnic Kurdish association.
Dr Ismail Besikci, a sociologist, was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment in March under Article 140 of the penal code which prohibits publishing information abroad which damages the reputation of the Turkish state. The basis for the charge was a letter which Ismail Besikci wrote to the President of the Swiss Writers' Union during a previous period of imprisonment. In the letter he wrote: "The official ideology in Turkey obstinately continues to deny the existence of a Kurdish people and a Kurdish language ...". This was the third time in 11 years that Ismail Besikci - who is not a Kurd - has been imprisoned for expressing such views. (See Amnesty International Report 1982.)
The trial continued of members of the National Salvation Party, charged under Article 163 of the penal code with intending to adapt "the basic social, economic, political or judicial orders of the State to religious principles and beliefs". The defendants were in provisional liberty while the trial continued. In June and October arrests were reported of members of Islamic religious sects, also charged under Article 163 with violating the principle of secularism. At the end of 1982 Amnesty International had not received any further information about these cases.
All political offences were tried by martial law courts. Amnesty International's own trial observers and other lawyers who visited Turkey reported that most lawyers acting in cases heard by these courts complained of the difficulties they faced in preparing the defence case. They complained, in particular, of insufficient access to their clients and the conditions under which consultation with clients took place. Following the military coup sentences of three years and less were not subject to appeal, but in March a bill was passed by the Consultative Assembly which allowed appeals against sentences of over six months. Amnesty International continued to be concerned that the right to appeal was not available in all cases. Also of concern was the continuation of the 45-day detention period during which detainees were not usually allowed access to lawyers or families. Most allegations of torture received by Amnesty International related to this detention period.
Throughout the year Amnesty International continued to receive
282
allegations that prisoners charged with political offences had been tortured and that in some cases death had resulted. Amnesty International asked the authorities for investigations into many alleged deaths in custody. In some instances the authorities replied that the cause of death was suicide or illness, but in other cases no reply was received. In January Amnesty International urged the authorities to investigate the deaths in Istanbul of Bahadir Dumanli on 3 January and his brother-in-law, Ataman Ince, on 26 October
1981.	At the end of 1982 Amnesty International had not received any response concerning these cases, but had learned from press reports that police officers were being tried in cormection with Ataman Ince's death.
On 27 May Amnesty International wrote to the Turkish Ambassador in London expressing concern about the deteriorating state of health of many prisoners in Diyarbakir Military Prison. This was alleged to be due to torture, harsh prison conditions and insufficient medical attention. Particularly mentioned were Mehdi Zana, Pasa Uzun, Mumtaz Kotan and Huseyin Yildirim. Amnesty International asked the Turkish Government to allow a delegation from Amnesty International to visit the prison. On 17 September Amnesty International wrote again to the Ambassador concerning alleged deaths in Diyarbakir Military Prison of prisoners on hunger-strike in protest against torture and inadequate defence facilities. By the end of 1982 Amnesty International had received no response to these letters.
Huseyin Yildirim, a lawyer, was released from Diyarbakir Military Prison in July, and in October he left Turkey. Amnesty International interviewed him in Sweden in November and arranged for him to receive a medical examination. The medical report stated that Huseyin Yildirim "shows signs of external violent injury by a blunt weapon to the head, both upper extremities, the trunk and both lower extremities; and that the injuries may well have occurred as a result of the torture described by [him]". Huseyin Yildirim described in detail the torture to which he was subjected, including beatings on all parts of the body, electric shocks and burnings. He also described the torture of many other prisoners in Diyarbakir Military Prison. Similar information was received from Serafettin Kaya, another lawyer, who had been imprisoned and tortured in the same prison in 1981 and who was interviewed by Amnesty International during
1982.
There were 14 executions in 1982, bringing to 24 the number of people executed since September 1980. According to official figures, 98 people convicted of political murders were under sentence of death on 30 November 1982. Amnesty International did not know the total number of people awaiting execution at the end of 1982, but believed
283
it to be well over 100. Amnesty International appealed repeatedly to the authorities for a halt to executions and the abolition of the death penalty.
On 1 July Denmark, France, the Netherlands, Norway and Sweden each filed with the European Commission of Human Rights an application against Turkey under Article 24 of the European Convention on Human Rights. The five applications alleged violations of the following provisions of the convention: Article 3 (prohibition of torture and inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment); Article 5 (liberty and security of person); Article 6 (right to a fair trial by an independent and impartial tribunal); Article 9 (freedom of thought, conscience and religion); Article 10 (freedom of expression); and Article 11 (freedom of assembly and association).
