Mauritania
w' " A
ifl • —^ J Amnesty International's main concerns ^^ —' - - vi	detention without trial of real or
suspected political opponents of the government, brutal conditions of imprisonment at Jereida camp, judicially imposed amputations and the death penalty.
In February 1982 Mauritania signed the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights.
In March 1982 as many as 150 suspected supporters of Iraqi "Ba'athism" were arrested and held without charge. Most were freed after a short period, but between 10 and 20 reportedly remained in detention in a military camp near the capital, Nouakchott. Among them were Mohamed Yehdih Ould Breidelleh, former Minister of the Civil Service in the government nominated by the ruling military authorities, known as the Comité militaire de salut national (CMSN), Military Committee for National Salvation, and Khalil Ould Ennahoui, former director of the official daily newspaper Chaab (the People). Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to release these prisoners and two other adopted prisoners of conscience. It also appealed for the release of five individuals suspected by the authorities of pro-Iraqi sympathies, and began investigations regarding four others apparently held on suspicion of supporting Morocco's policy on the war in tiie Western Sahara. These nine detainees were held under house arrest without trial following waves of arrests which reportedly took place in March and August 1981. They included Mohammeden Ould Ichiddou, a magistrate, and Naval Lieutenant Dahane Ould Ahmed Mahmoud, former Minister of Foreign Affairs under the CMSN.
60
Amnesty International continued throughout 1982 to seek the release from house arrest or imprisonment of senior officials of the deposed administration of former President Moktar Ould Daddah, who were arrested between June 1979 and April 1980. Seven former ministers, including Hamdi Ould Mouknass and Sidi Cheikh Ould Abdellahi, were reportedly released from house arrest during 1982. In late 1982 reports were received that former minister Ahmed Ould Daddah and another former minister had been released on 21 November, Mauritania's National Day. In late November 1982 the government informed Amnesty International that "all the former members of the Ould Daddah government had been freed". At the end of the year Amnesty International was still attempting to establish whether this amnesty had been extended to three individuals detained since late 1979 and early 1980, apparently because of their association with the Ould Daddah administration. They were Mohamed Lamine Ould Hormatallah, former deputy in the Mauritanian National Assembly representing Dakhla in the disputed territory formerly known as the Spanish Sahara, who was held near Kiffa; Abdarrahmane Ould Mouloud Ould Daddah, a businessman, held at the Caserne des pompiers, fire station, in Nouakchott; and Tijani Ould Kerim, a teacher and prominent youth leader, held in Tiguent.
Amnesty International was concerned about the conditions under which five convicted political prisoners were reported to be held at Jereida military camp, some 30 kilometres north of Nouakchott. These prisoners, who included former Head of State Lieutenant-Colonel Moustapha Mohamed Ould Saleck and former Prime Minister Sid 'Ahmed Ould Bneijara, were arrested in early February 1982 and accused of plotting to assassinate the Head of State Lieutenant-Colonel Mohammed Khouna Ould Haidalla. On 5 March 1982 the Special Military Tribunal imposed heavy prison sentences on all five accused and ordered that their property be confiscated. At the time of sentencing, the tribunal's president. Major Sow Samba, was reported to have ordered that the prisoners be " subject to a severe detention regime, whereby they never see the light of day and their only contact is with the person who brings their food". According to reports received by Amnesty International, the five prisoners were being held in underground cells so small that the prisoners were unable to lie down; the cells were insanitary, without any light and extremely poorly ventilated; food was reported to be very poor and prisoners were denied any exercise, visits or correspondence. In August 1982 Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to improve these conditions but no reply was received.
Amnesty International remained concerned by cruel penalties imposed by the Shari'a, Islamic law, court. In February 1982 Sidi
61
Gueye, who had been convicted of armed robbery by the court, was publicly executed. In mid-1982 two amputations of the right hand were performed after conviction by the Shari'a court, but without the publicity and large crowds which had accompanied the first amputation of hands in September 1980. At that time and following subsequent amputations Amnesty International had called for an end to tiiese penalties and appealed to medical personnel not to participate in amputations. Reports received by Amnesty International suggested that a medical auxiliary had performed the amputations in 1982, following the refusal by doctors in Mauritania to participate.
