France
Amnesty International's main concern was the continued imprisonment of conscientious objectors to military service. Prosecutions of unsuccessful applicants for conscientious objector status were suspended pending reform of the law. However, those conscientious obj ectors who had not applied for recognition as conscientious objectors and continued to reject both military and alternative service were imprisoned by military courts. Tribunaux permanents des forces armées (TPFA), Permanent Tribunals of the Armed Forces. These courts were abolished from 1 January 1983.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of 10 conscientious objectors in 1982. Amnesty International was especially concerned that they had been tried by the TPFA even while legislation providing for the abolition of these courts was under consideration by the government.
Jean Lamy, a Jehovah's Witness, joined his regiment at Pujol à Montbeliard on 4 August 1981. He refused to wear a uniform on religious grounds and was at once placed under arrêts de rigueur (close arrest) until 7 October, when he was moved to the military prison at Metz. On 21 October he was transferred to the civilian prison of Metz-Queleu. On 19 January 1982 he was tried by the TPFA at Metz and sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment. He was released on 4 August 1982.
Two members of a Breton pacifist movement who had been sentenced to two years' imprisonment on 18 December 1981 for insoumission (insubordination) by the TPFA of Rennes were released in 1982. Bernard Corbel was released on 27 November and Hervé Kerrain on 9 December (see Amnesty International Report 1982).
The number of imprisoned conscientious objectors fell considerably after the presidential amnesty of 1981 and the suspension of
254
prosecutions pending the reform of the law ordered by Charles Hemu, the Minister ofDefence. The change was intended to broaden the grounds for recognizing conscientious objection to military service and a new bill was expected to be debated in parliament in early 1983.
The TPFA, which had heard cases involving military offences, including those of conscientious objectors, were abolished with effect from 1 January 1983. From then on such offences were to be judged by civilian judges. The TPFA were, however, to remain in operation in French Polynesia, Landau (for the French troops stationed in the Federal Republic of Germany) and in Paris (for French military personnel in Africa).
The introduction of the Loi sécurité et liberté (law of security and liberty) in February 1981 was of concern to Amnesty International, principally because it widened the applicability of the special summary procedure relating to flagrants délits, blatant misdemeanours. In Amnesty International's opinion the use of summary courts to give rapid judgments in cases where the facts were in dispute could prejudice a fair trial (see Amnesty International Report 1982). The government elected in May 1981 announced its intention to reform this law, in particular the use of the summary procedure knc wn as saisine directe (direct referral to a court). However, by the end of 1982 the projected reform had not yet passed through all its legislative stages.
