Upper Volta
Amnesty International was concerned about the detention without trial of trade unionists, of members of a political organization supporting the trade unionists, of two students, and of some 30 senior officials in the overthrown administration of former President General Sangoule Lamizana.
On 16 January 1982 a spokesman for the ruling Comité militaire de redressement pour le progrès national (CMRPN), the Military Committee of Recovery for National Progress, announced the arrest of four leading members of a left-wing political organization known as the Ligue patriotique pour le développement (LIPAD), Patriotic League for Development. Their arrest followed the publication in LIPAD's newspaper - called Le Patriote (The Patriot) - of a photograph of Soumane Toure, leader of the Confédération syndicale voltaïque{C^V), Trade Union Confederation of Upper Volta, one of the country's four main trade union confederations. The CSV was banned by the CMRPN in November 1981. The newspaper also reportedly published statements by Soumane Toure criticizing the CMRPN's policy towards the trade unions. Soumane Toure himself had gone into hiding in November
94
1981, when the authorities issued an order for his arrest. The LIP AD members were released in mid-February without being charged. At the same time the CMRPN rescinded a ban on all strikes which had been imposed in November 1981, but imposed severe restrictions on the legal use of strike action by trade unions. In April 1982 the constituent unions of the banned CSV confederation called a three-day strike to protest against the new restrictions on striking, the banning of the CSV and the arrest warrant against Soumane Toure. The authorities charged 154 trade unionists with unlawful strike action, and a first group of 82 of these were tried in camera and sentenced to pay a fine in September 1982. At the same time Soumane Toure was apprehended by the authorities and taken into detention. In October 1982 Amnesty International appealed to CMRPN leader Colonel Saye Zerbo to provide information as to the legal basis of this detention. The authorities did not respond.
In March 1982 students Joseph Ilboudo and Norbert Zongo, who had been held without charge since April 1981 (see Amnesty International Report 1982), were released from detention. Amnesty International had appealed to the authorities in 1981 for their immediate trial or release.
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the trial or release of some 30 former senior officials of the administration of General Sangoule Lamizana which was overthrown by the CMRPN in November 1980. Those arrested and held without trial included former President Lamizana, Prime Minister Joseph Conombo and 17 government ministers, and several former high-ranking officials. Most were held in military camps in Ouagadougou, the capital, and Bobo-Dioulasso, where they were not allowed visits. In late April 1982 the CMRPN announced the establishment of a special court, composed mainly of military officers and non-jurists appointed by the authorities, which appeared to have been created specially to try the former officials. It was defined as competent to try all political offences, all criminal acts with a political motivation and embezzlement, fraud and corruption. Some crimes defined by the law establishing the court were made retroactively punishable, and no appeal was possible to a higher court.
On 7 November 1982 the CMRPN was overthrown in an armed coup, reportedly backed by a majority of non-commissioned officers and lower-rank soldiers of the Upper Voltan army. Five people were reported killed during or shortly after the coup, including Lieutenant-Colonel Nezien Badembie, Minister of the Interior and of Security. According to official sources he was shot and killed while attempting to escape from custody. A new ruling body, known as the Conseil provisoire du salut du peuple (CPSP), People's Provisional Salvation
95
Council, was created and the CMRPN was formally dissolved and its members arrested and detained. In its first radio statement the CPSP attacked the CMRPN for alleged corruption and for "the unjustified repression of workers, pupils and students by banishment and by arrest". In one of its first decrees the CPSP ordered the release from prison to house arrest of the former officials arrested in November 1980. Trade union leader Soumane Toure was also released from detention and placed under house arrest. Several dozen other trade unionists who had apparendy been banished in April 1982 to remote towns were allowed to return to Ouagadougou. In December 1982 the authorities announced that the former senior officials arrested in November 1980 would be brought to trial within six months before the special court established by the CMRPN.
