Zimbabwe
Amnesty International was concerned about the use of detention without trial under emergency legislation in force since 1965. The state of emergency was renewed twice during the year, each time for six months. Amnesty International was also concerned about allegations of torture and ill-treatment of detainees and reports of deaths in detention. The first executions since independence in 1980 were carried out in September 1982.
In February the government announced the discovery of substantial arms caches on farms owned by Joshua Nkomo's Patriotic Front (PF) party, the minority party in the ruling coalition. PF supporters living on the farms were arrested, PF assets were confiscated and Prime Minister Robert Mugabe dismissed Joshua Nkomo and certain other PF leaders from the cabinet. For a time the government threatened to arrest Joshua Nkomo but no such action had been taken by the end of the year. However, in MarchDumiso Dabengwa, former head of the PF's military wing, and Lookout Masuku, the senior PF officer in the national army, were arrested. They were later charged with treason and remanded in custody on several occasions, but their trial had not begun by the end of the year.
Following the dismissal of Joshua Nkomo and the arrest of PF military leaders, a number of former PF guerrilla fighters deserted from the army and engaged in armed opposition to the government. These "dissidents", as they were termed by the authorities, remained
103
active throughout 1982. They were apparently responsible for an increasing number of civilian killings, particularly in Matabeleland, and in July for the abduction of six foreign tourists who were still missing at the end of the year despite an intensive search by security forces. The kidnappers reportedly demanded the release of PF military leaders as a condition of the tourists' release.
The government responded to the dissidents' activities with increasing severity, deploying large numbers of soldiers in Matabeleland. At the end of 1982 Amnesty International was receiving reports of human rights abuses by government forces against civilians suspected of sympathizing with the dissidents. Large numbers of people were said to have been arrested, and apparently detained illegally by the army, at newly constructed internment camps at Tsholotsho, Lupane and Nkayi. Allegations of brutality and kiUings of civilians by soldiers were also received but were difficult to substantiate.
Amnesty International was not able to estimate the number of people arrested for political reasons during 1982 but they were many. In addition to civilians, they reportedly included some former guerrillas who had been integrated into the national army and who were detained to prevent them deserting and joining the dissidents. Several long-time supporters of the Zimbabwe African People's Union (ZAPU), as the PF was formerly known, were also arrested. Among them was Vote Moyo, a former long-term detainee and prisoner of conscience who had become a member of parliament in 1980. He was one of a number of people arrested in June allegedly in connection with an incident in which shots were fired at the home of Prime Minister Mugabe. He was alleged to have helped plan the attack, which occurred more than a week after his arrest.
The most widely reported detentions were those of a number of white people, including a member of parliament, two journalists, several farmers and certain high-ranking air force officers. Some of their cases were the subject of legal actions which resulted in decisions against the government and led to considerable tension between the executive and the judiciary.
Wally Stuttaford, one of 20 white members of parliament, was arrested in December 1981. He was held for two months under 30-day detention orders and then, still uncharged, was served with a ministerial detention order of indefinite duration issued under the Emergency Powers Regulations. He contested his detention in the courts and in late July the High Court ruled that he had been detained illegally for seven months. However, he had been charged a week earlier with plotting against the government and so he remained in custody until October, when his case finally went to trial. He was
104
acquitted and discharged but detained again shortly after leaving the court. However, he was held only briefly before being released unconditionally. Three witnesses summoned to give evidence against him, but whose testimony did not substantiate the charges against him, were detained after the trial, and were still held at the end of 1982.
Earlier, Wally Stuttaford brought a legal action against the government alleging that he had been assaulted in the first weeks of his detention. The case was heard in June and he was beheved to have proved his case and been awarded substantial damages. However, in accordance with government instructions, the court hearing was conducted in camera and its outcome was kept secret.
The case of Alan and Noel York, farmers from Figtree, also gave cause for concern. Arrested in January, they were acquitted in May on charges of possessing arms but were immediately detained again under ministerial detention orders but not charged. In July, they brought an action before the High Court, which declared their detention unlawful. The state appealed against this decision but it was upheld by the Supreme Court which ordered their immediate release. They were freed but detained once more on their way home. They brought a new action before the High Court, which again ordered their release but the authorities refused to comply or to disclose the whereabouts of the two men. The Chief Justice reportedly protested to the Prime Minister. Their detention orders were then amended to circumvent the court decision, but in late August they were released unconditionally after their relatives appealed for Prime Minister Mugabe's intervention.
In June the wives of Dumiso Dabengwa and Lookout Masuku successfully applied to the High Court for the right to visit their husbands, who had been denied visits since late March. The state appealed against the ruling but it was upheld by the Chief Justice. A similar action was taken in September when lawyers representing three detained air force officers applied for access to them. The hearing was heard in camera on government orders but the court decided in the lawyers' favour. They were permitted to visit their clients, whom they subsequently alleged publicly had been tortured and assaulted under interrogation. At least 11 air force officers had been detained incommunicado following an incident in July, when aircraft at the country's main air base were sabotaged. None had been brought to trial by the end of 1982.
In addition to the allegations made by the detained air force officers, and earlier by Wally Stuttaford, a number of black prisoners alleged that they had been tortured during interrogation by members of the Central Intelligence Organisation (CIO). For example, in
105
November four former PF guerrillas arrested in April after dissidents attacked a village told the magistrate at their trial that they had been beaten and tortured at Karoi while being interrogated by CIO officers. They claimed also that another man detained with them had been beaten to death under interrogation. The magistrate accepted their torture allegations but later convicted them of possessing arms.
The detainee who allegedly died in custody in April was Collen Mhlanga, a former PF guerrilla who was a lieutenant in the army. In June Amnesty International expressed concern about the circumstances of his death in custody and asked the Home Affairs Minister, Dr Herbert Ushewokunze, if there had been an official inquiry. The organization also urged the Minister to make public the names of all detainees held under emergency powers and to take action to ensure that they were safeguarded from ill-treatment in custody. No reply was received. A further death in custody was reported in October, when Joseph Dube, a former PF guerrilla arrested for illegally possessing arms, was said to have committed suicide in a police cell.
The government's response to torture allegations was imsatisfactory. Following the action brought by Wally Stuttaford, the government amended the Emergency Powers Regulations to provide all members of the security forces with immunity against prosecution for any act committed "in good faith" for the purpose of preserving "the security of Zimbabwe". This provision, similar in nature to the Indemnity and Compensation Act which the government repealed in 1980, also empowered the Minister of Defence to halt court actions already instituted against the government if they concerned acts by security forces personnel committed in good faith or if it was "in the national interest". Later in the year two lawyers who disclosed the detained air force officers' torture allegations were themselves arrested and charged with making subversive statements and with contempt of court. They were released to await trial in 1983.
The first executions since independence were carried out in September when two men convicted of murder were hanged. Following these executions, leading members of the government reportedly stated that in future greater use would be made of the dea'h penalty to punish captured dissidents who had deserted from the national army. Earlier, at the beginning of September, Prime Minister Mugabe had announced that such dissidents might in future be tried by court-martial and sentenced to death, though no such courts-martial were known to have been held by the end of 1982. No further executions were known to have taken place after the two in September. At least 11 people were sentenced to death during 1982. Most had been convicted of murder.
•^•r.L.i^-,'-"-»'






iimMntmtíi^	itwMái
nSftfb 9ái ^«d «aed o»
'II'
