Romania
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, many of them would-be emigrants or religious dissenters. Amnesty Intemational was also con-cemed about lack of fair trial procedures for people charged with political offences. It received a number of allegations of ill-treatment of people arrested for political reasons and prison conditions were reported to be poor. It also received reports of two people forcibly confined in psychiatric hospitals for the nonviolent exercise of basic human rights. During the year Amnesty International worked for the release of 50 prisoners of conscience, but it believed that the total number of prisoners of conscience was much larger.
In August, 11 religious dissenters who had been adopted by Amnesty Intemational as prisoners of conscience were released. There were further releases of prisoners of conscience following the announcement on 29 December of a presidential decree. This decree pardoned and released people sentenced to up to five years' imprisonment or corrective labour. In addition, sentences of between five and eight years' imprisonment or corrective labour were reduced by one sixth. The decree excluded recidivists and people convicted of violent crimes, bribery, corruption and escaping from prison. Amnesty International later learned of, and welcomed, the release under this decree of the majority of adopted prisoners of conscience held in late 1982.
As in past years, many people experienced official harassment and were sometimes imprisoned as a result of having applied to emigrate. Would-be emigrants continued to be liable to summary trial, without legal defence, on charges of "parasitical" or "anarchic" conduct under decree 153/1970. This provides for up to six months' imprisonment or "corrective labour without deprivation of liberty". Under the latter penalty the convicted person is assigned to a particular place of work, may not leave the area without the permission of the local militia and receives greatly reduced wages. Prisoners convicted under this decree included Paul and Polina Dragu, from Tirgu Jiu. They were sentenced to six and four months' imprisonment respectively in January after they and their four daughters went on hunger-strike in protest against official harassment and refusal to allow them to emigrate.
112
Amnesty International adopted as prisoners of conscience 12 would-be emigrants who in July were sentenced to three years' imprisonment each by a court in Bucharest. They had written joint letters to the authorities complaining that their applications to emigrate had been rejected. They had also applied to the Procurator's Office for permission to hold a public demonstration in support of their demand to be allowed to leave the country. They were convicted under Article 323 of the criminal-code of "association with intention to commit an offence".
Amnesty International learned of several people who had been imprisoned for trying to leave the country without authorization, having failed to obtain official permission to emigrate. Article 245 of the criminal code dealing with "fraudulent crossing of the border" makes this an offence punishable by imprisonment or corrective labour for between six months and three years. Two couples from Caransebes - Luca and Varsavia Arnaut and Nicolae and Maria Olaru- were reported to have been sentenced to 14 months' imprisonment each for this offence in June.
Amnesty International received details of two cases in which would-be emigrants were alleged to have been forcibly confined to a psychiatric hospital. On 6 February MihaiB aba from Bucharest was allegedly arrested and forcibly confined in the psychiatric unit of hospital No. 9 in Berceni after he and four friends had gone on hunger-strike in support of their demand to emigrate. Amnesty International did not know how long his confinement lasted; by the end of the year he and three of his friends had been allowed to leave the country. It was also alleged that Ildi Gergely, aged 23 from Timisoara, had been forcibly confined in a psychiatric hospital in Jebel for one month after her arrest in December 1981 while trying to cross the border into Yugoslavia. She was later reported to have received a prison sentence but by March 1982 had been released.
As in past years there were reports of the arrest and harassment of active Christians, many of them members of Protestant evangelical sects. In a number of cases they were imprisoned for having infringed official restrictions on religious freedom, in particular on the dissemination of religious literature. Prisoners adopted by Amnesty International included Dr Silviu Cioata, a preacher of the Brethren Church and a member of the Romanian Christian Committee for the Defence of Freedom of Religion and Conscience (ALRC). This latter organization was founded in 1978 by a group of Christians, the majority of them Baptists, who were critical of official restrictions on religious freedom. In March a court in Ploiesti sentenced Dr Cioata and seven others to prison terms of between five and six years. They were found guilty of having violated customs and press laws by distributing Bibles
273
smuggled into the country. Amnesty International considered thatDr Silviu Cioata and his co-defendants had not been motivated by commercial profit but by religious belief, and that they were prisoners of conscience. In August it was reported that all eight had been pardoned and released.
In November Amnesty International expressed its concern to the Romanian authorities about the arrest on 6 November ofGeza Szocs, aged 29, a poet from C luj. He was reportedly detained together with at least four other people from Cluj and Oradea, who, like him, were members of Romania's Hungarian minority. Their arrest followed the publication of a memorandum in an unofficial Hungarian-language journal produced in Romania. The memorandum was addressed to the participants of the Madrid meeting of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe and claimed that the Hungarian minority was the object of an official policy of assimilation. Geza Szocs and those arrested with him were reported to have been released within four or five days after having been threatened with being charged with treason. Geza Szocs was reportedly detained again from 9 to 15 December, but legal proceedings against him and four others were halted.
Prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International who had not been released by the end of the year included several serving particularly long sentences. One of these. Father Calciu-Dumitreasa, aged 56, a Romanian Orthodox priest, continued to serve a 10-year sentence imposed in \ 919 {sqq Amnesty International Report 1980). Another, Carmen Popescu, aged 40, was sentenced to six years' imprisonment in 1981 under Article 166 of the criminal code dealing with "propaganda against the socialist state". Dragos Oloieru, aged 59, from Radauti, a former political prisoner, was also convicted under Article 166. He was accused of writing some 20 letters during 1981 to the Romanian authorities and to humanitarian organizations and radio stations abroad. Only one of the letters addressed abroad reached its destination. In this letter Dragos Oloieru stated that he had been unfairly dismissed from work at the end of 1980 and that his many efforts to obtain redress from local judicial and party officials had been ignored. On 29 May 1981, together with three others, he went to Bucharest to seek an interview with officials of the Central Committee of the Romanian Communist Party, but was turned away and threatened with psychiatric confinement. He was arrested in December 1981. At his trial on 13 January 1982 a military court reportedly found that he had "disparaged the central organs of the party and thus the social order of our country" and sentenced him to eight years' imprisonment.
Amnesty International was also concerned by reports that a
274
number of prisoners of conscience had been threatened or beaten following arrest. During investigation, they were usually denied access to defence counsel and relatives. Trials were often summary, and many were held in camera. Reports of poor prison conditions, with inadequate food, medical care and hygiene, gave further grounds for concern.
Amnesty International did not learn of any death sentences imposed during 1982.
