Haiti
Amnesty International's concerns <2. Jui. c?^. -. focused on the detention of prisoners of conscience, the continued detention without trial of some 20 political prisoners, allegations of ill-treatment of detainees, alleged "disappearances" and the application of the death penalty.
The 21 prisoners arrested in 1980 and adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International, who included several members of the Parti démocrate chrétien haïtien, Haitian Christian Democrat Party, were retiied in August 1982 following the quashing of their 15-
146
year sentences by the Cour de cassation, Appeals Court, on procedural grounds in February 1982. In the second trial, originally scheduled for July, they were sentenced to six years' imprisonment. An Amnesty International delegate visited Haiti in July to observe the trial. Although the trial was postponed until August he was able to meet members of the government and convey Amnesty International's belief that S y Ivio C laude and others were prisoners of conscience who should be immediately and unconditionally released. He was also able to meet the defence lawyers, but not the defendants.
On 26 August Amnesty International asked President-for-Life Jean-C laudeDuvalier for the release of these prisoners of conscience. On 22 September, the armiversary of the accession to power of the President's father, the government declared a pardon for these 21 prisoners and for tìiree other adopted prisoners of conscience: Ulrich Désiré, Gustave Colas and Emmanuel Noël. Sylvio Claude, his daughter Marie-F ranee, and most of those pardoned, continued to be under close surveillance after their release. Volontaires de la sécurité nationale (VSN), the political police most commonly known as tontons macoutes, were reported to be on permanent guard at Sylvio Claude's door. S y Ivio and Marie-F ranee C laude were again detained on 28 December. Marie-France Claude was released the same day, but Sylvio Claude was held for two days. Amnesty International appealed to the government to stop the harassment of Sylvio C laude and the other former prisoners.
RobertMarcThelusma, tried with UlrichDésiré, Gustave Colas and Emmanuel Noël and also adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience, died in detention in April 1982. While he was in prison Amnesty International received reports that he had been severely beaten and otherwise ill-treated. Shortly before his death, it was reported that his own doctor was allowed to see him and had recommended an urgent operation. However, the authorities would not allow him to be admitted to a hospital and he was left for 15 days without treatment. One morning he was found dead in his cell.
At least 19 prisoners believed to have been detained for alleged political activities against the government were held without charge or trial at the end of 1982. Among these were Behnond C houloute, held since February 1978, Frank Maître and Eric Alcinder, held since August 1979, and Jacques Emmanuel and Harry René, reportedly arrested in March 1981 in the Dominican Republic and handed over to the Haitian authorities. Jacques Emmanuel and Harry René were both reported to be seriously ill. In July appeals were sent to the government expressing concern about their health and urging that they be released immediately unless charged and tried.
A mnesty I ntemational continued to be concerned about the fate of
147
Rock Charles Deróse, who was reportedly arrested on 12 November
1981	and taken to the Casernes Dessalines (military barracks). His whereabouts since then were not known. The government denied that Rock Charles D erose (also known as J eróme Jean) was detained, and there were fears for his safety.
On 28 D ecemberGérardDuclerville, a lay preacher, was arrested one hour before he was due to present his regular program Messe du Matin on Radio Cacique. There were reports that he was being ill-treated. Amnesty International received reports that sectors of the church, particularly those involved in supporting prisoners and their families, had received an increasing number of threats. Several, in particular the church-owned radio station Radio Soleil, had spoken openly against the government's economic policies. In November
1982	it was reported that the Minister ofForeign Affairs and Religions, Jean-RobertE stimé, had formally warned six RomanC atholic priests that criticism of the government would no longer be tolerated. On 23 November 1982 the Conférence haïtienne des religieux, Haitian Religious Conference, sent a letter to its members saying that an increasing number of them had been called before the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Religions and had been threatened, and that there was a campaign of intimidation against the church.
The courts continued to impose the death penalty, although Amnesty International did not learn of any executions. In September the organization learned that death sentences had been imposed on Rubens Brutus and WilnerPhaneus for murder, and on 13 September it appealed to President-for-Life Jean-Claude Duvalier to commute their sentences.
At the end of August the Chambre législative, parliament, passed a law submitted by the government creating the Commission nationale des droits de l'homme. National Commission of Human Rights, to promote and protect human rights. All the members of the commission were nominated by the President in September. According to its statutes, the commission would receive complaints about human rights violations in Haiti from other states, private individuals and from national and international institutions. It would then make recommendations to the government who would be free to accept or reject them. Apart from the publication of its internal regulations. Amnesty International was not a ware of any activity by the commission during 1982.
