Liberia
Amnesty International was concerned about the arrest and prosecution of individuals who allegedly infringed a government ban on all political activities, five of whom were sentenced to death but subsequently pardoned and released. The organization was also disturbed by continuing use of the death penalty and the execution of a number of soldiers.
In August 1982 Liberia ratified the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights.
The military government headed by Commander-in-Chief Samuel K. Doe, which seized power in April 1980, maintained its ban on the exercise of civil and political rights throughout 1982 and took severe action against anyone suspected of contravening it. In January the Liberian National Students' Union reportedly issued a public appeal
54
to the ruling People's Redemption Council (PRC), calling for the repeal of Decree No. 1 of April 1980, which had imposed the ban on political activities. On 20 January or shortly thereafter, six student leaders were arrested and detained in the Post Stockade prison in Monrovia. Several days later they were tried in camera by the Supreme Military Tribunal and reportedly convicted of treason. Five of the students were sentenced to death, and 29 January was scheduled as the date for their execution. However, on 28 January Head of State Doe issued an executive pardon which resulted in the immediate and unconditional release of the student leaders.
Summary action was also taken in March against James Cooper, a 70-year-old former registrar of the national university. He was arrested reportedly for "slandering the military government" and for this was given three years' imprisonment apparently on the orders of the military authorities. On 13 April 1982 Commander-in-Chief Doe announced during a speech commemorating the second anniversary of the PRC's coming to power that James Cooper had been pardoned and freed. In December 1982 Commander-in-Chief Doe reportedly ordered the security forces to arrest any individual engaging in political activities, and threatened a mandatory two-year prison sentence for this offence. However, Amnesty International had received no reports of any political prisoners being held at the end of 1982.
Amnesty International was concerned about the use of the death penalty; in late January 1982, Sergeant David D. Gbedeh was executed by firing-squad after being convicted of murder by the Supreme Military Tribunal. On 3 February 1982 four soldiers were executed by firing-squad. They had reportedly confessed, during a hurried "preliminary investigation" by the military authorities, to having participated in an armed robbery the previous night when three other soldiers had been killed by robbers. Following these executions Amnesty International informed the authorities of its concern and appealed to them to consider the abolition of the death penalty.
