Korea (Republic of)
Amnesty International remained concerned about the detention of prisoners of conscience, reports of torture and the use of the death penalty. 1982 saw the release imder successive presidential amnesties of the remaining 15 prisoners in the People's Revolutionary Party case of 1974, of most of the people arrested in 1980 for violations of martial law regulations, and of opposition leader Kim Dae-jung and his co-defendants. Amnesty International was concerned, however, that at least 150 students were prosecuted under the Law on Assemblies and Demonstrations (LAD) for taking part in non-violent demonstrations criticizing the government or for distributing leaflets containing their criticisms. It was also concerned that a niunber of community and trade union activists arrested in 1981 on charges of anti-state or pro-communist activities were convicted, in many cases in spite of their claims that evidence was obtained from them under torture. It was further concerned by the first known executions since 1975 of people convicted of political offences.
On 22 January 1982 Lee Tae-bok, the president of a small publishing firm, was sentenced to life imprisonment on charges under the National Security Law (NSL) of trying to incite a revolution and establish a socialist government. He was accused of organizing students' and workers' leagues to further his aim (through anti-government demonstrations and strikes) and of publishing books which the prosecution said called for class struggle (see Amnesty International Report 1982). Lee Tae-bok admitted trying to inform workers about their rights. In court, he and his 25 co-defendants testified that they were tortured into admitting the charges. One of his co-defendants was acquitted; the others received prison terms of one to 10 years, suspended in one case. Amnesty International adopted Lee Tae-bok and his co-defendants as prisoners of conscience. It received no reply to its calls for the authorities to investigate the claims of torture and to make the results of the investigation public. On 22 May 1982 an appeal court confirmed the life sentence on Lee Tae-bok, reduced the prison terms on the others to between seven years and 10 months and suspended the sentences on four people. On 15 September 1982 the Supreme Court confirmed the sentences. Six of the prisoners, all students serving one-and-a-half to two years, had their sentences suspended under the presidential amnesty of 24 December 1982.
On 13 February 1982 an appeal court confirmed a sentence of
208
seven years on Lee Kyu-ho and of two-and-a-half years on Park Jae-soon, arrested in March 1981 and convicted on 10 October 1981 on charges under the NSL of anti-state activities within the Hanool Bible study group in Taejon (see Amnesty International Report 1982). Another member of the group, Kim Jong-saeng, a militiaman, was sentenced to five years' imprisonment by a military tribunal on the same charges. Amnesty International continued to appeal for their release.
On 23 February 1982,16 people tried in the Pusan Good Books Association case, whom Amnesty International had adopted as prisoners of conscience, were sentenced to between two and seven years' imprisonment, with suspended sentences for two of them. They included Lee Sang-nok, a university graduate working in a factory, and Koh Ho-suk, a high school teacher, (who both received seven-year terms) and other teachers, students and workers. They were said to have met to discuss social and political issues and to have organized study groups to help workers understand their rights. They were arrested without warrant between June and August 1981 and held incommunicado until September 1981. They were charged under the NSL with activities aimed at bringing about a communist society. At the first trial, the prosecution denied the defendants' claims that they had been tortured. In their appeals against the convictions, the defendants said they had been tortured by the police until they confessed to being communists. On 26 June 1982 an appeal court reduced the sentences by six months or one year, suspending the sentence on one defendant. The Supreme Court confirmed the sentences on 27 October 1982. Amnesty International learned of no independent investigation into the torture claims.
On 18 March 1982 there was an arson attack on the United States Cultural Centre in Pusan. One person was killed and two others were injured. Leaflets found nearby criticized the US Government for its support of President Chun Doo-hwan and called on it to withdraw its troops from South Korea. Twenty-two people were arrested, and were indicted on 29 April. Ten of them were charged under the NSL with either planning, taking part in or conspiring in the arson attack, in an attempt to overthrow the government and replace it with a socialist state. The others were charged with harbouring or assisting some of the defendants to evade arrest. The prosecuting authorities later suspended the charges against six of the latter group. The trial of the 16 started on 14 June 1982. Although a government spokesman had reportedly given assurances shortly after the arrests that there would be no torture, some of the defendants stated in court that they had been tortured into admitting the charges. On 11 August 1982 two defendants - Moon Pu-shik and Kim Hyong-jang- were sentenced to
209
death; two, to life imprisonment; the others to between two and 15 years, and two received suspended sentences. On 13 December 1982 an appeal court confirmed the death sentences and reduced or confirmed some other sentences. Amnesty International urged the authorities to investigate the claims of torture and commute the death sentences on Moon Pu-shik and Kim Hyong-jang.
Amnesty International also took up the cases of several clergymen. The Reverends Koh Yong-kun and Kim Kyong-shik and Kim Young-jin, head of the Korea Ecumenical Youth Council, were arrested after a memorial service in Kwangju on 18 May 1982 for those who died in the disturbances in that city two years before {soe Amnesty International Report 1981). The two clergymen reportedly called on President Chun Doo-hwan to take responsibility for the deaths and resign. The Reverend Koh Yong-kun was released on 25 May 1982. The two others were charged under the LAD and were sentenced on 24 June to eight and 10 months' imprisonment respectively.
Amnesty International also called for the release of Lee Tae-hi, Park Young-son and Cho Sang-hi, trade unionists at Korea Control Data, a computer parts assembly plant in Seoul, arrested on 10 July 1982. They were among a group of about 50 who held a sit-in in the Ministry of Labour after having been refused an appointment with government officials to discuss the closure of their factory. They were charged under the LAD. On 23 November 1982 Cho Sang-hi was sentenced to one year's imprisonment; the two others received sentences of 18 months.
On 30 July 1982 Kim Chol-ki, aged 26, the secretary of the Korea Ecumenical Youth Council, was arrested under Article 104(2) of the criminal code on charges of defaming the state. On 23 July he had distributed a statement to the press, including foreign journalists, which reportedly criticized the government's stand during the labour dispute about the closure of Korea Control Data and called for the release of the three trade unionists. On 21 October Kim Chol-ki was sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment. Amnesty International adopted him as a prisoner of conscience.
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the release of Soh Sung, sentenced to life imprisonment, and of his brother Soh Joon-shik, held in preventive custody under the Public Security Law since the expiry of his sentence in 1978. Both were arrested in 1971 because of their involvement in student demonstrations during the presidential elections. A new two-year custody order was imposed on Soh Joon-shik on 27 May 1982. For the first time, he was allowed to file a lawsuit challenging the order. Hearings started in June 1982. Amnesty International urged the authorities to cancel the detention order on Soh Joon-shik.
210
Amnesty International made a special appeal for the release of Im Tong-kyu, arrested in 1979 and serving life imprisonment for alleged membership of two "anti-state" organizations. Amnesty International believed that he was detained because of his work with agricultural cooperatives.
Amnesty International welcomed successive presidential amnesties benefiting prisoners of conscience. Two co-defendants of Kim Dae-jung-Kim Chong-won dnéYQChoon-ho-{stQ Amnesty International Report 1981) had their sentences suspended in the 3 March 1982 amnesty. Also released then were eight prisoners of conscience arrested in 1974 in the People's Revolutionary Party (PRP) case. Other prisoners of conscience had their sentences reduced; they included Kim Dae-jung and 10 of his co-defendants, Chung Dong-nyon, and the seven remaining prisoners in the PRP case. Choi Chul-kyo, Kang Jong-hon, Paik Ok-kwan, Kang Woo-kyu and Chin Tu-hyon, whom Amnesty International had adopted as prisoners of conscience (see Amnesty International Report 1982), had their death sentences commuted to life imprisonment.
Koh Eun, Kim Sang-hyun and Lee Sok-pyo, tried with Kim Dae-jung in August 1980 {sçq Amnesty International Report 1981) were released in the amnesty on 15 August 1982. Also released were Lee Oo-jae, arrested in the Korea Christian Academy case (see Amnesty International Report 1980) and Chi Chong-hwan, a press photographer arrested in 1979. They had all been adopted as prisoners of conscience.
Kim Dae-jung and the remaining prisoners in his case had their sentences suspended in the amnesty of 24 December 1982. Also given conditional release were Chung Dong-nyon and 11 others detained after the Kwangju disturbances of May 1980; the seven remaining prisoners in the PRP case; three students arrested after non-violent demonstrations in May 1980, including prisoner of conscience Cho Tat-^ovi {set Amnesty International Report 1981)', and six students tried with Lee Tae-bok.
There were persistent reports of the use of torture during police investigation, especially of detainees held under the NSL. Claims of torture in the L^e Tae-bok, Pusan Good Books Association and Pusan arson cases alleged prolonged immersion in water, severe beatings, sometimes by several people at once, being tied up inside coffins, electric shocks, threats of execution and the torture called "roast chicken" where a prisoner whose hands and feet are tied to a rod is swung in mid-air and beaten.
On 14 October 1982 Amnesty International urged Minister of Justice Bae Myung-in to investigate the death, two days earlier, of Park Kwan-hyong, a former student leader, while on hunger-strike in
211
protest against prison brutality. Amnesty International received reports that he had been beaten and had water forcibly poured down his throat. On 20 October 1982 the Minister of Justice denied before the National Assembly that Park Kwan-hyong had been beaten or that the hunger-strike had directly caused his death. No details of the government's investigation were available; shortly afterwards, however, ^e prison warder was transferred.
On 12 October 1982 Minister of Home Affairs Roh Tae-woo outlined in the National Assembly several measures to ensure that police officers respected all legal provisions related to the detention and interrogation of suspects.
Amnesty International appealed for several prisoners to be given adequate medical care. Lee Shim-bom and Cho Sung-oo, arrested in May 1980 and tried with Kim Dae-jung, were reportedly receiving only minimal medical attention for spinal lesions caused by beatings during interrogation. Choi Sok-jin, sentenced to life imprisonment in the South Korea National Liberation Front (SKNLF) case of 1979 and an Amnesty International adopted prisoner of conscience, was said to have suffered fractures of the vertebrae and ankle during interrogation and to be suffering also from a kidney disease.
Amnesty International communicated its concern to President Chun Doo-hwan about the reported execution of four criminal offenders on 22 July 1982 and of six other prisoners on 8 October 1982. In the latter group was Shin Hyang-shik, sentenced in the SKNLF case, and Kim Tae-yul, who was sentenced to death in 1975 for alleged espionage but whom Amnesty International believed could have been a prisoner of conscience. On several occasions Amnesty International wrote to the President urging him to commute all death sentences.
