Suriname
Amnesty Intemational's main concem was reports of summary or extrajudicial executions of alleged opponents of the government by the armed forces.
In Febmary 1982 the civilian government ofPresidentChinA Sen was dismissed by Lieutenant Colonel Desi Bouterse, Commander-in-Chief of the Siuiname Armed Forces. The military authorities had shared executive power with a civilian government since a military coup in February 1980, after which parliament, legislative elections and the constitution were suspended. A new civilian cabinet was appointed in April 1982 but Lieutenant Colonel Bouterse, aided by a military committee, retained control of the govemment.
On 13 March Sergeant Major Wilfred Hawker was summarily executed by firing-squad, following an attempted coup on 11 March. Amnesty Intemational wrote to Lieutenant Colonel Bouterse on 16
172
March, expressing its concern. On 23 March Amnesty International wrote to the government calling for those arrested after the attempted coup to be given a fair trial and urging that no further executions take place.
In October 1982 theMoederbond, Suriname's largest trade union confederation, organized a series of strikes demanding a return to civilian rule. The strikes ended after the military authorities reportedly agreed to negotiations with Cyril Daal, Chairman of the Moederbond, and other trade union leaders over a new constitution, a law on poiitical parties and an elected constituent assembly.
However, on 8 December a number of prominent civilians were arrested by the military authorities, following alleged disturbances in the capital, Paramaribo. Amnesty International subsequently received reports that at least 15 people were summarily executed while in military custody on 9 December. They included CyrilDaal; Kenneth Gonsalvez, Dean of Suriname's Bar Association; Andre Kamperveen, former Minister of Culture and Sport; Josef Slagveer, director of the Informa news agency, and other prominent lawyers, journalists, university lecturers and politicians. On 10 December Amnesty International conveyed its concern about the alleged executions, and urged that those still in detention be treated humanely and that no further executions take place.
On 14 December Lieutenant Colonel Bouterse said on Suriname television that 15 people, tested on suspicion of plotting a coup, had been shot while trying to escape from custody..»However, reports received by Amnesty International indicated that the victims had been shot through the front of the head or chest (in some cases several times) and bore signs of having been tortured. Most of the 15 people who died on 9 December had been taken from their homes by military personnel in the early hours of 8 December. The night before the headquarters of the Moederbond, two independent radio stations and the offices of an opposition newspaper had been burned down, allegedly by government troops. Two of those reportedly executed were former army officers who had been in military detention for nine months, accused of involvement in the attempted coup in March 1982. In November a military court had sentenced them to long terms of imprisonment. Their three defence lawyers were among those arrested on 8 December and reportedly executed the next day.
Amnesty International asked the Secretary General of the United Nations to use his "best endeavours" (under the terms of the General Assembly Resolution 35/172 on Arbitrary and Summary Executions) to establish the full facts of the reported executions. Amnesty International also expressed its concern to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights.
Lieutenant Colonel Bouterse reported in an interview with
173
CANA (Caribbean News Agency) on 18 December that no one remained in detention as a result of the alleged December coup plot. Amnesty International was unable to confirm by the end of the year reports that many more people than the 15 mentioned above had been killed or executed.
		
