Yemen (People's Democratic Republic of)
During 1982 Amnesty International continued to work on behalf of 25 adopted prisoners of conscience and investigated the cases of nine possible prisoners of conscience. Most of them were detained during the 10 years following independence in 1967. Little official information was made available on these cases or on other prisoners and, as in previous years, no responses of substance were received from the authorities to the numerous inquiries by Amnesty International.
Among the adopted prisoners of conscience were eight associates of the former federal government which was in power under British colonial rule until independence in 1967. Two of them - Nasir bin Aidrus al-Kazimi Aulaqi and Muhammad Abdulilah al-Jifri -were arrested in November 1967 and sentenced in February 1968 to 10 and 15 years' imprisonment respectively. Although they had served their sentences there was no official confirmation of their release and Amnesty International believed they were still in detention. The remaining six of this group have been detained since 1967 without charge or trial, four of them at al-Mansurah prison, Aden.
In April 1982 the organization learned through unofficial sources of the release of two adopted prisoners of conscience: Yahya Abdul QawiMufiahi, arrested in October 1971 and detained at al-Mansurah prison, and Abdul Malik Ismail Muhammad, former Ambassador to Egypt, arrested at Aden airport in May 1975.
Amnesty International continued to work on behalf of 15 political prisoners detained between 1970 and 1975 and held since then without trial. The whereabouts of seven were unknown and there were fears that they might be dead. Information received by Amnesty International indicated that between 1967 and 1975 hundreds of people had "disappeared" in the PDRY. Some "disappeared" from prisons where they had been receiving regular visits from their families, others were taken into custody, often violently, from their place of work, from their homes or from the streets. Despite persistent inquiries the families of the "disappeared" were unable to find out whether they were dead or detained in a particular prison. The authorities rarely responded to inquiries; when they did they stated that these people had "left the country" or had been shot as "intruders" while crossing the border into Saudi Arabia or the Yemen Arab Republic.
334
Tawfiq 'Az'azi, achief magistrate at the Supreme Court of Aden, was last seen by friends at the Rex Bar at Tawahi, Aden, on the night of 31 March 1972. He later "disappeared" from his apartment where he lived alone. Amnesty International believes that he was abducted because he had refused to convict a number of political detainees on the grounds that they had committed no offence under the penal code, and had ordered their release.
On 7 April 1982,12 Yemenis were sentenced to death by the High Court of Aden for planning to sabotage economic installations and illegally bringing explosives into the PDRY. A 13th man was jailed for 15 years. Earlier, on 4 April, Amnesty International had cabled President 'Ali Nasir Muhammad expressing concern at the prosecution's demand for the death penalty, reiterating its opposition to the death penalty in all cases and urging commutation of such sentences on humanitarian grounds. The sentences on two of the 12 were commuted to 15 years'imprisonment by the President, but the remaining 10 were executed on 22 April 1982.
