Morocco and
Western Sahara
Amnesty International was concerned about the imprisonment of more than 200 actual or possible prisoners of conscience, long-term detention without trial, incommunicado detention, ill-treatment during pre-trial detention, deaths in detention, "disappearances" and the death penalty. In May 1982 the Report of an Amnesty International Mission to the Kingdom of Morocco was published, which examined Amnesty International's human rights concerns in Morocco.
During 1982 Amnesty International called for the release of approximately 125 adopted prisoners of conscience and investigated the cases of over 100 other prisoners from a wide variety of political groups and sections of the population. Groups of these prisoners went on hunger-strike for limited periods on several occasions during 1982 to draw attention to their situation. Approximately 110 of the
322
prisoners of conscience were members of various Marxist-Leninist groups who had been tried in 1973 and 1977 and sentenced to long prison terms.
During 1982 Amnesty International adopted as prisoners of conscience six leaders of the Union socialiste des forces populaires (USFP), the Socialist Union of PopularForces, and the Confédération démocratioque du travail (CDT), the Democratic Confederation of Labour, who had been arrested on 20 June 1981 and charged with complicity in crimes allegedly committed during the strikes in Casablanca of 20 June 1981 (see Amnesty International Report 1982). As 1982 ended, their trial had been postponed indefinitely and they were still being held in preventive detention,more than one and a half years after their arrest. They included Mustafa Karchaoui, editor-in-chief of the USFP newspaper/I/-MoMÄarnr (banned since June 1981) and Noubir Amaoui, Secretary General of the CDT. Three other officials of the USFP who had been adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience in 1981 benefited from amnesties and were freed on 3 March 1982, the anniversary of King Hassan's accession to the throne. They had been sentenced to one year in prison for criticizing the Moroccan Government's policy on the Western Sahara and served approximately half their sentences.
Amnesty International was investigating the cases of more than 100 possible prisoners of conscience. They included 15 peasants from the region ofBeni-Mellal, arrested in December 1979 after a dispute over land rights and sentenced to up to three years' imprisorunent. They were all believed to have been released by the end of 1982. Amnesty International followed the cases of more than 20 Saharans arrested in 1977, tried during 1980 and released during 1981 and 1982 as their sentences expired. Some reports suggested that several were harassed by police after release, including being detained for short periods and not allowed to travel freely.
Amnesty International remained concerned about, and continued to investigate, the "disappearance" of more than 60 other Saharans whose detention has never been officially acknowledged by the authorities. (Amnesty International believes that the actual number of such "disappearances" may be considerably higher.) The government has persisted in its refusal to respond in substance to Amnesty International inquiries in "disappearance" cases.
Amnesty International was investigating the case of Ali Idrissi Kaitouni who was sentenced in 1982 to 15 years' imprisonment and a fine of 100,000 Dirhams (approximately £10,000). He had been convicted of "insult to the dignity of the King and the inviolability of national institutions", "incitement to crimes against the internal security of the state"and the publication of "falsehoods detrimental to
323
public security". The only evidence against him appeared to be a published collection of his poetry.
After student unrest in November and December 1981 in a number of Moroccan cities, including Oujda, Fes, Rabat and Casablanca, many students were arrested and approximately 50 were tried. Most were sentenced to terms of several months' imprisonment. However, several were judged before the court of first instance in Rabat in January 1982 and sentenced to terms of up to three years; their appeal, first scheduled to be heard in Rabat in June, was postponed until August, when they were finally freed. Among those freed was Hakima Naji, held in Laalou prison in Rabat in an advanced state of pregnancy. Amnesty International had appealed for proper medical attention on her behalf.
Amnesty International was also concerned about the arrests of two people involved in promoting Berber cultural expression: Ouzzin Aherdan, director of the Berber publication^mazz]^/!, and Ali Sadki, Professor of Letters at the University of Rabat. Professor Sadki had published an article in Amazigh for which he was charged with "publishing false information causing injury to public order and institutions". Ouzzin Aherdan was released shortly after his arrest, but Professor Sadki received a one-year sentence.
In November 1982 approximately 30 USFP militants were arrested in Beni-Mellal following a dispute within the USFP and a confrontation at their local office; four were later sentenced to one year in prison and the others received lesser sentences. In December 1982, after a series of protests over educational issues by students in lycées and at the university in Oujda, the security forces are reported to have attacked students in two lycées and killed several of them. Unofficial sources, which Amnesty International has not been able to corroborate, cited up to seven deaths. As the year ended. Amnesty International was seeking further information regarding both sets of events.
A number of amnesties were granted affecting 676 prisoners in January 1982 and approximately 400 in July. Some prisoners were released and the sentences of others were reduced. However, according to Amnesty International's information, no political prisoners or prisoners of conscience benefited, other than the three USFP officials mentioned above.
Amnesty International received during 1982 allegations that individuals held in police detention centres for interrogation had been ill-treated. These included allegations of beatings and prolonged suspension from bars. Amnesty International continued to be concerned about approximately 100 military prisoners arrested following attempts on the life of King Hassan II in 1971 and 1972, and held in secret
324
detention since 1973 in cruel and degrading conditions. Amnesty International feared that as many as 20 of these prisoners might have died, partly as a result of these conditions.
In January 1982 two prisoners convicted of child murder were executed. Amnesty International expressed its opposition to the death penalty in all cases in a cable to King Hassan II. In July 1982 Amnesty International appealed for the commutation of the death penalty imposed on Muhammad Daddach for attempting to join the Polisario Front (engaged in a war with Morocco for control of the Western Sahara), and asked that he be given proper medical care. Reports indicated that he was being deprived of treatment for a broken collarbone. No further information was received on this case.
In May 1982 Amnesty International published Report of an Amnesty International Mission to the Kingdom of Morocco, containing the text of a memorandum it had submitted to the Moroccan Government in December 1981, which presented in detail its concerns and made a number of recommendations. Amnesty International concluded: " 1 ) that in a number of crucial respects the legal and administrative procedures currently applied in Morocco do not provide sufficient protection against ill-treatment for people in custody; 2) that legally responsible individuals are frequently not carrying out the laws or are interpreting their legal responsibilities in such a fashion as to enhance the likelihood that the fundamental rights of persons in custody will be violated; 3) that legislation has been and is currently being applied in a way that has led to the arrest and conviction of numerous 'prisoners of conscience"; 4) that a number of blatantly illegal practices, contravening both Moroccan law and the international covenants on human rights which Morocco ratified on 3 August 1979, have led to serious human rights violations involving the'disappearance' of large numbers of people and the deaths in custody of others."
Amnesty International recommendedthatthe government institute a public and impartial commission of inquiry to reform its arrest and detention procedures, establish clear time limits to incommunicado detention and allow arrested people prompt and regular access to lawyers, relatives and medical care. The aim of all these measures would be to protect arrested people from ill-treatment. Amnesty International also urged that all prisoners of conscience be released. It called on the government to provide information about prisoners alleged to have "disappeared" after being taken into custody and about the fate of all military prisoners still held for involvement in the coup attempts of 1971 and 1972 {set Amnesty International Report 1982).
In its memorandum Amnesty International had asked the government to respond to the organization's concerns, but the government
325
did not reply before the publication of the report. However, as the report was published, several Moroccan embassies issued a statement to the press and the official press in Morocco carried variants of this statement. In addition, several Moroccan officials in Rabat referred to the publication in meetings with the press. In none of these indirect responses were the human rights concerns in the Amnesty Intemational report refuted or squarely addressed, although Moroccan officials criticized the timing of the report, the publication of which coincided with King Hassan's visit to the USA. On 9 June 1982 Amnesty International wrote to Prime Minister Maati Bouabid pointing out that in December 1981, when the King's visit to the USA was scheduled to take place in January 1982, it had informed the government of its intention to publish in May 1982. King Hassan's visit was later postponed to May. In its June letter Amnesty International stressed its disappointment that the authorities had not responded in substance to the issues raised in the report and, more importantly, had not made any public commitment to improve the human rights situation: the Moroccan authorities were violating the provisions of intemational human rights instmments including the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, ratified by Morocco in 1979.
A meeting of various local and regional Moroccan bar associations in Marrakech in June 1982 called for steps to be taken to improve respect for human rights in Morocco. The meeting recommended changes in the Code of Criminal Procedure to safeguard individual rights, ratification of the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, providing copies of the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners in prisons and detention centres, releasing all political prisoners, and abolishing the death penalty.
In June 1982 Amnesty International submitted information to the United Nations under the procedure to investigate "a consistent pattern of gross and reliably attested violations of human rights".
Amnesty Intemational remained concerned about the fate of Polisario Front members reported to have been arrested by the Polisario Front since 1975 for criticizing the Front's policies. Amnesty Intemational had requested information from the Polisario Front about these individuals in 1981, but by the end of 1982 had received no information.
326
