Czechoslovakia
Amnesty International's major concern was the continuing detention of prisoners of conscience under legislation which explicitly restricts the non-violent exercise of human rights. Prison conditions, the harassment of former prisoners of conscience and the death penalty also gave cause for concern. At the end of 1982 Amnesty International was working on behalf of 33 adopted prisoners of conscience and investigating four further cases, but it believed that the total number of prisoners of conscience was higher.
In May 1982 Amnesty Intemational translated and made available the official commentary to Chapter 1 ofthe Czechoslovak Penal Code (published in May 1980) which contains the provisions under which the majority of adopted prisoners of conscience have been sentenced.
249
According to the commentary, even the slightest manifestation of dissent from official policies is an offence under the penal code.
Among those imprisoned for expressing views which the authorities disapproved of was Zbynek Cerovsky, a 51-year-old engineer and a signatory for the unofficial human rights group Charter 77. He was arrested in November 1981 and in March 1982 sentenced to two years' imprisonment for "incitement". He had criticized the government and its relations with the Soviet Union in his application to emigrate and subsequently showed it to several people. He was seriously ill and Amnesty International issued an urgent appeal on his behalf.
During the year several former prisoners of conscience were again imprisoned. One of them, Petr Pospichal, a 22-year-old printer and Charter 77 signatory, was arrested in March 1982 while doing his military service and brought to trial in May. He was found guilty of discussing political subjects with fellow servicemen, of disseminating Charter 77 materials, of playing tapes of an "anti-state" nature, of criticizing the leading role of the Communist Party and of expressing views hostile to the state and social order of the Republic. He was given an 18 months' prison sentence for "incitement". In November 1978, at the age of 18, he had been sentenced to 11 months' imprisonment for unofficial cultural activities.
Amnesty International has received reports that the authorities have sometimes introduced extraneous criminal charges in the prosecution of people engaging in dissenting activities. Although Amnesty International cannot always assess the grounds for such charges, in the cases of adopted prisoners of conscience it is satisfied that they were imprisoned for the non-violent exercise of their human rights, ratherthan for any actions which might reasonably be qualified as criminal. One such case concerned four people arrested in November 1981 for publishing and distributing the unofficial journal Vokno (Window) (see Amnesty International Report 1982). They were sentenced in July 1982 for "breach of the peace". Two were also convicted on charges of "illegal possession of drugs", charges which Amnesty International believed to be unfounded. Ivan Jirous was given a three-and-a-half year sentence; Frantisek Starek two-and-a-half-years; Michal Hybek 18 months and Milan Fric 15 months. The first two, both Charter 77 signatories, were also sentenced to two years' protective surveillance.
Another example is that of four members of an unofficial group calling itself the "Revolutionary Action Group". In December 1981, two days after the imposition of martial law in Poland, the group published and distributed a leaflet calling for solidarity with Polish workers. In late January and early February 1982 police officers
250
interrogated a number of people, and four members of the group were remanded in custody on charges of "incitement". During the investigation proceedings the charge was changed to one of "subversion" and the charge of "misappropriation" - referring to a duplicating machine and some other articles - was introduced against two of the defendants. In December 1982 the Prague City Court sentenced Jan Wünsch, 25, to four years' imprisonment and two years' protective surveillance; Vaclav Soukup, 23, to three years and two years' protective surveillance; Jitka Tumova, 22, to 15 months, and Josef Wünsch, 20, to one year's imprisonment.
Active Christians continued to be arrested for unofficial reUgious activities. In May 1982 Amnesty International launched an action on behalf of imprisoned religious believers in Czechoslovakia. Appeals were sent on behalf of several people convicted for publishing and distributing unauthorized religious literature and several Roman Catholic priests imprisoned for saying Mass or for holding theological discussions without state approval. These included the Roman Catholic priest F rantisek Lizna, who had been sentenced in September
1981	to 20 months' imprisonment for producing and distributing unofficial religious literature. In July 1981, before he started serving his sentence, he attempted to send abroad a letter giving information about the Roman Catholic Church in Czechoslovakia and copies of an unofficial religious bulletin. In January 1982 he was tried and found guilty of "damaging the interests of the Republic abroad" and his sentence was increased to 27 months.
Seven people prominent in Czechoslovak cultural Hfe, who had been arrested in May 1981 on charges of "subversion" {sqq Amnesty International Report 1982), were released from pre-trial detention but criminal proceedings against them continued: Jirina Siklova, Karel Kyncl, Jan Ruml and Eva Kanturkova were freed in March
1982	and Milan Simecka, Jiri Ruml and Jan Mlynarik in May. Jan Mlynarik and Karel Kyncl were reported in November 1982 to have been given permission to emigrate.
Amnesty International was concerned about the authorities' open disregard for their human rights obligations. At the appeal hearing of Jan Litomisky on 7 January 1982, the Procurator maintained that the defendant was wrong to invoke the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights because Czechoslovak citizens were more liable to be judged in accordance with their own national legal norms, and these norms restricted the freedoms guaranteed by the covenant to exclude activity which could be regarded as anti-socidist. Czechoslovak laws regarding "anti-socialist" behaviour have consistently been applied to imprison people for the non-violent expression of their views disapproved of by the authorities.
251
Amnesty International was concerned by reports about conditions in Plzen-Bory prison where many prisoners of conscience served their sentences. There were reportedly 36 prisoners to a cell. Production norms for prisoners making artificial jewellery were reportedly set so high that some prisoners had to work excessive hours - in some cases 12 hours a day, six days a week. Prisoners who did not meet the target allegedly had their food rations cut.
Amnesty Intemational received reports that former prisoners of conscience who continued their dissenting activities, and their families, had been subjected to psychological pressure. Vaclav Maly and Ladislav Lis, who were released from pre-trial detention in December 1979, were reported to have been subjected to repeated interrogations and continuous police surveillance. On 7 January 1982 the police reportedly threatened Vaclav Maly with death. He has since been reported to have come under increased pressure from the police to emigrate. In June 1982 the wife ofLadislav Lis received two letters threatening her two children unless a ransom was paid. On 30 June 1982 Amnesty International urged the President to ensure the safety of the Lis family.
A discretionary death sentence is retained under the penal code, and one person was executed in August 1982 for murder.
