Gabon
Amnesty International was concerned \	about the imposition of prison sentences
/ of up to 20 years' hard labour upon 29 prisoners of conscience convicted by the Court of State Security on 26 November. They were convicted of atteinte à la sûreté de l'Etat, threatening state security, and outrage au président, insulting the President. No evidence of violent action or intent was produced against the defendants during their trial, which was observed by a delegate of Amnesty International. The organization was also concerned that the proceedings before the Cour de sûreté de l'Etat, Court of State Security, did not conform to internationally recognized standards. Amnesty International was further preoccupied by reports that political detainees were tortured, beaten and ill-treated, and by the public execution on 1 December of three people convicted of murder.
The government signed the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights on 26 February 1982.
Amnesty International sought the release of 29 adopted prisoners of conscience arrested in November and December 1981 and March 1982. Initially the organization had received details of 23 of this group. All 29 were detained for allegedly having supported an opposition group, the Mouvement de redressement national (MORENA), the Movement for National Recovery. MORENA documents criticiz^ the government and called for the amendment of the constitution to permit an opposition party. Amnesty International estimated in December 1981 that over 100 people had been detained on suspicion of being associated with MORENA, but that many had been released shortly afterwards. In March 1982, during the visit to Gabon of Pope John Paul II, another four or six alleged MORENA sympathizers were arrested following the circulation of tracts critical of the government.
On 24 July President El-Hadj Omar Bongo indicated during a press conference that 22 people had been arrested in connection with MORENA and would be tried. On 10 November, 3 7 people appeared before the Court of State Security. An Amnesty International observer was present throughout the trial. The trial was adjourned until 17 November so that defendants' lawyers, who were officially appointed(com/wis d'ojjiîce), could study their briefs. On 26 November, 13 defendants were sentenced to 20 years' hard labour plus 10 years'
36
banishment from Libreville, the capital, and 5 years' suspension of civil rights. This group included Jean-Marc Ekoh, a leading educationalist and former minister; Jérôme Nguimbi Mbina, a member of the National Assembly; Jean-Pierre Nzoghe Nguema, the rector of Omar Bongo University; Jules Mba and Simon Oyono-Aba'a, former diplomats. Sixteen other defendants were sentenced to shorter terms in prison or fined. Eight were acquitted. Amnesty International considered that the trial did not conform to internationally recognized standards, in particular because little evidence was produced other than statements from prisoners who alleged that they had been ill-treated. No proof of violent action or intent was produced in support of the charge of threatening state security. No substantial evidence was produced against those defendants who did not admit membership of MORENA. On 29 November Amnesty International publicly appealed to President Bongo to release the 29 prisoners of conscience.
At the end of the year Amnesty International was still trying to clarify the situation of eight other detainees, alleged to be MORENA sympathizers, who were not tried and whose release had not been reported. It also continued to appeal for the release of Etsine Serge Edouard, a prisoner of conscience arrested in 1981 for distributing tracts unconnected with MORENA, and took up for investigation the case of Abbé Ngwa-Nguema, a Roman Catholic priest and teacher detained in October 1982 apparently on account of his criticism of the govermnent.
Some defendants described at their trial in November 1982 how they had been kept naked and without food during the early part of their detention at Gros Bouquet prison in Libreville. Some of them were reported to have been tortured, including by electric shocks, starvation and beatings. All the defendants were reported to have been kept incommunicado in solitary confinement Vincent Nguimbi was reported to have been severely beaten afl;er his arrest in December 1981. According to unofficial sources, Michel Ovono was subjected to electric shocks following his arrest in March 1982. Amnesty International was also concerned that sick prisoners had not received adequate medical attention. Two of those sentenced to 20 years' hard labour on 26 November - Moubamba Nziengui and Luc Bengono-Nsi - appeared to be psychologically disturbed during their appearance in court. Amnesty International requested the authorities to arrange for both men to be examined by a qualified doctor.
On 1 December three men convicted of murder - Ferdinand Nzigou, Assala Souleymane and Christophe Mikolo Mombo- were publicly executed by firing-squad in the first public execution since 1979. The executions were televised. Amnesty International informed President Bongo of its concern over the executions and appealed to
37
him to exercise his right of clemency when future death sentences came before him for review.
