Niger
Amnesty International was concerned about the long-term detention without trial and restriction under house arrest of suspected opponents of the government. There were also reports of ill-treatment of detainees, at least two of whom were reported to have died in custody, and of harsh and inadequate prison conditions. The authorities continued to hold former President Hamani Diori and former leader of the Sawaba (Freedom) Party Djibo Bakary under house arrest without trial in the capital, Niamey. Hamani Diori, who was arrested following his overthrow in 1974, was allowed visits, although restrictions on these were reportedly imposed from time to time. Djibo Bakary had been arrested in 1975 for alleged involvement in an attempted coup, and was reportedly held virtually incommunicado. Seventeen of Hamani Diori's relatives or former officials of his administration, including former ministers Aboubacar Moussa and Ibrahima Issa, reportedly remained in detention without trial, as did three individuals suspected of involvement in coup attempts in 1975 and 1976.
Two detainees held in Tillabery prison- former trade union leader Siddo Hassane and a former gendarme- were believed to have died as a result of ill-treatment at the hands of the security forces in early May 1982. Some reports suggested that a third detainee had also died. Their arrest was linked in some reports to the arrest in early April 1982 of 14 members of the Tuareg ethnic group who, according to official sources, were planning to sabotage Niger's principal mining installations at Arlit. Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to confirm these reported deaths in detention and to establish an official inquiry to determine responsibility for them. No answer was received.
69
Conditions of detention in the prisons at Agadez and Tillabery, where most of Niger's political detainees were believed to be held, were said to be poor. Sanitation and nutrition standards were reported to be low, and prisoners held in these two centres were apparently rarely allowed visits or letters from their families. Medical facilities were also alleged to be inadequate.
