Albania
Amnesty International's major concerns were the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, the lack of legal safeguards for people arrested and tried for political offences, allegations of ill-treatment of detainees and harsh prison conditions.
During the year a number of senior government officials were replaced, among them F ecor Shehu, Minister of the Interior. The First Secretary of the Albanian Party of Labour, Enver Hoxha, announced in November that Fecor Shehu and a "group of plotters" had been detained for investigation. He also announced an amnesty decree for certain categories of offenders, including some political prisoners.
Albania, although a member of the United Nations, has not ratified the international human rights covenants. The constitution justifies the restriction of certain human rights on the grounds that "the rights of citizens are inseparable from the fulfilment of their duties and cannot be exercised in opposition to the socialist order". In practice, many people have been imprisoned for the non-violent exercise of basic human rights under various broadly formulated charges such as "anti-state agitation", "sabotage" and "treason". Article 55 of the criminal code, dealing with "anti-state agitation and propaganda", punishes by three to 10 years' imprisonment "Fascist, anti-demo-cratic, religious, war-mongering or anti-socialist agitation and propaganda, as well as the preparation, dissemination or the possession for dissemination of literature of a content liable to weaken or undermine the state of the dictatorship of the proletariat". If this offence is committed in time of war or has "especially grave consequences", the penalty is not less than 10 years' imprisonment or death. According to
244
unofficial reports, in the past many people have been imprisoned under this article for expressing views disapproved of by the authorities. In 1982 Amnesty Intemational learned of further cases. They included a young man sentenced to eight years' imprisonment in 1981. He was arrested while doing military service and accused of having criticized Albania's leaders in conversations with other conscripts. He denied the charges and appealed against the sentence, but it was confirmed on appeal. Amnesty International also received details of five workers from the towns of Tirane, Durres, Vlore and Korce, who were said to be serving prison terms imposed in separate cases ranging from six to 15 years for "anti-state propaganda". All had apparently been accused of expressing views critical of economic or political conditions in the country.
Freedom of movement continued to be severely limited. As in past years Amnesty Intemational learned of people serving prison sentences for having attempted to leave the country without official permission. This is an offence punishable under Article 127 of the criminal code -dealing with "illegal crossing of the border" - by up to five years' imprisonment. However, in some circumstances the same offence may be treated as "treason" and punished under Article 47 (11) which prescribes a penalty of at least 10 years' imprisonment or death for "flight from the state and refusal to return to the fatherland on the part of a person sent on service or allowed to leave the state". Amnesty Intemational learned of two further cases - a person from Elbas an and another from Korce - said to be serving prison sentences of 18 and 10 years respectively for having tried to leave the country without authorization.
In 1967 Albania was officially proclaimed an atheist state; all places of worship were closed. Religious leaders of the Muslim, Orthodox and Roman Catholic faiths were prohibited from carrying out religious duties and many were persecuted. It was alleged that by 1971,12 out of 14 surviving Roman Catholic priests were imprisoned or interned in labour camps, where some were known to have died. In early 1982 emigre religious sources alleged thatFatherNdoc Luli-a Jesuit priest imprisoned in 1980 for having baptized the children of a relative - had recently been killed in prison. Other unofficial sources, however, stated that he was in Ballsh prison in late 1982.
The authorities published no figures for political prisoners, and Amnesty International believes that it had details of only a fraction of the total number. Information received in recent years indicated that people convicted of political offences were generally sent to camps for political prisoners in Ballsh and Spac, and that by 1982 the combined population of these camps was between 2,500 and 3,000. Political prisoners were also held in Tirane and Burrel prisons. Young people
245
and women convicted of political offences served their sentences together with ordinary criminal prisoners in prison camps in Lezhe and Repartit Kosove (Lushnje) respectively.
In addition, an unknown number of people convicted of political crimes were reported to have been given a supplementary penalty of banishment or internment of up to five years. Banishment or internment may also be imposed administratively, without court trial and for unspecified periods, on those who "present a danger to the social system ofthe People's Republic of Albania" under Decree No. 5912. Moreover, the decree allows internment or banishment to be imposed on "members of the family of fugitives living inside or outside the state"; that is, as a reprisal against people who have not themselves necessarily broken the law.
Information about trial procedures received by Amnesty International during 1982 and in past years indicated that political detainees have been held for up to six months in solitary confinement without access to defence counsel or family, and that officials conducting investigations have frequently beaten suspects to obtain confessions. It appeared that political prisoners were defended by a lawyer only rarely, and then by court-appointed lawyers who made little effort to defend the accused.
Conditions in the camps of Ballsh and Spac were described as harsh, with poor food, hygiene and medical care. Production targets in Spac - a labour camp where prisoners mine copper - were said to be excessive.
Prisoners held in Spac camp in 1982 were reported to include a number of military officers purged in 1974 when the former Minister of Defence, General Beqir Balluku, was executed.
On 10 November 1982 Enver Hoxha denounced Mehmet Shehu - a former Prime Minister officially said to have committed suicide in December 1981 - as having worked for US, Yugoslav and Soviet foreign intelligence services. He said that a group of plotters linked with Mehmet Shehu had been arrested and was being investigated and named as one of these Fehor Shehu, Minister of the Interior until January 1982. Sources outside Albania alleged that others arrested included Mehmet Shehu's wife and son, as well as the former Defence and Foreign Ministers, Kadri Hazbiu and Nesti Nase, both replaced during 1982.
On the same occasion Enver Hoxha announced an amnesty decree that came into force on 15 November. Although officially described as a broad amnesty it included only three categories of political offence. People sentenced to up to eight years' imprisonment for "anti-state agitation and propaganda" and those convicted of "illegal crossing of the border" were released; those convicted under
246
Article 47(11) of "flight from the state" benefited by a remission of a quarter of their remaining sentence. In addition, people convicted of political offences with only a year of their sentences left to serve were released. The authorities did not state how many political prisoners benefited from this amnesty. Amnesty International learned from unofficial sources of 18 political prisoners from Spac and Ballsh camps who were said to have been released under the amnesty.
