Saudi Arabia
The main concern of Amnesty International continued to be amputations and the death penalty. Amnesty International was also concerned about reported arrests of possible prisoners of conscience, about inadequate detention and trial procedures characterized by lengthy pre-trial detention, and about allegations of ill-treatment.
On 13 June 1982 King Khalid bin 'Abd al-'Aziz, aged 69, died of a heart attack and was succeeded by his brother Crown Prince Fahd. Prince 'Abd Allah bin 'Abd al-'Aziz, Commander of the National Guard, was named Crown Prince. Following his accession to power, King Fahd declared a partial amnesty covering first offenders convicted of murder, theft, arms smuggling, and corruption as well as alcohol and drug offenders. However, as far as Amnesty International was aware, no political prisoners benefited from this amnesty.
During 1982 Amnesty International received reports of the arrest of over 100 people suspected of being critical of government policies. Most of these arrests were reported to have taken place between May and September 1982. However, they were not acknowledged by the authorities nor mentioned in the Saudi news media. In December 1982 Amnesty International wrote to Prince Naif bin 'Abd al-'Aziz, Minister of Interior, enclosing the names of 128 detainees, some of whom the organization feared might be prisoners of conscience. It asked for confirmation of arrest and details of any charges or pending trial proceedings against them. Among those detained were Fawzia al-Bakr, lecturer at the sociology department of the University of Riyadh; Salih al-'Azzaz, chief editor of al~Yawm newspaper in Dammam; and a number of journalists, teachers and students. The legal status and whereabouts of the detainees was unknown.
Amnesty International was concerned about procedures which led to long delays before prisoners were charged and tried. Several prisoners were reported to have been detained incommunicado for many months, some of them in solitary confinement. For example, two Thai carpenters - Pilarn Pucharoen and Boonsri Prakarnnung -were arrested in April 1980 on suspicion of complicity in the murder of a Yemeni shopkeeper, and held in solitary confinement without charge or trial ever since. Both complained to their lawyer that they had been tortured with electric shocks during their detention. Keith Carmichael, a British subject, was detained incommunicado at Aleysha detention centre from 2 November 1981 until 31 January
327
1982. During this time requests by the British Consulate to visit him were reportedly refused. When he was eventually allowed access to the British Vice-Consul he complained that he had been threatened with sexual assault by a guard and that on the night of 17 November
1981	his feet were padlocked to the back of a chair and the soles of his feet beaten with a cane. As a result his feet and ankles became swollen and he was hospitalized for over two weeks.
Islamic law prescribes amputation of the right hand as the punishment for repeated theft where there are no mitigating circumstances. Amnesty International considers amputation to be a cruel, inhuman and degrading punishment, and as such prohibited by international law. During 1982 Amnesty International learned of three cases in which this punishment was carried out: "Ali Hamud Muhammad, a national of the Yemen Arab Republic, was convicted by the High Court in Riyadh on 25 February 1981 and his right hand was severed in Justice Square, Riyadh, on 25 June 1982; Roland Debtin, a Filipino, was convicted on 12 July 1982 by a court in al-Ihsa' and his right hand was severed on 23 December 1982; Hamdi bin Zuwai'al bin Nahar al-'Unayzi was convicted on 11 January
1982	by a court in Hafr al-B atin and his right hand was severed on 31 December 1982. In all three cases the convictions were upheld by the court of cassation and the Supreme Court of Justice, and were ratified by royal decree.
Islamic law imposes the death penalty for premeditated murder, adultery, sodomy and rape. During 1982 Amnesty International learned of at least 16 executions which were carried out in public and reported in the Saudi press. Sa'id bin Suqan al-Zahrani was executed on 18 May 1982 in the town of Quia in the province of al-B aha, after being convicted of the murder, in October 1978, of Ahmad bin Musa al-Zahrani. Under Islamic law the relatives of a murder victim may demand retribution (Q/sai) in the form of the death of the murderer, or they may waive such a claim freely or by settlement. Sa'id bin Suqan al-Zahrani was convicted of murder in 1979 but the courts found it necessary to wait until the heirs of the deceased had reached the age of majority and had all agreed on execution as the form of retribution before sentence could be carried out.
328
