Malawi
Amnesty International's concerns centred on the arrest and trial of Orton Chirwa, a leading political opponent of the government, and his wife. Vera Chirwa. The organization was also concerned about the detention without trial of their son, Fumbani Chirwa, and the continuing imprisonment of Sofiliano Faindi Phiri, who was adopted as a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty International in early 1981.
In early January the government announced that Orton Chirwa had been arrested with his wife and 26-year-old son on 24 December 1981 in Mchinji District in Central Region. They were officially said to have entered the country illegally from Zambia, where Vera Chirwa had been teaching at the national university. Announcing the arrests the government said that they would soon be tried on criminal charges. A former Minister of Justice and Attorney-General, Orton Chirwa had left Malawi soon after independence in 1964 following a dispute with President H. Kamuzu Banda. Later, in exile in Tanzania, he formed the Malawi Freedom Movement (MAFREMO) in opposition to President Banda's government. Following the arrest of the Chirwas, unofficial sources alleged that they had been forcibly abducted by Malawi security agents while visiting a relative living in Chipata in eastern Zambia. Amnesty International expressed its
57
concern about these allegations to the government and requested information about the detainees, who had been held uncharged and incommunicado since their arrest, but no response was received. In March and again in September, Amnesty International asked the Zambian Government whether there had been an inquiry into the alleged abduction of the Chirwas from the vicinity of Chipata, but the government did not respond.
In April Amnesty International asked the Malawi Government for details of future trial proceedings envisaged against the Chirwas and indicated that, in the event of a trial, the organization wished to send an observer. The government did not respond to this inquiry or to a further appeal in early July on the anniversary of independence, but on 28 July the trial of Orton and Vera Chirwa began. They appeared before the Southern Region Traditional Court in Blantyre and were jointly charged with treason, which carries the death penalty. They were alleged to have conspired to overthrow President Banda's government between April 1977 and the time of their arrest in December 1981. They pleaded not guilty.
In early August Amnesty International sought an assurance from the government that a legal observer would be permitted to enter the country and attend the trial. Such an assurance was not forthcoming, however, with the result that Amnesty International's observer was unable to attend the trial.
The trial of Orton and Vera Chirwa had not been completed by the end of 1982. It was conducted before a panel of five judges headed by Chief Nazombe of Mulanje District. Like all defendants in the Traditional Court, Orton and Vera Chirwa were denied legal representation but were permitted to cross-examine witnesses in their own defence. During the course of the proceedings. Vera Chirwa reportedly alleged that they had been abducted from Zambia, but the precise circumstances and location of their arrest remained unclear. They were reportedly taken to and from court each day wearing wrist and ankle chains.
Amnesty International took up the cases of Orton and Vera Chirwa for investigation and was concerned that their trial before the Traditional Court did not meet internationally-recognized standards for fairness.
Fumbani Chirwa, whose case was taken up for investigation by Amnesty International, was not brought to trial with his parents and was still believed detained without charge at the end of the year. Despite repeated inquiries. Amnesty International was not able to obtain details of the legal basis for his detention or his place of imprisonment. He appeared to be held incommunicado.
Amnesty International continued to press for the release of
58
Sofiliano Faindi Phiri, a former nominated member of parliament who was sentenced to five years' imprisonment in March 1981. He had been convicted of sedition by the Southern Region Traditional Court after standing trial with Gwanda Chakuamba, a former cabinet minister. He was said to have committed sedition when, at a political meeting in November 1981, he praised Gwanda Chakuamba's achievements in helping bring about development in Southern Province. This was taken to be insulting to President Banda. Phiri was adopted as a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty International because he was imprisoned for expressing his political opinions.
