Guinea-Bissau
Amnesty International was concerned by the continuing detention without charge or trial of former senior officials of the deposed administration of President Luiz Cabral and other suspected political opponents of the government.
A considerable number of former officials were arrested when President Cabral was overthrown in November 1980 and accused by the new government of complicity in extrajudicial executions. During 1981 and 1982 at least 25 such detainees were known to have been released, apparently because inquiries had shown that they had not been involved in the killings. However, by the end of 1982 at least 15 of these former officials were still in custody, although no charges had been brought against them. The detainees included the former Minister of Defence, Umaro Djalo, who was arrested at the time of the coup, and Constantino Texeira, former Minister of the Interior. He was absent from the country at the time of the coup but returned soon afterwards and was immediately arrested. He has been publicly accused by President Joao Bernardo Vieira, the former Prime Minister who replaced President C abral, of ordering the extrajudicial execution of four prisoners who had fought with the Portuguese colonial forces. Both detainees were reported to be held incommunicado at the Prisao da Marinha, Naval Prison, in Bissau, where they were said to be in poor health in late 1982 as a result of harsh conditions.
Other former officials still in custody at the end of 1982 included former members of the security pohce and both commissioned and non-commissioned officers in the armed forces. They were held at B rá detention camp near Bissau. One of them, former police inspector Joao Saul C arvalho das Neves Jacob, was reported to have died at the camp in May. According to some sources, his death might have been the result of ill-treatment.
In November President Vieira announced the release of five former officials. He said that an official commission of inquiry set up to investigate the killings under the administration of President Cabral had decided that they had not been involved.
Three other former officials were arrested in late June and accused of plotting against President Vieira. Former Minister of Health, Joao da Costa, had previously been detained for some months after the November 1980 coup and released uncharged. He was known to have been involved in serious disagreements with President Vieira before
47
the coup in 19 80 and was said to have been severely beaten after both his arrests. The two other officials were a former Ambassador and a former Interior Ministry official.
In an interview published in a Senegalese newspaper in July 1982, President Vieira claimed that the human rights of the three suspects were being respected and that their cases were the subject of judicial investigations. However, by the end of 1982 no formal charges were known to have been brou^it against them.
In October five former officials arrested in March 1981 were tried on charges of embezzlement and economic sabotage. They had all been involved in administering the Armazens do Povo, a network of state-owned shops responsible for selling food and consumer goods before the November 1980 coup. Four were convicted and sentenced to periods of imprisonment. They included Armando Ramos, former Minister of Trade, who had been responsible for setting up the shops in the early i970s. He was convicted on embezzlement charges and sentenced to eight years' imprisonment. Opposition sources claimed that the embezzlement charges were fabricated to justify the imprisonment of former officials and the gradual restoration of commerce into private hands.
The status of a former political prisoner, Rafael Barbosa, a former leader of the present ruling political party between 1959 and 1962, remained unclear during 1982. His release from prison, where he was serving a 15-year prison sentence, was originally announced by President Vieira at the end of 1980. However, he was reported to have been rearrested in March 1981. At the beginning of 1982 he was said to have been released from prison, but he apparently remained under house arrest.
