Togo
Amnesty International was concerned by the continued imprisonment of three political prisoners sentenced after a trial which fell short of internationally recognized standards, by the detention without trial of political prisoners and by harsh prison conditions. In November 1982 Togo ratified the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights.
Amnesty International appealed throughout 1982 for a judicial review of the sentences imposed on Kodjovi Emmanuel de Souza, Kouao Stephan Sanvee and Kwassi Jean Savi de Tove, all,of whose cases were being investigated by the organization. They were all convicted by the State Security Court in August 1979 on charges of conspiracy to overthrow the government. The first two were sentenced to death but later had their sentences commuted to life imprisonment. Kwassi Jean Savi de Tove received a 10-year prison sentence. During their trial, which was attended by an Amnesty International observer, the guilt of the accused was not adequately established, and the defendants were denied access to defence counsel at all stages of the judicial process.
Kouassivi Alphonse de Souza and Abalo de Souza, two other prisoners sentenced by the State Security Court at the same trial in August 1979, were pardoned by President Gnassingbe Eyadema in January 1982 and released.
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about the use of detention without trial, known as "administrative detention", to hold individuals suspected of political opposition to the authorities. In a letter to the authorities in January 1982 Amnesty International expressed its concern about the detention without trial of six individuals, including Placca Akouete, Elizabeth Mensah and Fini Koffi Louis, accused of printing or distributing "subversive documents", and appealed for information on the legal basis for these detentions.
No reply was received. At the end of 1982 Amnesty International was attempting to confirm reports that these six detainees had been released.
Conditions of detention at the Gendarmerie headquarters in the capital, Lome, were reported to be harsh. Detainees were held in dark, poorly ventilated cells and the quality and quantity of food was reportedly inadequate. Sanitation was poor, and visits very restricted. The political prisoners held at Lome's central prison were reported to receive inadequate food and to be denied both reading and writing materials.

