Uganda
Amnesty International was concerned about the detention without trial of large numbers of actual or suspected political opponents of the government. Many of these were detained by the army without legal authority. Other detainees were held by the civil authorities under the Public Order and Security Act, often in disregard of their legal and constitutional rights, but generally in better conditions than those held by the army. Detainees in military custody were reported to have been routinely tortured, and many "disappeared" or were killed. Amnesty International was also concerned by reports of extrajudicial execution of civilians by army personnel.
Three years after the overthrow of President Idi Amin, the security situation in several parts of the country was still unsettled. In March the United Nations Commission on Human Rights appealed to governments and humanitarian organizations to assist the Government of Uganda to guarantee human rights and fundamental freedoms. Armed groups - the National Resistance Movement, the Uganda Freedom Movement, and the Uganda National Rescue Front (an organization of officials and soldiers of the former government) -operated in certain central districts and the West Nile area, and were responsible for the killings of a number of soldiers and civilian officials. Many unarmed civilians were reported to have been killed by the Uganda army in anti-guerrilla operations. Many thousands fled to neighbouring countries or were displaced within Uganda.
An Amnesty International mission visited Kampala in January 1982 and raised with President Milton Obote and government
89
ministers and officials the organization's concern over alleged abuses of human rights committed during 1981. In particular the delegates inquired about the detentions of political opponents. The government denied that there was a consistent pattern of human rights abuses and denied allegations that civilians had been detained or tortured by the army. It claimed that it held no political prisoners and justified detention without trial by reference to the armed threat posed by guerrilla movements. The authorities provided information or comments on over 350 prisoners about whom Amnesty International inquired, although the delegates' request to visit two particular detainees was refused. The delegates affirmed Amnesty International's understanding of the problems of restoring respect for human rights in the aftermath of the atrocities of President Amin's government but stressed that neither economic circumstances nor the armed guerrilla threat could justify violations of fundamental human rights.
On 5 August Amnesty International submitted to the government a memorandum based on the mission's findings, which contained detailed recommendations for measures to protect human rights. Amnesty International urged that no one be detained for their political opinions or activities and that all people arrested in political circumstances be charged and tried in accordance with the law; that civilians be protected from illegal detention and torture by the army, and that a special inquiry be established into reports of torture at Makindye and Kireka military barracks and the army offices in Nile Mansions in Kampala; that conditions in military and civil prisons be brought up to internationally accepted standards; that all "disappearances" of detainees, deaths in custody and illegal killings by soldiers be fully investigated, and that those responsible be brought to justice. Amnesty International also declared that it did not condone political killings by anti-government forces.
In September Amnesty International launched an international campaign to end these human rights violations.
The government responded to Amnesty International's memorandum on 1 September. It repeated its denial that gross human rights abuses had occurred, and accused Amnesty International of "hostile criticism" and of "gross discourtesy" in publicizing its concerns at the same time as engaging in a dialogue with the government. On 18 October Amnesty International replied to the government's criticisms. Noting that the government had failed to give substantive replies to a number of Amnesty Intematíonal's concerns, it reiterated its recommendations. Amnesty International recognized the importance of some steps that had been taken but stressed that continuing reports of arbitrary arrests and detentions, torture, deaths in custody and killings by the army indicated the urgent need formore vigorous measures.The
90
government had not replied to Amnesty International's communication of 18 October by the end of 1982.
During 1982 Amnesty International continued its investigations into the cases of over 50 prisoners taken up in 1981, as well as appealing on behalf of many others arrested in 1982. In May the government published the names of 239 people detained indefinitely without charge or trial under the Public Order and Security Act (1967). Amnesty International welcomed this step but the government did not respond to its further inquiries on 11 June about detainees not on the list, and about other safeguards against misuse of the special powers in the act. The act requires that detainees' names be published within 30 days and the constitution requires inter alia that detainees be served with a formal detention order within 14 days of arrest, and that their cases be reviewed by an independent review tribunal within two months and thereafter at six-monthly intervals. A further list of 179 detainees was published in July, Some detainees were released during 1982, but further detentions took place later in the year, and the number of those detained under the act at the end of 1982 was not disclosed. Amnesty International learned that the detention review tribunal began its work in August.
A small number of people arrested in political circumstances were formally charged and brought before a magistrate. To Amnesty International's knowledge no political prisoners were tried. Some were released after charges were dropped and others were held pending trial. For example, Antony Ocaya, Secretary General of the opposition Democratic Party, was arrested in Kampala by soldiers during Amnesty International's mission in January and reportedly tortured in Mbuya military barracks. He was transferred to police custody two days later. He was charged with possession of seditious literature, but was released on bail three days later, and the charge was later dropped.
Amnesty International welcomed the release of a substantial number of prisoners during 1982. Thirty-five untried detainees were released on 1 January 1982 and 155 more named detainees were released on 17 January. They included four opposition members of parliament. A further 1,200 detainees, whose names were not published, were freed on 28 August to mark Uganda's 20th anniversary of independence. They were believed to include political prisoners such as John Kaliisa, a former ambassador, and Ambrose Okullo, a former government minister, as well as several hundred members of ex-President Amin's security forces. The government stated that during 1981 and 1982 it had released over 5,500 members of ex-President Amin's security forces detained in 1979, leaving possibly fewer than 300 still detained, mostly without charge. Some other
91
prisoners for whom Amnesty International had appealed were released during 1982, including Daniel Musisi, a doctor, who had reportedly been tortured and shot in the feet in Makindye military barracks in late 1981.
Amnesty International believed that some of the released prisoners had been prisoners of conscience. However, in many cases of people arrested in political circumstances, it was impossible to determine whether they were prisoners of conscience or not, due to the scale of the arrests, the disregard for legality, and the authorities' frequent refusal to acknowledge or explain the arrest. Those arrested were commonly accused of being guerrillas or guerrilla collaborators.
Several thousand people were detained during 1982 in mass arrests. Over 100 people were reportedly arrested by soldiers in the Rubaga Cathedral area of Kampala on 23 February after a guerrilla attack against the Malire army barracks. Some of those arrested-who included children and hospital patients - were later found dead, or "disappeared". Several thousand people were arrested in Kampala in March and April in joint police and military security operations. The majority were released within hours after identity checks but several hundred were reportedly transferred to military custody where a significant proportion were believed to have been tortured and many killed. Amnesty International appealed to President Obote on 15 April to investigate reports that over 70 prisoners were killed in Katabi barracks in Entebbe at the end of March, but received no response.
Although the army has no legal authority to hold civilians in custody, hundreds of civilians were allegedly taken to Nile Mansions army offices for military interrogation and then held in military barracks such as Makindye, Mbuya, or Kireka. Many were never seen again, and reports indicated systematic torture and frequent deaths or killings of prisoners in these barracks. David Ibanda, an elderly doctor arrested in Jinja on 26 March, died in Mbuya military barracks in Kampala the next day. Dan Etole, a member of the Uganda Red Cross executive committee, was arrested in Kampala by soldiers on 7 October and last seen at Nile Mansions military interrogation offices. President Obote announced a commission of inquiry into the death of Dr Ibanda, but, by the end of 1982, it was not clear whether the commission had commenced inquiries or reached any conclusions. Amnesty International's urgent appeals for an inquiry into the "disappearance" of Dan Etole met no response.
Amnesty International continued to press the authorities for information on the whereabouts and fate of several people reported to have "disappeared" after arrest by military personnel in 1981. They included Constantine Kabazaire, a former magistrate, and other
92
Uganda Patriotic Movement members arrested in Mbarara on 15 May 1981; Beatrice Kemugisha, a Makerere University lecturer in educational psychology, arrested on 10 September 1981 and allegedly taken to Kireka barracks and tortured; and Stephen Mulira, an accountant, arrested in Kampala on 4 April 1981 and last heard of in military custody in Nile Mansions. No satisfactory replies were received. Concern over alleged"disappearances" in Uganda was also expressed in February by the United Nations Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances.
Amnesty International received frequent, detailed and consistent allegations of torture in several military establishments, notably Makindye, Kireka, Katabi and Mbuya barracks, and the military offices in Nile Mansions in Kampala. Other military barracks, and a number of private houses allegedly used as secret military detention centres, were also reported as places of torture. Torture methods reportedly included beatings with sticks, batons, guns, leather whips, electric cable and chains; shooting in the legs and feet; crushing of hands and feet; rape and other sexual tortures of women; and death threats.
In addition to being tortured, prisoners in military detention centres were given very little food or none at all for days at a time, and were refused medical treatment. Detentions were unacknowledged and unrecorded, and detainees were held incommunicado. Huge ransoms were reportedly demanded from some prisoners' relatives to obtain their release. Many prisoners were allegedly killed arbitrarily.
Conditions in civil custody in Luzira Upper Prison, a maximum security prison near Kampala where those detained under the Public Order and Security Act and other prisoners were held, were better. Amnesty International received no reports of torture, medical treatment was provided and prisoners were allowed some reading material, exercise, and religious services. They were, however, often denied visits and correspondence with relatives and lawyers, and suffered poor diet and unhygienic conditions.
The government ordered the International Committee of the Red Cross to withdraw from Uganda in March 1982. Until December 1981 it had been granted regular access to detainees in Luzira prison held there since the overthrow of the Amin government. Cardinal Nsubuga, head of the Catholic church in Uganda, was allowed to visit Luzira prison in April 1982, and stated that the prisoners seemed to be generally well-treated, although shortages of medicines and medical equipment were noted.
Reports were received of numerous incidents of arbitrary and illegal killings of civilians by the army. Some occurred during anti-guerrilla operations in the areas of armed conflict, but it was alleged
93
that many kiUings had no direct connection with confrontations between the army and guerrillas.
Some hundreds of people were said to have been killed in the districts of Mpigi and Lowero during 1982. In two such incidents, over 60 villagers were reportedly killed by the army in Matuga and Kawanda villages, 20 kilometres north of Kampala, in mid-April; and at Kasanje and Ssisa villages in Mpigi south district, 40 kilometres southwest of Kampala, over 80 villagers were reportedly rounded up by the army at a government assembly on 12 July, beaten and taken away - their bodies were later found in nearby forests.
The government denied that there was a pattern of extrajudicial executions by the army, and stated that killings were being carried out by guerrillas wearing stolen army uniforms. Amnesty International was iinable to investigate this. The government also informed Amnesty International that where abuses by the security forces were reliably reported, those concerned were apprehended and dealt with in accordance with the law. Amnesty International asked for information on any legal proceedings in connection with such incidents.
