Chile
Amnesty International's major concerns were: persistent allegations of torture of detainees by the security forces - 95 known complaints were submitted in 1982 to the courts; the first two judicial executions in several years; the continued detention of prisoners of conscience; the short-term detention of hundreds of people, either individually or in groups during non-violent demonstrations; and the banishment without trial of 66 people after non-violently expressing their political beliefs. It was also concerned about the lack of progress in the investiagions of some 650 documented cases of "disappearances" since 1973 and the killings in suspicious circumstances of members of the opposition, reportedly by the security forces or by "death squads" alleged to be composed of members of the security forces.
An Amnesty International mission went to Chile from 23 April to 15 May 1982 to examine people who said they had been tortured in the custody of the security forces or by armed civilians thought to be members of the security forces. Two of the mission delegates were doctors. On arrival, the delegation asked for appointments with the Ministers of the Interior and of Justice. Neither minister replied and the delegation was therefore unable to meet the Chilean authorities during its visit.
The delegation interviewed and carried out detailed medical examinations of 19 people, 18 of whom said they had been tortured by members of the security forces. It met several local doctors specializing in the treatment and rehabilitation of torture victims. It collected more than 60 written testimonies and evidence of torture from other alleged torture victims or their relatives.
Seventeen of the people examined said they had been slapped, punched, kicked or beaten with a blunt instrument, and 14 said they were tortured with electric shocks (eight in the genitals). Most said they had also been the victims of psychological methods of torture, including mock executions, sleep deprivation and threats to their lives and those of their families. A 19-year-old trainee social worker, arrested at the beginning of 1981, said she was punched, kicked and electrically tortured, raped four times, and forced to lie beside a decomposing corpse. She was arrested, interrogated by the Central Nacional de Informaciones (CNI), secret police, and released without charge after 20 days in incommunicado detention. She had
119
been receiving psychiatric treatment since her release. The majority of the former detainees alleged that they had been in contact with a doctor while held in a torture centre, and that they had been medically examined just before torture and again afterwards. It was alleged that some medically trained personnel participated directly in torture. Thirteen of the former detainees said they had been tortured in a secret detention centre of the CNI located at 1470 Calle Borgoño in central Santiago. All of them said no legal warrant was presented at the time of their arrest.
The Amnesty International delegates found that the descriptions of torture were entirely compatible with the signs and symptoms found on examination. The Amnesty International delegation found that the arrest, detention and interrogation procedures employed by the CNI and other branches of the security forces violated principles in both the constitution and the code of penal procedure. Some actions by officials of these forces appeared to justify prosecution for criminal offences under the penal code.
The Amnesty International delegation also found that the courts had not taken effective action to prevent detainees from being tortured and had commonly failed to respond to recursos de amparo (similar to petitions for habeas corpus) within the 48-hour period stipulated by law. They had rarely issued orders to the security forces to produce the detainees in court within 20 days - the period for which the Minister of the Interior may hold them without charge under emergency legislation. Furthermore the courts had not found and punished those responsible for torture of detainees. Most investigations into the involvement of members of the security forces were carried out by the military judiciary, which systematically closed investigations for "lack of evidence".
After the mission. Amnesty International continued to receive allegations of torture of detainees by the security forces. During 1982, Amnesty International launched 24 urgent appeals on behalf of 350 people who risked being tortured. Amnesty International received testimonies from several individuals on whose behalf it had intervened, confirming the systematic use of torture.
Amnesty International was concerned about the use of the death penalty. No judicial death sentences had been carried out since 1967 (although in 1973 there had been reports of summary executions of many supporters of the government of President Salvador Allende). On 22 October Gabriel Hernández Anderson and Eduardo Villanueva, former security agents, were executed by firing-squad. They had been sentenced to death for murder and bank robbery. President Pinochet had declared shortly after their arrest that he would not reprieve them if they were sentenced to death. On 22 June and 7 October Amnesty
120
International appealed to President Pinochet to commute their sentences.
In another move towards the greater use of the death penalty, the Minister of the Interior informed the press that a new anti-terrorism law being prepared by the government contained provisions for sentencing to death those found guilty of terrorist offences. However, the law was not promulgated during 1982.
The government continued to renew regularly the state of emergency and the State of Danger of Disturbances to Public Order under the terms of the constitution. In particular, Interim Provision 24 of the constitution was frequently invoked by the Minister of the Interior to arrest political suspects "by order of the President of the Republic", hold them incommunicado for up to 20 days, banish them for three months to remote parts of the country, or expel them from the country. During 1982,1,789 detentions underthisprovisionwere recorded by local human rights groups. Sixty-six people were banished for three months without trial, and five were expelled from the country on the orders of the Minister of the Interior. Of the 39 people actually charged and committed for trial, only six were accused of terrorist activities. This relatively small number supported allegations by human rights groups that emergency legislation was used to repress political dissenters rather than to respond to the violent acts of armed opposition groups.
Former prisoner of conscience Manuel Bustos, President of the unofficial Coordinadora Nacional Sindical, National Trade Union Co-ordinating Body, and Héctor Cuevas, President of the Confederación Nacional de Trabajadores de la Construcción, National Federation of Construction Workers, were arrested on 2 and 3 December, respectivefy, accused of having organized a demonstration on 2 December to publicize social grievances of the workers. The demonstration was dispersed violently by the police with the help of a group of civilians armed with sticks and chains who assaulted several trade union leaders, journalists and human rights lawyers who sustained serious injuries. Formal complaints were lodged by the Colegio de Periodistas, Journalists' Association, and were being investigated by the courts. Manuel Bustos and Héctor Cuevas were expelled from the country on 3 December on the orders of the Minister of the Interior. In Temuco in southern Chile, 20 farmers were detained on 3 December and their leader, Carlos Podlech, was expelled from the country the following day, accused of having organized an illegal meeting to protest against the economic policies of the government. Recursos de amparo lodged on behalf of Manuel Bustos, Héctor Cuevas and Carlos Podlech were ail rejected by the Court of Appeal.
Trade unionists, students and relatives of "disappeared" prisoners
121
were detained for short periods. On 23 July 1982, 11 members of the Agrupación de Familiares de Detenidos-Desaparecidos, Association of Relatives of "Disappeared" Prisoners, were arrested in the Plaza de Armas during a peaceful demonstration on behalf of the "disappeared" prisoners. Two were released the same day, but nine were held without charge for five days in a Santiago police station. They were subsequently released unconditionally.
In a series of demonstrations on 15 December, 277 people were arrested in Santiago, Concepción and Valparaiso. The demonstrations had been called to protest against government economic policies and the expulsion of Manuel Bustos and Héctor Cuevas. Among those arrested were students, relatives of the "disappeared" and of political prisoners, and trade unionists. All but 15 were unconditionally released within five days. The remaining 15 people were banished for three months under Interim Provision 24 of the 1981 constitution, without charge or trial. Amnesty International appealed on their behalf
In past years secret organizations such as the COVEMA, Comando Vengadores de Mártires, and Comando Carevic, alleged to be formed by members of the security forces, have been accused of being responsible for the killing of members of the opposition. Such paramilitary groups continued to harass and threaten human rights workers Hnked to the Church.
On 26 February the body of trade union leader Tucapel Jiménez was found on the outskirts of Santiago. He was leader of the Asociación Nacional de Empleados Fiscales, National Association of Fiscal Employees. An investigation was opened into the killing but no one had been found responsible by the end of the year. After the killing, several key witnesses, relatives of Tucapel Jiménez, and lawyers involved in the case received death threats. At least three people left the country because of these threats. These included two men who had identified CNI agents who had reportedly been following Tucapel Jiménez before his death.
Amnesty International continued to receive reports of poor prison conditions and harassment of political prisoners. In particular, the organization was concerned at reports of long delays in the provision of medical treatment. The medical treatment available in most prisons was limited and the only medicines usually available were analgesics such as aspirin. Other medicines prescribed by prison doctors had to be provided by the prisoner's family. Amnesty International received several reports of prison authorities refusing to allow these medicines to be handed over to the prisoners. Amnesty International also received reports that prison authorities delayed or refused permission for visits by external doctors, or for prisoners to attend outside clinics even when such visits had been authorized by the courts. The political
122
prisoner Cecilia Radrigán was reportedly denied an X-ray for a suspected gastric ulcer for four months.
Such delays sometimes resulted in unnecessary deterioration in the health of prisoners. On 13 August 1982 Amnesty International appealed on behalf of Mario Ulises Figueroa Zapata, arrested on 31 May 1982 and held in secret detention by the CNI for several days before being taken to the public prison in Concepción. He was reportedly tortured while in secret detention. When transferred to prison he was in need of medical treatment, but the prison authorities reportedly refused to allow a prison doctor to examine him and other prisoners arrested with him. Subsequently, they were allowed only minimal attention in the prison sick bay. The prison authorities eventually allowed a forensic doctor to see them.
Prisoners of conscience Sergio Patricio Aguiló Melo, Ignácio Germán Molina Valdivieso and Pablo Fuenzalida Zegers, along with several others, who had been charged and sentenced to 541 days of extrañamiento (exile) for belonging to the bsiantálzquierda Cristiana, Christian Left, and then freed on bail, had their sentences suspended by the Supreme Court in December. Amnesty International had repeatedly requested the government to drop charges against them.
Several prisoners of conscience were released during the year and expelled from the country, including Héctor Figueroa Yáñez, sentenced to 19 years and six months, and Julio Vial Aranda, sentenced to 12 years. At the end of December 1982 some 150 people were in prison accused of activities against the state. Over 100 others were free on bail pending the outcome of their trials. Amnesty International was working on behalf of 59 prisoners of conscience or possible prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty International continued to press the authorities to clarify the fate of some 650 documented cases of prisoners who "disappeared" between 1973 and 1977. No progress was reported during the year, in spite of overwhelming evidence in many of the cases of the involvement of the security forces in the arrest and "disappearance" of the victims.
Amnesty International submitted information on human rights violations to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights, the UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, and other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations. In December 1982 the UN special rapporteur on Chile stated that he was not in a position to report an improvement in the human rights situation in Chile, and that none of the recommendations made by the international community during 1982 had been heeded.
123
	
	
	
	'' c ^A *
