Ethiopia
31
Amnesty International's concerns included the prolonged detention without trial of prisoners of conscience, widespread arrests made on political grounds, the government's continued failure to account for several prisoners who "disappeared" in custody in 1979, and allegations of torture and harsh treatment of prisoners. The continuation of armed conflict in Eritrea, Tigre, parts of the Ogaden and certain other areas severely affected the human rights of civilians in those areas and made it difficult to obtain details of human rights violations. Allegations were received of imprisonment without trial and extrajudicial executions of civilians, in Eritrea in particular, as government forces fought armed opposition groups seeking territorial independence.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience, some of whom were held because of their position in the former government. Many were imprisoned because they belonged to a particular ethnic group (or nationality) and were therefore suspected by the authorities of association with armed opposition organizations. The prolonged internal armed conflict and the government's failure to publish any information on political imprisonment made it impossible to estimate the number of political prisoners in the country. Several thousand were allegedly in prison for political reasons but Amnesty International was unable to confirm this. A major amnesty of political detainees took place in September.
Over 50 senior civil servants of Eritrean origin were reportedly arrested in Addis Ababa in early 1982, soon after the launch of the government's "Red Star" military campaign against the Eritrean armed opposition movements. In the rural areas many people who refused to be conscripted into the army to fight in the campaign were alleged to have been arrested.
Several priests and members of the Ethiopian Evangelical Mekane Yesus Church were imprisoned, churches closed and church property seized - particularly in Wollega District in the west. The government stated that it upheld the right to freedom of religious worship, but in January the Foreign Minister reportedly accused certain churches of "anti-revolution, anti-government, and anti-people activities". Several leaders of the Mekane Yesus Church, including its President Emmanuel Abraham, were arrested and held for a short period in January. Others were held for longer periods, such as the Reverend Olana Lamu, President of the church's western synod, who was arrfested in
32
September in Wollega Province, allegedly ill-treated, accused of "writing anti-revolutionary statements and posters" and reportedly still detained without trial at the end of 1982. Adherents of other, smaller churches, especially those with international connections such as Baptists, Mennonites and Seventh Day Adventists, were subjected to similar actions by the local authorities.
Three teachers of the Beta Yisrael community (known as Falashas or Ethiopian Jews) were arrested in January and allegedly tortured. Amnesty International's inquiries on their behalf received no response. They were released in July. Thirty other members of the community were reportedly still held in Gondar prison at the end of 1982, accused of planning or attempting to leave the country illegally. Attempting to leave the country without permission is an offence categorized as "betraying the revolution" and punishable by lengthy imprisonment-or even death, if committed "under grave circumstances" - according to a penal code amendment of April 1982.
Amnesty International received reports that 88 people who had fled to Djibouti in previous months and applied for asylum there -some of whom were recognized refugees - were forcibly returned to Ethiopia on 16 February and immediately arrested by the Ethiopian authorities. However, the Commissioner for Relief and Rehabilitation, Shimelis Adugna, stated in response to Amnesty International's inquiries that none of this group had been arrested or detained. Amnesty International sought to investigate these reports further.
On 11 September the Provisional Military Government released 716 prisoners to mark the eighth anniversary of the 1974 revolution, when the government of Emperor Haile Selassie was overthrown. Amnesty International welcomed the amnesty and requested details of those released, appealing at the same time for a general amnesty for all political prisoners. No reply was received. Details of the amnesty were not published but a substantial number of political prisoners were released, including the remaining 55 senior officials of the former government who had been detained without charge or trial since 1974 and held in the cellars of the former Menelik Palace. Among them were former Crown Councillor Germatchew Tekle Hawariat; the then Dean of Holy Trinity Cathedral, Hapte Mariam Workneh; and former government ministers, members of parliament, senior civil servants, diplomats, and high-ranking military officers. All political detainees held in the headquarters of the 4th army division were said to have been either released or transferred to other prisons. A small number of women detainees were released including some arrested in 1974.
Amnesty International continued ta appeal for the release of prisoners of conscience who did not benefit from this amnesty. They
33
included relatives of the late Emperor who were arrested in 1974 - his daughter Princess Tenagneworq Haile Selassie, a daughter-in-law, and four grand-daughters and three grandsons - and the widow and five children of Ras (Prince) Asrate Kassa (who was summarily executed in November 1974). Rebecca Asrate, who was suffering from a skin disease, was finally allowed to go into hospital for treatment. Since 1981 Amnesty International had appealed for her to receive medical care.
Other long-term political detainees included members of the banned All-Ethiopia Socialist Movement (Aie'/jo«e) and the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Party (EPRP). An unknown number of Eritreans, Tigreans and Oromos arrested in previous years for alleged association with armed opposition movements were also believed to be still detained in Asmara, Addis Ababa and other towns, but few details were available. Many Oromo civil servants and intellectuals arrested in Addis Ababa in February 1980 had not been tried or released by the end of 1982.
The "disappearances" in 1979 of 15 political prisoners and the Reverend Gudina Tumsa, head of the Ethiopian Evangelical Mekane Yesus Church, who was abducted in Addis Ababa by unidentified gunmen believed to be government agents, were still unresolved. Amnesty International had submitted the cases to the United Nations Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances. The working group reported on 31 December 1981 the Ethiopian Government's statement that the Reverend Gudina Tumsa had never been arrested but had left to join the opposition Oromo Liberation Front (OLP), and that another (believed to refer to former government minister Kassa Wolde Mariam) was still in detention. Amnesty International's continued inquiries addressed to the Ethiopian authorities received no response. No evidence emerged to support the government's claim regarding Reverend Gudina Tumsa or to establish whether any of the 10 detained former officials were still alive and in detention. Amnesty International received reports that the five "disappeared" Me'isone leaders were secretly detained, but this could not be verified.
The majority of political prisoners were detained without charge or trial and without legal formalities. The cases of political detainees were said to be reviewed in secret by a special committee consisting of officials of the Central Investigatory Organ (security officers who investigate and interrogate prisoners), the police, the prison administration, and the Ministries of Public Security and of Law and Justice. No details of the review procedure were known.
Amnesty International was concerned about continued allegations of torture and harsh treatment of political prisoners. In Addis Ababa
34
most of those arrested on political grounds were taken for interrogation to the headquarters of the Central Revolutionary Investigation Department (known as the "third police station"). Prisoners there were reportedly often tortured during interrogation. Prisoners were held incommunicado in dirty overcrowded cells without medical treatment or proper sanitary or toilet facilities. Some prisoners were said to have been held there for over a year before being transferred to other prisons. Conditions for political prisoners transferred to military police headquarters in Addis Ababa were said to be worse.
Some political prisoners were reportedly transferred to "rehabilitation centres" for political re-education. Amnesty International received allegations of harsh treatment in rehabilitation centres in Tessenei and Makalle, in the north. Reports were received of torture and summary execution but Amnesty International was unable to confirm them. Conditions in the central prison in Addis Ababa, known as "Alem Bekagne" (meaning "End of the World"), where many political detainees were held, were poor. Relatives brought prisoners their daily food and could exchange short censored letters with them, but visits were very rarely permitted, and the food provided by the prison authorities for prisoners whose families could not send food daily was meagre. The 55 former officials released in September had been detained for eight years in the damp underground cellars of the former Menelik Palace with only short periods of exercise each day in the open air. Many suffered from respiratory and nervous complaints as a consequence. Medical facilities were generally inadequate, and long delays in obtaining medical treatment or hospital admission were frequent. Access to political prisoners by international humanitarian organizations had not been granted since 1975.
35

