Barbados
Martin Marsh was hanged on 28 September, having been sentenced to death for murder at the age of 17 in January 1981. His execution contravened the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to which Barbados is a party. Article 6(5) states "Sentence of death shall not be impKDsed for crimes committed by persons below eighteen years of age . . .".
Amnesty International wrote to the government on 16 November, expressing deep regret at the execution and urging the government to bring the laws of Barbados into line with international standards. In October 1981 the government had informed Amnesty International that although Barbados law provided the death penalty for murder for people over the age of 16, the representations made by Amnesty International would be taken into account by the Privy Council in advising the Governor General on clemency.
Five people were sentenced to death in October 1982, one of whom was reportedly under the age of 18. The last execution before that of Martin Marsh was in October 1980.
Bolivia
The armed forces, who had seized power in July 1980, continued in office until September 1982. During this period Amnesty International's concerns were widespread arrests without charge or trial, ill-treatment and torture of prisoners and extrajudicial executions. A further concern was the activities of paramilitary groups linked to the security forces, which were reportedly involved in arrests of and attacks on opponents of the military government. In September 1982 the military government resigned and on 10 October Hernán Siles Zuazo was inaugurated as President. During the remainder of the year Bolivia's human rights record improved. Amnesty International received no further reports of political arrests and the civilian government took steps to investigate killings and "disappearances" during previous military governments.
Following the July 1980 military coup, political and trade union
113
activities were suspended. Many of the arrests in 1982 followed demonstrations, strikes and other protests by students, trade unionists and politicians against the military government's economic measures and human rights record. Between January and September 1982 Amnesty International appealed on behalf of 207 people, seeking confirmation of arrests and guarantees of physical safety.
Individuals were arrested without warrant and were initially held incommunicado. Most were detained for a few weeks or months without charge or trial and then released. Families were denied access to their imprisoned relatives and were often unable to establish where they were held. Amnesty International remained concerned that arrests failed to comply with legal provisions. One agency reportedly involved in such abuses was the Departamento de Inteligencia del Estado (DIE), State Intelligence Department, which replaced the Servicio Especial de Seguridad (SES), Special Security Unit, disbanded in 1981. Despite official assurances in 1981 that the DIE would not have repressive functions and that it would have a new staff. Amnesty International continued to receive reports that former SES personnel operated in the DIE and that the unit was responsible for ill-treatment and torture. The beating of prisoners during arrest and detention was common and Amnesty International also learned of prisoners being subjected to the electric prod {picana eléctrica). One female prisoner was reportedly raped in detention.
In March 1982 Amnesty International appealed for the release of Luis López Altamirano, the Secretary General of the Confederación de Trabajadores Fabriles de Bolivia (CTFB), Bolivian Confederation of Factory Workers. He was arrested on 8 February 1982 and taken to the main detention centre for political prisoners in La Paz - the Departamento de Orden Político (DOP), Department of Political Order, where he was reportedly tortured by DIE agents: he was blindfolded, his wrists and ankles were tied to the comers of a bed and electric shocks were applied to his mouth, nostrils, ears and genitals. On 16 February 1982 a paramilitary group attacked and ejected from the offices of the Conferencia Episcopal Boliviana (CEB), Bolivian Bishops' Conference, 22 factory workers who were staging a hunger-strike in protest against the government's economic measures and the continued detention of their leader, Luis López. On 16 April the Minister of the Interior, Romulo Mercado Gamica, ordered Luis Lopez's release.
Over 100 people were reportedly detained in the Cochabamba area during the weekend of 27 March 1982. During a peaceful demonstration on 26 March in Cochabamba paramilitary groups, reportedly with the support of regular troops, shot at the demonstrators causing six deaths. Eleven people were hospitalized and there were
114
numerous arrests. On 1 April 1982 Amnesty International called on the President to set up an inquiry into the deaths and urged that those detained be humanely treated.
On 26 May 1982 President Celso TorreUo declared a general amnesty for political exiles and announced that restrictions on trade union and political activities would be lifted. Government statements indicated that the amnesty would permit exiles to return but that it would not cover those in detention. A number of exiled Bolivians, including Genaro Flores, leader of the Confederación Sindical Única de Trabajadores Campesinos de Bolivia (CSUTCB), Rural Workers Confederation of Bolivia, for whom Amnesty International had campaigned in 1981, returned to Bolivia. However, arrests, ill-treatment and torture were reported after the amnesty. The activities of paramilitary groups reportedly linked to the security forces also continued. On 6 July 1982 the parliamentary deputy of the Movimiento Nacionalista Revolucionario de Izquierda (MNR-I), Nationalist Movement of the Revolutionary Left, Zenón Barrientos, was reportedly abducted by four hooded paramilitary personnel in La Paz. He was forced into a car, tied up and beaten. After two hours he was left in the Aranjuez area of the city.
General Celso Torrelio Villa and his cabinet resigned on 14 July 1982 and General Guido Vildoso Calderón was sworn in on 19 July. The new government undertook to respect human rights, but Amnesty International continued to learn of arrests and of attacks by paramilitary groups. Following General Vildoso's resignation on 17 September the 1980 Congress was reconvened and Hernán Siles Zuazo, leader of the MNR-I, was inaugurated as President on 10 October 1982.
A continuing concern throughout 1982 was the fate of Bolivians who had "disappeared" during previous military governments. Amnesty International highlighted the case of José Luis Martínez Machicao, a university student and bank worker, who "disappeared" after his detention on 12 December 1980. Figures published in November 1982 by the Asamblea Permanente por los Derechos Humanos (APDH), Permanent Assembly for Human Rights, a Bolivian human rights organization, indicated that as many as 164 individuals had "disappeared" since 1979. In December 1982 the APDH criticized the commission of inquiry set up by the civilian government for its delay in investigating such "disappearances".
A Tribunal de Honor de las Fuerzas Armadas, Armed Forces Commission of Inquiry, was set up in November 1982 to investigate the killing of eight leaders of the Movimiento de la Izquierda Revolucionaria (MIR), Movement of the Revolutionary Left, following a raid on La Paz house by the security forces on 15 January 1981. The only survivor, MIR parliamentary deputy Gloria Ardaya, testified
115
that the eight leaders had been machine-gunned to death by military and civilian personnel. Gloria Ardaya had subsequently been imprisoned for 45 days in the DOP and the Ministry of the Interior where she had been tortured.
The Partido Socialista I (PSI), Socialist Party I, filed a legal complaint in November 1982 against former President General Garcia Meza and former Minister of the Interior Colonel Luis Arce Gómez in connection with the killing of its leader Marcelo Quiroga Santa Cruz. He was killed by the security forces during a raid on the headquarters of the Central Obrera Boliviana (COB), Bolivian Trade Union Central, on 18 July 1980.
Decree Law 19276, adopted by the civilian government in November 1982, abolished state security agencies including the DOP, SES and DIE "since these groups ... have committed a series of acts and actions denigrating to the human condition by lending themselves to the service of instruments of repression and torture".
The Special Envoy on Bolivia appointed by the United Nations, Héctor Gros Espiell, paid a second visit to the country in November 1982 to investigate the human rights situation. His report was to be presented to the United Nations Human Rights Commission in 1983.
On 12 August 1982 Bolivia acceded to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and its Optional Protocol.
