Zambia
Amnesty International was concerned about the detention without trial of alleged opponents of the government, several of whom were taken up for adoption or investigation as prisoners of conscience, and by the trial of 13 people accused of treasoa There were also reports of torture relating to 1981 and earlier. At least 15 people were sentenced to death for criminal offences and one execution was known to have been carried out.
The Preservation of Public Security Regulations continued to be used to detain without trial real or suspected opponents of the government and, it would appear, certain criminal suspects whom the authorities were not prepared to prosecute in the courts. Under the regulations the President is empowered to authorize detention without trial for an unlimited period outside the jurisdiction of the courts. It is required that detainees be informed of the formal grounds for their detention, that their names be published in the Government Gazette and that their cases be subject to review by a specially established tribunal within one month and thereafter at half-yearly intervals. This tribunal can recommend release or continued detention, but the President is not obliged to implement its recommendations.
Those in detention under the regulations included at least nine people arrested in mid-1981 in connection with an alleged plan to help the 13 treason trial defendants escape, a former supporter of the United Progressive Party (UPP), which was banned in 1972, and several alleged followers or associates of Adamson Mushala. Adamson Mushala, whom the authorities claimed had been trained as a guerrilla fighter by South African forces in Namibia, was shot and killed by Zambian soldiers in November after several years of violent criminal activity in North Western Province.
Several detainees sought release by applying to the courts for writs of habeas corpus. Most argued either that the formal grounds for their detention had no validity or that their detention orders were invahd because legal procedures had not been fully observed. Such applications were normally heard by the courts only after considerable delays and were generally unsuccessful. For example, two men detained in 1977 for allegedly providing food and clothing to Adamson Mushala and his followers were denied habeas corpus in August despite the state's failure to bring charges against them in the five years since their arrest In late July, however, the Ndola High Court ordered the release of Emmanuel Mwamba, a former diplomat and supporter of the UPP
101
who had been detained without trial under a Presidential order since August 1979. The court ruled that it was unreasonable for him to continue in detention for allegedly assisting in the preparation of a political leaflet which another court had earlier ruled was neither seditious nor subversive. Emmanuel Mwamba had been adopted as a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty International.
The trial of 13 people charged with treason following an alleged plot to overthrow the government in October 1980 started in the Lusaka High Court in January. The defendants, who included Edward Shamwana, a prominent lawyer, and Valentine Musakanya, a former governor of the national bank, had, with two exceptions, been held in custody since late 1980. Godfrey Miyanda, a former army officer, had been returned forcibly from Zaire in May 1981, when the defendants first appeared in court to be charged and remanded in custody. Mundia Sikatana, a lawyer, was arrested and added to the list of defendants in August 1981, shortly before another defendant, former Air Force Commander Major-General Christopher Kabwe, was discharged and released after agreeing to become a prosecution witness.
All the defendants denied the treason charges. When the trial opened in January, Mundia Sikatana appUed unsuccessfully for his own discharge on the grounds that the President had in writing promised him immunity from prosecution. The judge turned down this request, but allowed him to appeal to the Supreme Court, which subsequently said it had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal. One of the defendants became ill but the trial of the 12 others continued until August, when four were discharged following the presentation of the prosecution case. Those freed included Mundia Sikatana, whose case had been taken up for investigation by Amnesty International, and Godfrey Miyanda. The trial closed in October, but judgment had not been given by the end of 1982. The defendants faced a mandatory death sentence if convicted of treason.
New information became available about the alleged use of torture in 1981 and earlier. In August Christopher Chawinga, an Air Force Warrant Officer detained in mid-1981 for alleged involvement in a plan to bring about the treason trial defendants' escape, told the Lusaka High Court during a habeas corpus action that he had been stripped naked and assaulted by security police officers first at the Central Police Station in Lusaka and then at the Police Training School in Lilayi. Similar allegations of assault were made by Faustino Lombe, whose case was taken up for investigation by Amnesty International, and by other detainees arrested in mid-1981 in connection with the alleged escape plot (see Amnesty International Report 1982).
102
In August the Supreme Court upheld an earlier court decision granting substantial damages to seven former detainees who had been assaulted by police in December 1979. They had been arrested on suspicion of spying for the government of Bishop Abel Muzorewa in Zimbabwe.
Some 15 people were known to have been sentenced to death during 1982, most for murder but at least four for armed robbery. One execution is known to have taken place. In all, more than 50 people convicted of serious criminal offences were believed to be under sentence of death and awaiting execution at the end of the year. Several were believed to have been under sentence of death for more than five years.
