Congo
Amnesty International was concerned by the use of detention without trial, allegations of torture, and the death penalty.The detainees included 34people from Cabinda, an enclave of Angola, who had been held since 1977, and former President Joachim Yhombi-Opango, who had been detained without trial together with several associates since shortly after he was ousted in February 1979. During 1982 at least five people were detained after a bomb explosion in May and several refugees from Zaire were also arrested and detained without trial. One was forcibly repatriated to Zaire and imprisoned there. In December Congo ratified the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights, which it had signed in November 1981.
There were two serious bomb explosions in Brazzaville. In May at least 15 people were killed when a bomb exploded at a cinema, and a similar explosion at the international airport in July also resulted in casualties. Responsibility for the first attack was claimed by the Groupe patriotique armé du Congo, Congo Armed Patriotic Group, a clandestine organization not previously reported to be active.
Soon after the first explosion five people were arrested. They included Bernard Kolelas, a former senior government official who had previously been detained without trial on several occasions and was adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience in
29
late 1978. Although they had been in prison since May, the five detainees were subsequently accused of being responsible for the second explosion in July, They were held incommunicado and questioned by the security police for several months. Eugène Madimba, one of the detainees, was allegedly tortured with electric shocks to make him confess and implicate others. However, it appears that there was insufficient evidence to substantiate a case against them. In September, they were moved from the security police headquarters in Brazzaville to a police training school at M'Pila, where they remained incommunicado. They went on hunger-strike, demanding to be tried or released. Amnesty International was investigating their cases. At the end of the year they were still being held, apparently without charge.
Amnesty International remained concerned by the continued detention without charge or trial of at least 34 Cabindans arrested in early 1977 suspected oflinks with
de Cabinda (FLEC), Cabindan Enclave Liberation Front. During 1982 they were reportedly held at an airforce base near Pointe-Noire. The cases of all 34 were taken up for investigation by Amnesty International but the authorities did not respond to inquiries.
Former President Yhombi-Opango remained in detention throu^out 1982 together with several other people arrested with him in March 1979, a month after he was deposed by President Sassou-Nguesso. Their cases have also been taken up for investigation by Amnesty International.
A number of refugees from neighbouring Zaire were detained without charge during 1982 and one of them, Eke Akanga N'Koy, was forcibly repatriated to Zaire in November 1982 and immediately arrested there. Others detained included Kabeya Tshang and Mupesse Impobakut, refugees who had previously been imprisoned for political reasons in Zaire and whose cases had been taken up by Amnesty International. In December 1982 Amnesty International was informed that a Ugandan asylum-seeker had been tortured at the security police headquarters in Brazzaville after being accused of espionage.
The use of the death penalty also gave cause for concern. At least one death sentence was imposed for a criminal offence and two people convicted of murder during 1981 are reported to have been executed in October.
