Grenada
Amnesty International's major concern was the continued detention without charge or trial of suspected opponents of the government; Amnesty International was also concerned by the imposition of several death sentences.
Amnesty International continued to investigate the cases of 74 detainees held under People's Law No. 8. This provides for the preventive detention without charge or trial of persons suspected of endangering public safety. Their cases are periodically reviewed by the Minister of the Interior, a post held by the Prime Minister, Maurice Bishop.
On 15 November the government announced the release of 28 detainees, 16 of whose cases had been under investigation by Amnesty International. They included a number of people who had been held in preventive detention since the government came to power in March 1979.
Amnesty International received reports that further detainees were released in December. The government had not disclosed their names by the end of 1982, but Amnesty International learned that 19 were cases being investigated by the organization.
Amnesty International did not know how many people remained in preventive detention at the end of the year.
I n August A mnesty International wrote to the Grenadian authorities expressing concern about reports that detainees in Richmond Hill Prison had been denied visits from their relatives for five months following an escape in December 1981. Religious services in the prison had also been stopped for five months. During the year Amnesty International wrote to the authorities expressing concern about reports that detainees were confined to their cells for 23 hours a day, and had few facilities for exercise or occupation.
In October an Amnesty International observer attended the trial of five people charged in connection with a bomb explosion which had killed three people at a government rally in June 1980. The five defendants were originally charged with murder, which carries a mandatory death sentence. However, the charges were changed, retroactively, to charges under the Terrorism (Prevention) Law, which was introduced by government decree in October 1980. This provides for terrorist offences to be tried by a judge without a jury and for a mandatory death penalty for causing death by explosives or acts of terrorism. Two of the defendants were found guilty of causing death
139
by explosives and two of aiding and abetting the offence. All four were sentenced to death. The fifth defendant was acquitted but remained in preventive detention.
Three of the five defendants had signed confessions which they alleged had been extracted by ill-treatment during interrogation by the People's Revolutionary Army (PRA). The judge ruled two of the three statements inadmissible on the grounds that they were not voluntary. The only other evidence against the accused was the testimony of two co-defendants who were granted a stay of prosecution in return for testifying for the prosecution. Their uncorroborated testimony was the only evidence on which three of the four defendants were convicted. Appeals were pending.
