Honduras
Amnesty International's concerns in Honduras included repeated and increasing reports of arbitrary arrest and detention, torture, "disappear-_	ances" and the extrajudicial execu-
tion of both Honduran and foreign citizens. The victims included students, teachers, trade unionists and peasant leaders. Regular security forces and newly-proclaimed "death squads", allegedly operating in complicity with the government, were named as responsible. These abuses continued after the inauguration in February of the first civilian president in a decade.
The governmentformed several new anti-terroristforces, including the Tropas Especiales para Operaciones de Selva y Nocturnas (TESON), Special Troops for Jungle and Night Operations. In May the Congress passed a new anti-terrorist law. Decree 33, (Ley Antiterrorista) which defined a large number of acts, such as damaging property or destroying documents, as subversive acts against the state. For example, under Decree 33 invasion of land was to be considered a terrorist act. During 1982 human rights of concern to Amnesty International were violated by TESON and other new security units acting under Decree 33.
Honduras has permitted the entry of many thousands of refugees, including Salvadorians, Guatemalans and Nicaraguans. However, there were reports of Salvadorian-Honduran combined troop action in which hundreds of Salvadorians were killed inside El Salvador as they tried to reach refuge in Honduras (see El Salvador entry).
During 1982 the Honduran Government and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) cooperated to move Salvadorian refugees inland and away from the border. However, the UNHCR representatives were hindered on occasion by the Honduran security forces in their efforts to meet arriving refugees and assist them to safety in Honduras. Amnesty International continued to receive reports of Salvadorian refugees being harassed and abducted from camps and settlements inside Honduras by Salvadorian military and paramilitary forces, acting on some occasions with the apparent cooperation or complicity of their Honduran counterparts. On 2 March 1982 seven bodies were discovered near the hamlet ofGuajini-quil by other refugees. They were later found to have been refugees who resisted relocation inland, to Mesa Grande, San Marcos de Ocotepeque, Honduras. They had decided to return to El Salvador, but were reportedly killed by Honduran soldiers and Salvadorian National Guards.
149
Amnesty Intemational appealed for information concerning a group of Salvadorians, including opposition leader Archimedes Antonio Cañada Rodríguez and two children, arrested in the Honduran capital Tegucigalpa in August 1982 by the security unit known as the "Cobras", the Cuerpo de Policía Anti Subversivo, Anti-Subversive Police Corps. The detainees were reportedly handed over to another branch of the Honduran security forces, the Fuerzas de Seguridad Pública (FUSEP), Public Security Forces. In September a guerrilla group seized hostages in the Chamber of Commerce in San Pedro Sula. Their demands included the repeal of the new anti-terrorist 1 aw, the withdrawal of US military advisors and the release of some 70 Honduran and foreign political prisoners including Cañada Rodríguez. In response, the Honduran and Salvadorian authorities reportedly acknowledged that some Salvadorians, of whom only Cañada Rodríguez was named, had been returned to El Salvador where they were in custody. Throughout the affair the Honduran Government continued to deny that it was holding anyone for political reasons, and the detention of Cañada Rodriguez in El Salvador was not verified. On a number of other occasions the Honduran Government released Salvadorian political prisoners in response to guerrilla demands, after having initially denied that they were in detention.
The fate of two other groups of foreign nationals, many of them Salvadorian, who "disappeared" in Tegucigalpa in 1981 remained unclarified despite renewed appeals during 1982 for information. In both cases eye-witnesses interviewed by Amnesty Intemational confirmed the arrest of the detainees, and in both cases children who were among the detained were later placed in the care of others by officials.
During 1982 Amnesty International appealed on behalf of other foreign nationals, some living in Honduras, others merely travelling through, who had "disappeared". In the cases of several "disappeared" Costa Ricans and Nicaraguans documents were available showing the exit of the missing people from countries adjacent to Honduras. However,Honduran officials continued to deny that they had entered Honduras, even in cases where witnesses attested to having seen the missing people in Tegucigalpa, or to having spoken to them in custody in Honduras.
In March Salvadorian-bom US resident Ramón Cardona was arrested by Honduran immigration police while in transit in Toncon-tin airport in Tegucigalpa. He was apparently arrested on the basis of his possession of publications including the British magazine The Economist which showed Salvadorian guardsmen on its cover. Ramón C ardona testified that while in custody he had been threatened with being tumed over to the Salvadorian authorities and wamed that
150
he would be tortured in such a way that no marks would be left. He told of being confined in a small wooden box in which he was unable to stand, and of the use of electric shocks during interrogation. Ramón Cardona was released after some 72 hours in detention in a secretjail just minutes before a delegation from the USA arrived in Honduras on his behalf.
H onduran and foreign workers assisting Salvadorian and Guatemalan refugees suffered human rights violations during 1982. A foreign mission of inquiry happened to visit the town of El Amatillo on the same day in January 1982 that Honduran soldiers had entered. The mission reported that it had interviewed witnesses who said that the soldiers had ill-treated three campesinos (peasants) including beating them with rifle butts. One of the peasants, Goyo Reyes, was taken to the military barracks atLa Virtud where he was beaten on the back with a machete and accused of aiding the guerrillas with food. Goyo Reyes was a member of the local committee of the international Catholic relief agency CARITAS that aids Salvadorian refugees with food and medicine. Photographs taken on 7 J anuary 1982, the day of his release, show wounds and bruises on his back consistent with his allegations.
On 12 March Marcarlo Ramírez Rodríguez, another CARITAS worker, presented himself at the military barracks at the border refugee camp of La Virtud on the orders of the commanding officer. Two priests who went that evening to inquire about him were told he was in detention. Later, between two and three am, he was seen being taken by soldiers to the village of La Cuesta. Amnesty International appealed for information as to his whereabouts, but there was no further news of him. At the time of his arrest there was a great deal of military activity around La Virtud, involving both Honduran and Salvadorian troops. On the day that Ramirez "disappeared" Salvadorian refugee Vicente Alfaro was reportedly detained in the same area by Honduran soldiers, savagely beaten and tortured in the presence of witnesses, then thrown into the Mocal river.
InJuneAmnestylntemational appealed for information concerning the whereabouts of Dr Oscar Girón, a Guatemalan doctor who was visiting Honduras in connection with refugee work. He was detained on 9 J une 1982 by four uniformed Honduran soldiers and two armed civilians In the E1 Tesoro reftigee camp for Guatemalans, near C opán. Also arrested was a nurse from the USA. In testimony made available to Amnesty International after her release several days later, the nurse stated that she had heard D rG iron moaning as he was beaten by his abductors. She told how they were both forced to go down into a ravine where Dr Girón's body was discovered on 6 July. The witness believed that the men who abducted D r G irón and herself belonged to
151
a small Honduran army detachment patrolling the northern border. During the days she spent in custody in San Pedro Sula, she several times overheard reference to the 12th Batallion of Santa Rosa de Copan.
On 26 July four more people working with refugees, in this case Salvadorians, "disappeared" in Tegucigalpa. One had allegedly been threatened earlier by a member of the security unit Dirección Nacional de Investigaciones (DIN), National Directorate oflnvesti-gations. 11 was sub sequently reported that all four had been tortured in custody. The DIN was also cited as responsible for the death of a young Nicaraguan, Lilián Soto Ulloa, in April 1982. She was pregnant and reportedly aborted under torture. DIN agents then allegedly threw her into the street; she died some hours later in hospital.
Honduran students, teachers, trade unionists and peasant leaders were also arbitrarily arrested, tortured, abducted or killed during the year. Amnesty International appealed on behalf of six students arrested by the DIN on 27 Aprü in Tegucigalpa at the home of the then Deputy Prosecutor of the Republic. Despite the fact that the Deputy Prosecutor witnessed the arrest, the DIN initially denied their detention. In early May Amnesty International learned that four of the six had been released, but that the remaining two were reportedly being tortured. No further news of these cases was received.
I n July at least 12 teachers' union leaders were reportedly arrested following a demonstration protesting against Honduran army involvement in El Salvador, and tiie authorities' apparent tolerance towards armed opponents of the Nicaraguan Government operating from Honduran territory. Also in July 160 peasants were arrested under the new anti-terrorist law for having occupied land in the department of Copán. There were unverified reports that the peasants were subsequently released. Throughout 1982 peasant leaders were arrested. José Maria Gómez, a leader of the Unión Nacionale de Campesinos Auténticos de Honduras (UNCAH), National Union of Authentic Peasants of Honduras, was reportedly abducted by DIN agents on or about 18 August 1982. In response to appeals on his behalf the authorities denied that he was in custody but sources within Honduras reported that he was being tortured at DIN headquarters in San Pedro Sula. Amnesty International appealed in August on behalf of several students and trade union leaders who, according to a wide variety of sources, had been detained that month by the security forces. They included Felix Martinez, Roberto Fino, Eduardo Becerra Lanza and Hernán Pérez Alemán. Felix Martínez' body was found dressed as a guerrilla in a secret shallow grave on 29 August 1982. His teeth had been bashed out, and his body had been beaten and bore stab wounds.
152
The body of Roberto Fino was also found in August, in the town of Goascarán, in the department of Valle, along with that of psychology student Reynaldo Diaz Flores, also arrested by the DIN in August. Sources in Honduras reported that Becerra Lanza had been seen in custody having convulsions and close to death by another detainee who was later released. There was no further news of the fate of Pérez Alemán.
RamónCustodio, journalist and President of the Comité Para la Defensa de los Derechos Humanos en Honduras, CommiW&Q for the Defence of Human Rights in Honduras, was arrested for eight hours on 12 August, shortly after he had written two articles in the newspaper Tiempo publicizing a series of human rights violations by the military.
During 1982 Amnesty International submitted a number of cases to the United Nations Working Group on Enforced and Involuntary D isappearances. A t the 12th Regular S ession of the General Assembly of the Organization of American States, Amnesty International reiterated its concerns in Honduras including the increasing number of political prisoners who "disappeared" during 1981 and 1982 and the human rights abuses to which Salvadorian refugees were subjected.
