Nepal
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about the imprisonment, often without trial, of political opponents of the government Amnesty International received reports of arrests of workers, students, professionals and political leaders throughout the year. Most appeared to have been held under the Public Security Act (PSA), which allows preventive detention under renewable nine-month detention orders for up to a maximum of three yeare. Political activity is severely restricted under the "partyless" panchayat system by which Nepal is governed. Other legislation
218
reported to have been used against people engaged in political activity were the Treason (Crime and Punishment) Act (the Raj Kaj Act), the Organizations and Associations (Control) Act, the Press and Publication Act and the Contributions Act.
In August 1982 the Home Minister told the iVai/ona/PancAaj^ai (national assembly) that 49 people, including 22 students, were being held at that time under the PSA. It was understood that most people held under the PSA were detained for relatively short periods and that the total number detained under the PSA during the year was far higher. The total number of students alone who were reported to have been arrested during the year was over 200, the majority being members of the left-wing All-Nepal National Independent Students Union (ANNISU). Around 150 members of ANNISU were arrested in March at the time of the union's sixth annual congress, a number of whom subsequently claimed that they had been tortured while in detention. In addition, an unknown number of people arrested in the period around the national assembly elections ofMay 1981 remained in detention under the PSA, some without trial. Among them was Durga Pokhrel, a journalist and former university lecturer, whose case had been taken up for investigation after her arrest under the PSA in June 1981. Amnesty International adopted Durga Pokhrel as a prisoner of conscience in March 1982 after her detention order had been renewed. She was released on 14 April 1982.
