Ghana
Amnesty International was concerned about reports of arbitrary arrest, beatings and killings by members of the security services, particularly the army. The government of Flight-Lieutenant J. J. Rawlings publicly condemned the abuse of military powers on several occasions and instituted legal proceedings against those accused of political killings in one case. Amnesty International was also concerned about the detention without trial of political opponents of the Provisional National Defence Council (PNDC), including up to 492 former members of the previous government of Dr Hilla Limann or of political parties which had existed under his government. Other political opponents of the PNDC arrested in 1982 included people accused of plotting against the government - at least six in July 1982 and at least 22 in December.
The PNDC government was installed on 31 Decemberl981 asa result of a military coup, and a high level of violence continued throughout 1982. The most widely reported of the political killings during 1982 occurred on 30 June when three High Court judges and a retired army major were abducted from their homes during curfew hours and shot. The PNDC in July instituted a commission of inquiry headed by a judge, Justice Azu Crabbe. Although the inquiry was still in progress at the end of 1982, five people had already been charged with murder and complicity to murder: two soldiers, two former soldiers and Joachim Amartey Kwei, a member of the PNDC at the time of the killings.
On 2 March the PNDC issued a Preventive Custody Law (PNDCL 4) naming 492 persons to be taken into preventive custody for an indefinite period. A number of these detainees were released during the year. On 1 October Amnesty International wrote to Flight-Lieutenant Rawlings to express its concern about the detention without trial of people who had held public or political office during Dr Limann's government. The PNDC subsequently released six former ministers, 18 former members of parliament and 32 former members of Military Intelligence. It also announced that detainees against whom there were no adverse reports would be released in due course, and that the cases of prisoners in poor health would be reviewed. A medical team appointed by the government subsequently examined both criminal and political prisoners in a number of detention centres and produced a list of those whom they considered eligible for
42
release on medical grounds. Amnesty International did not receive any information as to how the cases of political prisoners were reviewed other than on medical grounds. On 31 December the government announced the release of a further 22 political detainees including two - Yaw Adu-Larbi and Frederick Blay - whose arrests had not been officially announced. On the same day the government announced the release of 529 prisoners on the grounds of ill-health. A review committee which was reported to include Flight-Lieutenant Rawlings specifically excluded from release on medical grounds people convicted by the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council in 1979. It was reported that some 20 former military personnel convicted of economic crimes by special courts in trials which Amnesty International considered to be unfair were still in prison at the end of 1982. Some of these had been originally Usted as suitable for release on medical grounds. At the end of 1982 at least 22 of the people named in PNDCL 4 were still detained without trial.
Three politicians closely associated with Dr Limann's People's National Party - Kwesi Armah, Nana Okutwer Bekoe III and Krobo Edusei - were convicted of economic crimes in October by the Public Tribunal, which was inaugurated by FHght-Lieutenant Rawlings on 26 August. The Public Tribunal was designed to deal with crimes against the national interest, both economic and political. It was composed of both jurists (although of relatively little experience) and lay members. Its constitution permitted no right of appeal and those who appeared before it were forbidden to engage in technical arguments. It was boycotted by the Ghana Bar Association. The chairman of the Public Tribunal, George Agyekum, declared in November that he would henceforth impose death sentences for smuggling. Nevertheless, the Public Tribunal was not known to have passed any death sentences either before or after that declaration. Amnesty International asked the government for a visa to permit its delegate to observe sessions of the Public Tribunal. No reply was received.
Amnesty International investigated reports that both political and criminal detainees were beaten by soldiers during or shortly after their arrest. Such ill-treatment was most commonly alleged at Burma Camp, the main military barracks.
43
.....	
	
I	
MMj	^^ V
' \ i'	
