Israel and the Occupied Territories
The
concerns
of
Amnesty International were the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience; the use of administrative measures, with no judicial involvement, to physically restrict individuals and detain them without charge or trial; the widespread use of short-term detention without charge or trial; the practice of summary trials; allegations of ill-treatment of detainees; and killings by the security forces during public disturbances. It was also concerned about the detention with no legal rights of thousands of people captured by the Israeli Defence Forces (IDF) after the Israeli invasion of Lebanon, and allegations that these detainees were ill-treated.
During 1982 Amnesty International worked for the release of 58 prisoners of conscience and investigated the cases of three possible prisoners of conscience. Forty-one of these 61 prisoners were released during the year. Six cases were people convicted of security offences, seven were conscientious objectors, and 48 were imprisoned or restricted in their movements by administrative order.
312
The IsraeH authorities frequently suggested that prisoners adopted as prisoners of conscience or investigated by Amnesty International had advocated violence, for example by openly sympathizing with or belonging to the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO). Amnesty International holds that sympathy or membership as such does not necessarily show that an individual advocated violence, and works for the release or fair trial of such people when there is no evidence of their individually having used or advocated violence.
During 1982 Amnesty Intemational learned of 13 reservists and regulars in the IDF who were sentenced to between 14 and 35 days' imprisonment for refusing to serve in the Occupied Territories or, after the invasion in June, in Lebanon. All were charged with "refusing to obey an order". Amnesty Intemational repeatedly appealed for their release as prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty International continued to be concerned aboutthe use of the July 1980 Amendment to the Prevention of Terrorism Act which makes it an offence, in Israel proper, to publicly show sympathy with a hostile organization "whether by hoisting a flag or displaying a badge or slogan or by causing an anthem or slogan to be heard". In May, for example, Ghazi 'Abd 'Ali from Galilee was sentenced to 32 days' imprisonment, plus six months' suspended, for singing a nationalist song during demonstrations in March. Nine people were sentenced in August to two months' imprisonment and six months' suspended after a Palestinian flag was found in their social club.
In the Occupied Territories the possession or distribution of illegal literature or propaganda material is an offence under Article 85 of the Defence (Emergency) Regulations and Security Provisions Order (SPO) 101. A typical case was Hamdi Farraj, a journalist, who was detained from 1 April to 3 May, charged with possession of 12 illegal books, fined, and given a six-month sentence suspended for three years.
Amnesty International informed the Israeli authorities of its concern about thousands of prisoners captured and detained by the IDF following the Israeli invasion of Lebanon on 6 June 1982. Not only combatants, but also civilians - including many medical personnel - of Palestinian, Lebanese and other nationalities were arrested in large numbers. They were initially held in temporary detention and interrogation centres in southem Lebanon, and in Israeli prisons and prison camps. From the second week in July most detainees were transferred to a prison camp constmcted at Al Ansar in southem Lebanon. In mid-November Israeli officials stated that over 9,000 people had been detained in Al Ansar camp, of whom over 5,400 were still held. However, this figure did not include those Palestinians and Lebanese arrested who were never transferred to Al
313
Ansar camp, many of whom were held in incommunicado detention in Lebanon and Israel and later released.
On 1 July 1982 Amnesty International wrote to the Israeli authorities expressing concern that prisoners arrested in Lebanon were not being treated in accordance with internationally accepted standards, and that they were being held incommunicado. Amnesty International urged the government to allow the prisoners access to a humanitarian organization and to family and lawyers, and to publish full details of the prisoners. In his reply of 25 August 1982 the Attorney General stated that A1 Ansar detainees were being treated according to the Fourth Geneva Convention and that the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) was conducting regular visits.
On 22 October Amnesty International reiterated its concerns, saying that the ICRC visits had begun only on 18 July, up to five weeks after arrests started, that detainees had still not received visits from families or lawyers, and that Palestinians captured in Lebanon and detained in Israel were still being held incommunicado. Amnesty International also called on the government to release promptly all remaining detainees or to "grant them the right to confront and refute evidence against them". By the end of 1982 several Israeli lawyers had been given power of attorney by some of the detainees' families but none had been allowed to visit their clients in Al Ansar camp, or in Israeli prisons. In November a review committee composed of three IDF officers was set up at Al Ansar camp to examine the cases of detainees who had appealed against their imprisonment.
Amnesty International continued to work on behalf of individuals detained or physically restricted by administrative order. Three-month administrative detention orders were served on 13 Druze from the occupied Golan Heights in February, March and May. Their arrest followed a decision by leaders of the Golan Druze community to hold a general strike in protest at the Israeli annexation of the Golan Heights on 15 December 1981, and at the government's policy of issuing Golan Heights residents with Israeli identity cards. Nine of the orders were renewed for a further three months. All 13 were released by the end of the year.
Under Article 110 of the Defence (Emergency) Regulations of 1945 in Israel proper, and Article 86 of SPO 378 in the Occupied Territories, people can be confined to their towns or villages by day, and their homes by night. This is "to preserve public safety and order" according to the Attorney General in reply to Amnesty International inquiries about such cases. In 1982, 77 restriction orders affecting 5 7 people were issued. Those restricted included political activists, mayors, journalists, lawyers, trade unionists, academics and students. Amnesty International worked on behalf of 35 restricted persons
314
during the year. They included three Palestinian trade unionists - H aj 'Abd Abu Diab, Ibrahim Daqqaq and Jiryis Khouri - who were placed under town arrest on 1 January 1982, and whose orders were later renewed; and 'All 'Awad al Jamal, whose case Amnesty International had investigated when he was held in administrative detention from May 1975 to March 1982 and who was issued with a restriction order on 2 March 1982, immediately upon his release. Restriction orders, initially issued for three or six months, were repeatedly renewed. Amnesty International knew of 24 people restricted for over two years, and one for four years (sqq Amnesty International Report 1982).
Amnesty International was concerned about the use of short-term detention to hold hundreds of West Bank demonstrators, mainly school children and students, protesting at Israeli policies in the Occupied Territories and in Lebanon, and many others arbitrarily arrested apparently to deter them from demonstrating. These detainees were held under the authority of the army in ad hoc detention centres such as the one at AlFar'a near Nablus. Most were released after 18 days (the legal limit for holding a person without charge under Security Provisions Order 378) and many were rearrested. The arbitrary nature of many of these arrests was attested to during the trial in Jaffa of seven Israeli soldiers charged with assaulting West Bank residents and detainees. The trial was in progress at the end of 1982. One defendant stated: "We were told to collect them, 150 or 200 at a time, whoever happened to be around. It didn't matter if they had demonstrated or not."(/erMia/ewPoif, 5 January 1983) Another described arresting Palestinians on the basis of lists compiled by the civilian administration even though they were not suspected of having committed an offence.
Amnesty International was also concerned about the practice of summary trials. Between February and May hundreds of people, mostly demonstrators, were tried individually and in groups of up to 60 and sentenced to imprisonment for up to nine months or fined. These trials were often held \n ad hoc courtrooms, and Amnesty International was concerned that they might not have been fair, since the proceedings were so rapid that lawyers and defence witnesses were often unable to be present.
Amnesty International received a number of testimonies from former prisoners who alleged that they were beaten and subjected to sensory deprivation while in custody or during interrogation. However, Amnesty International was not able to investigate these allegations thoroughly. The authorities charged several members of the IDF with ill-treatment of detainees during the year. In the trial of seven soldiers cited above, defendants testified that they had been ordered by their
315
commanding officer to beat up demonstrators and detainees. Three soldiers, two of them women, were prosecuted early in 1982 for assaulting detainees, and were given prison sentences of one, three and six months.
Amnesty International received press reports and first-hand accounts alleging that people captured during the Israeli invasion of Lebanon and held in temporary detention centres were, at least until the third or fourth week of June, beaten indiscriminately and often severely, exposed to the sun for long periods, deprived of food and water sometimes for several days, and threatened and intimidated. This treatment was reported to have led to serious injury, illness and, in seven or eight cases, to death. Amnesty International wrote to the Attorney General on 1 July and asked for an immediate public inquiry. The Attorney General, in his reply of 25 August, dismissed these press reports as "exaggerated" and "fabricated", but stated that "any specific allegations of maltreatment will be carefully looked into and, if necessary, the appropriate action taken". In its reply of 22 October Amnesty International reiterated its call for a fiill inquiry to establish whether ill-treatment occurred. The Israeli military authorities were reported to be investigating the deaths of seven men whose bodies were found in an Israeli detention centre in Sidon, as well as allegations of ill-treatment which were brought to their attention. Amnesty International received no details of their findings. Amnesty International continued to receive reports of ill-treatment of people arrested by the IDF in Lebanon.
In 14 separate incidents during 1982,15 demonstrators were shot dead and hundreds of others injured by the IDF in the Occupied Territories. In a letter to the Prime Minister on 22 July Amnesty International expressed concern at the repeated shooting and killing of demonstrators. Amnesty International said it could not, without new information, accept the arguments of self defence or "panicky" reaction by troops to justify the shooting and killing of demonstrators who did not have firearms. It urged the government to prevent further loss of life during demonstrations, to initiate an inquiry into the incidents and to make public its findings. In his reply of 15 December the Attorney General pointed out that "thorough investigation and prosecution are undertaken against all those suspected of any breaches of the law, whoever they may be". The Israeli army had been conducting its own investigation into the killings since early May 1982 following allegations of police brutality by three Israeli reserve officers serving on the West Bank. As a result two senior Israeli officers were relieved of their posts, and two officers given three-month and four-month suspended sentences for causing the death of Arab demonstrators.
Following the killing of hundreds of Palestinian and Lebanese
316
civilians in the Sabra and Chatila refugee camps in West Beirut by armed Lebanese militiamen between 16 and 18 September 1982, the Israeli Government established a judicial commission to determine whether the Israeli authorities had any responsibility in this. The IDF were in military control of the area at that time. The commission, headed by the chief justice of the Supreme Court, met in open and closed sessions and heard testimony from front-line commanders and high-ranking miUtary officers and cabinet officials, including the Army Chief of Staff, the Minister ofD efence and the Prime Minister. As 1982 ended the commission's work was still in progress. Amnesty International had urged the United Nations to establish an impartial, independent and international inquiry into the atrocity. It had also called on the Israeli Government to act rapidly to clarify the circumstances of the killings and to cooperate in any international investigation.
