China
Amnesty International's main concerns were trials of political prisoners that fell short of internationally established standards,the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, the detention without trial of political prisoners and the use of the death penalty. Most prisoners of conscience arrested in 1981 remained detained without trial and the charges against them were still unknown. However, a series of political trials was reported to have been held during the second half of 1982, some of which concerned prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International.
Towards the end of 1982 Amnesty International was preparing a memorandum to the government outlining its concerns in the People's Republic of China (PRC). This followed discussions held during the year in Geneva and New York between representatives of the PRC and of Amnesty International.
In December 1982 the National People's Congress of the PRC adopted a new constitution replacing that of 1978. Article 35 guarantees "freedom of speech, the press, assembly, association, procession and demonstration". Other articles strengthen the provisions of the previous constitution against arbitrary arrest and introduce new protections against unlawful searches. However, Amnesty International noted with concern that the new constitution no longer guarantees some fundamental rights which were included in the 1978 constitution - such as freedom of correspondence, freedom of publication and the freedom to strike — and that it contains provisions restricting the freedoms it guarantees. For example, although Article 36 proclaims "freedom of religious beliefs", it also provides that "religious bodies and religious affairs are not subject to any foreign domination" - a clause which may be used against people who communicate with churches and religious groups abroad.
A major development was a series of political trials during the second half of 1982. Some were of former provincial or local leaders described as "followers of the Gang of Four". These trials were given wide coverage by the Chinese news media, in contrast to other trials on which no official statement or information was made public. These mainly concerned prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International whose trials appeared to have been held in closed court. Wang Xizhe and He Qiu, two former editors of unofficial journals from Guangzhou, adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty
192
International, were the first reported to have been tried. Wang Xizhe was reported to have been sentenced to 14 years' imprisonment and deprivation of political rights for an additional four and a half years at his trial on 28 May 1982 in Guangzhou. He Qiu was reported to have been sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment on 29 May 1982. Both were convicted of "counter-revolutionary ofTences". According to unofficial sources, their families were not notified in advance about the trials, contrary to the requirements of the Law of Criminal Procedure which came into force in January 1980, and no official record of the verdicts was made public.
Also tried in 1982 was Xu Wenli, a worker and former editor of the unofficial journal April Fifth Forum, who had been arrested in Beijing in April 1981. According to a document alleged to be the record of the court judgment in his case, published in the Hong Kong review Baixing on 16 October 1982, Xu Wenli was tried on 8 June 1982 by Beijing Intermediate People's Court and sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment and four years' deprivation of political rights on charges of "organizing a counter-revolutionary clique" and "counterrevolutionary propaganda and agitation". The accusations against him, according to the document, included holding "secret" meetings in Beijing in June 1980 and forming a "Chinese Communist Alliance", as well as planning the publication of a "Study Bulletin" and the creation of a "Chinese Association for the Promotion of Democratic Unity" with an office in Hong Kong. The second charge against him - "counter-revolutionary propaganda and agitation" -referred to his speeches, writings and protests against official measures and to their dissemination abroad.
The document named several other detained editors of unofficial magazines, who were also prisoners of conscience, as having been involved in Xu Wenli's "counter-revolutionary group". They were: Wang Xizhe, from Guangzhou; Sun Weibang (alias Sun Feng), from Qingdao (Shandong Province); Xu Zuiliang, from Nanjing (Jiansu province); Fu Shenqi, from Shanghai: and Liu Er'an, from Anyang (Henan Province). The document specified that those named above and "others" involved in the same cities and "elsewhere" were "to be dealt with separately": that is, they were to be tried separately in the cities where they were detained. More than 25 editors and supporters of unofficial journals were arrested in various cities from April to August 1981. Only Xu Wenli, Wang Xizhe and He Qiu were reported to have been tried by late 1982. Amnesty International requested information from the authorities about Xu Wenli and others reportedly connected with his case.
Several other prisoners of conscience were reported to have been tried in Beijing in mid-1982, including Lu Lin, an editor of the
193
unofficial journal Exploration, detained since mid-1981 in Beijing. He was reported to have been sentenced to four years' imprisonment. No details of the charges against him were known.
The trial of five former prominent Red Guard leaders was also said to have taken place in Beijing in November 1982. They were reported to have been arrested in 1978 because of their activities during the Cultural Revolution (1966 to 1968). No further information about their trial was available in 1982.
A group of nine or 10 people were reported to have been detained in Beijing in connection with the arrest on 28 May 1982 of Lisa Wichser, an American teacher in Beijing. Lisa Wichser was accused of "stealing China's secret information". She stated after her release that this referred to non-public documents about the Chinese economy which were given to her by Chinese friends, had a wide circulation, and could not be regarded as constituting "state secrets". After a few days in detention Lisa Wichser was expelled from the country. Those arrested in connection with her case included her fiancé, Yi Xiegong, a student of economics, and eight other students. They were reported to be still detained at the end of 1982 but the charges against them were unknown.
Amnesty International was also concerned about the arrest of Liu Shanqing, a resident of Hong Kong who reportedly "disappeared" after going to Guangzhou in December 1981 to visit the relatives of a prisoner of conscience. His family subsequently learned from officials in Guangzhou that he had been arrested. However, no official information has been disclosed since then about his whereabouts or the charges against him despite repeated inquiries to the Chinese authorities by his friends and relatives in Hong Kong.
Karma Dhorong, a 44-year-old Tibetan hermit of Jodha district in the Autonomous Region of Tibet, was reported to have been arrested in December 1980 in Lhasa for preaching Buddhism. Lobsang Chodag, a worker in a truck repair shop in Lhasa, was reported to have been arrested on 23 April 1980 for putting up a poster. It was alleged that Lobsang Chodag was ill-treated after his arrest. Amnesty International was investigating these and other cases of people reported to be held on political or religious grounds in the Autonomous Region of Tibet.
In early 1982 Amnesty International received further information on the arrests of Roman Catholic priests and laymen in Shanghai on 19 November 1981. It was initially thought that only five priests had been arrested, but later reports indicated that at least 13 priests and laymen had in fact been held. They were believed to have been arrested for religious activities independent of the official Chinese Catholic Church. Statements by Chinese officials indicated that they
194
were accused of carrying on "counter-revolutionary activities under the cloak of religion", which included maintaining contact with the Vatican. By late 1982 they had not been tried and no charges had been made public against them. However, a lay Catholic, Matthew Zhu Lide, was reported to have been assigned to three years' "reeducation through labour", a form of detention without trial against which the detainee has no legal recourse.
Amnesty International was concerned by the continued use of "re-education through labour" as a form of detention without charge or trial (see Amnesty International Report 1982). Among new cases of people reported to have been assigned to "re-education through labour" because of their opinions or beliefs were Xue Mingde, an independent painter from Sichuan who in 1980 organized an exhibition of his works in his home in Chengdu, and Tao Sen, a student at Changsha's Teacher Training College who had a leading role in student protests against irregular conduct by the college authorities in local elections. Tao Sen was reported to have been arrested in June 1981 and assigned to "re-education through labour" for three years. Xue Mingde received the same term after his arrest in the second half of 1981.
In September 1982 Amnesty International renewed its appeals for the release of Liu Qing, a co-founder of the unofficial journal kpnV Fifth Forum who had been detained since November 1979 for selling the transcript of the trial of another imprisoned editor. Liu Qing was assigned in 1980 to three years of "re-education through labour" and was due for release in November 1982. However, he was reportedly tried in mid-1982 in Beijing and sentenced to seven years' imprisonment for "counter-revolutionary" offences. The trial was neither announced nor acknowledged by official sources and no other details were known. People held without trial for "re-education through labour" may be tried at the end of their term of "re-education", or during it if they are accused of committing a new offence. In Liu Qing's case the reason for his trial was presumed to be a testimony on his arrest and detention which he wrote in the labour camp to which he had been sent. In it he reported having been beaten and held for several months in solitary confinement after his arrest.
Amnesty International remained concerned about the prolonged detention without trial, and often without formal charges, of people held on political grounds. For example, Ren Wanding, the founder of a group called the Chinese Human Rights Alliance, had been detained without trial since 1979. No charges were ever made public against him.
The use of the death penalty remained a major cause for concern. Amnesty International received reports of 76 death sentences passed
195
during the year. Of these, four were pronounced with suspension of execution for two years and 65 were carried out- usually immediately after a "public trial rally" organized to announce the sentences. One of those sentenced to death with a two-year reprieve was aged under 18: Yang Junhua was convicted in January 1982 of having planted a bomb in an act of revenge which killed one person and wounded 11.
In October 1982 Amnesty International renewed its appeals against the use of the death penalty in the PRC. It expressed concern about the number of executions during 1982 and the lack of public reporting on what happens when the period of reprieve ends for people who have been sentenced to death with suspension of execution. It urged the authorities to provide information about all cases of suspended death sentences known to Amnesty International which were due to be reviewed between November 1981 and November 1982.
