Bulgaria
Amnesty International's concerns were the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and violations of internationally accepted legal safeguards in political trials. Amnesty International was also concerned about reports of poor prison conditions. It learned of three executions.
As in past years, people were imprisoned for the non-violent exercise of their rights to freedom of expression and freedom of association, generally under Articles 108 and 109 of the criminal code. These broadly-formulated articles deal respectively with "anti-state agitation and propaganda" and "forming or leading an organization aimed at committing crimes against the People's Republic of Bulgaria". Amnesty International adopted as a prisoner of conscience Halil Uzunoglu, a Turkish citizen convicted in January 1982 under these two articles. He was arrested in September 1981 during a visit to relatives in Bulgaria. The charges against him were reported to have been based on copies of emigre publications found by police at a relative's house, in particular a booklet about the Turkish minority in Bulgaria. This had been published in Bursa in Turkey by a local branch of an association of emigre members of the Turkish minority from Bulgaria of which Halil Uzunoglu was president. Halil Uzunoglu is believed to have denied that he had brought these publications into Bulgaria, but was found guilty and sentenced to four and a half years' imprisonment.
Amnesty International learned of other prisoners apparently serving sentences for "anti-state propaganda" as a result of having exercised non-violently their right to freedom of expression; it sought further information about them.
As in past years Amnesty International received allegations that certain prisoners serving long sentences for espionage had been convicted on false charges. It continued to press the authorities for
247
details of the charges against one of these, Yusuf Husnuev Mustafov, aged 46, a member ofBulgaria's Turkish minority. He was arrested in 1976 and sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment after applying to emigrate to Turkey and after a member of his family had left Bulgaria without official permission. In May Amnesty International sought assurances that he was receiving appropriate medical treatment after it was learned that he was suffering from intestinal bleeding and a skin ailment.
The constitution does not guarantee freedom of movement and few Bulgarian citizens have received permission to emigrate. People who attempt to leave the country without official authorization may be punished, under Article 279 of the criminal code, with up to five years' imprisonment. An amendment to the code in April increased the maximum penalty to six years' imprisonment if the offence is repeated. During 1982 Amnesty International learned of several people who had served sentences in the late 1970s and early 1980s for attempting to leave the country without permission.
Political trials are not usually reported in the domestic news media and official censorship severely restricts information about human rights violations in Bulgaria. Amnesty International believes that the cases which came to its notice represented only a fraction of the total. Several former prisoners of conscience have estimated that in the early 1980s there were about 250 political prisoners (including some 150 people convicted of attempting to leave the country without permission) in Stara Zagora prison, where most political prisoners were held. About 1,000 to 1,400 prisoners were said to be held in Stara Zagora prison.
Amnesty International's information indicated that people arrested on political charges have commonly been denied basic legal safeguards. Although in some cases this information concerns trials which took place in the 1970s, practice did not appear to have significantly changed by 1982. For instance, it appears that Halil Uzunoglu was allowed to see his family only once after his arrest, and that he did not have access to a lawyer during the investigation, which lasted two and a half months. Neither his family nor officials from the Turkish Embassy were admitted to his trial in January 1982.
Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about reported restrictions on basic legal safeguards, including access to a lawyer and relatives, during the investigation of two Italian citizens, Paolo Farsetti and Gabriella Trevisin, who were arrested in Bulgaria in August 1982 on charges of espionage. They were accused of having photographed military sites. Amnesty International appealed to the Bulgarian authorities to ensure that they be granted a fair trial. In a departure from normal practice in espionage trials, an Italian lawyer, an Italian
248
diplomat and Italian journalists in Sofia were admitted to the first day of the trial which opened on 22 December. It was adjourned the same day after the court granted the defendants' request for witnesses in Italy to be examined.
Accounts by former prisoners of conscience indicated that medical care and food in prisons were inadequate. There have also been complaints that guards have beaten prisoners and punished them for minor breaches of prison rules by solitary confinement with reduced food rations in special punishment cells. Such cells in Stara Zagora prison were said to be four feet square with concrete floors and no heating, toilet or washing facilities. Conditions in section 7 of Sofia Central Prison and in Pazardzhik prison, where recidivists are sent, have been described as particularly harsh.
After their release prisoners of conscience have often been subjected to various forms of harassment, as well as restrictions on their freedom of movement in the form of banishment or assigned residence.
Amnesty International learned of three executions. The Bulgarian press reported on 6 October that Ivan Vulchev Nedyalkov and Svetlosar Krustev Lazarov had been executed for multiple murder and robbery. On 22 July it was reported that Tsvetan Bratanov had been executed; he was convicted of having caused and driven away from a road accident in which six people were killed.
