Bangladesh
Amnesty International was concerned about the imprisonment of political prisoners under special legislation, the trial of civilians including political prisoners by military courts applying summary procedures, the ill-treatment of political prisoners in jail, continued allegations of human rights violations in the Chittagong Hill Tracts, and the imposition of the death penalty.
On 24 March 1982 President Sattar's government was overthrown in a military coup led by General Hossain Mohammad Ershad, who became Chief Martial Law Administrator. From 24 March 1982 the constitution was suspended and the National Assembly dissolved, and the armed forces ruled the country. Martial law regulations and newly-constituted military courts operated throughout the country.
Under martial law political activities among students and trade unionists were banned. Hundreds of political party workers, trade unionists and students were arrested in the months following the coup. Members of certain political parties, in particular the Bangladesh National Party (BNP), its student wing (BNSP), and the Jatiya
186
Samajtantrik Dal (JSD), featured prominently in trials before military courts. Former ministers of President Ziaur Rahman's and President Sattar's governments were tried before the Special Martial Law Tribunal, the principal military court established since the coup. Most were charged with "corruption and misuse of power". Amnesty International sent a cable to General Ershad on 26 March 1982 expressing concern at the introduction of the death penalty for offences including corruption and illegal possession of arms. It urged that charges should be made public and that trials should be held before civilian courts with full legal safeguards, including the right of appeal to an independent tribunal. These recommendations were not implemented.
Fourteen former ministers were arrested on corruption charges during 1982 and several sentenced to terms of imprisonment. Moudud Ahmed, former Deputy Prime Minister and BNP leader, was arrested on 14 November 1982. Amnesty International asked General Ershad on 17 December 1982 for details of the charges against Moudud Ahmed, and expressed concern at his detention.
Two prominent leaders of the Freedom Fighters Association (veterans of the 1971 independence war) were arrested in early 1982. On the first day of the coup Lieutenant Colonel (Retired) Nuruzzaman, ex-Chairman of the Muktijoddah Sangsad, and a vigorous defender of the Freedom Fighters' rights and privileges, was arrested under the Special Powers Act and held, initially, in Dhaka Central Jail. He was adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience, and was released on bail on 21 October 1982. He faced two charges: attempting to seduce armed forces personnel from their allegiance or duty; and publishing "prejudicial reports" in 1981 about trial standards in the court-martial of 31 officers.
Another leader of the Freedom Fighters, Colonel (Retired) Shawkat Ali, a member of parliament, was arrested in May 1982 on a variety of charges, including murder and kidnapping, and tried before Jessore Special Martial Law Court. A large number of distinguished Bangladeshi lawyers went to Jessore to observe the trial and Colonel AH was acquitted on 12 October 1982. Immediately after the verdict he was taken to Dhaka Central Jail, to await trial with Lieutenant Colonel Nuruzzaman on a charge of publishing "prejudicial reports" in 1981. Amnesty International adopted him as a prisoner of conscience.
Suranjit Sengupta, leader of the Jatiya Ekata Party and former member of parliament and lawyer, was also detained under the Special Powers Act and adopted as a prisoner of conscience. He was released on 15 October 1982. Amnesty International believed that a considerable number of opposition political leaders and workers remained in detention at the end of 1982. Some were detained soon
187
after the coup but had still not been charged at the end of the year. At the end of 1982 Amnesty International was working on behalf of 10 adopted prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty International was concerned about standards of justice in trials of civilians before the three categories of military court set up in April 1982: the Special Martial Law Tribunal; five Special Martial Law Courts; and 23 Summary Martial Law Courts. Appeals to regular courts of law are forbidden. In practice, lawyers frequently represent defendants in the higher military courts, but before the 23 Summary Martial Law Courts legal representation is forbidden although the accused may be assisted by a "friend". Defendants are allowed no help in preparing or presenting cases before these courts. In each of the 23 Summary Marial Law Courts twojunior officers and one non-commissioned officer sit in judgment over cases punishable by sentences of up to seven years. The explicit aim of these courts is to settle cases quickly, and there have been frequent reports of prisoners being arrested, charged and convicted within a week. Few acquittals from these courts were reported.
Amnesty International adopted six trade unionists arrested after March 1982, when strikes and labour disputes at state-owned enterprises were classed as "agitational and political activities" against the interests of the state. On 10 July sentences of three years' imprisonment were imposed on Nasiruddin Jehad and Abu Baker for "instigating workers to strike" at Koalpara Power Station.
The Industrial Relations (Control) Ordinance 1982 (Ordinance No. 26), which was promulgated in August 1982, established a Registrar of Trade Unions who would announce which trade unions enjoyed "majority support of workers as new bargaining agents", a Labour Court which would settle labour disputes, and banned all strikes and lock-outs, punishable by two years' imprisonment with hard labour or a fine, or both.
The new government also banned political activities by students, banning all student unions and arresting students who demonstrated at Rajshahi University in the days following the coup. The Vice-Chancellor of Rajshahi University, Dr Moslem Huda, was dismissed, tried and sentenced by a martial law court for "abuse of power and corruption". Three students of Dhaka University were arrested on 16 September 1982 and sentenced one week later to seven years' imprisonment with hard labour for fixing "anti-state and anti-government" posters on walls of the university campus. There were reports of further disturbances and arrests of students in November 1982 at Dhaka University, Dhaka Medical College and Chittagong University.
Members of Bangladesh's legal profession came into conflict with
188
the authorities after government attempts to change the judicial system by creating three new High Court Benches outside the capital in June 1982. Lawyers participated in a national boycott of the courts on 10 October 1982, and on 16 October, 13 lawyers were arrested. All the lawyers were released on 26 October after consultations between the Bangladesh Supreme Court Bar Association and the government.
GuideUnes to newspaper editors seemed designed to prevent independent reporting of the defence in cases before martial law courts, in particular the Special Martial Law Tribunal. Amnesty International adopted as a prisoner of conscience Golam Mazed, tdiiox oiX]\Q Dainik Runner, who was sentenced on 27 May 1982 to two years' rigorous imprisonment for publishing a "prejudicial" article criticizing the martial law administration. Golam Mazed was released in early September 1982 after a campaign on his behalf by various press organizations. Two weekly newspapers were banned in 1982 after publishing reports judged "prejudicial" to the government.
The conditions and treatment of prisoners in Bangladesh remained a long-standing concern of Amnesty International. The government recognized the need to improve conditions in the announcement of a program of prison reforms in May 1982. There were disturbing reports of beatings and deaths in prison during 1982. Serajul Islam, a JSD worker from Kushtia, died on 30 November 1982 in Kushtia Jail, where he had been detained for seven months without trial. The JSD Secretary General, Abdur Rab, alleged that Serajul Islam had been beaten to death by police officers and buried without a post mortem examination, and that another JSD worker, Safayet Ah, detained in jail, was seriously ill after ill-treatment.
Fighting continued to be reported in the Chittagong Hill Tracts, inhabited by a non-Bengali tribal population most of whom are Buddhists or Christians. Their opposition to the government's policy of establishing Bengali settlements in the Hill Tracts led to conflict between these ethnic groups and the army and police, and reports of many deaths. Amnesty International received allegations that security forces had harassed, tortured, illegally detained and raped inhabitants of the area, but was unable to verify these allegations. Official permission is required to enter the Hill Tracts and outside observers were seldom allowed access to the territory.
The death sentence was imposed frequently for murder in aggravated circumstances, but not all were carried out. Six executions were reported in 1982. Amnesty International appealed to General Ershad in September 1982 on behalf of Biswajit Nandi, whose execution by hanging was imminent. Biswajit Nandi was originally sentenced to death in 1977 by a Special Mihtary Court in Dhaka for
189
"waging war against the government", and had reportedly spent over five years in a condemned cell, where he remained at the end of 1982. Amnesty International also appealed on behalf of a number of other prisoners sentenced to death by civilian and military courts without right of appeal.
