Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
Amnesty International's concerns were the continued imprisonment of prisoners of conscience; allegations of ill-treatment of people detained for political reasons in psychiatric hospitals; harsh conditions suffered by prisoners of conscience in penal institutions; and the continued use of the death penalty. Amnesty International worked on behalf of approximately 450 prisoners known or thought likely to be prisoners of conscience.
On 27 December the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet proclaimed an amnesty in connection with the 60th anniversary of the formation of the USSR. The amnesty did not apply to the majority of political prisoners. It did not cover articles of the criminal code such as "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda" and "anti-Soviet slander" nor the articles under which most religious prisoners are convicted. The amnesty excluded also some articles under which prisoners of conscience have been falsely charged, such as "engaging in a prohibited trade". A few prisoners of conscience were in the categories benefiting from the amnesty, especially those convicted on charges of "hooliganism", but even they could be excluded if they had '"maliciously violated the regime, while serving a term of punishment".
Most prisoners of conscience were charged with political offences such as "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda", "circulation of
284
fabrications known to be false which defame the Soviet state and social system" (often referred to as "anti-Soviet slander") or with violating the "legislation on cults" which restricts religious activity. Others were convicted on criminal charges which bore no apparent relation to their dissenting activities and which Amnesty International believed to be without foundation.
Amnesty International learned of more than 200 people arrested in 1982 solely for expressing views - political, religious or nationalist - disapproved of by the authorities and of another 40 who were arrested in 1981 and convicted in 1982 for the same reasons. It learned of 17 people who were newly confined in psychiatric hospitals in 1982 for political rather than authentic medical reasons.
Amnesty International learned of no instances of people being acquitted by a Soviet court of a political or religious offence. However, one prisoner of conscience, Genrikh Miller, falsely convicted on a criminal charge, was acquitted on appeal.
More than half the new cases Amnesty International learned of during 1982 were of religious believers. Most were members of unregistered Baptist congregations who reject the restrictions imposed by the state on their freedom to choose their own church leaders, to bring up their children according to their own religious convictions and to preach their beliefs openly. The authorities regard these unregistered communities as illegal. It also became known that two members of the officially registered Baptist church were arrested for distributing religious samizdat, unofficial and uncensored literature.
Amnesty International learned of at least eight members of the Russian Orthodox Church who were imprisoned. One was Zoya Krakhmalnikova, who edited and compiled the Russian Orthodox samizdat lonxvidXNadezhda (Hope), a compendium of readings in the tradition of pre-revolutionary literature.
From Uzbekistan Amnesty International received reports of the arrest and imprisonment of people engaged in reproducing and distributing Islamic samizdat. In September 13 people stood trial in a Tashkent court accused of illegal reproduction and distribution of the pamphlet "About the Islamic Faith". By the end of 1982 only two of the sentences were known - those passed on Abduzakir Rahimov and Mahmudjon Roziev, both charged with "speculation" and "engaging in a prohibited trade". Abduzakir Rahimov was sentenced to seven years' imprisonment in a labour colony and Mahmudjon Roziev to four years. Amnesty International also learned of the conviction of Saidkarim Azamov, a mullah who was accused of illegally teaching the Koran in a school in a Tashkent suburb.
Many people were imprisoned for attempting to leave the USSR. At least eight Jews campaigning for the right to emigrate to Israel or
285
for the preservation of Jewish culture were arrested or tried. On 6 November losif Begun, a private teacher of Hebrew, convicted twice before for his activity in the Jewish emigration movement, was arrested in Leningrad on a charge of "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda". Amnesty International issued a special appeal on his behalf. At least nine Soviet Germans were arrested or tried in connection with their campaign for emigration. Soviet Germans have been charged under a variety of articles of the criminal code such as "refusing to do military service", "anti-Soviet slander", "parasitism" and "petty speculation". Amnesty International was informed of 16 other Soviet citizens arrested in connection with their wish to leave the USSR. One of them, Alexander Maximov, had sought permission to emigrate from the Soviet Union since 1975 and had previously been convicted in 1980. He was sentenced to two years' imprisonment in a corrective labour colony with strict regime for "parasitism".
The authorities continued to imprison members of non-Russian nationalities who protested against what they considered an official policy of "Russification" discriminating against national minorities, or people who had advocated independence for their nations. They included Ukrainians, Armenians, Latvians, Lithuanians, Estonians, and Georgians. People who had advocated Russian nationalism were also arrested.
There was a new wave of arrests of members ofthe unofficial trade union SMOT, the Free Interprofessional Association of Workers. Among those arrested was Lev Volokhonsky, who had already served a sentence from 1979 to 1981 for his involvement in SMOT.
Amnesty International adopted five prisoners of conscience in connection with the editing and distribution of two left-wing iûmz/ifai joumals Varianty (Alternatives) and 5oisia/izm ibudushchee{Socìaì-ism and the Future). Their trial was expected to take place in November 1982, but was postponed.
Amnesty International worked for the release of imprisoned members of the Group to Establish Trust between the USSR and the USA. This group proposed at its foundation on 4 June 1982 a four-sided dialogue between the governments and peoples of the USSR and the USA. One member, Sergei Batovrin, was forcibly confined in a Moscow psychiatric hospital from 6 August to 7 September. Another, Oleg Radzinsky, was arrested on 26 October on a charge of "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda". Other members have been detained briefly and threatened.
On 8 September the unofficial Moscow group monitoring Soviet observance of the 1975 Helsinki Final Act announced that it was to disband after one of the three remaining members of the group, 75-year-old lavi^er Sofia Kalistratova, was charged with "anti-Soviet
286
slander". After the group disbanded the prosecution of her case was deferred. The persecution of members of Helsinki monitoring groups continued throughout the year: in early April 1982 Ivan Kovalyov, a member of the Moscow group, was convicted of "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda" and sentenced to five years' imprisonment and five years' internal exile.
In October 1982 Amnesty International issued a paper describing the fate of seven imprisoned'Helsinki monitors who had had fresh sentences imposed while completing prison terms. All seven were adopted prisoners of conscience. Petro Sichko was charged with further offences in the corrective labour colony where he was held in May 1982, just 10 days before he was due to complete a three-year sentence for "circulating anti-Soviet slander". He was tried and sentenced to a further three years' imprisonment, again for "anti-Soviet slander". Amnesty International was informed of other similar cases. At the end of the year Valéry Abramkin, one of the editors of the samizdat']o\xm2i\ Searches, was charged just before the end of his prison term. Amnesty International was concerned that prisoners of conscience held together with ordinary criminal prisoners in corrective labour colonies appeared to be in particular danger of facing further charges. Ordinary criminal prisoners were sometimes made to testify against imprisoned prisoners of conscience, who were then convicted of slandering the Soviet Union. The authorities have been known also to use ordinary criminal prisoners to force prisoners of conscience to recant Mikhail Kukobaka reported in a letter of April 1982 that he was ill-treated in Yelets Investigation Prison, Lipetskaya Region, by ordinary criminals who forced him to write a self-incriminating letter.
Among those threatened with fresh sentences were Vyacheslav Bakhmin and Irina Grivnina, imprisoned members of the Working Commission to Investigate the Use of Psychiatry for Political Purposes.
The abuse of psychiatry, against which the working commission had been protesting, continued. Amnesty International received further information on the internment of dissenters in psychiatric hospitals for political rather than authentic medical reasons. At least three were reported to have been confined indefinitely in special psychiatric hospitals. These are the strictest psychiatric hospitals intended for people who "represent a special danger to society". Among them was the historian Viktor Artsimovich from Tomsk, who was accused of having written the samizdat article "Contradiction upon Contradiction", a critical analysis of the works of Karl Marx. He was ruled to be suffering from schizophrenia and "philosophical intoxication" and sent for forcible treatment to a special psychiatric hospital.
287
The majority of people known to have been confined in ordinary psychiatric hospitals were citizens wishing to emigrate from the USSR. Sergei Belov, a former lawyer from Ivanovo Region, was interned in a psychiatric hospital on 2 February for the sixth time in the past six years.
Amnesty International continued to receive reports of prisoners of conscience being ill-treated in psychiatric hospitals. During 1982 Amnesty International learned of the death of Nikolai Sorokin, a metal-worker, in Dnepropetrovsk Special Psychiatric Hospital in 1980. He had been treated with powerful drugs for a long time. He contracted a kidney disease and doctors in Dnepropetrovsk Special Psychiatric Hospital advised that he should be moved to an ordinary psychiatric hospital for appropriate treatment. This advice was reportedly overruled by a KGB (Committee of State Security) official. After Nikolai Sorokin's death the official responsible was removed from his post.
There was no improvement in the harsh conditions in which prisoners of conscience served their sentences. They continued to suffer from chronic hunger, inadequate medical care and difficult, often dangerous, compulsory labour. Amnesty International received reports of prisoners of conscience being punished for protesting against these conditions. In September a protest action was reported from a labour colony in the Perm region. Prisoners went on strike after Oleksander Shevchenko, a prisoner of conscience, had been ill-treated by guards and had his arms broken. Six prisoners of conscience who participated in the strike were confined to the punishment cell. In 1982 it became known that an Armenian prisoner, Marzpet Arutyunyan, had been beaten by police in Rostov transit prison on 18 July 1981 during an interrogation about the escape of three of his cell-mates. Three of his ribs were broken.
In 1982 Amnesty International continued to receive reports that prison work norms were set excessively high. Prisoners of conscience, among them the Jewish prisoners Anatoly Shcharansky and Alexander Paritsky, are known to have been punished for not fulfilling these norms.
Prisoners of conscience sentenced to internal exile faced harsh conditions in the remote areas to which they were sent. Amnesty International issued a special appeal asking for the release from exile on health grounds of Danylo Shumuk, a 68-year-old Ukrainian prisoner of conscience reported to be seriously ill after spending more than half his life in Polish, German and Soviet prisons and labour colonies.
Amnesty International learned of six executions and 19 people sentenced to death. It believes this to be only a fraction of the total
288
number of death sentences. Most were sentenced to death for offences involving murder, but some received the death penalty for non-violent crimes. In April, for example, Vladimir Rytov, former Deputy Minister of Fisheries of the USSR, was executed for bribery. Amnesty International appealed for the commutation of every death sentence of which it learned. In October the Soviet press reported that President Leonid Brezhnev had commuted the death sentence imposed on Egres Kirtava, a police officer convicted of murder.
