Mali
Amnesty International was concerned about the imprisonment of two prisoners of conscience sentenced in 1979 and by the short-term detention of three students arrested in November 1982. It also received further reports of severe conditions in Taoudenit and other remote Saharan prisons.
In December 1982 Mali ratified the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights.
The two prisoners of conscience were Dr Mamadou Gologo and Idrissa Diakite, both sentenced to four years' imprisonment in October 1979 on charges of "insulting the head of state". Their arrest followed the distribution of leaflets in the capital, Bamako, in late March 1979 criticizing the government and the country's sole political party. On 22 September 1982 both prisoners were granted amnesty by President Moussa Traore and released from prison.
In early November 1982 three students were arrested in Bamako and detained at the Camp 1 de la gendarmerie, the central gendarmerie barracks. They included Harouna Barry, former deputy leader of the banned Union nationale des élèves et étudiants du Mali, Malian National Union of Pupils and Students. Their detention followed the distribution in several institutes of higher education in Bamako of leaflets which criticized the government-sponsored student movement and irregular pajnnent of state grants to students. In early December 1982 the three detained students were released, but they were expelled from their place of study, the Ecole normale supérieure, higher teachers' training college, for their "serious misconduct". Amnesty International expressed its concern to the authorities about
59
these detentions and asked for information regarding the detainees' legal status. No reply was received.
Amnesty International continued to receive reports that conditions of detention in the remote Saharan prison of Taoudenit, where political prisoners reportedly continued to be held, were extremely harsh. The combination of extreme heat, poor food and exhausting work in the area's salt mines was beheved to have led to many deaths among detainees in the past few years. Amnesty International remained concerned that conditions in several other Saharan prisons, such as those at Kidal and Tessalit, were also reported to be poor, with inadequate sanitation, food and medical facilities.
