Benin
Amnesty International was concerned by the long-term detention without trial of suspected political opponents of the government, the continuing imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and other political prisoners sentenced after unfair trials, and the ill-treatment of prisoners.
Throughout 1982 Amnesty International sought the release of 29 detainees, mainly students and teachers, arrested between 1979 and 1981 and detained without trial after protests against the government's education policy at Benin's university and in various schools. They reportedly continued to be
19
held as " administrative internees" and to be denied official notification of the reasons for their detention, any charges against them, and the duration of their detention. Twenty-six of the detainees had been arrested between March 1979 and January 1980, as part of official measures against a newly-formed autonomous student organization which had publicly called for improvements in university education and criticized government-controlled student associations. All were adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International. Grégoire Aile, Raphael Djegui and Jérôme Houessou were arrested in March 1981 following the distribution of leaflets and the painting of slogans on street walls in the capital, Cotonou, calling for the release of detained student leaders and for reforms in university education. They were also adopted as prisoners of conscience. Amnesty International was seeking information on the cases of a further five individuals also reportedly arrested in March 1981, and of four pupils arrested in April 1981 following the distribution of more leaflets.
Amnesty International continued to seek the release of five prisoners of conscience, two of whom had been sentenced to death -Abbé Alphonse Quenum and former Agriculture Minister Adrien Ahanhanzo Glele. They were among 13 people arrested in 1975 and convicted of participation in alleged attempts to overthrow the government. They were not allowed to attend their trials, which took place in March 1975 and February 1976 before the country's principal executive body, the Conseil national de la révolution (CNR), the National Council of the Revolution, which was convened as a Tribunal révolutionnaire national. National Revolutionary Tribunal. The CNR was given by decree "sovereign decision-making power" to pronounce a verdict and to impose sentence, without reference to existing laws and judicial procedures. The accused were denied the rights to defence counsel and to appeal, and most were not officially informed of the sentences imposed on them. In its appeals to the authorities to release the five prisoners of conscience and to review the cases of the eight remaining prisoners sentenced by the CNR, Amnesty International pointed out that the manner of the trial appeared to violate the constitution of Benin, known as Lai fondamentale. This guarantees inter alia the right to defence counsel.
Amnesty International was investigating the cases of three former senior government officials - Claude Midahuen, Léonard Maboudoû and André Oke Assogba-who were arrested in 1975 and 1976, also in connection with the alleged 1975 coup attempts. These detainees had been held without charge or trial since their arrest, and appeared to have been classified as "administrative internees". Amnesty International was also investigating the cases of Colonel Alphonse. Alley and two other individuals, who were arrested in early 1973
20
following the alleged discovery of an earlier plot to overthrow the government. They were tried and sentenced by a non-judicial body to terms of imprisonment of between 10 and 20 years. They were not allowed to attend these proceedings, nor were they allowed defence counsel or the right to present evidence. Amnesty International continued its investigations concerning Pascal Chabi Kao, Théophile Paoletti and Michel Bamenou Toko, all former ministers in the deposed government of Hubert Maga, who had been held without charge or trial since their arrests between late 1972 and mid-1973. Although they had reportedly been accused at the time of their arrest of misappropriating state funds while in office, several reports were received by Amnesty International which suggested that the reasons for their arrests were primarily political. In late October 1982 Pascal Chabi Kao and Théophile Paoletti were reported to have been released, although litde was known about the circumstances.
Amnesty International was concerned by the generally poor conditions under which political detainees were held and by the ill-treatment to which some were subjected. The conditions of detention of the 29 pupils, students and teachers were of particular concern: they continued to be deprived of food by the prison authorities and were completely dependent on other prisoners or on their families; in the central prisons of Cotonou and Porto Novo they were held in overcrowded and poorly ventilated cells; the standards of sanitation and hygiene were unacceptably low, and many of these prisoners were reported to be suffering from skin, stomach, throat and eye complaints. During 1982, however, the prison authorities reportedly relaxed restrictions on correspondence for many political prisoners. Conditions of detention at the Commissariat central (central police station) in Cotonou reportedly continued to be very harsh, due particularly to severe overcrowding of detainees into small cells and the very poor food. Several of the individuals arrested in March 1981 were thought to be held at Parakou in northern Benin, where conditions are also believed to be harsh, due to overcrowding and poor sanitation. Medical facilities were reported to be grossly inadequate in all of Benin's prisons.
21
