Kenya
Amnesty International was concerned about the indefinite detention without trial of prisoners of conscience and the imprisonment of certain political opponents on charges of sedition. Amnesty International's concerns also included cases of "disappearance", allegations of ill-treatment of prisoners, harsh prison conditions, and the use of the death penalty, armed coup attempt was made on 1 August by sections of the Air Force (KAF). A radio announcement by the rebels stated People's Redemption Council" had taken power. The attempt
48
failed after some hours of fighting, mainly in Nairobi, between the rebels and troops loyal to the government. The government stated that 129 people were killed. Unofficial sources claimed that the death toll was at least several hundred, including many civilians.
Before the coup attempt eight people had been detained without charge or trial under the Preservation of Public Security Act - the first use of this measure since President Daniel arap Moi assumed office in 1978. The government gave no reasons for their detentions. George Anyona, a former member of parliament detained from 1977 to 1978 and adopted then by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience, was arrested on 30 May 1982. He had publicly advocated the formation of a second political party, and had reportedly been about to announce the formation of such a party and to apply for its registration. The authorities announced his detention on 2 June. A bill published the next day to amend the constitution to make Kenya a one-party state was unanimously approved by parliament on 9 June. Until then it had not been illegal to advocate or prepare to form another political party, although no party otherthan the ruling Kenya African National Union (KANU) had been allowed to exist since 1969, when the opposition Kenya People's Union (KPU) was banned. John Khaminwa, a lawyer, was also arrested and detained during this period. He appeared to have been detained solely for his professional legal activities in representing George Anyona and other clients in cases politically embarrassing to the government or to individual high officials. Five university lecturers were also arrested in June after President Moi had accused certain unnamed lecturers of "teaching subversive literature aimed at creating disorder in the country". The detained lecturers were Al-Amin Mazrui, a linguistics lecturer and playwright; Edward Oyugi, lecturer in educational psychology; Kamoji Wachiira, a bio-geographer and tree specialist; Mukaru Ng'ang'a, a historian and unsuccessful parliamentary candidate; and Willy Mutunga, a law lecturer, who was initially arrested and charged with sedition - the charges were later dropped but he was then immediately detained.
Amnesty International expressed concern to the authorities on 2 June at the use of indefinite detention without trial in violation of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which Kenya has ratified, and urged that George Anyona be charged and tried or released Amnesty International went on to appeal for the imconditional release of the seven other detainees whom it adopted as prisoners of conscience. Particular concern was expressed about the healtl^ of Al-Amin Mazrui, who suffered from heart disease, chronic asthma and high blood pressure.
Amnesty International was investigating the cases of two other
49
critics of the government imprisoned for alleged possession of a seditious publication. Wang'ondu wa Kariuki, a journalist and unsuccessful parliamentary candidate, was arrested on 15 May and sentenced to four-and-a-half years' imprisonment on 19 July, on a charge of possessing Pamiawa (Struggle), a clandestine anti-government pamphlet. He denied the charge, claiming that the pamphlet had been placed among his papers by the police after they had searched his house. Maina wa Kinyatti, a history lecturer at Kenyatta University College, was arrested on 3 June and charged with possession of a seditious publication, which was not specified until his trial in October. He was convicted and sentenced to six years' imprisonment. He denied the charge, claiming that the alleged seditious document - a student leaflet circulating in 1980 - had been inserted later among papers removed by the police when searching his house.
The "disappearance" in Kenya of three Sudanese and two Ugandan nationals, who had fled abroad for political reasons but had apparently not sought asylum in Kenya, caused concern for their safety. They were later discovered to have been detained in their countries of origin, to which they had evidently been secretly deported, without legal process and at the request of their respective governments. They included David Dak Gash, a Sudanese former diplomat, who was reportedly arrested in Nairobi on 14 March, and Balaki Kirya, the political leader of the Uganda Freedom Movement (UFM), a Ugandan guerrilla organization, who was reportedly arrested in Nairobi on 24 July. The Kenyan police denied that they had been arrested or held in their jurisdiction. The Ugandan authorities claimed that Balaki Kirya, who appeared in the Uganda High Court on 27 July and was charged with treason, had been arrested after entering Uganda of his own volition. Amnesty International's inquiry to President Moi on 28 July about the reported arrest in Kenya of Balaki Kirya received no response.
The coup attempt of 1 August by air force personnel led to the arrest of virtually the entire air force - over 2,000-strong - although the two self-confessed coup leaders, a private and a sergeant, fled to Tanzania where they were granted asylum in October. Trials by court-martial of members of the air force, which was subsequently disbanded, began in September. Defendants were permitted defence lawyers, and had the right of appeal to higher military authorities. Most pleaded guilty. By the end of 1982 four defendants had been sentenced to death for treason, and over 700 to prison terms ranging from six months for neglect of duties to 25 years for mutiny. Several hundred civilians were convicted in the civil courts on charges of looting and celebrating the coup, and imprisoned for up to two years.
Koigi wa Wamwere, amember of parUament and former detainee
50
(1975 to 1978), was arrested on 6 August and immediately detained under the Preservation of Public Security Act. The government gave no explanation but Amnesty International believed that he was imprisoned for his parliamentary criticism of the government and not for involvement in the coup. Amnesty International adopted him as a prisoner of conscience. Oginga Odinga, former Vice-President of Kenya and former prisoner of conscience ( 1969 to 1971 ), was placed under a restriction order on 21 August and formally placed under house arrest under the Preservation of Public Security Act on 8 November, also without explanation. On 24 September Titus Adongosi, a Nairobi University student leader arrested immediately after the coup, was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment for sedition after pleading guilty to participating in a demonstration on 1 August supporting the coup. Amnesty International was investigating the cases of 67 other university students arrested shortly after the coup attempt and charged with sedition. They had not been tried by the end of 1982.
Amnesty International was concerned about the possible death sentences faced by Raila Odinga, Deputy Director of the Bureau of Standards and a son of Oginga Odinga, and Otieno Mak'Onyango, a prominent journalist, who were arrested and charged with treason. Details of the charges and the date of their trial had not been announced by the end of the year.
The treatment of prisoners was of concern to Amnesty International. The authorities refused in many cases to confirm the arrest, explain the legal status, or disclose to relatives or lawyers the whereabouts or condition of the prisoner. Some of the imprisoned students were allegedly subjected to beatings, death threats, deprivation of food and sleep, and other forms of ill-treatment during interrogation. The 67 students who remained in custody in Nairobi Remand Prison on charges of sedition were allegedly held incommunicado in insanitary, overcrowded cells and given inadequate food. Lengthy delays in receiving qualified medical treatment were reported.
Prisoners detained under the Preservation of Public Security Act and held in Kamiti prison in Nairobi, Shimo-la-Tewa prison in Mombasa and other prisons were allegedly kept in permanent solitary confinement, provided with blankets but not beds or mattresses, and allowed little or no reading material. They were denied all visits, and correspondence with relatives was heavily restricted and subject to long delays.
Amnesty International learned of six death sentences imppsed in 1982 for murder or armed robbery. Four death sentences were imposed by courts-martial on former KAF member on charges related to the coup attempt- the first death sentences for treason since
51
independence in 1963. Amnesty International appealed to President Moi to commute the death sentences. No reply was received. The number of executions and prisoners under sentence of death were not published by the government.
