Namibia
Amnesty International was concerned about the use of detention without trial and the deaths in custody of three uncharged political detainees held incommunicado by South African security forces. It was impossible to estimate precisely how many people were detained for political reasons but they were believed to number several hundred. One group of more than 100 political detainees entered a fifth year of continuous incommunicado detention without trial. There were new allegations of torture of detainees, and Amnesty International received information about the existence of at least one secret interrogation centre where detainees were tortured. New information was received concerning alleged "disappearances" and church leaders accused South African security forces of the extrajudicial execution of civilians in Namibia. Amnesty International remained concerned about the use of administrative restriction orders against former uncharged detainees and the failure of the government to review the cases of political prisoners
64
convicted and sentenced to long prison terms after a trial in 1968 which did not conform to internationally recognized standards.
International negotiations for a constitutional settlement continued throughout the year as did the conflict between South African security forces and nationalist guerrillas supporting the South West Africa People's Organization ( SWAPO). At one stage considerable optimism was expressed by some of the parties to the negotiations that a final agreement on Namibia's future was near, and August 15 was named as a provisional cease-fire date. However, the proposed cease-fire was observed neither by SWAPO nor South Africa, whose military forces launched a major new incursion into neighbouring southern Angola at the beginning of August.
In late 1981 the Council of Ministers introduced the Combating of Terrorism Bill in the National Assembly in order to repeal the South African security laws applicable in Namibia and abolish the death penalty for political offences. However, the bill was not passed and the Terrorism Act continued in force. Three alleged guerrilla fighters were charged and tried under its provisions and in early June sentenced to prison terms ranging from nine to 11 years.
Detention without trial continued to be used extensively, particularly in the northern districts of Ovamboland and Kavango. It remained impossible, however, to estimate how many people were detained due to the official secrecy surrounding detention and the absence of any requirement that detainees' relatives be notified of their arrest or where they were held. Proclamation AG.9 of 1977 remained the legal basis for most detentions. It empowers all officers in the South African security forces to detain any person uncharged and incommunicado for up to 30 days for interrogation. Further detention beyond this initial period may be, and in many cases was, authorized by the Administrator-General. Those detained under AG.9 were believed to be largely civilians, including a number of teachers and clergy, who were suspected of possessing information about the movements of SWAPO guerrillas. However, hardly any were charged or brought to trial.
At least three detainees held under AG. 9 were known to have died in custody in 1982. In August an inquest was held into the death of a detainee who was said to have been shot dead in January while attempting to escape from the military base at Ruacana. The detainee could not be positively identified, nor the cause of death proven, because his corpse had apparently disappeared under unexplained circumstances while being transferred from Ruacana to Oshakati.
In November there was a wave of detentions in the Kavango area, where SWAPO guerrillas were reported to have become more active during the year. At least 25 people were detained under AG.9, some
65
of them reportedly by members of a special police counter-insurgency unit known as Koevoet, Crowbar. In separate incidents two of the detainees - Jona Hamukwaya and Kadumu Katanga - died within hours of being taken into custody on 18 November. Both were said to have been assaulted in detention but in neither case was the cause of death known by the end of 1982. Major-General Gouws, the Commissioner of Police, confirmed their deaths on 25 November. He said that their bodies would be sent to Pretoria for post-mortem examination and that there would be a police inquiry into their deaths.
Following these deaths and reports that other detainees arrested in Kavango had been assaulted in custody, Amnesty International appealed to Administrator-General Hough to initiate an independent inquiry and called for detainees to be granted immediate access to relatives and legal counsel as a safeguard against torture and ill-treatment. However, the authorities did not accede to this appeal.
Most of those detained in Kavango in November were released shortly after the deaths of Jona Hamukwaya and Kadumu Katanga but at least six were believed to be still held incommunicado and uncharged at the end of 1982. Unusually, in view of their policy of withholding all information about AG.9 detainees, the authorities disclosed the names of those released in December, although they refused to disclose the names of those still detained or where they were held. In the case of Frans Mayira, a teacher about whom Amnesty International inquired after receiving a report that he had been brutally assaulted in custody, the authorities first denied all knowledge of him but later included him on a list of detainees released.
During 1982 Amnesty International took up the cases of several long-term detainees for investigation. They were among some 180 or more Namibian refugees forcibly abducted from Angola by South African military forces in May 1978. More than 60 were released within weeks of their enforced return to Namibia but almost 120 others remained imprisoned in a military detention camp near Mariental. They had been held without charge or trial under Proclamation AG.9 since May 1979, when that decree was amended to permit unlimited detention, but it was not known under which law they had been held during their first year in detention.
The South African authorities did not disclose the identities of the detainees at Mariental but permitted access to them by delegates of the International Committee of the Red Cross. Individual churchmen were also permitted to conduct religious services at the camp. In August several detainees received visits from relatives, the first since May 1978.
Amnesty International continued to press for the lifting of restrictions on some 15 former untried detainees who had been adopted as
66
prisoners of conscience in 1979. Upon release in 1980, they were served with so-called "release warrants" of unlimited duration which generally restricted them to particular areas, prohibited them from receiving visitors at home and subjected them to house arrest during the hours of darkness. A number had their restrictions eased during the course of 1982 enabling them to resume their occupations as teachers. All restrictions on one former detainee, Aaron Ipinge, were lifted on 13 December according to information sent to Amnesty International by the Council of Ministers. Earlier, in May, the South African authorities imposed a new two-year banning order on Nathaniel Gottlieb Maxhuilili, formerly a leading member of SWAPO. He had been restricted continuously since 1972 under a succession of banning orders imposed under the South African Internal Security Act, which is in force in the Walvis Bay enclave in which he was living.
A British Council of Churches delegation which had visited northern Namibia three months earlier reported in February that they had been given details of alleged beating and electric shock torture of detainees, beating and rape of civilians, cases of alleged "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions. Their report cited 20 cases of alleged abuses by South African security forces, all of them relating to incidents which were said to have occurred within six weeks of the delegation's visit.
Similar allegations were made by two South African church leaders who visited Namibia briefly in February and in a report published in May by the Southern African Catholic Bishops Conference {SACBC). This report, prepared after an SACBC delegation's visit to Namibia in September 1981, alleged that detainees had been subjected to electrical torture, physical assaults, blindfolding and partial suffocation during interrogation by security police or military personnel. Before publication, the SACBC submitted its report to the South African Prime Minister for comment. He dismissed its allegations but stated that the authorities were prepared to prosecute or discipline security force personnel who committed offences.
Allegations of torture were also made in February by former detainees interviewed by journalists near Rundu, in Kavango. In March, Peter Kalangula, head of the local administration in Ovambo-land, reportedly complained to the South African Prime Minister about alleged human rights abuses by the security forces. This led the South African Defence Force (SADF) to establish a board of inquiry into the allegations and by June 40 cases were said to have been investigated. Several were apparently substantiated and expected to lead to prosecutions of SADF personnel. In May a special liaison committee to investigate complaints was formed by the Ovambo
67
ethnic authority. It included South African military and police representatives, which led local church leaders to decline to participate.
In late 1982 Amnesty International received information about the existence of a secret interrogation centre in which several AG.9 detainees had allegedly been tortured with beatings and electric shocks. The detainees claimed that they had been taken to and from the secret centre blindfolded, had had no contact with one another and had been allowed no exercise outside their cells while imprisoned there. Arrested in late 1981, most of the detainees concerned were held for several months and released uncharged in mid-1982.
There was continuing concern over alleged "disappearances". The best documented case was that of Johannes Kakuva, who allegedly "disappeared" from security police custody in late 1980. His relatives brought an action before the Supreme Court in late 1981 alleging that he had been tortured and seeking confirmation of his death. The security police denied responsibility and claimed that he was released from custody and then either abducted or killed by S WAPO guerrillas. In June the case resumed briefly in the Windhoek Supreme Court but was not resolved. A further hearing was expected in early 1983.
Three people were known to have been sentenced to death for murder during 1982 and two executed. Both those hanged were black men who had been convicted of murder. The execution of two white brothers sentenced to death for murder in 1981 was stayed in May the day before they were due to be hanged. Neither they nor three other whites under sentence of death had been executed by the end of 1982. Amnesty International appealed to the South African State President to grant clemency to those under sentence of death.
In November Amnesty International wrote to the South African Prime Minister detailing its concerns in Namibia. In December, the organization published a report. Human Rights Violations in Namibia, and began a campaign to end violations of human rights. In its letter to Prime Minister Botha, the main points of which were publicized on 1 December, Amnesty International made a number of recommendations to prevent further abuses and ensure protection of human rights. These recommendations included immediate repeal of Proclamation AG.9 and the provision of adequate safeguards against torture or ill-treatment of detainees, the establishment of an impartial judicial commission of inquiry into allegations of torture, "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions. The organization also called for the immediate and unconditional release of all prisoners of conscience from imprisonment or physical restriction. Amnesty International appealed for the trial or release of all untried political detainees and a review of the cases of convicted political prisoners, some of whom
68
were sentenced to long prison terms after trials which did not conform to internationally recognized standards. In making these recommendations Amnesty International drew attention to the fact that all parties to the Namibia independence negotiations had already agreed that a future independence constitution should contain a Declaration of Fundamental Rights in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. However, the South African Prime Minister had not replied to Amnesty International by the end of the year.
