United Kingdom
r
^f ^ Q^	Amnesty International expressed
fL	concern to the authorities about the
jft^-i^C^	operation of the non-jury "Diplock
^	^ courts" in Northern Ireland. It also
sent observers to two trials. Amnesty International had no adopted prisoners of conscience during the year. In a letter to the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland in December Amnesty International expressed its concern that the proceedings in the "Diplock courts" might not conform to international standards for fair trial. These courts were named after the judge who recommended in a 1972 inquiry that "terrorist" offences committed in Northern Ireland should be tried by senior judges sitting alone with no jury. None of those tried in this way have been adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience. Many have not claimed to be innocent but demanded political prisoner status on the grounds that the offences for which they were convicted were politically motivated.
The Diplock courts conform to international standards in several respects: the accused have access to independent defence counsel; trials are open to the public and are reported in the news media; and there are full rights of appeal to the Court of Criminal Appeal and to the House of Lords. There is a significant rate of acquittals. Furthermore, allegations that confessions were obtained as a result of physical ill-treatment had virtually stopped since Amnesty International's 1978 report on that subject and the subsequent confirmation of Amnesty International's findings by a government-appointed committee of inquiry. However, Amnesty International was concerned at various issues connected with the fact that the great majority of those convicted by Diplock courts were convicted solely on the basis of confessions.
289
The police and army have wide powers to arrest people and detain them on suspicion for up to seven days. During the first two days people who have been arrested are held incommunicado, without access to lawyers or relatives. The laws and police regulations permit the use of strong psychological pressure on suspects to induce them to confess. Even confessions obtained in this way may be admitted into evidence by the Diplock courts, although they would be excluded by established standards in other courts in the United Kingdom. By comparison with trials in ordinary courts in the United Kingdom, the fact that there is no jury, but only a judge, reduces the safeguards against such confessions being given too much weight. These factors lead to the risk that people would be convicted and sentenced to imprisonment on the sole basis of confessions which, having been obtained by oppressive methods, are not reliable. Appeal to higher courts would not overcome this deficiency since the appeal courts consider more the trial courts' application of the law rather than their assessment of the evidence.
In its letter to the Secretary of State in December 1982 Amnesty International called on the government to indicate whether it was planning a review of the existing system of criminal justice in Northern Ireland from arrest to conviction, and undertook to submit its concerns to the review body.
Amnesty International's concerns were illustrated by the case of Michael Culbert (see Amnesty International Report 1982). In January 1982 the Court of Appeal upheld his conviction and sentence of life imprisonment. Amnesty International had sent observers to his appeal hearing in December 1981 and January 1982. Michael Culbert was convicted in October 1979 of murder and of belonging to the Provisional Irish Republican Army (IRA) solely on the basis of an oral confession which he denied having made. At the lime of the alleged confession he had been subjected to prolonged interrogation and lack of sleep. Amnesty International was not able to make an assessment of whether he had made the alleged confession or of the veracity of its contents. However, it believed that the case confirmed its doubts about the standards employed in Northern Ireland for accepting confessions as the sole evidence of guilt.
In November 1982 an Amnesty International observer attended pan of the preliminary court proceedings against eight people before a magistrate in Cardiff, Wales. The eight were all Welsh nationalists and members of the Welsh Socialist Republican Movement or the Plaid Cymru, Welsh Party, Youth Movement or both. They were charged with involvement in the placing of 13 bombs between March 1980 and March 1982. The accused denied the charges, and their supporters alleged that evidence against them had been fabricated. The
290
proceedings ended in November witii a decision that all eight be brought to trial. The trial was due to begin in April 1983.
In April, May and June 1982 an Amnesty International delegate observed parts of the trial in Leeds of 12 Asian youths from nearby Bradford. The 12 were charged with varying degrees of involvement in the preparation of petrol bombs found by the police in Bradford in July 1981. Amnesty International sent an observer in view of allegations that many of the defendants had made confessions involuntarily, or that alleged confessions by them had been fabricated. It was also alleged that the case against them was motivated by the determination of the police to "crack down" on politically active Asian youths in Bradford. At the trial most of the accused admitted having participated in making the bombs. They pleaded not guilty on the grounds that they had done so in self-defence because they feared organized, violent attacks on the Asian community in Bradford by large numbers of white youths. Another defence they used was that the charges against them were wrongly formulated: that the petrol bombs were not "explosive substances" in the sense of the statute under which they were charged, and that they did not intend to cause injury to person or property. All 12 were acquitted by verdict of the jury on all charges.
Towards the end of the year there was a series of incidents in which police and army personnel shot and killed unarmed suspects in Northern Ireland. Among the victims were members of the Provisional IRA and the Irish National Liberation Army. There were allegations that the police had undertaken a "shoot to kill" policy to eliminate supporters of these groups by killing them rather than by arrest. The killings took place in a context of repeated shootings and attacks on the police and army by supporters of these groups, and it was therefore difficult to assess these allegations. Amnesty International began research into this matter but had not reached any conclusions by the end of the year.
	
	
	
	
p	
