Cuba
Amnesty International's main concerns were the continued detention of approximately 38 long-term politick prisoners who had completed their sentences; the increase injudicial executions for allegedly political crimes; and prolonged detention without charge in the custody of the state security police of people suspected of political activities.
Since 1981 at least 38 political prisoners had completed their original sentences of 15 to 20 years but had not been released. In protest against their continued detention, 10 went on hunger-strike on 10 October 1982. In the past some prisoners have been given additional sentences by courts for "rebellious attitudes" in prison, for example refusing to wear prison uniform or to participate in rehabilitation programs. In these cases courts dealing with offences against the security of the state had ruled that the attitude of the prisoners required a medida de seguridadpostdelictiva - a further renewable term of one or two years' imprisonment in a work camp. However, Amnesty International was not aware of any judicial procedure to extend the detention of the prisoners whose sentences expired in 1982. On 29 October Amnesty International expressed concern about the situation of these prisoners and about the health of those on hunger-strike. The hunger-strike ended in November when relatives were promised that the prisoners would be freed and allowed to leave the country, provided a foreign government would give them entry visas. Although the Governments of Costa Rica and Venezuela had offered visas for many of them, at the end of December they were still in detention and reportedly held incommunicado. Amnesty International appealed to the Government of Cuba on 22 December after receiving news that these prisoners were being held incommunicado and that one, Raúl del Valle, was in a critical condition as a result of the hunger-strike. Raúl del Valle had completed a 20-year sentence in November 1981 but was not released.
The retained prisoners belonged to a group of some 220 long-term political prisoners known as plantados because of their refusal to obey prison regulations in protest against being treated as ordinary criminals. In spite of the fact that their trials by revolutionary tribunals in the early 1960s did not always conform to internationally recognized
129
standards, their sentences have not been reviewed. Although none of the remaining plantados was adopted as a prisoner of conscience. Amnesty International appealed for their cases to be reviewed and remained concerned about allegations of frequent and prolonged suspension of visits from relatives and of correspondence. Most of these prisoners were held in the Combinado del Este prison in Havana and in the Boniato prison in Santiago de Cuba in eastern Cuba.
Armando Valladares Pérez, an adopted prisoner of conscience, was released in October after serving almost 22 years of a 30-year sentence, following the personal intervention of the President of France. He confirmed the information gathered by Amnesty International, namely that no conclusive evidence had been presented against him during his trial and that for several of the later years of his imprisonment he had been paralysed. Intensive physiotherapy in the months before his release had restored his ability to walk. He also confirmed that his medical treatment had been withdrawn several times as a consequence of his books being published abroad and of his protests about his treatment.
Angel Cuadra Landrove, another prisoner of conscience adopted by Amnesty International, was released in April at the end of his 15-year term. By the end of 1982 he was still waiting for authorization to leave the country.
Amnesty International was investigating the cases of Elizardo Sánchez Santa Cruz, Luis Ruiz, Eladio Moreno Vilches, Edmigio López Castillo, Nicolás Guillén Landrián, Orestes Bautista González and Gustavo Arcos Bergnes to assess whether their detentions fell within the organization's mandate.
Reports continued to reach Amnesty International of the prolonged incommunicado detention of political suspects in "Villa Marista", the headquarters of the State Security Police. Carlos Alvarez, a US citizen of Cuban origin, went to Cuba to visit his family. He was arrested on 30 January and detained without charge in "Villa Marista" on suspicion of having links with anti-govemment exile groups in the USA. On 19 February Amnesty International appealed to the government to make known the charges against him and to allow him access to a lawyer and to his family. On 16 April he was unconditionally released and allowed to return to the USA.
Miguel Mariano Suárez, a Cuban-bom naturalized citizen of the USA, was arrested in April 1982 while visiting his mother in Cuba. He was detained in "Villa Marista" until his release without charge in August 1982. On 29 July Amnesty International had appealed on his behalf He later said that he had been forced to confess to spying.
Long periods of incommunicado detention and intimidating
130
interrogations were reported by foreign nationals charged with illegal entry into Cuba. Amnesty International was concerned about reports of incommunicado detention for long periods, the lack of information given to families, and the use of threats and other intimidating methods to extract self-incriminatory statements.
Juan del Rio Vargas, Luis Felipe Santos and Felipe Hernández Martínez were reported to have been arrested and sentenced to eight years' imprisonment for their religious activities as Jehovah's Witnesses. Few details were available but Felipe Hernández Martínez was known to be held in Combinado del Este prison in November 1982. Jehovah's Witnesses have been banned in Cuba since 1975.
During 1982 Amnesty International learned of an increase in death sentences and executions. A former prisoner in a punishment cell in Combinado del Este prison reported to Amnesty International that in April 1981 there were 67 prisoners under sentence of death in that wing of the prison. According to the same prisoner by August 1981, 54 had been executed. Some were said to have been political prisoners. Among those executed were: Abilio González, 28, and Rodolfo Alonso Roche, 21, reportedly for attempting to burn a bus; Emiho Reloba Cardulis, reportedly for burning down a sugar refining factory; three brothers named Garcia Marin, reportedly for taking hostages in an embassy. Raudel Rodriguez Rodriguez and Eduardo Delgado (see Amnesty International Report 1981), who had been sentenced to death in December 1980 for disarming and wounding a police officer, were not executed. Their sentences were apparently commuted by the Council of State which has the final authority to commute the death sentence. On 1 October 1982,29 Cubans accused of the attempted assassination of President Fidel Castro were reportedly executed. Among them were Ramón Toledo, 40, and Armando Hernández González, 29. It was reported that they were executed in La Cabaña prison.
Amnesty International was also concerned at reports that 10 prisoners sentenced to death in 1959 in connection with crimes committed by the armed forces of former President Batista remained under sentence of death; their sentences had not been reviewed since 1959.
131

