Yugoslavia
291
Amnesty Intemational was concemed by the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, many of them ethnic Albanians convicted of nationalist activities. There were allegations that political detainees had been physically ill-treated during pre-trial detention and Amnesty Intemational received information about three such cases. Amnesty International was also concerned about unfair trials and poor prison conditions. It learned of seven death sentences and two executions.
In a report published in February, Yugoslavia: Prisoners of Conscience, Amnesty Intemational set out its concerns. Chief among these was the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience. The report observed that according to official figures political prosecutions had increased since late 1979 and had further risen in 1981 when many ethnic Albanians were arrested following nationalist demonstrations in the province of Kosovo. It stated that the charges in political cases had often not involved the use or advocacy of violence and concluded that the vague formulation of certain laws allowed the imprisonment of people for exercising their human rights in ways disapproved of by the authorities. The report said that breaches of investigation and trial procedures were sufficiently prevalent in political cases to warrant serious concern. Amnesty International's other concerns were poor prison conditions and the death penalty.
Amnesty Intemational had submitted the text of the report to the Yugoslav Govemment in October 1981 with a request for comments which it undertook to make public. There was no response to this request. In March 1982 the Federal Public Prosecutor, in an interview published in the Belgrade daily newspaper Po/zW/ra, described Amnesty International's report as malicious and untrue. He said there had been only a small rise in political prosecutions in 1980 and the following year - a view which conflicted with official statements and figures cited in Amnesty Intemational's report. The Federal Public Prosecutor appeared to ascribe to Amnesty International various statements which it had not made in the report or elsewhere - for instance, that Yugoslavia had the highest number of political prisoners of any European country. (As a matter of policy Amnesty Intemational does not grade countries according to their record on human rights.) He concluded that prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International had worked to destroy the country's political and
292
constitutional system and that their imprisonment did not violate the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights. He did not, however, mention any case in which a prisoner of conscience adopted by Amnesty International had been proved to have used or advocated violence. Several other articles published in the Yugoslav press during the year discussed political offences and advocated changes in the law and injudicial practice to bring to an end the imprisonment of people for the non-violent exercise of their right to freedom of expression.
Official figures published in 1982 stated that in 1981, 5 94 people had been charged with political offences, of whom 386 were ethnic Albanians. The figure for the first six months of 1982 was 268, an 84 per cent increase over the first half of 1981. Ofthe 268,150 were from Kosovo province. The high proportion of prosecutions in Kosovo and among ethnic Albanians was linked to nationalist demonstrations which occurred in Kosovo in March and April 1981 and continuing nationalist unrest among ethnic Albanians. During the demonstrations of 1981 ethnic Albanians - the majority population in Kosovo -demanded that the province cease to be a part of the republic of Serbia and be granted its own republic status within the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. On 1 September 1982 it was officially announced that since those events 527 people had been sentenced for political crimes in Kosovo. This figure did not include well over a thousand ethnic Albanians summarily punished by up to three months' imprisonment or fines for minor political offences. It also excluded ethnic Albanians convicted of political crimes outside Kosovo.
During 1982 Amnesty International learned of some 24 trials involving about 100 ethnic Albanians charged with political offences. Some were accused of disseminating nationalist propaganda materials. Others were accused of belonging to organizations seeking republic status for Kosovo, or of expressing support for this aim. Still others were charged with founding or participating in irredentist organizations, that is, organizations aiming at the secession of Kosovo and other Albanian-inhabited territories from Yugoslavia and their unification with the People's Socialist Republic of Albania. In none of these trials were the defendants accused of having used violence; some, however, were apparently charged with having planned or advocated violence. More than half the sentences imposed ranged from five to 15 years' imprisonment; the majority of those convicted were in their 20s or younger. In July five major trials were reported in Kosovo involving some 60 ethnic Albanians, including university teachers, journalists, lawyers and other professionals. Sentences of up to 15 years' imprisonment were imposed. The defendants were generally charged with founding or being members of irredentist organizations, an
293
accusation which many denied. Press reports indicated that some defendants were charged with planning violence, but gave little information about the evidence for this. Amnesty Intemational sought further information on such cases. It adopted as prisoners of conscience eight young people convicted by a court in Pristina on 24 July of having sought republic status for Kosovo. It also adopted three students and a high-school pupil sentenced to between five and eight years' imprisonment by a court in Vranje, Serbia, in May. Halil Selimi and his co-defendants were charged with being members of an irredentist organization and with having disseminated irredentist propaganda materials. Other prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty Intemational included Emmsh Salijevski and Dema Ulaj, who were each sentenced to five years' imprisonment by courts in Skopje, Macedonia, andBijelo Polje, Montenegro, respectively. Emmsh Salijevski was convicted of selling tape-recordings of Radio Tirana (Albania) broadcasts which criticized Yugoslav government policy in Kosovo. Dema Ulaj was charged with writing poems in praise of Albania and with bringing into Yugoslavia from Albania propaganda materials which he had given to others.
Prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International also included non-Albanians, among them Dragomir Stojanovic and Janko Sarajlic, both convicted of "hostile propaganda". Dragomir Stojanovic, aged 60, was sentenced in April to five and a half years' imprisonment by a court in Leskovac, Serbia, for making "malicious, disparaging and untme statements about Yugoslavia's revolution". Janko Sarajlic, aged 33, a coach-driver working abroad, was sentenced to four years' imprisonment in November by a court in Slavonska Pozega, Croatia, for bringing into Yugoslavia copies of emigre journals.
In July Amnesty Intemational appealed for the release of eight people summarily sentenced to between 25 and 50 days' imprisonment for having raised banners marked Solidarnosc (Solidarity, the then suspended Polish trade union) at an official rally on 9 July in Belgrade in support of the Palestinian people. At the end of ae month seven others were imprisoned for between 20 and 30 days after some of them had publicly protested against the imprisonment of the eight.
In November eight Yugoslav citizens, among them two well-known university professors, sent a petition to the State Presidency asking for the release of five people from Belgrade prison psychiatric hospital. The petition said these people had been confined for expressing their political opinions in letters to the Yugoslav authorities. It called for a review of their cases, and for them to be examined by independent Yugoslav or international experts. The petition stated that they should be treated in ordinary psychiatric hospitals if they
294
were found to be mentally ill. Amnesty International sought further information on these five people.
In December Amnesty International v/rote to the Federal Minister of Justice to urge a judicial inquiry into the alleged ill-treatment of Hydajet Hyseni, Halil Alidema and Ukshin Hoti, ethnic Albanians from Kosovo, convicted of political offences in 1982. Hydajet Hyseni was alleged to have been so severely ill-treated after his arrest in December 1981 that he could not recognize his family when they visited him in April. He did not appear at the trial of 18 co-defendants in Pristina in July. The court was informed that this was because he was in a depressive state. In August he was said to be in the psychiatric section of Belgrade prison hospital. On 18 November he was sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment at a trial from which the press appears to have been barred. Halil Alidema and Ukshin Hoti, who were also alleged to have been physically ill-treated during pre-trial detention, were sentenced to 11 and nine years' imprisonment respectively in July. Amnesty International adopted as a prisoner of conscience Ukshin Hoti, who was not charged with the use or advocacy of violence; it sought further information about the charges against Halil Alidema and Hydajet Hyseni. An article in the Yugoslav press in April noted that allegations of ill-treatment during pre-trial detention had been made in a number of political trials of ethnic Albanians.
Amnesty International was concerned that convictions in political trials might sometimes have been obtained on the basis of false testimony given as the result of pressure by the police. This appears to have been the case in the trial of Anto Kovacevic in June in Doboj. He was accused of having become a member of an emigre organization while living in Vienna, of having spoken "maliciously and untruthfully" of conditions in Yugoslavia and of having told jokes against the late President Tito. The charges appear to have been based largely on statements made by two of his compatriots studying at Vienna university, who were detained by police while visiting Yugoslavia in December 1981. In June 1982 these men withdrew their testimony. In statements made in Vienna they declared that they gave it after police threatened them that if they did not cooperate by testifying against Anto Kovacevic and by informing on compatriots in Vienna they would be deprived of their passports. Anto Kovacevic was sentenced to eight and a half years" imprisonment, reduced to six years on appeal.
Prison conditions also gave grounds for concern; reports of conditions at Stara Gradiska prison in Croatia, where a number of adopted prisoners of conscience were detained, appeared to be particularly poor. A Belgrade criminologist who had in August served
295
a 30-day sentence for protesting against the imprisonment of eight supporters of the Polish trade union Solidarity (see above) wrote an open letter to the Serbian Secretary of Justice in September. In the letter he detailed numerous violations of laws concerning the treatment of prisoners in Padinska Skela and Belgrade central prisons where he served his sentence. These included the beating of prisoners, lack of proper medical care, exploitation of prison labour, and failure by the authorities to supervise prison conditions in accordance with the law.
On 17 January three emigrants - Jusuf and Bardhosh Gervalla and Zeka Kadri - ethnic Albanians from Kosovo, were shot dead in Stuttgart in the Federal Republic of Germany. Jusuf Gervalla was a leader of an irredentist organization. Amnesty International received allegations that the Yugoslav state security service was responsible for these killings. The official Yugoslav press, however, said that the three men were killed by rival emigre groups.
Amnesty International learned of seven death sentences passed in 1982: one for war crimes and six for murder. On 16 February it was reported that a death sentence imposed in 1981 on Hasim Suljic, convicted of war crimes, had been commuted on appeal to 20 years' imprisonment. Amnesty International knew of two executions in 1982: Hamit Azizi was executed on 4 January and Paloka Gecaj on 6 April, both convicted of murder.
