Pakistan
Amnesty International's concerns continued to be the arrest and imprisonment of large numbers of people for peacefully exercising - their right to freedom of opinion, the trial of civilians before military courts with inadequate legal safeguards and the further erosion of standards to ensure a fair trial, and persistent reports of ill-treatment and torture of political detainees. Amnesty International was also concerned about the high number of death sentences imposed by courts in Pakistan and the extension of the range of offences carrying the death penalty in law, as well as the imposition of cruel, inhuman and degrading punishments on people convicted of political and other offences.
On 13 January 1982 Amnesty International published iPaA:zs'/an.-Human Rights Violations and the Decline of the Rule of Law, a report documenting a deterioration in human rights standards in
219
Pakistan. The report stated that arbitrary imprisonment, torture and executions of political prisoners had increased in Pakistan, and that the erosion of the powers of civilian courts under military rule had become serious in 1981 {stQ Amnesty International Report 1982).
On 13 January 1982 the Pakistan Government responded by stating that most of the allegations in the report were based on "hearsay" or "unreliable" evidence. Itrejected Amnesty International's findings that mass arrests and systematic torture were used against political opponents. However, the government did not reply in detail to the specific findings in the report and did not allay Amnesty International's concerns.
Peaceful opposition to the government and criticism of its policies were met with widespread arrests in 1982. Among those detained were lawyers, journalists, trade unionists, doctors, teachers and students. Many acts of anti-government violence also occurred during the year. The military government claimed that those arrested had organized violence, often alleging that they were members of the opposition organization Al-Zuljikar, based in Afghanistan and allegedly led by two sons of the executed Prime Minister, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto. Amnesty International believed, however, that many of those arrested had been engaged in non-violent opposition activities.
Amnesty International believed that over 3,000 people were arrested in the country as a whole in the two weeks from 25 February 1982. Many of those arrested were members of opposition political parties officially described as "criminal anti-social elements". Some 40 members of the banned National Democratic Party were arrested after demonstrations in March 1982, the first in Pakistan since October 1979 when the military government banned political activities. They were released after several days. Rallies of striking teachers and doctors took place in Peshawar and Lahore in March. The rallies were broken up by police charges and many participants arrested. They were held in detention for some hours or days. In a rally in Lahore on 18 March 1982, in which school teachers criticized the government's policy of reforms of an "Islamic" nature, over 100 teachers were arrested.
During the wave of arrests from August to September 1982 which followed acts of violence including the killing of a member of the Federal Advisory Council, many hundreds of political workers of Pakistan's banned political parties were detained, including a number whom Amnesty International believed were held for their non-violent political activities. On 12 October 1982 the Minister of the Interior stated that the government had arrested 650 people suspected of "terrorist activities" and that 22 had been sentenced by the courts. No further details were given.
220
A number of lawyers were arrested for criticizing and refusing to submit to the Legal Practitioners (Amendment) Ordinance, passed on 15 July 1982. The ordinance prohibited Bar Association and Bar Council members from "indulging in any political activity, directly or indirectly". The Lahore Bar Association reported that 15 lawyers were detained in Punjab on 24 August 1982. The All Pakistan Lawyers Convention in Lahore on 7 October 1982 was immediately followed by the arrest, trial and sentencing by a Summary Military Court to one year's imprisonment of two lawyers - Mian Sher Alam and Iftikhar Hussain Gillani - on charges of making "objectionable" speeches and indulging in political activity. The two lawyers had organized the convention, attended by some 2,000 Pakistani lawyers, which became a focus for criticism of the military government and demands for restoration of civil liberties. Amnesty International adopted the two lawyers as prisoners of conscience. Two more lawyers were arrested on 24 October 1982 - Abdul Hafeez Lakho and Abdul Malik - respectively President and Joint Secretary of the Karachi Bar Association. They were sentenced to one year's imprisonment and Amnesty International adopted them as prisoners of conscience. The four lawyers were released from Karachi Central Jail at the end of December 1982 when the authorities commuted the remainder of their sentences.
Hundreds of students were arrested in 1982 in Lahore, Karachi and other towns, for protesting peacefully against policies of the military government. Amnesty Intemational leamed of students held in prison for many months without being charged or tried under preventive detention laws.
Several non-violent demonstrators were arrested in Azad Kashmir (the part of Kashmir administered by Pakistan, in which martial law does not apply and political parties are not banned). The arrests followed demonstrations calling for free elections and non-payment of taxes, organized by an alliance of Azad Kashmir political parties. Of those arrested, many were reportedly detained without charge. On 10 September 1982 Amnesty International urged President Zia-ul-Haq to release immediately arrested politicians including the former presidents of Azad Kashmir, Sardar Mohammad Ibrahim and Abdul Qayyum. Some 800 demonstrators against army rule were reportedly detained for a short period in Azad Kashmir in December 1982.
Among the prominent politicians arrested for non-violent political activities during 1982 was 92-year-old Pkhtoon leader Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan. On 30 October 1982 he was placed under house arrest for "participating in political activities". A dozen members of the Movement for the Restoration of Democracy were detained for a month under preventive detention legislation when President Zia-ul
221
Haq visited the United States of America. In the absence of official statistics about arrests and releases of political prisoners. Amnesty International could not give a precise estimate of their number. However, it believed that there were several hundred political prisoners in Pakistan at the end of 1982, many of them prisoners of conscience, held for the non-violent exercise of their human rights.
At the end of 1982 Amnesty International was working for the release of 46 prisoners of conscience and investigating the cases of 11 possible prisoners of conscience. Amnesty International was concerned about the continued detention of a number of prisoners of conscience after the expiry of their sentences. Among these were Irshad Rao, who should have been released in August 1982; Zamin Shah and Abdus Salim, who should have been released in May 1982; and Rasul Baksh Palejo, due to be released in October 1980. Amnesty International received reports that Irshad Rao and Rasul Baksh Palejo were ill in prison, and not receiving the necessary medical attention. Among prisoners of conscience released in 1982 were Ehsanullah Khan (released 23 December), and Mairaj Mohammad Khan, who was released on 11 March and rearrested twice before being released again on 5 December 1982. Besides those in prison, a number of prominent politicians remained under house arrest.
Many prisoners who had been tried in Pakistan before military courts were denied a fair and open trial according to international standards. Civilians were regularly tried for political offences before military courts under martial law regulations, without the right of appeal to the High Courts or other civil courts. In November 1982 three students were sentenced by a Special Military Court in Hyderabad, Sind, to seven years' imprisonment and 10 lashes under Martial Law Regulation No. 4 for possession of subversive literature. They were Imdad Hussain Chandio, Sher Mohammad Mangrio and Mohammad Khan Solangi, who had been detained since March 1981. Amnesty International adopted them as prisoners of conscience.
A new Martial Law Regulation, No. 53 of 27 September 1982, placed the burden of proof on the defendant instead of on the prosecution. Military courts were instructed to presume the guilt of the accused on the basis of police or other investigation alone, unless the contrary was proved by the accused. This martial law regulation, broadly defined to cover a wide range of offences connected to terrorism, carried the death penalty as maximum sentence. Amnesty International was concerned about the drastic extension of the use of the death penalty in Pakistan under this martial law regulation, and under Martial Law Regulation No. 54, both of which were retroactive to 5 July 1977.
Martial Law Regulation No. 5 3 of 27 September 1982 established
222
death as the maximum punishment for acts of sabotage or terrorism causing damage to property, as well as for a wide range of offences "likely to cause insecurity, fear or despondency among the public". The death penalty could also be imposed for aiding such offences, or for failing to give information about them to the martial law authorities. Martial Law Regulation No. 54 states that "Failure to give information would render him liable for action under this law which carries the maximum penalty of death". Failing to report relevant information about "lawless elements" (a term broadly defined to include "any dacoit [bandit], robber, terrorist, proclaimed offender" or other person) can be punished with death. Amnesty International urged President Zia-ul-Haq on 4 October 1982 to reconsider this drastic extension of the death penalty.
Many death sentences were passed by military and other courts in Pakistan. No official statistics were given by the government on executions, few cases were reported in the press, and Amnesty International was not in a position to estimate the number of executions in Pakistan during the year. However, in December 1982 alone 20 executions were reported. During 1982 Amnesty International appealed on behalf of 25 prisoners sentenced to death by military and civil courts.
Amnesty International continued to receive detailed accounts of beatings and torture of prisoners detained in prisons and police stations. Among methods reported to Amnesty International were: beatings with rubber shoes, clubs and sticks; being hung upside down by a rope; deprivation of sleep; burning and pulling of hairs; and electric shocks. On 12 May 1982 Amnesty International cabled the Minister of the Interior and the Governor of Punjab province to express concern about reports of torture (including beatings and burning with cigarettes) during the interrogation of Mohammad Ejaz Bhatti, a student and member of the People's Party of Pakistan (PPP), who was arrested in December 1981. Amnesty International urged an immediate investigation of reports concerning this prisoner, and asked for assurances that he would be given medical treatment and not subjected to further ill-treatment.
Military courts frequently ordered political and other prisoners to be flogged. Six people were arrested in March or April 1981 in connection with the publication of a pamphlet entitled Awam Dost (The People's Friend), which supported the banned PPP. They were adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience. The six men were convicted on 17 October 1982 before a Special Military Court in Lahore, under Martial Law Regulation No. 33. Two-Sheikh Sohail Ahmed and Shoaib Mir - received the maximum sentence of seven years' imprisonment and 20 lashes, and the four others seven
223
years' imprisonment with 10 lashes. In November 1982 the Camp Jail authorities stayed the flogging pending appeals to the Punjab Martial Law Administrator.
Amnesty International continued to receive reports of public floggings imposed on people convicted of non-political crimes. Seventeen people in Multan, Punjab, were prosecuted in the first case of its kind in Pakistan for"violatinga motion picture ordinance". Sentences of 15 lashes, various terms of imprisonment and heavy fines were imposed on the 17 men and women by a Summary Military Court on 12 October 1982. A 60-year-old man, Mohammad Hussain, was flogged in public before hundreds of people on 8 December 1982 at Sukkur. He had been convicted before an Islamic court of abducting a girl, and was sentenced to 10 lashes and three years in jail. On 23 December 1982 the Urdu newspaper Jang reported that an Islamic court in Dir, North West Frontier Province, had sentenced an unmarried, pregnant girl, Jahan Meena, to a public flogging of 10 lashes and two years in prison.
Since amputation of the hand was introduced as a punishment for theft in 1979, 22 people were reported to have been sentenced to amputation. However, there were no reported cases of this sentence being carried out. In the case of Ghulam Ali, convicted of stealing a clock from a mosque, the sentence was confirmed by the Federal Shari'a Court in June 1982. This was the first time that the Federal Shari'a Court had confirmed a lower Shari'a court's sentence of amputation. It was not known if the sentence was carried out.
In May Amnesty International submitted information to the United Nations under the procedure to investigate rep>orts of "gross and reliably attested violations of human rights".
