South Africa
Amnesty International was concerned about the use of detention without trial and alleged torture and ill-treatment of political detainees, including some prisoners of conscience, who were held incommunicado for interrogation by security police. Two political detainees died in security police custody during the year; others required hospital treatment. There was continuing concern over the use of banning orders to restrict political opponents of the government, many of whom were subject to partial house arrest and adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International.
In a number of political trials uncharged detainees summoned as witnesses for the state received prison terms of up to five years for contempt of court when they refused to testify. At least 101 people were hanged for criminal offences. Six alleged members of the banned African National Congress (ANC) were sentenced to death for treason but death sentences imposed on three others in 1980 were commuted by the State President in June. In early December South African military forces entered Lesotho and killed at least 30 South African refugees and 12 Lesotho nationals. During 1982 there were also fatal bomb attacks on prominent ANC supporters in Mozambique and Swaziland which were alleged to be the work of South African security agents, although this could not be proved.
New security laws were introduced following a commission of inquiry into security legislation headed by an appeal court judge, P. J. Rabie, which reported in February. In July a new Internal Security Act replaced the Terrorism Act of 1967 and related security laws. The new act retained many features of the earlier legislation: for example. Section 6 of the Terrorism Act, which empowered security police to hold detainees incommunicado and without charge indefinitely and to withhold all information about them, reappeared virtually intact as Section 29 of the new act. The Internal Security Act renewed the authorities' powers to ban individuals or organizations arbitrarily and without explanation, to prosecute as offences a wide range of political activities, some of which carry the death penalty, to hold people indefinitely in preventive detention and to detain incommunicado potential witnesses in future political trials. However, provision was made for fortnightly visits to Section 29 detainees by a magistrate, a doctor and an Inspector of Detainees appointed by the Minister of Justice. Procedures were also established for reviewing the cases of
78
Section 29 detainees after six months' detention. A Board of Review was set up to which Section 28 detainees, those in preventive detention, and banned people might apply, but the Minister was not required to implement the board's recommendations.
Three other laws were introduced as a result of the commission's recommendations. One made it an offence punishable by up to one year in prison to demonstrate near court buildings. Another defined the offence of intimidation; several black trade unionists were charged under this act in late 1982 for urging workers to strike. The third, the Protection of Information Act, replaced the Official Secrets Act and made it an offence to disclose, publish or retain information relating to security matters. In March a Ministry of Law and Order was created with responsibility for security matters.
Neil Aggett, a doctor working as a trade union official, was found hanged in his cell at the Johannesburg security police headquarters on 5 February. He had been detained in November 1981 when a number of students, officials of black trade unions and other critics of the government were arrested by security police. He was held incommunicado under Section 6 of the Terrorism Act and was not charged. Following Neil Aggett's death, detainees who had been in custody with him alleged that he had been assaulted and subjected to electric shock torture by security police and, shortly before his death, interrogated continuously for more than 60 hours. At an inquest eye witnesses testified to his ill-treatment and alleged that they too had been tortured by security police. Lawyers representing Neil Aggett's family acknowledged that he had died by suicide but argued that it had been induced by ill-treatment. An Amnesty International observer attended part of the inquest in October. In late December the magistrate dismissed the evidence of former detainees, accepted the account given by the security police, and absolved them from any responsibility.
In early August Ernest Dipale, aged 21, was also found hanged in a cell at the Johannesburg headquarters of the security police. No inquest had been held by the end of 1982.
Isaac Tshifhiwa Muofhe was one of a number of people, including leading churchmen, detained in November 1981 by Venda security police and allegedly tortured in the Venda "homeland", declared "independent" in 1979. He died in custody two days after his arrest. Medical evidence at his inquest in Sibasa in July indicated extensive injuries and death from loss of blood. The presiding magistrate ruled that he had died from an unlawful assault by two security police officers. The case was referred to the Attorney-General of Venda and at the end of 1982 it was expected that the two officers would shortly be tried for murder.
79
Many people detained in 1981 were still held without charge or trial at the beginning of 1982. They included students, community workers and black trade union officials such as Dumile Makanda and Maxwell Madlingozi of the Motor Assemblers' and Components Workers' Union (MACWUSA) and four leading officials of the South African Allied Workers' Union (SAAWU). Few of these detainees were charged although most spent several months in detention without trial and some were allegedly tortured. The MACWUSA officials were released in February after eight months in incommunicado detention but at the end of March they were restricted under banning orders. Three of the SAAWU officials were charged in May, six months after their arrest. However, when they were tried some months later all charges against them were dropped and they were discharged. One of the three, Thozamile Gqweta, the SAAWU President, had earlier become mentally disorientated, reportedly as a result of his treatment in security police detention. He was taken to a hospital psychiatric ward in March, detained again in May and charged under the Terrorism Act, but finally freed in November.
Detentions continued throughout 1982. Those arrested and held incommunicado included several "coloured" students from Cape Town and black students at the University of the North, more black trade unionists, and officials of black political organizations such as the Azanian National Youth Unity. Two well-known black journalists - Joe Thloloe and Mathatha Tsedu - were detained under security legislation in June. Both had already been adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International following their restriction under banning orders in January 1981. Another banned black journalist, Zwelakhe Sisulu, was freed in February after more than eight months' incommunicado detention without trial.
There was also extensive use of detention without trial in the Ciskei, Transkei and Venda, three of the four "homelands" declared "independent" but not recognized internationally. Most detainees in these areas were held incommunicado under provisions similar to those prevailing in the rest of South Africa. In all three "homelands" those detained included churchmen for whom Amnesty International appealed. The number of detainees was impossible to estimate because of the secrecy surrounding detention. From all three areas it was alleged that detainees had been tortured or ill-treated.
New allegations of torture were made by former detainees and by witnesses and defendants at a series of political trials. A number of such allegations were compiled by the Detainees' Parents Support Committee (DPSC), an organization formed by relatives and friends of detainees in 1981. On 30 September 1982 the DPSC published a
80
memorandum based on 70 statements by former detainees, which alleged that security police torture methods included electric shocks, beatings and slapping, enforced standing and strenuous physical exercise, and sleep deprivation.
In November the Minister of Law and Order announced new guidelines for security police treatment of detainees, which stipulated that they must not be ill-treated or tortured. Provision was made for early medical examination of detainees, although not by a doctor of their choice, but the new regulations were mainly a reiteration of earlier guidelines.
Banning orders continued to be used to restrict the freedom of movement, association and expression of critics of the government. A number of banning orders were lifted early at various times during 1982 and others, including that on Helen Joseph, a well-known opponent of apartheid first placed under house arrest in 1962, expired and were not reimposed. However, at the end of December 1981 Winnie Mandela, a leading black opponent of the government and wife of imprisoned ANC leader Nelson Mandela, was restricted under a five-year order which continued to confine her to the town of Brandfort. Dr Beyers Naude, former Director of the banned Christian Institute, was served with a new three-year order in October when his previous five-year banning order expired. Winnie Mandela and Beyers Naude, like most other banned people, were adopted prisoners of conscience.
There were disturbing developments in a number of political trials, more than 20 of which took place during 1982. Apart from the torture allegations made by many of those before the courts, it was common for the prosecution to call as witnesses people who had been detained incommunicado for long periods. For example, in February at the trial of Khotso Seatlholo and Mary Loate on charges under the Terrorism Act, those called as state witnesses included Thami Mazwai, a journalist, and several others who had been in detention without charge or trial since June 1981. Thami Mazwai refused to testify as a prosecution witness and alleged that he had been assaulted in security police custody. The judge sentenced him to 18 months' imprisonment for contempt of court, and imposed similar sentences on four others who also refused to testify. This pattern was repeated in other political trials, with sentences of up to five years' imprisonment being imposed on detainees who refused to give evidence for the state.
At least seven people, all of them alleged members of the ANC, were convicted of treason. Three of those convicted - Thelle Simon Mogoerane, Jerry Semano Mosololi and Marcus Thabo Motaung -were sentenced to death in August. Three others convicted in September received long prison sentences. In October a 10-year
81
sentence was imposed on Barbara Hogan, the first woman to be convicted of treason. She admitted membership of the ANC but disassociated herself from those ANC policies which embraced the use or advocacy of violence. In an earlier case two security police officers were charged with assaulting Barbara Hogan in detention. A doctor testified that her injuries probably could not have been self-inflicted, but the judge acquitted both defendants. Barbara Hogan was adopted as a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty International.
Three conscientious objectors imprisoned for refusing military service were adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International. They were members of churches which the authorities had not recognized as pacifist and were therefore prosecuted as military defaulters rather than as conscientious objectors. In each case they were sentenced to be discharged with ignominy from the Defence Force and to be imprisoned for one year in a civilian prison.
Many death sentences were imposed during 1982 for murder and other violent crimes, and three alleged ANC members were sentenced to death for treason in August. In April the appeal court confirmed death sentences imposed on three other alleged ANC members convicted of treason in 1980, but in June their sentences were commuted to life imprisonment by the State President. Another three alleged ANC guerrillas convicted of treason in 1981 had their death sentences confirmed by the appeal court in November. They, and the three men sentenced in August, petitioned the State President for clemency, but no decision had been taken by the end of 1982. Amnesty International appealed to the State President to commute these death sentences and welcomed the three reprieves in June. Amnesty International also sought clemency for prisoners under sentence of death for criminal offences.
According to government figures, 100 executions were carried out in 1982 for criminal offences. The authorities gave the following racial breakdown: one white, 37 "coloureds" and 62 Africans. In addition, at least one execution was also carried out in the Venda "homeland". No information was available about the use of the death penalty in the other "homelands".
On 9 December South African military forces entered Lesotho and attacked houses in Maseru occupied by South African refugees, including ANC officials. In all, 42 people are known to have been killed, including at least 19 recognized refugees and four asylum-seekers from South Africa. Twelve Lesotho nationals were also killed, apparently because they were living in houses previously occupied by refugees from South Africa. Most of the victims of these extrajudicial executions were reported to have been unarmed; some were alleged to have been shot dead while asleep.
