Iraq
The concerns of Amnesty International continued to be the arbitrary arrest and detention of individuals for the non-violent expression of their political beliefs, the lack of basic legal safeguards in trials of political prisoners before the Revolutionary Court and the Special Military Court, "disappearances", torture and deaths in custody. Amnesty International continued to be concerned about the large number of executions, including executions for political offences after trials lacking basic legal safeguards.
Political activity, including belonging to or associating with an illegal organization, attending unauthorized meetings, talking part in anti-government demonstrations, printing, distributing or reading banned political literature, and refusing to join the ruling B a' ath party, could all lead to arrest, imprisonment and, in some cases, to execution. Members and ex-members of the Ba'ath party and the armed forces faced the death penalty if they joined or associated with any illegal party, including^4/Da'wa AlIslamiya (the Islamic Call), the Iraqi Mujahideen, the Iraqi Communist Party, the Kurdish Democratic Party, the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan and several other smaller Kurdish parties. Amnesty International remained concerned about the widespread arbitrary arrest and detention of suspected opponents of the government. Although Amnesty International received the names of hundreds of people reportedly detained on political grounds since 1979, it was not able to estimate the total number of political prisoners. Opposition and exile sources claimed that there were thousands of political prisoners held in Iraq.
309
During 1982 the cases of 38 possible prisoners of conscience were under investigation by Amnesty International {sqq Amnesty International Report 1981 and 1982). Amnesty International repeatedly requested information from the government regarding these cases, but the authorities rarely responded, except to say that Amnesty International's information was "unreliable" and "without foundation".
In April 1982 Amnesty International learned of the arrests of four assistants to Ay atollah A1 Kho'i, a spiritual leader of the world's Shi'a Muslim community. They were Mohammad Irwani, Mohammad Badqubi, Sayyid Kammoussi and Mohammad Taki Jalali. Eleven of his closest assistants and many of his 131 students had reportedly been arrested shortly after the beginning of the Iraq-Iran war. In 1981 Amnesty International wrote to the Iraqi Government requesting information about these reported arrests but received no reply. The fate and whereabouts of all these prisoners remained unknown, although Amnesty International received unconfirmed reports that Mohammad Taki Jalali had been executed.
In August 1982 Amnesty International received reports that 52 people suspected of opposition to the government were arrested in July 1982 in the areas of Najaf, Kerbala and Khadhimiya. The charges against them and their whereabouts were unknown.
Following riots and demonstrations during the first half of 1982 many arrests reportedly took place in various cities in Iraqi Kurdistan including Qalat Diza, Halabjah, Ranya, Irbil, Suleimaniyah and Kirkuk. Kurdish opposition sources alleged that the security forces opened fire on the demonstrators, killing several, and that two demonstrators in Irbil were picked at random by the security forces and executed on the spot. Amnesty International was unable to verify these reports.
On 16July 1982 the Revolutionary Command Council issued an amnesty for all Kurds accused of taking up arms against the Iraqi Government in the autonomous region. Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz stated on 10 August that all member of the Iraqi Communist Party were also granted amnesty. On 6 August Amnesty International wrote to President Saddam Hussain for details of the amnesty but received no reply. To Amnesty International's knowledge the government published no information concerning the names or number of political prisoners who benefited from the amnesty.
Amnesty International was concerned about the continued failure of the government to account for the "disappearance" of several members and supporters of the Iraqi Communist Party. These included Dr Sabbah al-Durrah and Dr Safa al-Hafidh, both arrested on 8 February 1980, and Aida Mutar Yassin, Leyla Yusif, Raja' Abdul Majid, Ramzia Jada' A1 Shiabany, all arrested in July 1980.
310
Their relatives claimed that they had not been able to obtain any information about them since their arrest. Amnesty International asked for information about these arrests but received no reply.
Amnesty International continued to receive allegations of torture and reports of death under torture. After its publication/ra^.- Evidence of Torture appeared in April 1981, Amnesty International learned of 29 people who allegedly died under torture between 1979 and 1981.
After the publication of the report Amnesty International called on the Iraqi Government to receive an Amnesty International mission to discuss the report and aspects of legal and administrative practice. The government agreed to receive an Amnesty International delegation at the beginning of 1983.
Amnesty International continued to receive reports on the summary proceedings employed by different types of special court, including the Revolutionary Court in Baghdad and the Special Military Court in Kirkuk. The Revolutionary Court dealt with offences against internal or external security as well as certain economic and drug offences. It consisted of two military officers and a civilian president who were all members of the ruUng Ba'ath Party. The defendant was usually only given access to a defence lawyer after the investigative stage had been closed and trials were frequently held in camera. The Special Military Court of Kirkuk tried Kurds arrested in the Kurdish region charged with political offences. Trials were held in camera and no defence counsel permitted. Amnesty International received numerous reports of detainees having been tortured before being brought before this court. Sentences by both courts were final: no appeal to a higher court of law was allowed, even in death penalty cases. The majority of death sentences in Iraq were pronounced by special courts.
According to reports received by Amnesty International 27 members of the Turkuman community were executed in early February 1982 in the village of Tiss'een near Kirkuk. It was not known whether they had been charged or tried. In December 1982 Kurdish opposition sources reported the executions in August 1982 of 10 members and supporters of the banned Patriotic Union of Kurdistan. They were allegedly tried by the Special Military Court in Kirkuk and sentenced to death.
According to the predominantly	Da 'wa AlIslamiya, 166
of its members and supporters were executed in early 1982. Legislation in force since 1980 makes membership of, or affiliation to, Al Da'wa Al Islamiya an offence carrying the death penalty. On 4 January 1982, the official news agency, INA, reported that 30 members of Al Da'wa Al Islamiya, "convicted of crimes punishable by execution", benefited from a presidential pardon. Amnesty International wrote to the President welcoming the amnesty and
311
requested that this measure be extended to all those under sentence of death. It also requested the names of all those who were amnestied but received no reply.
Thirty-five members and supporters of the IraqiCommunistParty were reportedly executed in Kerbala in September and October 1982. Their bodies were said to have been returned to their families for burial. Amnesty International was unable to verify these reports. Other reports reaching Amnesty International suggested that several army officers had been executed for their "bad performance" in the Iraq-Iran war.
No executions known to Amnesty International were announced or confirmed by the authorities except that of Dr Riad Ibrahim Hussain, former Health Minister, following his dismissal from the government in June 1982. The exact date of his execution was not known nor whether he was charged or tried. The official news agency quoted President Saddam Hussain as saying that Dr Riad Ibrahim Hussain "had imported medicine which killed people" and had been executed as a "traitor".
