Brunei
Amnesty International was concerned about the use of emergency legislation to detain people without trial for extraordinarily long periods in conditions which seriously endangered their mental and physical well-being.
Amnesty International continued to work for the release of detainees held under the Emergency Orders issued in December 1962. Some had been held without trial for 20 years since their arrest for alleged involvement in the rebellion of December 1962 launched by the Partai Rakyat Brunei (PRB), Brunei People's Party. In August 1962 the PRB won all the elected seats in the Legislative Council. The then Sultan refused to convene the Legislative Council and called in British troops to suppress the ensuing rebellion launched by the PRB. The rebellion was defeated and approximately 2.500 members of the PRB and its military wing, the Tentera Nasional Kalimantan Utara (TNKU), North Kalimantan National Army, were detained.
The Emergency Orders under which the detainees were held authorized the Chief Minister to issue indefinitely renewable two-year detention orders. By the beginning of 1982 all but nine of the original detainees had been released although other people reportedly associated with the PRB had been arrested subsequently under the Emergency Orders. It was believed that there were 30 people detained under the Emergency Orders, although the government refused to disclose the precise number even to members of the Legislative Council.
Amnesty International learned of the death in detention of one of its adopted prisoners of conscience, Othman bin Haji Karim. He was 68 years old and had been detained continuously since the revolt. Several of the detainees had reached advanced years and Amnesty International was concerned that their detention in isolation without regular visits or correspondence was a danger to their well-being.
190
On 20 January 1982 Amnesty International wrote to the Sultan of Brunei expressing regret at the government's decision announced on 7 January 1982 to introduce the death penalty for drug offences, to be mandatory in cases involving trafficking in drugs over a fixed amount. Brunei already had the death penalty for a number of offences including waging war against the Sultan and attempted murder by convicts serving sentences of more than 15 years.
	
	yf ■ "
