Viet Nam
Amnesty International was concerned about the detention without trial of thousands of members of the former South Vietnamese Government in "re-education" camps. It was also concerned about the psychological and physical effects of long-term detention without trial for indefinite periods; reports of people arrested on political grounds, some of whom might be prisoners of conscience; the absence of adequate legal safeguards to protect detainees in pre-trial detention; the detention of people apprehended while trying to leave Viet Nam illegally; and the use of the death penalty.
In its 1981 Report of an Amnesty International Mission to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam Amnesty International recommended to the Vietnamese Government that it consider early ratification of the United Nations International Covenants on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and on Civil and Political Rights, as well as the Optional Protocol to the second covenant. Amnesty International welcomed the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam's accession to the two covenants on 24 September 1982.
Despite this development, however, the Vietnamese Government continued to detain thousands of members of the former South Vietnamese administration nearly eight years after the cessation of hostilities, thus violating several articles of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Amnesty International believed that the detention for "re-education" of prisoners because of the position they
239
held under former South Vietnamese governments violated the internationally recognized right not to be detained arbitrarily, that is, without charge or trial. In particular, it violated the right to be presumed innocent until proved guilty and the principle that legislation should not be applied retroactively.
Amnesty International repeatedly expressed its concern for these prisoners in the absence of any declared intention by the government as to the date of their release. In an interview in June 1982 Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach stated that the number of detainees currently held in "re-education" camps was 16,000. In a further statement to CBS Television of the USA on 13 June 1982 the Foreign Minister stated that the Vietnamese Government would be willing to release all detainees from "re-education" camps if they were accepted by the USA for entry into that country. On 17 June Amnesty International cabled Foreign Minister Thach noting his statement and recommending that all prisoners in camps be released pending resettlement elsewhere, should they desire such resettlement.
On 23 December 1982 Amnesty International wrote to Prime Minister Pham Van Dong again urging the government to abolish compulsory detention without trial for people connected with the former administration and the release of the remaining prisoners in the camps. Amnesty International also drew attention to its long-standing concern at the detention of old or seriously sick prisoners in "reeducation" camps. It cited the cases of five such prisoners, all adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience. The organization considered that they should be released immediately, bearing in mind Article 7 of the Provisional Revolutionary Government Policy Statement on Re-education (No. 02/CS/76) which declared that such people could be released with their families' guarantee. Amongst these prisoners was Mai Van Le, former Deputy Dean of Saigon Law School and Chairman of the National Economic Council, who was reported to suffer from a stomach ulcer, dysentery and beri-beri. During 1982 Amnesty International appealed on behalf of several prisoners suffering ailments which could not apparently be adequately treated in the "re-education" camps. Conditions in many "reeducation" camps remained harsh with inadequate medical care and food.
Amnesty International was also concerned about prisoners of conscience held in "pre-trial detention". Among the Amnesty International adopted prisoners of conscience held in Viet Nam were writers, artists, priests and members of the former neutralist "third force". These prisoners were often held technically in "pre-trial detention" for an indefinite period, despite the fact that the relevant decree. No. 02/SL/76, allows a maximum of one year's pre-trial
240
detention for people accused of serious offences. Most such prisoners were held in Chi Hoa Prison in Ho Chi Minh City. Pham Van Tarn, a journalist and former Secretary General of the Vietnamese League of Human Rights, had been detained in "pre-trial detention" for more than four-and-a-half years. Other prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International included seven Jesuit priests and a Dominican Father reportedly arrested for"anti-govemment behaviour" in December 1980 and January 1981. Five of the priests - Father Joseph Khuat Duy Linh. Father Roch Dinh van Trung, Father Joseph Do Quang Chinh, Father Albert Nguyen van Hoa and Brother Peter Pham Huu Lai - were transferred in late 1982 to Chi Hoa Prison while the three others - Father Joseph Nguyen Cong Doan, Father Joseph Le Thanh Que and Father Joseph Hoang Si Quy - reportedly remained in the custody of the security police {Cong An). None of the eight had been charged or tried.
There were indications that the authorities had imprisoned people in northern Viet Nam because of their conscientiously held beliefs. Among those adopted by Amnesty International was Bui Hoang Cam, a 62-year-old poet and former Communist Party member, arrested on 20 August 1982 and accused of having "cultural relations with foreigners".
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about people arrested trying to leave Viet Nam illegally, and adopted as prisoners of conscience those imprisoned for attempting to leave for reasons of conscience, where they had no opportunity to leave the country legally. During 1982 several such cases were reported to Amnesty International. Some people had been denied the civil status or documentation necessary to apply for emigration under the terms of the Orderly Departure Program sponsored by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and continued to try to leave illegally. An examjDle was Le thi Som Mai, a 19-year-old daughter of two well-known South Vietnamese writers. Her father and mother were arrested and sent for "re-education" in 1976: her mother was released in December 1976 but her father remained detained in a camp. Le thi Som Mai's sisters were expelled from school, reportedly because of their family background. Unable to apply to emigrate legally. Som Mai and her brothers and sisters joined an illegal emigration attempt. They were all arrested and, although other women and children arrested at the same time were reportedly released soon after. Le thi Som Mai remained detained in a labour camp in the central highlands.
Amnesty International was concerned about an apparent tendency by the courts to pass death sentences more frequently than before. Amnesty International learned of five death sentences passed in the
\
241
first six months of 1982 and of 12 executions carried out during the year. Tran van Hung, "a professional hooligan who had earned his living by theft and burglary" was condemned to death in August 1981 for theft. While awaiting the decision of the Chairperson of the Council of State on whether to commute his sentence, he tried to escape from prison and murdered an inmate in the attempt. On 17 August 1982 he was publicly executed by the authorities in Hanoi. Six people convicted of "counter-revolutionary off"ences" including murder and armed robbery were executed in Ho Chi Minh City on 23 December.
Nguyen van Hoang, Tran Quang Man and Nguyen van An were arrested with several others in April 1979 and were condemned on 13 August 1981 to life imprisonment for "plotting to overthrow the revolutionary government". In an appeal which took place on 27 May 1982 the three men were condemned to death, and they remained under sentence of death until the end of 1982.



. »à. appIîiv liîi'iÂj^îCï
