Nigeria
Amnesty International was concerned about the detention without trial of suspected supporters of a religious leader, Alhaji Mohammed Marwa, also known as Maitatsine. All were released in October 1982. It was also concerned about the death penalty. On 31 August Nigeria signed the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights.
More than 900 alleged supporters of the late Alhaji Mohammed Marwa were detained without trial following rioting in December 1980 which was reported to have resulted in more than 4,000 deaths in Kano State. Of those detained on suspicion of involvement in the riots, more than 900 were reported to have been held without trial until October 1982 when President Shagari ordered their release. It was not known whether they included any prisoners of conscience. Further rioting then occurred in Maiduguri and Kaduna, inspired by followers of Alhaji Mohammed Marwa. Some reports suggested that these riots were sparked off by some of his supporters after their release from Kano prison in October, although this connection was denied by the federal government.
Alhaji Mohammed Marwa's sect was banned by President Shagari on 18 November by decree. Chief Richard Akinjide, the Minister of Justice, announced that people convicted of membership of the sect would face prison terms of between three and five years. Although this decree was intended to be applied to those followers of Alhaji Mohammed Marwa who had participated in the riots of October and November, Amnesty International was concerned that it could entail the detention of people for their non-violent religious beliefs. By the end of 1982 Amnesty International had received no reports that the decree had been used to detain prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty International remained concerned about the use of the
70
death penalty but was unable to ascertain the number of death sentences or executions. Eight appeals against the death penalty were reported to have been rejected by the Supreme Court in January and February alone.
