Guatemala
Amnesty International was concerned about widespread extrajudicial executions; "disappearances" after arrest often without warrant; and torture. The victims came from all sectors of society, including peasants and Indians, trade unionists, religious personnel, political leaders, journalists and members of the legal profession. They numbered many thousands in 1982. Successive governments in Guatemala have blamed clandestine paramilitary "death squads" for abuses or stated that the victims died in clashes between extremist groups of the left and the right which the authorities were unable to control. The authorities also claimed that some of the victims died in confrontations between official security forces and guerrilla groups. Amnesty International concluded on analysis of all available information that there were no independent "death squads" operating out of government control, and liiat official security units, sometimes operating in plain clothes, were responsible for the vast majority of such abuses. (See for example Amnesty International Annual Report 1981 and 1982.) The pattern of human rights violations observed in previous years continued during the first months of 1982.
In March a three-man junta assumed power in a nearly bloodless coup, rejecting the results of the elections held that month. The new government declared that it intended to ensure respect for human rights in Guatemala and to put a stop to the "death squads". It announced the formation of a new body to receive complaints and investigate past "disappearances". Some civilian officials who had
140
been involved in repression during the previous government were arrested. The Cuerpo de Detócí/veí, Detective Corps (known as the "judiciales", judicial police) of the National Police, cited over the years as responsible for many "disappearances" and killings, was declared disbanded.
In the immediate aftermath of the coup, "death squad" killings and abductions in the urban areas of Guatemala did appear to decrease, and the distinctive, unmarked cars of the "judiciales" vanished from the streets of the capital, Guatemala City. However, there was subsequently little indication of any efforts to investigate past "disappearances", and in April the National Police announced the formation of two new police bodies with many of the functions previously performed by the "judiciales". "Disappearances" were once again reported from major urban centres and there were persistent reports of large-scale and increasing extrajudicial executions of non-combatant civilians in rural areas at the hands of military forces, assisted by civilian defence squads formed at government behest.
In June General Efrain Ríos Montt, leading member of the new government, dissolved the junta, assumed sole control of the government as President and commander of the armed forces, and replaced the country's 324 elected mayors with his own appointees. Amnesty International wrote to General Efrain Ríos Montt in June, welcoming his frequently expressed intention to ensure a return to respect for human rights, and suggesting a number of measures which might be helpful. Amnesty International noted that it would welcome the opportunity to discuss human rights issues with the government.
At the end of June a 30-day amnesty offered in some areas of the country by the authorities to its armed opponents expired, and General Ríos Montt announced a state of siege. Under its provisions the armed forces became even less subject to legal and political constraints. They were empowered to arrest and hold suspects without charge and without right of habeas corpus and to break into homes and offices at night without warrant. Publication of any information about guerrilla activity was banned except for official versions from the President's Public Relations Office. All political activity was banned.
In July Amnesty International published a report entitled Mass/ve Extrajudicial Executions in Rural Areas under the Government of General Efrain Ríos Montt. It was based on an analysis of a wide range of evidence, including eye-witness testimony given directly to Amnesty International. Information was also made available to Amnesty International by Guatemalan and foreign journalists, by health, refugee, assistance and religious workers, working in or visiting both
141
Guatemala and Mexico, and by independent foreign missions of inquiry. A listof incidents reported to Amnesty International until the end of June 1982 in which over 2,000 people had been killed was appended. Amnesty International noted that it could not confirm the information in every instance and pointed out conflicting information received from government and other sources on some incidents. These reported abuses were occurring in a context of armed conflict, and opposition forces had reportedly executed hostages in their custody and killed individuals whom they accused of being involved in repression. H owe ver, A mnesty International concluded that since the March coup, the security services had continued to kill, unlawfully and deliberately, large numbers of rural non-combatants and people suspected of sympathy with violent or non-violent opposition groups.
The government never repli ed directly to the report or to Amnesty International's June letter to President Ríos Montt. Instead it informed the Guatemalan and international news media that Amnesty International was engaged in a campaign of defamation against Guatemala.
In August Amnesty International wrote again to the authorities noting its concern at steps taken under the state of siege. Decree Law 46-82 extended the number of offences carrying the death penalty, established military tribunals to try people charged under the decree and severely restricted the legal safeguards for such defendants. No response was received. At dawn on Friday 17 September, in a cemetery, four prisoners convicted under this legislation were executed by firing-squad. The executions had been announced only 12 hours earlier when the men's families first learned of their relatives' whereabouts following their "disappearance" some time earlier. Any judicial proceedings had been held in secrecy. After widespread international protests at the executions, there were reports that the government were considering altering the procedures under Decree Law 46-82 to answer criticisms that the executed men had not had an adequate defence nor the right of appeal.
In August General Efrain Ríos Montt announced by decree the formation of a Council of State to advise him on the legislative functions he had assumed following the March coup. The Council was to be formed of selected representatives of various sectors of society.
Following the issue of its July report Amnesty International continued to receive evidence from a wide variety of sources of the involvement of government forces in widespread killings of non-combatant civilians throughout 1982. In taped interviews with foreign journalists (carried out primarily in Chimaltenango in July and August, and in El Quiché in May and September), military commanders
142
and soldiers admitted that they had summarily executed villagers on mere suspicion of involvement with opposition forces, or simply because they lived in aldeas (hamlets) believed to have been sympathetic to the opposition. In further testimony recorded in El Quiché in September 1982, young conscripts described interrogation techniques used by the army to discover the whereabouts of the opposition forces. They told of using the garrotte, of hanging people from trees and houses by their necks, and of hacking off pieces of people's bodies with machetes during the interrogation and torture of people suspected of subversion.
Almost an entire village was eliminated at San Francisco, Nentón, Huehuetenango, in July. Priests in Mexico compiled the names of over 300 victims from the few survivors. Testimony from Guatemala, confirmed by evidence obtained in Mexico, told how the villagers were divided into groups of men, women, old people and children, and shot, hacked and bashed to death.
A number of foreign missions of inquiry investigated reports of killings in the department of Chimaltenango in October. The army had reportedly promised peasants who had fied into the hills following earlier military attacks that they could safely return to their homes. However, observer teams concluded that returning peasants who were suspected of having been involved in any way with opposition forces had been summarily executed.
Amnesty International continued throughout 1982 to inquire into the fate of people abducted in urban areas of Guatemala. Medical personnel and students and staff of the University of San Carlos (USAC) continued to be victimized. Pediatrician Dr Juan José Hurtado Vega was arrested on 24 June 1982. Initially, the government denied all knowledge of his whereabouts. On 4 July President Ríos Montt, in the face of mounting international pressure, acknowledged that he was under arrest and was to be tried as a communist On 29 July Dr Hurtado was released into exile abroad. In succeeding months Amnesty International was encouraged to learn that several other people who had "disappeared" were later released.
Other cases of "disappearances" and killings remained unresolved. Graciela M orales H errerà, for many years treasurer of the F acuity of Economics at USAC, was abducted with her three children on 11 September from her home in Guatemala C ity by men in plain clothes believed by relatives and sources at the university to be acting with the complicity of the government. A petition of habeas corpus was presented, but there was no official comment and the family remained missing.
Amnesty International continued to press for information on the whereabouts of the thousands of people who "disappeared" under
143
previous administrations, including 25 trade unionists from the Central Nacional de Trabajadores (CNT), the Guatemalan Workers Congress, who "disappeared" after being detained at their trade union headquarters in Guatemala City in June 1980. They remained missing and were adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty International was concerned about foreign military assistance which could be used to carry out the human rights violations against which Amnesty International was working. The organization studied military aid being given or considered by a number of governments.
D uring 1982 A mnesty International learned on several occasions of the forcible repatriation by Mexican local authorities of Guatemalans who had gained refuge in southern Mexico. Reports were also received that individuals who had been forcibly returned had been sub-je cted to human rights violations in Guatemala, including extrajudicial execution. Detailed accounts were received of the incursion into Mexican territory of Guatemalan military and paramilitary troops. They were reported to have killed Guatemalans on Mexican territory and to have abducted others back across the border where, according to witnesses in Mexico, they were summarily executed. Amnesty International appealed on several occasions to the Mexican authorities not to return refugees, and to mvestigate reports that refugees had been forcibly returned to their country of origin. I nformation about cases of forcible repatriation was submitted to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
A mnesty International followed the deliberations of regional and international bodies concerning the human rights situation in Guatemala. Information was submitted to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States (OAS) and to United Nations agencies and offices. In September 1982 an OAS delegation was able to enter the country; the organization had been seeking a visit since October 1973. Submissions were made throughout the year by Amnesty International to the UN Working Group on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances, which includedGuatemala among the countries where it considered the practice of "disappearance" to be widespread. In March 1982 the UN Commission on Human Rights expressed its concern at the continuing deterioration in the human rights situation in Guatemala and resolved to appoint a special rapporteur to study it. I n D ecember the UN G eneral A ssembly noted reports of massive repression and displacement of indigenous peoples in Guatemala, and invited the Government of Guatemala and other parties concerned to cooperate with the special rapporteur.
