SIERRA LEONE
REPUBLIC OF SIERRA LEONE
Head of state and government: Ahmad Tejan Kabbah
Capital: Freetown
Population: 4.8 million
Official language: English
Death penalty: retentionist
2000 treaty ratifications: Optional Protocol to the UN
Children's Convention on the involvement of children in
armed conflict; Optional Protocol to the UN Women's
Convention; Rome Statute ofthe International Criminal
Court
The 1999 peace agreement collapsed after rebel forces captured UN peace-keeping troops in May. Killings, mutilations, rape and abduction of civilians, including women and children, by rebel forces increased. Government forces were responsible for extrajudicial executions, torture and ill-treatment Several hundred alleged government opponents were held without charge or trial. Renewed insecurity added to already large numbers of refugees and internally displaced people. The international community made efforts to resolve the crisis, including by strengthening the UN peace-keeping operation and taking action to ha It the diamond trade used to procure arms. In a significant move to end impunity, the UN Security Council resolved to establish a Special Court for Sierra Leone.
Background information
Before its collapse in May, implementation of the July 1999 Lomé peace agreement between the government
209	Amnesty International Report 2001

SIE
and the armed opposition Revolutionary United Front (RUF) was limited: attacks on civilians by rebel forces continued and thousands remained held captive; disarmament and demobilization was slow; large areas of the north and east, including diamond-producing areas, remained under rebel control; and up to a million people remained beyond reach of humanitarian assistance.
With the capture by RUF forces of some 500 troops of the UN Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), hostilities resumed. Government forces comprised the Sierra Leone Army and a civilian militia, the Civil Defence Forces (CDF). Rebel forces included the RUF and renegade soldiers from both the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council (AFRO—in power from 1997 to 1998—and from the army. Some demobilized combatants again took up arms. United Kingdom (UK) troops were deployed until mid-June to defend Freetown and support UNAMSIL. Several hundred UK troops remained to train the Sierra Leone Army. All UNAMSIL captives had been released by July after intervention by Liberian President Charles Taylor.
Following his arrest in May, RUF leader Foday Sankoh, who had been given a government position following the peace agreement, was succeeded by Issa Sesay. There was little contact, however, between him and the authorities and it was unclear whether he controlled all RUF forces. On 10 November the government and the RUF agreed a 30-day cease-fire in Abuja, Nigeria, under the auspices of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS). Although this agreement included deployment by UNAMSIL in rebel-held areas, this had not begun by the end of the year.
From September hostilities between armed groups along Sierra Leone's borders with Liberia and Guinea resulted in further population displacement. Indiscriminate shelling by Guinean security forces of villages close to the border in Kambia District resulted in civilian casualties. Responding to fears of conflict spreading throughout the region, ECOWAS planned to deploy an observer mission along the borders.
Abuses by rebel forces
In early 2000 human rights abuses against civilians -abduction, rape, looting and destruction of villages— by rebel forces occurred almost daily in Northern Province, particularly Port Loko District. From May deliberate and arbitrary killings, mutilation, rape, abduction and forced labour and recruitment increased. Aid workers were attacked and forced to withdraw from rebel-held areas.
Although abuses in and around Makeni and Magburaka, Northern Province, decreased from September, refugees forced to return from Guinea were attacked and pressured to join RUF forces in Kambia District.
A group of renegade soldiers known as the West Side Boys terrorized civilians through killings, rape, torture, abduction and ambushes along major roads in the Occra Hills area east of Freetown until September, when their leader was captured and many surrendered or were arrested.
Deliberate and arbitrary killings
Large numbers of civilians were killed by rebel forces from May, particulariy in areas around Port Loko, Lunsar, Makeni and Magburaka. Q On 8 May RUF members killed about 20 people and injured dozens of others when they fired on some 30,000 people protesting outside Foday Sankoh's residence in Freetown against RUF attacks on UNAMSIL
Q A man was killed and decapitated in June after he tried to prevent the abduction of his 15-year-old daughter as his family fled from Makeni. Q A man from the village of Magbile recounted how his sons, aged 11,21,23 and 25, were shot and killed in June when they refused to join rebel forces. Q In early September rebel forces attacked Guinean villages close to the Sierra Leone border, killing Sierra Leonean refugees.
Torture, including mutilations and rape
Many civilians had limbs deliberately amputated; others had the letters RUF carved into their flesh. Abduction of giris and women, rape and sexual slavery were systematic and widespread. Most victims had contracted sexually transmitted diseases and many became pregnant- Often, abducted women and girls, without adequate support, were unable to leave the combatants who had forced them into abusive relationships when they disarmed and demobilized. Q During a rebel attack on Lunsar in late May several people suffered amputations, some of both hands. Q Civilians near Mongeri who escaped from six months' captivity in October had been used as forced labour and repeatedly beaten and threatened with death; women had been repeatedly raped. Q A woman with a five-month-old baby was stripped and raped by several combatants when rebel forces attacked Masiaka in May; she was then abducted and subjected to further rape.
Q A 19-year-old woman from Magburaka reported the rape and killing of her sister during an attack in May; her husband was also killed.
Q Nine women and girls abducted by West Side Boys in August were taken to the village of Makupr where they were beaten, raped and threatened with death. Hostage-taking
On 25 August, a Sierra Leone Army officer and 11 UK military personnel were taken hostage by West Side Boys in the Occra Hills. Five were released after five days and the rest were rescued on 10 September in an operation in which one UK soldier and at least 26 West Side Boys were killed.
Human rights violations by government forces
Members of the CDF and the Sierra Leone Army were responsible for summary executions, arbitrary detention and torture of captured or suspected rebels and recruitment and use of child combatants. The CDF, operating in Eastern and Southern Provinces, became increasingly undisciplined and usurped police authority. Civilians were also arbitrarily detained at CDF headquarters, including in Bo,
210
Amnesty International Report 2001
SIE
Koribundu and Kenema. Ill-treatment and extortion of money and property at checkpoints were common and several incidents of rape, previously rare, were reported.
Q In May, five unarmed RUF combatants travelling with civilians were intercepted at a CDF checkpoint at Baiima, north of Bo; one was summarily executed and the others detained.
Q A detainee captured by the CDF in May and held in Bo lost an ear and suffered cuts to his back after being beaten with a bayonet; others reported being stripped and beaten with sticks until they bled. Q In September, two men were killed and a third injured when they resisted recruitment by the CDF. Q In September the CDF attacked police headquarters in Kenema, and detained and beat a senior police officer.
Q Making no attempt to involve the police or investigate, in September the CDF stripped two young boys accused of stealing money and beat them in public in a village near Mile 91.
Q In October JiaKangbai, ajournalist with the Standard Times newspaper, was detained in Freetown for two days by the CDF, and kicked, beaten and pistol-whipped, after publication of an article considered critical of the CDF,
Civilian casualties from aerial attacks
In May and June, attacks by government forces from a helicopter gunship on suspected rebel positions in Northern Province resulted in up to 30 civilian deaths and many other casualties. Attacks often appeared to be indiscriminate and undertaken without adequate measures to safeguard civilians. Although warning leaflets were dropped in Makeni and Magburaka, attacks followed shortly afterwards. Civilians fleeing Makeni, however, said that they were forced out of their homes by rebel forces as the gunship flew overhead. At least 14 civilians were killed in Makeni and at least six were killed in an early afternoon attack on the market in Magburaka.
Child combatants
The resumption of hostilities in May halted demobilization of child combatants, leaving several thousand still to be released by rebel forces, and resulted in further recruitment.
RUF forces continued to abduct and forcibly recruit children in Northern Province. Recruitment of children by the CDF also continued in Southern Province, despite assurances to the contrary given to AI representatives in May by the Deputy Minister of Defence, who is also National Coordinator of the CDF, In May about 25 per cent of combatants fighting with government forces near Masiaka were observed to be under 18, some as young as seven. The government reiterated that 18 was the minimum age for recruitment and instructed the acting Chief of Defence Staff to ensure demobilization of all those under the age of 18.
International and national organizations worked towards ending the use of child soldiers and assisting in their rehabilitation.
Refugees and internal displacement
From May renewed fighting and bombing caused hundreds of thousands of people to flee; about 5,000 to Guinea and 300,000 to other parts of Sierra Leone, bringing the number of internally displaced people to some 500,000. From September, when violence erupted along the Guinean border, 22,000 refugees in Guinea returned to Sierra Leone to escape arrest and harassment by the local population, incited by the Guinean authorities.
Those displaced remained at risk of human rights abuses. Around Port Loko, people venturing from camps to gather food and water were frequently abducted, raped and used for forced labour by rebel forces. Others fleeing areas behind rebel lines were accused by the CDF of being rebels or rebel sympathizers, and were beaten or killed.
Political detention
Several hundred members of the RUF or other perceived opponents were arrested in May, including Foday Sankoh. Some, fearing reprisals by the CDF, gave themselves up. They were held under emergency legislation introduced in 1998, and repeatedly renewed by parliament, which allowed indefinite detention without charge or trial. In June the government published the names of 121 detainees held under emergency powers in Freetown's Central Prison, The legal basis for the detention of others remained unclear. During August at least 200 detainees were released in Freetown and Kenema. Almost 300 detainees, including more than 10 children, however, remained held at the end of the year. Detainees were denied visits from their families and the UNAMSIL human rights section was not granted access to detainees in Freetown until September. Q Abdul Kouyateh, publisher of Wisdom PubUcarions, was arrested in Freetown in May after publication of an article about the alleged use of mercenaries by the government and was held without charge until October.
Intergovernmental organizations
The crisis precipitated in May forced the international community, in particular the UN, the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and ECOWAS, to reassess the viability of the peace agreement and the performance of UNAMSIL, the largest UN peace-keeping operation.
Although the UN Secretary-General recommended an increase in UNAMSIL troops to respond to continuing instability, meeting the existing complement of 13,000 agreed by the UN Security Council in May was hindered by withdrawal of Indian and Jordanian forces later in the year and reluctance by many countries to contribute troops.
The UNAMSIL force had a mandate to protect civilians under imminent threat of physical violence, within its capabilities and areas of deployment. A! called for all civilians to be protected at all times, including by deployment of UNAMSIL troops in areas where civilians were at greatest risk. It appeared, however, that on several occasions, for example in
211	Amnesty International Report 2001

SIE
Kabala in June and along major roads, they failed to protect civilians from attack.
The UNAMSIL human rights section continued to report abuses and promote protection of human rights, including by providing human rights training for police and prison officers and UNAMSIL troops. With the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, it contributed towards establishing a Truth and Reconciliation Commission and a National Human Rights Commission, both provided by the peace agreement.
In October a UN Security Council delegation visited Sierra Leone and recommended that, while maintaining military pressure, priority be given to dialogue with RUF leaders. It also recommended development of a comprehensive and coordinated strategy for Sierra Leone. The UN Secretary-General visited Sierra Leone in early December to assess the peace-keeping operation.
Impunity
The peace agreement had provided a general amnesty for all acts undertaken in pursuit of the conflict but its collapse forced reconsideration of this provision. In June the government requested UN assistance to establish a special court to try leading RUF members.
AI and other human rights organizations insisted that trials focus on those most responsible for grave human rights abuses, whether members of the RUF, AFRC, Sierra Leone Army or CDF, and regardless of current political position or affiliation.
In August the UN Security Council decided to establish a Special Court for Sierra Leone to prosecute those most responsible for crimes against humanity, war crimes and other serious violations of international humanitarian law. Commenting on the Special Court's draft Statute in November, AI called for the Court to have jurisdiction over crimes committed since the conflict began in 1991 rather than, as proposed, from November 1996; for any recruitment of children under the age of 15 years, whether forced or voluntary, to be defined as a crime; and for adequate and sustained funding for the Court.
Since the Court would only try a limited number of cases, AI stressed that its establishment must provide long-term benefits to the national judicial system, which had to be rebuilt and strengthened in order eventually to assume responsibility for trying perpetrators of human rights abuses.
Military assistance to rebel forces
The governments of Liberia and Burkina Faso were consistently cited as violating a UN arms embargo on rebel forces. They were accused of transferring arms and ammunition through their territories and trading diamonds from rebel-held areas. The Liberian government came under growing diplomatic pressure to end its support for the RUF.
International attention focused increasingly on "conflict diamonds". In July the UN Security Council imposed an 18-month prohibition on direct or indirect import of rough diamonds from Sierra Leone, other than those certified by the government. The
international diamond industry introduced measures towards regulating trade.
A UN Panel of Experts was established in August to investigate the link between the diamond trade and the conflict in Sierra Leone, including the implication of the governments of Liberia and Burkina Faso. It published a report in December which unequivocally established the involvement of both governments by means of international networks of arms and diamond brokers, dealers and transporters based in many countries. It made recommendations for effective implementation of the bans on illicit diamond trading and arms transfers.
AI public statements, selected country reports and visits
Reports and statements
•	Sierra Leone: United Nations Security Council must ensure the protection of civilians (AI Index: AFR 51/015/2000)
•	Sierra Leone: Rape and otherformsofsexualviolence against girls and women (AI Index: AFR 51/035/2000)
•	Sierra Leone:Amnestylnternationalcallsforfastand effective action on diamonds (AI Index: AFR 51/054/2000)
•	Sierra Leone: Ending impunity-an opportunity notto be missed (AI Index: AFR 51 /060 /2000)
•	Sierra Leone: Childhood-a casualty of conflict (AI Index: AFR 51/069/2000)
•	Sierra Leone: Recommendations on thedraft Statute of the Special Court (AI Index: AFR 51 /083/2000)
•	Sierra Leone: UN investigation exposes continuing trade in arms and diamonds (AI Index: AFR
51 /086/2000) Visits
AI delegates visited Sierra Leone in March, May, June and July. They met President Ahmad Tejan Kabbah and members of the government, RUF leader Foday Sankoh and UN officials, as well as members of nongovernmental organizations and victims of human rights abuses. Research was undertaken in Freetown and Northern and Eastern Provinces.
212
Amnesty International Report 2001
