PAKISTAN
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN
Head of state: Mohammad RafiqTarar
Head of government: General Pervez Musharraf
Capital: Islamabad
Population: 156.5 million
Official languages: English and Urdu
Death penalty: retentionist
Despite the government's stated commitment to human rights protection, human rights violations including torture and deaths in custody increased during 2000. Minorities were notgiven adequate protection when religiously motivated violence flared up. Violence against women and children continued ata high level. Political activities remained restricted following a ban on public activities in March. Activists contravening the ban were detained and some were charged with sedition. Several people detained at the time of the coup remained in unlawful detention. The death penalty was frequently imposed, but was banned for juveniles.
Background
The military government under Chief Executive Pervez Musharraf presented a comprehensive reform program to fight corruption and prepare for local elections by December, and a human rights agenda that focused on the protection of women, children and minorities. However, various groups, especially Islamist groups, exerted considerable pressure on the government and several initiatives were reversed.
In January, judges of the higher judiciary were asked to take an oath on the Provisional Constitutional Order (PCO) of 1999 which had suspended the Constitution. The Chief Justice and five Supreme Court judges refused to take the oath and seven High Court judges were not asked to take it. The Supreme Court in May declared the military takeover of October 1999 valid under the doctrine of necessity and gave the government three years to complete its declared objectives.
In April, former prime minister Nawaz Sharif was convicted of hijacking a plane and other offences and sentenced to two terms of life imprisonment. His co-accused were acquitted. The trial before an antiterrorism court did not fully meet standards for fair trial. In July, Nawaz Sharif was sentenced to i4years' imprisonment and disqualified from holding public office for concealing the purchase of a helicopter. In December Nawaz Sharif was pardoned in both cases and exiled, according to the government on "humanitarian grounds".
Political arrests and detention
Following a ban in March on political activities in public, dozens of political activists were arrested for breaches of the ban. Most were released within a short
184
Amnesty International Report 2001
PAK
time but several politicians of the Pakistan Muslim League were charged with sedition for making speeches criticizing the military government. All were freed on bail.
Some members of the previous government continued to be detained without charge or trial. Former minister for information Mushahid Hussain, who was arrested in October 1999, was held under house arrest, although there were no charges against him. In July, he was cleared of any suspicion of corruption. He was released in December.
The government in September announced a review of the cases of members of the Muttahida Qaumi Movement (MOM) who had been held for over five years without trial. Other people charged under previous governments continued to face trial. Rehmat ShahAfridi, editor-in-chief of The Frontier Post. arrested in April 1999, continued to be tried on drugs charges although the prosecution failed to produce any compelling evidence against him. Before his arrest, his newspaper had documented official corruption. He appeared to be a prisoner of conscience.
Dozens of activists and others were detained without charge or trial, most often to extract money from them. Many such detainees were tortured. Q Two children, 12-year-old Madad Ali and 14-year-old Sanjar, were discovered on 6 October by High Court officials in a police station in Hyderabad. Their brother had filed a petition alleging that they had been held without charge since 14 September and that police had demanded money for their release. Forty other jseople who had not been charged were found in that police station. No action was known to be taken against the police officers involved.
Anti-corruption trials
The anti-corruption drive did not always uphold the rights of the accused. Corruption charges were brought under the National Accountability Bureau Ordinance (NAB) of 1999 against dozens of bureaucrats, businessmen and former politicians. Several NAB provisions contravene international standards for fair trial, including one allowing detainees to be held for up to 90 days in executive, not Judicial, custody; a requirement that detainees prove their innocence; and thedenial of bail. Some NAB detainees were held for longer than 90 days, were reportedly detained and interrogated by military personnel, and were denied access to lawyers and family.
Torture/ ill-treatment
Torture in police custody and jails, often of people held in unlawful detention, continued to be widespread, leading to at least 25 deaths.
0	Mushtaque Maseeh was arrested on 31 July by police in Hyderabad because of a property dispute. He was beaten severely and suffered a skull fracture. When his condition deteriorated, he was released on
1	August. Doctors in the Civil Hospital noted marks of beating on his head, neck and torso. He died on
8 August after an operation. A judicial inquiry identified the official responsible and ordered him to
be charged with murder, but he had reportedly not
been arrested by the end of 2000.
Children
Abuses of children in custody continued to be reported. Members of the Lahore High Court Bar Association who visited Lahore Camp Jail noted sexual abuse of juvenile detainees by staff and inmates. In Hyderabad Central Jail, some 50 juvenile prisoners who had been regularly sexually abused by adult convicts were discovered by a newjail administration in September. They were transferred to the juvenile ward and disciplinary action against prison staff was announced.
Extrajudicial executions
Extrajudicial executions of criminal suspects declined sharply compared to previous years. Eighteen cases were reported. Victims of extrajudicial executions were mostly criminal suspects. Q Mumtaz, who was riding a bicycle in the early hours of 30 September in Karachi, was shot dead by police officers on a motorbike when he refused to stop at their signal. They claimed that Mumtaz had opened fire at them. The police officers were arrested for exceeding their powers but it is not known if they were charged.
In October, a Punjab police report detailing hundreds of killings by police during so-called "encounters" since 1990 was presented to the provincial government for further investigation. Between February 1997 and October 1999,967 criminal suspects were killed by police in "encounters" in Punjab province.
Lack of protection for religious minorities
In April, the Chief Executive announced procedural changes to the blasphemy law, which carries a mandatory death penalty, to prevent its misuse. One month later, following protests by Islamists, the amendment was withdrawn. At least 60 people were charged with religious offences. About half of these were detained as prisoners of conscience. O In August, Yousuf Ali was sentenced to death for blasphemy after a manifestly unfair trial amid media vilification. He denied ever having claimed to be a prophet of islam as alleged. Several prosecution witnesses admitted that they had not fully understood what the Sufi mystic taught. His appeal was pending. Q At least a dozen members of the Ahmadiyya community were killed by people opposing their beliefs. In November, five Ahmadis including two children were killed by a mob in Sargodha district and their bodies mutilated with axes. No one was arrested. Although the police were asked for help as tension built up before the incident, they took no protective or preventive steps. A judicial inquiry was set up.
Women
In August the National Commission on the Status of Women was set up to protect women's rights, but it had no enforcement powers, contrary to earlier government commitments. Its chairperson announced the setting up of a national ombudsperson for women's
Amnestylnternational Report 2001
185
PAL
issues and stated that laws discriminating against women would be amended.
In October, the Interior Minister said that "all discriminatory laws against women should be repealed or amended to remove any discrimination against women". Women's rights activists and a Senate-ordered study published in 1997 had identified the Zina Ordinance as discriminating against women, but no action to amend laws was taken during 2000. 'Honour' killings
The Chief Executive, General Pervez Musharraf, announced in April that "killing in the name of honour is murder and will be treated as such". In August, a governmental legal aid unit was set up in Larkana to ensure that honour killings would be treated as murder. In the absence of public awareness raising, these innovations had no impact on the rising trend of violence against women, including honour crimes-Scores of honour killings were reported from all parts of the country.
O In November, a man in Karachi who suspected his ii-year-old daughter of having an illicit affair axed her to death. When her mother and nine-year-old sister tried to protect her, he killed them too. He gave himself up to police stating that he had no regrets as "it was a question of honour".
Children
Children were subjected to abuses in custody and in the community, for instance as child labourers or bonded labourers. Domestic violence against children, including sexual abuse, remained widespread. The state made virtually no attempt to prevent these abuses or to hold the perpetrators to account.
The juvenile Justice System Ordinance 2000 was promulgated in July, establishing juvenile courts to try juvenile suspects, it bans the death penalty for anyone less than 18 at the time of the alleged offence as well as the use of fetters and corporal punishment. The Ordinance contains no reference to around 50 juveniles already under sentence of death. Q Mohammad Saleem, who was around 14 at the time of an alleged murder in June 1998, was sentenced to death in December 1998 by a military court. He was acquitted in January 1999, tried and sentenced to death again in June 1999—despite the prohibition of double jeopardy. He remained in a death cell with adult convicts as his appeal remained undecided.
Death penalty
At least 52 people were sentenced to death, the majority for murder, many by special courts whose procedures do not fully conform to international standards for fair trial. A verdict in March sentencing Javed Iqbal to be publicly strangled, cut into pieces and thrown into acid for the serial killing and mutilation of dozens of runaway children was opposed by human rights activists. The Council of Islamic Ideology declared it un-lslamic. An appeal was pending.
Three men due to be executed in April in Gujrat, Punjab province, for killing four people in a domestic dispute in 1989 were released when the family of the
victims pardoned them and accepted compensation under the q/5asand diyat\av/. Many others who could not offer adequate compensation continued to be held in death cells, sometimes for many years. There were nearly 4,000 people on death row.
At least six people were hanged. In April, Pakistan voted against a UN Commission on Human Rights resolution condemning the death penalty and calling for a reduction in executions.
Al visit
Al delegates were invited by the government to the Convention on Human Rights and Human Dignity in April and met several officialsto discuss aspects ofthe human rights program. The delegates earlier travelled to different parts of Pakistan to research the human rights situation after the military takeover
