NICERIA
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NICERIA
Head of state and government: Qlusegun Obasanjo
Capital: Abuja
Population: 111.5 million
Official language: English
Death penalty: retentionist
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Optional
Protocol to the UN Children's Convention on the
involvement of children in armed conflict; Optional
Protocol to the UN Women's Convention; Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court
lliere was no investigation into continuing incidents of alleged extrajudicial executions or excessive use of force by the security forces which have taken place since the restoration of civilian government in May 1999. One amputation and several public floggings were carried out under new laws introducing corporal punishment in some northern states. Evidence was heard in the trial of security officers allegedly involved in an attempted extrajudicial execution in 1996, and hearings started before a commission of inquiry investigating human rights violations committed before May 1999.
Background
There were sporadic outbreaks of civil unrest throughout the year in which hundreds died. As many as 1,000 people were killed in intercommunal violence between Christian and Muslim communities in February over the possible extension of Sharia (Islamic law) in Kaduna State, northern Nigeria, and in reprisal killings in eastern Nigeria. In May renewed rioting in Kaduna led to a further 300 deaths. Further unrest over Sharia left 10 dead in Gombe State in September and at least nine in Niger State in November. In October more than 100 people died in Lagos, southwest Nigeria, in intercommunal conflict.
There was widespread lack of public confidence in the severely under-resourced police force, and lynchings of criminal suspects by vigilante groups or community militias sometimes provoked intercommunal conflict. The government condemned the emergence of ethnically based militias and, following serious unrest, carried out widespread arrests of those allegedly involved. It increased the size of the police force and deployed troops in support of the police in areas of unrest. Special task forces were posted to the oil-producing Niger Delta area where thefts from fuel pipelines rose, scores of people died in explosions at pipelines ruptured by thieves and oil company personnel continued to be taken hostage for ransom.
In April, the Supreme Court ruled that the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights and other international treaties took precedence over domestic law. This overturned a March 1996 ruling by the Federal High Court that international legal obligations were overruled by military decrees which prohibited recourse to the courts. Human rights lawyer Gani Fawehinmi had challenged his detention without charge or trial from January to November 1996 on the grounds that it violated rights guaranteed by Nigeria's Constitution and the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights, incorporated into Nigerian law in 1983.
Killings by the security forces
There were reports that the security forces used excessive force in response to protests against oil company activities and thefts from oil pipelines in the Niger Delta, resulting in several reported fatalities. Earlier killings and ill-treatment by the security forces since May 1999 were not subject to independent investigation. Local human rights organizations expressed concern at persistent reports that suspected armed robbers were killed by the police instead of being prosecuted.
Q In April police shot dead at least one person, 18-year-old Barinaadua Gbaraka, and burned down homes in K-Dere village in Rivers State after residents opposed a road-building project by the Shell oil company. Several residents were detained and reportedly assaulted. Ledum Mitee, lawyer and leader of the Movement for the Survi-val of the Ogoni People (MOSOP), was among 11 people subsequently released on bail to await trial on charges including arson and attempted murder. His family home was among those burned. The trials were repeatedly adjourned.
182
Amnesty International Report 2001
NIC
Q A police task force in Abia State reportedly killed at least three people in the Osisioma area suspected of stealing fuel from ruptured pipelines: in May Sunday Benjamin, in June Ikechi Nwogu and in October Egbulefu Ugwuzor. In September and November the task force was alleged to have looted and burned property of relatives or associates of suspected fuel thieves.
Q House of Assembly representatives in Delta State reported that in September members of a paramilitary police unit had fired indiscriminately at residents of several villages, burned and ransacked homes, and looted property.
Q In October at least eight youths were reportedly killed when troops guarding an oil facility belonging to the Agip oil company fired on protesters from the nearby town of Olugbobiri, Bayelsa State. About 50 youths in speedboats had reportedly intended to shut down production after disagreements over a road-building project.
Q The Benue State authorities said that a judicial commission of inquiry would investigate the reported killing of 10 people by members of a federal paramilitary police unit in December. Raids on villages in the Mbalim and Mbasombo districts reportedly took place after community leaders reported pipeline leakages and contamination of farmland and waterways to the Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation.
Cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment
At least one amputation and several floggings were carried out. New laws introduced or announced in 10 northern states during 2000 provided harsh corporal punishments for offences including theft, sexual offences, consumption of alcohol and gambling. Several men and at least one woman were publicly flogged for offences which included smoking marijuana, gambling and carrying women on the back of motorcycle taxis.
The federal government did not challenge the unconstitutionality of some of the new state laws, but advised citizens to seek legal redress in the higher courts, including the Supreme Court. However, sentences were often carried out immediately after conviction and most defendants had no defence lawyer or means to bring an appeal. Q In February Sani Mamman, aged 18, was given 100 lashes in Zamfara State for having sexual relations outside marriage.
Q In March a farmer in Zamfara State, Buba Bello Jangebe, had his right hand amputated after being convicted of stealing a cow. He failed to appeal against the sentence within the allotted 30 days. Q In August Sule Sale received 86 lashes for drinking alcohol and stealing cigarettes in Katsina State. Q In September, 17-year-old Bariya Ibrahim Magazu was sentenced to 100 lashes for having sex outside marriage. Unable to produce sufficient witnesses to substantiate her allegation that she had been coerced into having sex with three men, one of whom had made her pregnant, she was sentenced to a further 80 lashes
for her accusations against the three men, which were judged to be false.
Political imprisonment
Supporters of opposition groups were arrested and charged with offences, sometimes following unrest, in circumstances suggesting that their detentions were politically motivated.
Q In May, 54 supporters of the Movement for the Actualisation of the Sovereign State of Biafra (MASSOB) were arrested in Aba, Abia State, and charged with treasonable felony and unlawful assembly They were alleged to have conspired to overthrow the government by declaring an independent state. In August a magistrates' court struck out the charges of treasonable felony on the grounds that the court lacked jurisdiction to try a federal offence and granted them bail on the charges of unlawful assembly. Q In early September Alhaji Sule Zurmi, an opposition party leader in Zamfara State, was arrested with 17 supporters and detained for more than two weeks. Charged with responsibility for an attack on the State Governor's convoy in which a number of people were injured, their arrest and prosecution were criticized by federal government officials as arbitrary and politically motivated. They were released pending trial. Q In October the authorities arrested scores of suspected supporters of the O'odua People's Congress (OPC), an organization set up to defend the interests of the Yoruba ethnic group. They were charged with offences including murder, arson and illegal possession of arms, in connection with unrest in Lagos and Ilorin, southwest Nigeria, in which more than 100 people, mostly from the Hausa community, died. Dr Frederick Fasehun, a leading OPC member, was released on bail by the Lagos High Court after three weeks. Immediately rearrested to face similar charges in Ilorin, he was again released on bail by a magistrates' court in Ilorin. The Lagos High Court subsequently dismissed the charges against him for lack of evidence.
Death penalty
No death sentences or executions were known to have been imposed during 2000. In January President Olusegun Obasanjo granted an amnesty to prisoners under sentence of death: those who had been awaiting execution for 20 years were to be pardoned and released; those under sentence of death for between 10 and 20 years were to have their sentences commuted to life imprisonment.
In December the government reportedly proposed to reintroduce capital punishment for the sabotage of fuel and power supply networks.
impunity
Trials
The trial of five former security officials, including former Chief of Army Staff General Ishaya Bamaiyi, continued. They were charged with the attempted murder in February 1996 of Alex Ibru, newspaper publisher and former government minister. The state's main prosecution witness, a former army sergeant, told
183	Amnesty International Report 2001

PAK
the High Court in Lagos that he and a senior police officer had fired at Alex Ibru. He said he had been part of a hit squad acting on the orders of superior officers.
No evidence was heard in two cases against former security officers and Mohammed Abacha, son of former head of state General Sani Abacha. They were charged in connection with the shooting dead in June
1996	of Kudirat Abiola, wife of the imprisoned winner of the 1993 presidential elections, Moshood Abiola, and the unexplained death in custody in December
1997	of Shehu Musa Yar'Adua, a former deputy head of state.
Human Rights Violations Investigation Commission
In October the Human Rights Violations Investigation Commission, set up in June 1999, began hearing evidence from witnesses to human rights violations committed between 1966 and the return to civilian rule in May 1999. From more than ii,ooo petitions received, it selected about 150 of the most serious cases for public hearing in five sessions in Abuja and other major cities, V^itnesses before the Commission described killings and torture by agents of the military government of General Sani Abacha (1993 to 1998). Former Captain U.S.A. Suleiman described being held in an unventilated and unlit cell and forced to stand all night by being chained hand and foot to a wall. Former Colonel Gabriel Ajayi described being tied up, hung from the ceiling and beaten. Both had been detained in connection with an alleged coup plot in 1995. The family of Alfred Rewane. a 79-year-old opposition supporter murdered in 1995, alleged that senior security officials had told a military investigation in 1998 of a government conspiracy to kill him and that supposed suspects arrested by the police had since died in custody. A former police commissioner told the Commission that security police had planted explosives to incriminate an airport manager killed ina car bomb explosion at Lagos international airport in 1996. This and other bomb blasts were widely believed to have been the work of the security services and were used as a pretext to imprison pro-democracy activists. Security officials denied the most serious accusations or refused to appear before the Commission. In December former head of state General Ibrahim Babangida and former military and police security chiefs obtained a High Court injunction restraining the Commission from compelling them to appear before it, on the grounds that their personal security would be at risk. They had been invited to give evidence about the alleged extrajudicial execution in 1986 of Dele Giwa, editor of Newswafc/jmagazine.
Al country report and visit Report
• Nigeria:Timefof justice and accountability (Al Index:
AFR 44/014/2000) Visit
An Al delegation visited Nigeria inJulyfortalkswith government officials and for meetings with local Al members and other human rights groups.
