GUYANA
REPUBLIC OFCUYANA
Head of state: Bharrat Jagdeo Head of government: Samuel Hinds Capital: Georgetown Population: 0.8 million Official language: English Death penalty: retentionist
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
There were reports of torture and ill-treatment by the police, and of police shootings in disputed circumstances. There were 23 people under sentence of death at the end of 2000. Prison conditions amounted to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment
Background
The Constitution Reform Committee, a parliamentary body, received proposals for the amendment of the 1985 Constitution. The Guyana Defence Force proposed
that the Constitution should outline the criteria for the deployment of troops in maintaining law and order.
Torture/ill-treatment
There were reports of torture and ill-treatment, including sexual assault, by the police. Victims included criminal suspects and their relatives. Individuals were arrested and detained arbitrarily, and were held in incommunicado detention by the police in conditions falling well below international standards.
In January, the Guyana Police Force reported that 40 officers had been disciplined or charged with a criminal offence as a result of complaints made during 1999, A further 15 were charged in June following complaints made in 2000.
O In September Mohammed Shafeek, aged 47, died in Brickdam police lock-up. An autopsy reportedly revealed multiple injuries, including fractures, cuts and bruises. Police failed to inform his family of his death. Initial police reports stating that he had been killed by fellow inmates conflicted with eyewitness reports which maintained that he had been injured by the police and was subsequently denied medical attention.
Police shootings
There were several police shootings in disputed circumstances, some of which appeared to be possible extrajudicial executions. Inquests had still not reportedly taken place into many killings by police, including the cases of Bonitus Winter and Shawn Nedd. Q On 7 January, Dexter Randolph was fatally shot by police officers in Tiger Bay in disputed circumstances. Eyewitnesses alleged that he was dragged from under a police vehicle and shot. The police asserted that he was armed,
Q On 14 April, an inquest jury concluded that no one could be held criminally responsible for the death of Victor Bourne, who was fatally shot by police in June 1998 at his home in Rasville, Al called for the findings of the inquest to be published in full.
Death penalty
Twenty-three people were under sentence of death at the end of 2000, including two women. Death sentences continued to be handed down, and some defendants in death penalty cases did not have adequate legal representation.
The executions of Ravindra Deo, Oral Hendricks, Ganga Deolall and Lawrence Chan were scheduled for 7 and 8 February 2000. All four meii were granted stays of execution, to allow the courts to consider further legal applications.
Q Lawyers acting for Abdool Saleem Yasseen and Noel Thomas, two death row prisoners, argued that the Court of Appeal had shown bias, since its three judges had publicly stated their support for capital punishment in comments on their cases. The outcome of the two men's appeals were still pending at the end of 2000.
Prison conditions
There were reports of ill-treatment in prison and of conditions which amounted to cruel, inhuman or
118
Amnestylnternational Report 2001
HAI
degrading treatment. Severe overcrowding, aggravated by long delays in the judicial system, contributed to outbreaks of infectious diseases including tuberculosis. Children continued to be held alongside adult prisoners, and human rights organizations were denied access to prisoners.
International organizations
In March AI attended a hearing on Guyana of the UN Human Rights Committee in New York, USA, and in April AI urged the government to implement in full the Committee's recommendations, in particular those concerning the use of excessive force by law enforcement officials, the obligation to treat those deprived of their liberty with humanity and the need to stop detaining children with adults.
Guyana failed to comply with its international reporting obligations under the UN Convention against Torture.
In April the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (lACHR) wrote to the government regarding the "disappearance" of Franz Britton, who has not been seen since he was detained in police custody in January 1999. The government failed to respond.
Following a hearing in October on the situation in Guyana by the lACHR in Washington, USA, the lACHR agreed to send a delegation to investigate human rights abuses.
AI visit
In February AI delegates visited Guyana to conduct research, and met government officials including the Ministerfor Home Affairs and the Minister for Foreign Affairs.
