NEP
NEPAL
KINGDOM OF NEPAL
Head of state: King Birendra BirBikram Shah Dev
Head of government: Girija Prasad Koirala (replaced
Krishna Prasad Bhattarai in March)
Capital: Kathmandu
Population: 23,9 million
Official language: Nepali
Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Optional
Protocol to the UN Children's Convention on the
involvement of children in armed conflict
Grave human rights violations by police, including extrajudicial executions, "disappearances" and torture, were reported in the context of the "people's war" declared by the Communist Party of Nepal (CPN) (Maoist) in 1996. There were also widespread abuses by members of the CPN (Maoist), including deliberate killings, hostage-taking and torture. The National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) was finally set up in May, but had not become fully operational by the end of 2000. Impunity and the lack of independent investigation into human rights violations remained a majorconcern.
Background
Political instability adversely affected the human rights situation. A power struggle within the leadership of the Nepali Congress Party (NCP), particularly between Girija Prasad Koirala and Krishna Prasad Bhattarai, resulted in the former replacing the latter as Prime Minister in March. However, the power struggle continued and hampered efforts to initiate a dialogue between the government and the CPN (Maoist).
In April, the National Defence Council (NDC), a constitutional body, was activated by Prime Minister Koirala as one of several measures to address the Maoist "people's war". The implementation of a government decision in April to establish a paramilitary force called the Armed Security Force was delayed and it had not been set up by the end of 2000, In October, the NDC decided to station the army in district headquarters.
There were several attempts to initiate talks between the government and representatives of the CPN (Maoist), including by the Consensus Seeking Committee, set up in December 1999 and chaired by former Prime Minister Sher Bahadur Deuba (a political ally of Krishna Prasad Bhattarai). Among the conditions for talks set by the CPN (Maoist) was a demand for an inquiry into the whereabouts of CPN (Maoist) members and supporters who had "disappeared".
The mandate of the Consensus Seeking Committee was not extended when it ended on 16 October. The Committee's final report described the Maoist "people's war" as a political problem arising from the country's socio-economic structure, and urged the government
to hold talks with the CPN (Maoist) about their demands, apart from those calling for constitutional changes. It also suggested that the security apparatus be strengthened. In November, the prospects for dialogue worsened after a released Maoist leader alleged that the government had forced him to denounce the CPN (Maoist) at a press conference.
Extrajudicial executions
According to official figures, between November 1999 and October 2000,221 people were killed by police in the context of the "people's war". The government claimed there were no civilians among them and that all members of the CPN (Maoist) were killed during exchanges of fire. However, there was clear evidence that dozens of civilians and many members of the CPN (Maoist) were unlawfully killed. There were also reports that riot police killed several civilians, including two children, when they opened fire during demonstrations in December.
The UN Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions visited Nepal in February. In her report, she stressed the urgent need to put in place strong, independent and credible mechanisms to investigate and prosecute human rights abuses,
Q Seven civilians and two alleged members of the CPN (Maoist) were killed on 14 January at Thaku, Achham district, when police went on a rampage in the village. Early that day, members of the CPN (Maoist) had coerced villagers into attending a "cultural program". When a police patrol thought to be from Kamal Bazar police station approached the village, the organizers fled. Police started shooting at random. Four villagers were shot dead while taking shelter in a tea shop, three others while running away. Two members of the CPN (Maoist) reportedly surrendered to the police and were interrogated for several hours. Villagers later heard shots. The next morning, police forced villagers to carry nine dead bodies to the river. The bodies were cremated there despite protests from the relatives of the dead villagers.
Q On 22 February, 15 unarmed civilians were allegedly killed by police in Rukum district, apparently in reprisal for the killing of 15 policemen during an attack by members of the CPN (Maoist) on a police station at Ghartigaun, Rolpa district, three days earlier. Police dragged people outside their houses and shot them. They also burned the houses. All those killed were reportedly supporters of the NCP, including Trivan Wali.
'Disappearances'/unacknowledged detention
There was mounting evidence of secret detention of people arrested on suspicion of being members of the CPN (Maoist). The whereabouts of 13 people arrested during 2000 remained unknown at the end of the year. More than 50 other "disappearances" reported in 1998 and 1999 also remained unclarified.
Several of those released after long periods of unacknowledged detention gave evidence of torture and of cruel, inhuman and degrading conditions of detention.
178
Amnesty international Report 2001
NEP
Q Tara Prasad Bhusal, a i7-year-old school student, was rearrested by police on 25 June from the premises of the Butwal Appelate Court, immediately after ajudge had ordered his release. He was held in secret detention at three different places for one month and kept blindfolded and with his hands tied for most of the time.
Torture/ill-treatment
Torture continued to be reported on a regular basis. Q A student from Kailali district who was arrested in May on suspicion of being a Maoist sympathizer was tortured for three days at the district police office. He was subjected to prolonged beatings on his back and legs with a stick and to falanga (beating on the soles of the feet).
Arbitra ry a rrests a nd detention
An estimated i, 600 people were serving a prison sentence or awaiting trial in relation to crimes allegedly committed in the context ofthe "people's war" at the end of 2000. The abuse of the Public Security Act, under which political activists were repeatedly rearrested despite court orders for their release, continued. The authorities also increasingly used provisions of the Anti-State Crimes and Penalties Act, 1989, which includes crimes such as insurrection and treason carrying punishments of up to life imprisonment. It appeared that the police were using this law to prevent suspects' release on bail pending trial.
Abuses by the CPN (Maoist)
According to official sources, members of the CPN (Maoist) killed 82 civilians between November 1999 and October 2000. Most of them were members of the NCP Dozens of people were also taken hostage or abducted. Children as young as 14, including girls, were recruited. There were also reports that those held captive were subjected to cruel punishments.
Al wrote to the leadership of the CPN (Maoist) in June to express concern about abductions of civilians, including children. In a public statement issued on 23 August, the leadership denied that children had been recruited into the "people's army". In a further letter sent in October, AI clarified that it opposed any form of recruitment, training or deployment of children under the age of 18, including for support roles such as messengers or porters. Al also sought clarification about "death sentences' reportedly imposed by Maoist "people's courts" on seven people as announced during a press conference organized by the Rolpa district unit of the CPN (Maoist) on 27 August. Q Man Singh Shahi, the President of the Association of Victims of Maoists in Kalikot district, was killed on 1 September.
â Shiva Prasad Bhatta, headmaster of the Mandali Primary School in Pandrung, Gorkha district, was killed on 22 August.
Q Three 14-year-olds and a 15-year-old student from Janapriya High School in Jajarkot district were taken away by members of the CPN (Maoist) from their school
hostel in Dashera on 8 and 9 June respectively. They had not returned by the end of 2000.
Impunity
There was a complete lack of accountability for extrajudicial executions. Investigations were internal and conducted by the police or the Ministry of Home Affairs, and in most cases the bodies of victims were disposed of without any inquiry.
Accountability in relation to "disappearances" and torture was also lacking. In August the Ham district court awarded compensation of Rupees 5,000 (US$70) to Hasta Rai, who had been tortured by police at Aitabari police post in November 1999. This was only the second case in which compensation had been awarded since the Torture Compensation Act came into force in 1996.
National Human Rights Commission
Members of the NHRC were appointed in May, more than three years after the law for the establishment of the Commission was enacted. The institution experienced logistical and financial problems arising from lack of government cooperation. The police also appeared reluctant to cooperate with the NHRC.
Al country report and visits
Report
• Nepal: Human rights and security (Al Index: ASA
31 /OOl /2000) Visits
A high-level delegation, including Al's Secretary General, visited Nepal in February. During a further visit in November, the Secretary General launched a campaign to eradicate torture in Nepal.
179	Amnesty international Report 2001

