NICARAGUA
A man was shot dead by police in disputed circumstances. A number of asyium-seekers were detained.
Background
The government announced a major review of existing systems and legislation for the protection and promotion of human rights. In June, the Ministry of Justice issued a set of guidelines for government policy advisers on the application of the 1993 Human Rights Act and the implications of the prohibition of discrimination due to come into effect from 2002. A parliamentary committee commenced a major inquiry into New Zealand's part in the promotion and implementation of international human rights standards, particularly in the Asia/Pacific region.
Police shooting
In April, a police officer at Waitara, Taranaki, shot dead Steven Wallace, a 23-year-old Maori man, in disputed circumstances- The shooting led to racial tension which was investigated by the national Human Rights Commission. In August, a police inquiry found that the shooting was lawful, and that "race was not an issue". According to the police, Steven Wallace had been acting in an irrational, destructive and threatening manner, and had smashed the windows of a police car and various buildings before being confronted by two armed officers. About one minute later, one of the officers fired four shots at Steven Wallace, allegedly as he came to within six metres of them holding a baseball bat. Police admitted that there had been delays in providing medical attention, investigations by a coroner and the Police Complaints Authority had not been completed by the end of 2000.
Detention of asylum-seekers
A number of asylum-seekers who arrived without travel documents were detained. In May the High Court in Auckland ruled that such detention may become illegal once it ceases to be reasonable under the circumstances.
REPUBLICOF NICARAGUA
Head of state and government: Amoldo Alemán Lacayo
Capital: Managua
Population: 5 million
Official language: Spanish
Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes
Human rights defenders were threatened. Police officers injured demonstrators and detainees.
Background
The effects of the agreement signed in 1999 between the two main political parties, the ruling Partido Liberal Constitucionalista, Constitutionalist Liberal Party, and the Frente Sandinista de Liberación Nacional, Sandinista National Liberation Front, started to emerge. They were criticized by sectors of civil society as a threat to the democratic process and to basic human and civil rights. For example, electoral reforms introduced in January established new rules for the creation of political parties, imposing difficult conditions, and changed the requirements for the registration of candidates. During municipal elections in November, a significant number of parties were left out of the contest and candidates were prevented from running for office.
Human rights defenders
Human rights defenders and non-governmental organizations were threatened. In March government ministers accused Vilma Núñez de Escorcia, President of the Centra Nicaragüense de Derechos Humanos (CENIDH), Nicaraguan Centre for Human Rights, of obstructing police work. Pro-government newspapers and radio stations suggested her death might be the answer to the unrest in the northeast of the country. CENIDH had been investigating the killing of three men, former members of an armed group of ex-soldiers, the Frente Unido Andrés Castro (FUAC), Andrés Castro United Front. In May an anonymous letter with further threats was delivered to CENIDH's office.
Government authorities, including President Amoldo Alemán, were reported to have strongly
180
Amnesty International Report 2001
NIC
criticized non-governmental organizations, calling them "merchants of poverty" among other things. In some cases these attacks came after the groups had criticized the authorities' handling of aid for victims of natural disasters.
O In December, DorothyVirginia Granada, a 70-year-old US citizen working as a nurse in a cooperative clinic in Mulukuku, North Atlantic Autonomous Region, was harassed and intimidated by police and immigration agents. The clinic had faced allegations of attempting to influence its patients politically; of illegal abortions; of treating members of FUAC; and of not being properly registered to practise. President Amoldo Alemán had attacked Dorothy Granada in the press, claiming that she was an illegal resident. On 8 December, 15 heavily armed anti-riot police, accompanying immigration officers, entered her house without a warrant to arrest and deport her. She was not at home at the time. She went into hiding in fear of another display of force and her health deteriorated. On 13 December, the Minister of the Interior, José Marenco, announced that her residency had been revoked on 7 December, and that she had 24 hours to leave the country. However, a judge reviewing the case annulled the minister's decision and ruled that she was a legal resident. The minister appealed and a final decision was pending at the end of 2000..
National Police
Police officers reportedly used excessive force, causing injuries to demonstrators, and ill-treated detainees. In March about 20 demonstrators protesting against law reforms were beaten and injured by members of the National Police who used rubber bullets and tear gas against them. Dozens of police officers were expelled from the force for corruption or abuse of authority, including beating people in their custody. In August a police officer was expelled from the force after a photograph appeared in the press showing him kicking two young men.
AI action
AI called on the government to protect human rights defenders and others who were being threatened.
