SPA
SPAIN
KINGDOM OF SPAIN
Head of state: King Juan Carlos I de Borbón Head of government: José María Aznar López Capital: Madrid Population: 39,6 million Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes 2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Optional Protocol to the UN Children's Convention on the involvement of children in armed conflict;Optional Protocolto the UN Women's Convention; Rome Statute ofthe International Criminal Court
There was unprecedented racist violence against foreign workers, mainly from North Africa, in El Ejido (Almería). Allegations of race-related ill-treatment by police officers increased. A large rise in the numbers of undocumented foreign nationals arriving on southern shores prompted claims that the authorities were failing to provide basic humanitarian care and that detention facilities were inhuman and degrading. A new law came into force that severely restricted the rights of undocumented immigrants, fined companies for transporting them, and provided for an accelerated expulsion procedure. Allegations of ill-treatment in prisons persisted, as did allegations of torture made by suspected members ofthe Basque armed group EuskadiTa Askatasuna {ETA), Basque Homeland and Freedom. ETA committed numerous human rights abuses in which 23 people, the majority civilian, were shot dead or killed by car bombs and many others, including children, were injured. There was an increase in acts of "street violence" by groups reportedly close to ETA, including arson, bombings and death threats. The government proposed new penal measures, including increased penalties for minors convicted of politically motivated violence.
Torture/ ill-treatment
Police brutality continued to be widely reported and there was a rise in allegations relating to ill-treatment of immigrants or others of non-European ethnic origin. Allegations were mainly of beatings with truncheons, punches, kicks, slaps and insults by officers of the local, national and autonomous police forces, A number referred to ill-treatment of immigrants, including minors, in the Spanish North African enclaves of Ceuta and Melilla, and there were criticisms about police passivity in connection with ill-treatment of immigrants in El Ejido where, in February, several days of race riots had forced some foreign workers to flee to the foothills of the mountains.
Allegations of torture made by ETA suspects held in incommunicado detention persisted. In April the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) described a 1997 visit to ETA prisoner Jesús Arkauz Arana.
The CPT commented that his account of ill-treatment by Civil Guards, following expulsion from France and while being held incommunicado, was technically credible and "the manner in which he described the sensation of losing consciousness as a result of asphyxiation was particularly convincing". It recommended a "general investigation of a thorough and independent nature... into the methods used by members of the Civil Guard when holding and questioning persons" suspected of involvement in armed bands. The CFT subsequently expressed disappointment that the Spanish authorities had still not carried out such an investigation. It also found that examining Judges and magistrates "could be more proactive" when they receive allegations of ill-treatment, Q A judicial inquiry was opened in October into allegations that municipal police officers severely ill-treated two Algerians, Hassan U. and Said M. The Algerians claimed that they were beaten by truncheons both before and after transfer to a police station in Ceuta. Said M,, a 17-year-old minor, reportedly lost consciousness during the beating and was revived with water from a rubber hose, with which, at the same time, he was beaten. While lying on the ground he was also allegedly kicked and insulted. Both Algerians were reportedly stripped to the waist and then taken to a police vehicle, again beaten, and left in the area of Calamocarro, where they had first been detained.
Deaths in custody
Q Antonio Augusto Fonseca Mendes, a native of Guinea-Bissau resident in Madrid, died in police custody while on holiday in Arrecife (Lanzarote) in May, His family claimed he had been severely beaten by police officers and photographs revealed a number of bruises on the body. A first autopsy found no sign of external ill-treatment but a second concluded unequivocally that a fatal injury was dealt to the right side of the neck by a "blow with a blunt instrument". A forensic opinion ordered by the judge to investigate the two apparently irreconcilable autopsy findings reportedly concluded that Antonio Fonseca had probably died of natural causes. The grounds for this finding were not clear. The police offered a series of different and contradictory explanations for the death. Al was concerned that in September the Interior Minister told Congress that there was no evidence of police ill-treatment, even though the judicial investigation was still under way and a number of serious questions remained unresolved, Q In December Abdelhadi Lamhamdi, an undocumented Moroccan reportedly trying to flee after disembarking on the coast of Tarifa (Cádiz), died after being shot by a Civil Guard who was pursuing him with a gun in his hand. Government representatives stated that the shot had been fired accidentally. An Algeciras court opened an inquiry into the death. A disciplinary investigation was ordered by the Director General of the Civil Guard and the officer was suspended.
Ill-treatment of immigrants
The numbers of undocumented African nationals disembarking on the beaches of the Campo de Gibraltar
222
Amnesty International Report 2001
SPA
and Canary Islands — including pregnant women, children and babies—rose considerably. More than 14.000 were reported to have been intercepted. Many were from Nigeria, Senegal and Sierra Leone. Particular concern was expressed by some non-governmental organizations about the failure to provide basic humanitarian care for many suffering from malnutrition, hypothermia and physical injuries. Most of these immigrants were allegedly held in overcrowded, inappropriate and insanitary conditions in the cells of Civil Guard barracks and a municipal sports centre before being served with expulsion orders and released. Concern was also expressed about delays in recovering bodies from beaches and a lack of diligence in identifying them.
In October, hundreds of undocumented Moroccans were deported to Ceuta and from there to Morocco, allegedly in conditions that infringed international standards, including maritime regulations on safety at sea. The Moroccans were reportedly held, sometimes handcuffed, inside police vans or buses in the holds of ferries. They were reportedly overcrowded and at risk of injury from the movement of other vehicles in heavy seas, subject to great heat and engine noise, and without access to safe escape routes in time of danger. Some ferry captains alleged that police officers had pressured them to accept the Moroccans as cargo rather than as passengers, in contravention of the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea,
Excessive use offeree against demonstrators
Several reports alleged excessive use of force by police or Civil Guards at demonstrations. In August an inquiry was opened by the Catalan government, the Generalitaî, into the action of the Catalan autonomous police, the Mossosd'Esquadra, during a demonstration by hundreds of Moroccan workers at Aitona (Lleida). Some alleged they had been beaten and subjected to degrading treatment. In November a demonstration outside Congress by pacifists demanding the abolition of the external debt reportedly resulted in 24 injuries and seven arrests. The Interior Minister told Congress that, while police intervention had been justified, the action of some officers had been "inappropriate" and "excessive". In Galicia too there were reports of excessive use of force by police officers.
Ill-treatment in prisons
A second report published in April by the CPT concerned its 1998 visit to police and Civil Guard headquarters and prisons, including Soto del Real (Madrid) and Salto del Negro (Las Palmas de Gran Canaria). The CPT reported that a number of prisoners at Salto del Negro alleged they had recently been ill-treated by prison staff. They referred to blows with batons while handcuffed to beds in the prison's segregation unit. The delegation found that inmates were handcuffed to beds in the unit on a "fairly regular" basis, sometimes for prolonged periods of time. Allegations of ill-treatment, such as blows with batons, were also received from Soto del Real. The CPT noted that the Spanish authorities had undertaken to address
excessive duration of confinement in restraints and the failure to provide the prisoners concerned with mattresses, but added that the above-mentioned use of handcuffs was "unacceptable".
Lasa/Zabala trial
In April the National Court sentenced former General Enrique Rodriguez Galindo and former civil governor julen Elgorriaga to a total of 71 years' imprisonment each for the illegal detention and murder in 1983 of ETA suspects José Antonio Lasa and José Ignacio Zabala. Three former Civil Guard officers were sentenced to between 67 and 69 years' imprisonment, and two— including a former secretary of state already convicted in another case—were acquitted. However, the court set aside charges of torture on the grounds of insufficient evidence and, more controversially, ruled that there was not enough evidence to prove that the accused had been members of an armed band, the Grupos Antiterroristas de Liberación (QAl). General Galindo — who had been promoted to that rank in 1995, after the emergence of evidence that he could be implicated in the murders — and his co-defendants appealed against their convictions to the Supreme Court. However, the National Court ordered the immediate detention of those defendants who were not already in prison, including General Galindo, without awaiting the verdict of the Supreme Court. The case had taken 16 years to come to trial, during which time crucial evidence was undoubtedly lost.
Abuses by armed groups
Following the ending of its cease-fire the previous November, ETA embarked on a new campaign of violence, which killed 23 people in various parts of Spain and injured many others, including children. Many of those who died were civilians, including local councillors, a journalist, an industrialist, a chief prosecutor and a judge. Several murders were attempted. The new ETA campaign was accompanied by an escalation in "street violence" Ckale borroka"), aimed at creating an atmosphere of intimidation and fear. In June Al urged ETA to put an immediate end to its campaign of killings of civilians and expressed concern about the "kale borroka" attacks. In October Al groups began a campaign to call ETA's attention to fundamental standards of human rights and international humanitarian law.
Abuses were also committed by the armed political group, the Grupos de Resistencia Antifascista Primero de Octubre (GKAPO). In November, following the arrest of presumed GRAPO leaders in Paris, France, a police officer was shot dead in Madrid.
The government responded to the ETA killings and "kale borroka "attacks with proposed new measures to curb politically motivated violence. These sought to increase the length of detention for minors convicted of terrorist offences and to create a special juvenile court within the National Court in Madrid. In November Al urged the authorities to ensure that any eventual legislation respect in particular the UN Children's Convention. Al also recalled its long-standing
223	Amnesty International Report 2001

SRI
opposition to Spanish laws governing incommunicado detention, These remain in force and. in AI's view, facilitate torture.
In October and November, lo people involved in various Basque political, social or cultural organizations were arrested, on the grounds of alleged links with ETA. They included Sabino Ormazabal Elola, a well-known writer, journalist, ecologist and supporter of non-violent civil disobedience. He and others arrested and subsequently detained denied belonging to, or collaborating with, ETA.
Updates
in January the Provincial Court of Vizcaya acquitted, on grounds of lack of evidence, two national police officers charged with the torture of Rita Margarete Rogerio, a Brazilian national, in 1995. The officers denied the charge and were supported by the public prosecutor, who did not accept that Rita Rogerio had been ill-treated. In an earlier trial in 1998 three officers had been acquitted of raping her. In 1999 the Supreme Court referred to the acquittal for rape as "horrifying" because, while a lower court had found it "luminously clear" that Rita Rogerio had been raped by a uniformed officer in police custody, the police witnesses had conspired to lie and conceal the fact, refusing to identify the person they must have known was the rapist. As a result the Supreme Court had no alternative but to uphold the acquittal. Two officers had subsequently been temporarily suspended from work.
In December a court in Sevilla sentenced a Civil Guard, a shooting instructor, to one year's imprisonment for killing Miriam Gómez Cuadrado in 1999. The Civil Guard shot at the car in which she was travelling after her boyfriend tried to escape a breathalyzer test. The boyfriend was sentenced to one year's imprisonment for reckless driving and disobedience.
Al country reports and visits Report
• Concerns in Europe, January-June 2000: Spain (Al
Index: EUR 01 /003/2000) Visits
An Al delegate visited Spain in October to gather information. In November Al delegates visited Vitoria and Madrid in connection with a campaign against ETA killings. They met the Spanish Secretary of State for Justice to discuss concerns about proposed new legislation aimed at minors involved in politically motivated acts of violence, as well as ETA abuses.
