AJ IK! STAN
REPUBLICOFTAJIKISTAN
Head of state: Imomali Rakhmonov
Head of government: Akil Akilov
Capital: Dushanbe
Population: 6.1 million
Official language:Tajik
Death penalty: retentionist
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Optional
Protocol to the UN V\/omen's Convention; Rome Statute
ofthe International Criminal Court
At least 38 people were reportedly sentenced to death during 2000, although the true number was believed to be much higher. One death sentence was known to have been commuted. There were reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees.
Background
In February the People's Democratic Party won Tajikistan's first multiparty parliamentary elections since the signing of the 1997 peace agreement. However, independent international observers stated that the elections had been tainted by official meddling.
The opening of the bicameral parliament, following elections to the upper chamber in March, officially concluded the peace process. The body responsible for implementing the peace agreement, the National Reconciliation Commission, was dissolved. The mandates of the UN Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) and of the Commonwealth of Independent States peacekeeping force ended in May and September respectively.
The Tajik, Kyrgyz and Uzbek authorities joined forces against the banned Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan (IMU) following incursions by IMU members into Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan (see entries on Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan).
By the end of December, some 10,000 refugees heading for Tajikistan to escape the fighting in northern Afghanistan were reportedly stranded in very poor conditions along the Panj River which marks the Tajik-Afghan border. Despite Tajikistan's international obligations, the refugees were denied access to Tajik territory.
The level of political violence remained high. Among the victims of assaults and killings were government officials and former commanders of the United Tajik Opposition.
Reportedly at least 200 suspected supporters of the banned Islamist party, Hizb-ut-Tahrir, Party of Liberation, faced criminal proceedings. The charges against them included anti-constitutional activity, fuelling religious strife and calling for the overthrow of the existing state system.
Torture/ill-treatment
There were reports of torture and ill-treatment by law enforcement officers in detention facilities. One detainee was allegedly forced to undergo an abortion.
236
Amnesty International Report 2001
TAN
Q Dilfuza Numonova, who was held in Dushanbe Prison under sentence of death (see below), stated that she was taken to hospital and forced to have an abortion in late January. Under Tajik law pregnant women cannot be executed. She maintained that she was innocent and had confessed to murder under duress.
Death penalty
Under the criminal code, 15 offences were punishable by death. However, there were no comprehensive statistics on the use of the death penalty, which remained a state secret. One death sentence was known to have been commuted. Q Rustam Baybulatov was sentenced to death by Dushanbe City Court in September. He had been convicted of charges including "banditry" in connection with his alleged membership of a banned armed group. He had been arrested in February after threatening a former UNMOT staff member in order to extort money. The chairman of the court reportedly stated that in passing sentence the court had taken into account the fact that the victim belonged to an international organization and was a foreign national. Q Injanuary, 21-year-old Dilfuza Numonova was convicted of killing her lover in November 1999 and sentenced to death by Dushanbe City Court. Her trial was reportedly unfair. In July, following international pressure, her sentence was commuted to 15 years' imprisonment by the Presidium of the Supreme Court of Tajikistan.
