MOZAMBIQUE
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE
Head ofstateJoaquim Alberto Chissà no
Head of government: Pascoal Mocumbi
Capital: Maputo
Population: 19.7 million
Official language: Portuguese
Death penalty: abolitionist forali crimes
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court
Reports of human rights violations including torture and killings of suspected criminals by the police increased, while efforts to reform the criminal justice system and to retrain the police continued. At least 41 people were shot dead bythe police during demonstrations. There was political unrest during protests against the 1999 election results, which led to arrests. Prisons remained severely overcrowded. At least 80 people died in police custody.
Background
Severe flooding hit Mozambique for several weeks in February and March with devastating effects on the economy and infrastructure. About 700 people died and 330,000 became homeless. Landmines laid during the civil war, which ended in 1992, became dislodged, posing a new threat to the population. Many donor governments cancelled part or all their bilateral debts.
Following parliamentary and presidential elections in December 1999, which were won by the ruling Frente para a Libenaçao de Moçambique (FRELMO). Mozambique Liberation Front, the government was reappointed in January. In February President Joaquim Chissano was sworn in for a further five-year term. Provincial governors were appointed in July. The opposition coalition, Resistênda Nacional Moçambicana-Uniâo Eleitoral iKEUAMO-DE), Mozambican National Resistance—Electoral Union, requested a recount of the vote and an inquiry into allegations of vote-rigging, but this was turned down. In January RENAMO's president, Afonso Dhlakama, threatened to set up a provincial government in the six northern and central provinces where the coalition had won a majority. He also moved the party 's headquarters to Beira, Sofala province, despite a law requiring political parties to be based in the capital. Protests against election results led to clashes with the police and the arrest of RENAMO members.
In January skirmishes between FRELIMO and RENAMO-UE in llha de Moçambique, Nampula province, resulted in several people being injured and damage to property, as RENAMO members protested against the election results. In May there was a report that RENAMO sympathizers had rioted in Morrumbala, Zambézia province, in protest against the local authorities.
173	Amnesty International Report 2001

MOZ
Excessive use of force
In May the police used excessive force to deal with a demonstration. Six people were shot dead and several wounded in Aube, in the Angoche district of Nampula province, as they peacefully demonstrated outside the police station to call for the release of a RENAMO member arrested earlier. Domingos Francisco Damiao, Feliciano José Carlos and Nanlissa Alberto died instantly while Mussa Aiuba died later in hospital. The bodies of two other demonstrators who had been shot were later found outside the town. Six people were arrested including Alvaro Chime Chale, RENAMO's representative in Angoche, who was arrested in Maputo several days after the incident and charged with inciting civil disobedience. The six were subsequently released on bail. They had not been tried by the end of 2000, nor had an inquiry into the incident been held.
In early November, 41 people died in clashes with the police during nationwide demonstrations organized by RENAMO to protest against the results of the December 1999 elections. Scores of demonstrators were wounded and hundreds arrested. Dozens of detainees were reportedly tried and some sentenced to prison terms in rapid trials, raising concern about their fairness. Others were still held uncharged at the end of 2000. There had been no inquiry into the killings and woundings by the end of 2000.
Police abuses
The number of allegations of police abuses increased, including in Maputo where there had been an improvement in previous years. There were reports of police officers assaulting street vendors who refused to comply with demands for illegal payments. Some officers were dismissed for abuse of power and misbehaviour, Q In July, two police officers in Maputo were arrested and charged with the indecent assault of five women and a security guard during an interrogation in connection with a theft in the restaurant where they worked. The officers had not been tried at the end of the year.
Torture/ ill-treatment
Reports of severe beatings or other forms of torture in police stations in order to extract confessions increased, including in Maputo where the number of cases reported in previous years had slightly declined. Many of the incidents were not investigated. Q Marcelino Mutolo and his brother-in-law Luciano Homo were tortured in Inhambame city in January by members of the Polfda de Intervengao Rápida (PIR), Rapid Intervention Police, who were apparently investigating a vehicle theft. Marcelino Mutolo was held handcuffed to a pillar in a mosquito-infested cell and made to stand for hours before he and Luciano Homo were taken outside the city. The two men were pushed to the ground and severely beaten and had shots fired above their heads. Both men were released uncharged several days later. Marcelino Mutolo reportedly had to pay a large sum of money to the police. No investigation was known to have been initiated.
Suspected extrajudicial executions
There were further reports of extrajudicial executions of suspected criminals by the police, which did not appear to have been investigated by the authorities. The police often claimed that the victims were shot when trying to escape. Q Gildo Joaquim Bata, who was accused of possession of a gun, and Tomás Paulo Nhacumba were arrested in Maputo in March. The day after their arrest the police took them in handcuffs to Gildo Joaquim Bata's home and demanded money from relatives for their release. As the families were unable to pay, both men were apparently taken back to the police station and subsequently "disappeared". Three days later their bodies were found in the morgue where they had been registered under different names. The body of Gildo Joaquim Bata had a bullet hole in the forehead while that of Tomás Paulo Nhacumba had one bullet hole in the forehead and one in the heart. The police claimed that both men had been shot while trying to escape. By the end of 2000 no investigation had been carried out.
Deaths in detention
At least 80 people died in suspicious circumstances in custody in Montepuez, in the northern province of Cabo Delgado, in late November. They had been arrested two weeks earlier during nationwide demonstrations called by RENAMO. Many of the deceased were RENAMO members. A team of investigators, including pathologists, concluded that the deaths were caused by suffocation. However, they were only able to perform post-mortem examinations. Survivors told Mozambican human rights organizations that on the night of the incident, at least 96 people were held in a cell at the police station which measures 7m x 3m. Human rights organizations which investigated the deaths claimed that the detainees had also been deprived of food and that guards ignored the detainees' cries for help. By the end of 2000 a commission of inquiry had been set up but was not yet functioning.
Prison conditions
Some attempts were made to improve prison conditions by processing cases more quickly and allowing bail. Nevertheless, prisons remained severely overcrowded- In June the president of the Parliamentary Commission on Justice, Legality and Human Rights stated that prison conditions violated human rights and degraded human life, adding that 65 per cent of the inmates were in pre-trial detention.
174
Amnesty International Report 2001
