MEXICO
UNITED MEXICAN STATES
Head of state and government: Vicente Fox Quesada
(replaced Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de León in December)
Capital: Mexico City
Population: 98,8 million
Official language: Spanish
Death penalty: abolitionist for ordinary crimes
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: UN Refugee
Convention and its 1967 Protocol; Optional Protocol
to the UN Children's Convention on the involvement
of children in armed conflict; Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court
Torture, death threats and political killings continued to be reported in 2000. Three prisoners of conscience remained in prison. Human rights defenders and journalists were harassed and intimidated. Hundreds of cases of torture, "disappearance" and extrajudicial execution from previous years remained unresolved.
Background
Elections in July resulted in the unprecedented defeat of the candidate for the ruling Partido Revolucionario Institucional (PKI), Institutional Revolutionary Party, which lost the presidency for the first time since the party was established in 1929. At his inauguration ceremony on i December, President Vicente Fox of the Partido de Acción Nacional, National Action Party, told Congress that "Mexico will no longer be held up as a bad example in matters of human rights. We will protect human rights as never before, respecting them as never before and seeking a culture that repudiates any violation and punishes the guilty," He also pledged to reform the economy, tackle poverty, crime and impunity, and bring about a peaceful solution to the conflict with the Ejército Zapatista de Liberación Nacional (EIW), Zapatista National Liberation Army, the Chiapas-based armed opposition group.
President Fox's cabinet included the new post of Special Ambassador for Human Rights and Democracy, Human rights organizations severely criticized the appointment of an army general as Attorney General for the Republic, claiming that it ran counter to the new government's pledge to combat impunity.
Within days of assuming power President Fox ordered the army in Chiapas to return to their barracks and presented Congress with a bill, based on the San Andrés Accord on indigenous rights signed in 1996 by the EZLN and the previous government. The EZLN announced it was prepared to hold talks with the new government. Administrative jarovisions introduced in 1998 which hindered the access of foreign nongovernment organizations (NGOs) to freely conduct on-site monitoring of the country's human rights situation were lifted in late December.
168
Amnesty International Report 2001
M EX
In August Mexico City's legislature approved an addition to the Penal Code for the Federal District allowing for sentences of between 15 and 40 years in prison for public servants found responsible for enforced disappearance. In December, President Fox signed a technical cooperation agreement with the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, under which the UN is to provide Mexico with assistance to strengthen the protection of human rights. An amnesty law approved by the state of Oaxaca in December led to the release of some 30 political prisoners.
By the end of the year a judge in Mexico had not issued a ruling on an extradition request submitted by Spain in August against an Argentine citizen accused of torture during the military government in Argentina (see Argentina entry).
rbitrary detention, torture and ill-treatment

The detention of criminal suspects without a judicial order remained widespread. Many of the detainees were allegedly tortured while under criminal investigation. Prison inmates were subjected to ill-treatment.
The joint publication in October of a report by Al Mexico and four other national organizations recommending reforms designed to prevent torture, led the National Commission for Human Rights (CNDH), a federal body, to claim that torture was on the decline in Mexico. The national organizations replied that the CNDH underreported torture cases and that the problem was widespread,
Q In July, the president ofthe CNDH informed the Secretary of National Defense that two army officers "had violated [the] Fundamental Rights" of Rodolfo Montiel Flores and Teodoro Cabrera Garcia, including their right not to be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment as enshrined "in article 5 [...] of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights". The two men had been detained and tortured by the army in May 1999 following their peaceful protests about excessive logging in the forests of Guerrero. A prosecutor who opened an investigation into the allegations of torture concluded that the Public Ministry was not competent to take the investigation forward and had transferred the case to a military prosecutor in December 1999. In April a court sentenced Teodoro Cabrera to 10 years, and Rodolfo Montiel to six years and eight months' imprisonment. The sentences, based on drugs- and firearms-related charges, were upheld on appeal in October. Both men were prisoners of conscience. Q In October, a prisoner held in the Topo Chico Prison in Nuevo León state was reportedly ill-treated after human rights activists staged a peaceful protest outside the prison to launch Al's worldwide campaign against torture. A prison official accused inmate Héctor Perez Cordova of being responsible for the protest and added that "we're going to punish you for it". Héctor Perez Cordova was stripped naked, placed in solitary confinement for seven days, and deprived
of food and medicine needed to control his symptoms of multiple sclerosis.
Q In October, Remedios Alonso Vargas and her two adult sons, Irineo and Luciano Mederos Alonso, were reported to have been detained and beaten by the Guerrero State Judicial Police (PJE) and then held incommunicado for seven days. During their incommunicado detention members of the PJE threatened them with suffocation and the brothers had carbonated water forced up their nostrils. All three were forced to sign confessions which they claimed not to have read.
Chiapas and Guerrero states
For most of the year members of indigenous communities in Chiapas continued to suffer acts of intimidation and violence, including death threats. Those responsible were reported to be members of the security forces or so-called "paramilitary" or "armed civilian" groups acting with the support or acquiescence of local and regional authorities. In Guerrero, members of the Organización Campesina de la Sierra del Sur(OCSS), a peasant organization, were harassed, threatened or killed in circumstances suggesting they were being targeted for political reasons.
Q On I March, a dispute over land rights in the municipality of Nicolás Ruiz, Chiapas, turned violent when members of the Public Security Police reportedly aided Alianza Campesina, an armed civilian group linked to the PRl, to attack peasants affiliated to the opposition Partido de la Revolución Democrática. Democratic Revolutionary Party. At least three people received gunshot wounds and a fourth was beaten. In a separate incident on the same day, a group known as Los Chinchulines, reportedly accompanied by members of the Federal Judicial Police, attacked villagers in Nuevo Poblado de Nachejev, municipality of Chilón. The villagers were threatened with death if they did not leave the area.
Q In July, Marco Antonio Abadicio Mayo, an OCSS activist, was ambushed late at night and survived being shot in the chest and arm by a group of men, near Atoyaquillo, municipality of Coyuca de Benítez. The previous January he was allegedly beaten and threatened by members of the security forces and then released without charge. In April OCSS activists José Martínez Ramón and Felipe Nava Gómez were shot dead in Coyuca de Benítez. It was not known whether investigations were conducted into these incidents.
Prisoners of conscience
Three prisoners of conscience, including Rodolfo Montiel Flores and Teodoro Cabrera Garcia (see above) remained in prison.
Q Brigadier General José Francisco Gallardo served the seventh year of his 28-year sentence. He had been convicted by a military court of a range of military offences after publishing an article calling for the appointment of a military ombudsman in Mexico. In 1996 the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights
169	Amnesty International Report 2001

MOL
recommended to the Mexican government that he be immediately released.
Human right defenders and journalists
Mexican human rights defenders and journalists continued to suffer acts of intimidation, including death threats.
Q In February an anonymous caller rang the offices of the Cen tro de Estudios Fronterizos y Promoción de Derechos Humanos, Centre for Border Studies and the Promotion of Human Rights, and made death threats against its members. Much of the work of this NGO in Reynosa concerns abuses suffered by would-be illegal migrants wishing to cross from Tamaulipas state into the USA. Arturo Solis, the director of the NGO, was accused by the authorities of defamation after he alleged that officials at Mexico's National Institute of Migration were guilty of extortion and ill-treating illegal migrants and were implicated, together with criminal organizations, in aiding their entry into the USA. In July witnesses for the defence of Arturo Solis were threatened and one received a death threat. As a result two of them retracted statements made in his defence.
O Two men claiming to be officers of the Judicial Police reportedly abducted journalist Freddy Secundino Sánchez in mid-June, apparently because of his articles in the political magazine Época. When he arrived at his Mexico City home in a taxi, the men shoved him back into the taxi, pushed him to the floor and forced the driver at gunpoint to drive off. Holding a pistol to Freddy Secundino's head, they beat him about the face and chest, and threatened to kill him before releasing him. Three weeks later an anonymous caller told the journalist that he was going to die. Freddy Secundino filed a complaint about both incidents with the authorities.
Impunity
The authorities continued to be accused by Mexican and international NGOs of having failed to break the cycle of impunity which had characterized Mexico's human rights record over the past decades.
The arrest in August of two army generals accused of drug-trafficking reawakened accusations by victims' relatives and human rights defenders that both were implicated in hundreds of "disappearances" during counter-insurgency operations in Guerrero state in the 1970s. A proposal by opposition senators for a commission of inquiry into these "disappearances" was not successful. However, in November a human rights NGO was reported to have filed a complaint before the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic relating to 19 of the "disappearances" and two cases of torture.
The full circumstances surrounding political killings in previous years remained unclear. These included the massacre of dozens of students in Mexico City in 1968; the killing of 26 peasants in Aguas Blancas and El Charco, Guerrero state, in 1995 and 1998 respectively; and the killing of 45 indigenous people in Acteal in 1996 and a further 11 in El Bosque in 1998, in Chiapas state.
Al country reports and visit Reports
•	Mexico: Prisoners of conscience - Environmentalists Rodolfo Montiel and Teodoro Cabrera (Al Index: AMR 41/013/2000)
•	Mexico: Motherand two sons tortured (Al Index: AMR 41/058/2000)
Visit
Al delegates visited Mexico in January.
