QATAR
STATE OF QATAR
Head of state: al-Shaikh Hamad Ibn Khalifa Al-Thani
Head of government: al-Shaikh Abdullah Ibn Khalifa
Al-Thani
Capital: Doha
Population: 0.6 million
Official language: Arabic
Death penalty: retentionist
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: UN Convention
agai nst Tortu re__
The trial of more than 100 people charged with involvement in the failed coup attempt of 1996 was concluded. At least 33 defendants received lengthy prison sentences. One political detainee, 'Abd al-Rahman bin 'Amiral-Na'imi, remained held without charge or trial for a third consecutive year. At least three people were executed In the first executions recorded byAI in more than lOyears.
International human rights treaties
In January Qatar acceded to the UN Convention against Torture. This was the third major international human rights instrument to which Qatar has become a party. The others are the UN Children's Convention and the UN Convention against Racism.
Coup trial
At least 33 people were sentenced to life imprisonment for their involvement in the failed coup attempt of 1996. Of the 33 convicted, nine had been tried in absentia. A total of 85 other defendants were acquitted, in previous years Al expressed concern that many of the defendants in this trial were allegedly tortured to force them to confess. To Al's knowledge, there was no investigation into these allegations. Al had no details of the evidence on which the defendants were convicted. Both the defence and the prosecution launched appeals against the sentences.
O Fahd 'Abdullah Jasim Al-Malki, one of the defendants sentenced to life imprisonment, had been forcibly returned to Qatar from Yemen in August 1998. He was allegedly beaten while under interrogation.
Detention without trial
'Abd al-Rahman bin 'Amiral-Na'imi continued to be held without charge or trial and without the opportunity to
challenge the legality of his detention in a court of law. He was arrested in June 1998, after he sent a petition to the members of the Consultative Council (Majlis al-Shura). in which he criticized aspects of government policy. The government has failed to respond to Al's repeated requests for clarification of his legal status.
Torture/ill-treatment
Al continued to receive reports of torture and ill-treatment,
Q Mazen al-Khatib, a United Kingdom national, was allegedly tortured while awaiting trial after his arrest in December 1999, Mazen al-Khatib was alleged to have been forced to lie for seven hours on his back, with his hands handcuffed behind his back, and beaten around the neck and head with a stick. The government failed to respond to AI's request that these allegations be fully investigated.
Executions
Two men, Qader Aktar Hassan and Anis Qassem Dahnassi, and a woman, Fatima Yussef al-Din Sayed, all Indian nationals, were executed on 14 June in Doha prison. According to Al's records, these were the first executions in the country for more than 10 years. The last execution recorded by Al took place in October 1988,
