EQUATORIAL GUINEA
REPUBLICOF EQUATORIAL GUINEA
Head of state: Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo
Head of government: Angel Serafín Seriche Dougan
Capital: Malabo
Population: 0.4 million
Official languages: Spanish, French
Death penalty: retentionist
Harassment of peaceful political opponents, which has been common for many years, continued throughout 2000. Some prisoners of conscience continued to be held and peaceful political opponents or individuals exercising their right to freedom of expression were arrested and faced ill-treatment by government officials.
Background
The two main opposition parties — Convergencia para la Democracia Soc/a/(CPDS), Convergence for Social Democracy, and Unión Popular, Popular Union — found it increasingly difficult to mobilize their supporters, especially in the continental part of the country where government control is more intense. Against this background, municipal elections in May were marked by very low voter turn-out following a call by three opposition parties to boycott what they called an "electoral farce". This boycott led to a landslide victory for the ruling Partido Democrático de Guinea Ecuatorial(PDQE), Equatorial Guinea Democratic Party.
UN Commission on Human Rights
In April the UN Commission on Human Rights examined the report of the UN Special Representative on Equatorial Guinea who had visited the country in November 1999. The Commission urged the government to respect freedom of movement, association and expression. It called on the authorities to adhere to the UN Convention against Torture and to ensure that military jurisdiction (which has frequently been applied to civilians) is strictly limited to military offences committed by military personnel. After this,
the authorities appeared to be reluctant to allow the UN Special Representative access to the country and failed to respond to several requests for a visa.
Treatment of Bubi prisoners
In March, some 40 prisoners from the Bubi ethnic group who were convicted after an unfair military trial in 1998 were transferred from the main prison of the capital Malabo, on Bioko Island, to Evinayong, some 500km east of Malabo. This made it very difficult for their families to bring them medicine and food and provide support. Al launched an appeal expressing concern that as the prisoners had to buy their own food, and not all had money to do so, many could soon be nearing starvation. Most of these prisoners had been tortured in pre-trial detention and they had been held for two years in extremely harsh conditions. Many appeared to be prisoners of conscience, arrested solely on account of their ethnic origin.
Conditions for this group of prisoners improved slowly. Their families were given access to them, although the distance and cost made visits rare. The prisoners were allowed to work outside the prison and to meet people from the town. In December the President issued a decree in which he pardoned 14 of these prisoners, including Milagrosa Cheba, the only woman in the group.
Prisoners of conscience
Two members of the Fuerza Demócrata Republicana (FDR), Democratic Republican Force, an opposition political party which has been refused official recognition, were held for most of 2000. Mariano Oyono Ndong was sentenced in December 1999 to three years' imprisonment. He was accused of possession of "material of dubious provenance" after the security forces found a two-year-old Al appeal in his home, Antonio Engonga Bibang was also convicted in December 1999 on charges of "insults against the government and the Armed Forces", These two prisoners were pardoned by the President in December,
Four FDR members were arrested in May and reportedly tortured in Malabo. They remained detained without trial until December, when they were confined to their villages in the district of Mongomo.
Torture/ ill-treatment
Augusto Mba-Sa Oyana, a businessman with joint Guinean/Spanish nationality, was reportedly tortured in Black Beach prison in Malabo. He was arrested in July on. his arrival at Malabo Airport, from Yaoundé, Cameroon, where he resided. It appeared that he was suspected of having links with political opponents living abroad. Augusto Oyana escaped from prison in August but one of his friends, Jesús Miguel Ondo, was arrested, accused of helping him to escape, and reportedly tortured. Jesús Miguel Ondò was released without charge in December.
Threats to freedom of expression
The authorities ill-treated individuals seeking to exercise their right to freedom of expression.
96
Amnesty International Report 2001
ERI
o Pedro Nolasko, a journalist, was reported to have been physically assaulted in March by the Secretary General of the Ministry of the Interior after publishing an interview with the leader of an opposition party In April a newspaper vendor who was trying to sell issues of La Opinión— the newspaper published by Pedro Nolasko-— inside the building of the General Secretariat of the Government was reported to have been assaulted by the Minister Delegate of the Interior. There was apparently no investigation into these two incidents.
AI country report
• Equatorial Guinea: No free flow of information (AI Index: AFR 24/004/2000)
