ZAMBIA
REPUBLICOF ZAMBIA
Head of state and government: Frederick Chiluba
Capital: Lusaka
Population: 9.1 million
Official language: English
Death penalty: retentionist
Torture and ill-treatment by police during the arrest and interrogation of suspects was widespread. At least three people reportedly died as a result of torture. At least 11 men were sentenced to death, but no executions were reported.
Background
When Zambia transformed itself in 1991 from a one-party state to a multi-party system, the first country in southern Africa to do so, expectations were raised regarding improvements of human rights. However, in the run-up to the second multi-party elections in 1996, the government used various tactics to prevent opposition politicians from standing, including calling their citizenship into question. Among those stripped of citizenship was former president Kenneth Kaunda. Several members of his party were deported to Malawi. Government restrictions on the rights to freedom of expression and assembly intensified ahead of elections due in 2001.
Torture/ill-treatment
The police continued to torture arrested suspects as a routine part of criminal investigations. In at least three incidents the torture allegedly resulted in death. Some police stations were reported to have specially adapted rooms where torture of suspects regularly took place.
Q On 25 December Dave Muyembe died in police custody, reportedly after being tortured in connection with the theft of a vehicle.
Q A 20-year-0ld man accused of stealing money from his employer was reportedly handed over to Siavonga police on 2 September. While in custody he was reportedly tortured to extract a confession. On 5 September the employer discovered that one of his relatives had stolen the money and the man was released. The man filed charges against the police officer and police station, but later withdrew his charges allegedly after intimidation by local police. Q On II january Shadreck Selemani was arrested at his house accused of theft. He was reportedly tortured for two days in a police station before being charged, and sustained a deep cut in his left leg. After his acquittal he filed charges against the police. The case was still pending at the end of 2000,
Human rights defenders
The government appeared to be taking steps to inhibit the work of human rights defenders. In rural
areas, agents from the Special Branch of the police attended meetings of non-governmental organizations and opposition parties. In some cases they threatened people teaching human rights. In urban areas the Public Order Act, which requires those planning demonstrations to notify police in advance, was used to deny the right to hold peaceful demonstrations.
Q Several non-governmental organizations staged a demonstration on 17 January outside the main police station in Lusaka to protest against the failure of the police to investigate the rape and killing of several young girls. The organizers had applied for a licence well in advance and believed they had permission from the police. When the demonstration started the police dispersed the crowd violently and arrested 39 women, who were held overnight before being released without charge.
Freedom of expression
Zambia has a vibrant independent press. The Post, a leading independent newspaper, has been repeatedly targeted by the government. The editor, Fred M'membe, and several of its journalists, who were arrested in 1999, faced charges of espionage in connection with an article commenting on Zambia's lack of military capacity. They were freed on bail pending judgment. On 21 December 2000 the High Court acquitted the last of the accused, Fred M'membe.
Forcible exile
The government continued to use deportation as a method of suppressing dissent despite a ruling against it by the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights in 1999. Human rights defenders and opposition politicians were threatened with deportation during 2000.
Q Despite the ruling of the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights that the deportation of William Banda in 1994 to Malawi violated his human rights, the government refused to allow him to return. Q On 30 October the Supreme Court ruled that Kenneth Kaunda, the former president who had been stripped of his citizenship to prevent him standing in elections, is a Zambian citizen. Q On 4 January Abdul Majid Tickley, a United Kingdom (UK) citizen who had lived in Zambia for more than 54 years, was deported to the UK. The deportation followed a letter he published in The Posrwhich challenged the Asian community in Zambia to be mors active in politics.
Death penalty
During 2000 at least 11 prisoners were sentenced to death, bringing the number under sentence of death to more than 230. There have been no executions since •997-
There was increased debate over the use of the death penalty during 2000. In September the Minister for Legal Affairs addressed an abolitionist conference, arranged by the Catholic Commission for justice and Peace.
272
Amnestylnternatlonal Report2001
ZIM
Q Benjamin Banda and Cephas Kufa Miti, who were sentenced to death on 13 October 1999, appealed against their sentence In the first legal challenge to the constitutionality of the death penalty in Zambia. The case had a first hearing 14 December in the High Court, but no judgment had been passed by the end of 2000.
Al country visit
Al delegates visited Zambia in February and met members of Al and other human rights organizations.
