PER
DC
ERU
REPUBLICOF PERU
Head of state and government: Valentín Panigua (replaced Alberto Fujimori in November) Capital: Lima Population: 25.6 million Official languages: Spanish, Quechua, Aymara Death penalty: abolitionist for ordinary crimes 2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Optional Protocol to the UN Children's Convention on the involvement of children in armed conflict; Optional Protocol to the UN Women's Convention; Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
Hundreds of prisoners falsely charged with terrorism-related offences remained incarcerated. Torture and ill-treatment remained widespread. Civilians continued to be tried by military courts forthe terrorism-related offence of "treason". Human rights defenders, journalists and opposition leaders received threats as part of what appeared to be a pattern of systematic intimidation against those critical of the authorities.
Background
In September revelations that President Fujimori's adviser on intelligence matters, Vladimiro Montesinos, had bribed opposition members of Congress, and that the armed forces were involved in selling arms to the Colombian armed opposition, forced the President to announce new elections in which he would not run as candidate. Elections were scheduled for April 2001.
In November, only four months after he had been sworn in as president for a third term. President Alberto Fujimori was declared "morally unfit" by Congress after he resigned while visiting Japan amid allegations of corruption. Valentin Panigua, a congressman from the opposition party /4cc/ón Popular. Popular Action, who had just been sworn in as President of Congress, became President of the Republic. His transitional government will remain in power until July 2001, when the successful candidate in the 2001 presidential elections takes office.
The Organization of American States (OAS) sent a high-level mission to the country in June which made a number of recommendations, including that the authorities should ensure the independence of the judiciary, guarantee the independence of the media, and ensure transparency in the armed forces and the national intelligence services. The OAS, the Peruvian government, opposition parties, the Ombudsman and members of civil society including human rights defenders established a dialogue known as the Mesa de Diálogo lo discuss implementation of the recommendations.
Following Valentin Panigua's election, many of the Mesa de Diálogo's recommendations began to be
implemented. By the end of the year, Baruch Ivcher, the owner of a television channel who had to flee the country in 1997 after exposing human rights violations and corruption in the intelligence services, had returned to Peru; all the lawsuits against him were dropped-
impunity
In October, in exchange for implementing the OAS recommendations, the government proposed extending the amnesty laws and granting an amnesty to all those who had committed human rights violations, carried out acts of corruption, or were involved in drug trafficking during President Fujimori's terms in office. In 1995 the Peruvian government had legalized impunity by passing two amnesty laws which grant immunity from prosecution to all those who committed human rights violations between 1980 and 1995. The government's proposal to extend these laws was refused by the members of the Mesa de Diálogo. Vladimiro Montesinos
In September, Vladimiro Montesinos, presidential adviser in matters of intelligence, fled the country amid allegations of corruption and asked for political asylum in Panama. Since 1991 the National Intelligence Service, to which Vladimiro Montesinos was closely linked, had been accused of human rights violations such as the extrajudicial execution of 16 people in Barrios Altos, Lima, in November 1991; the "disappearance" and extrajudicial execution of 10 students and one professor of the La Cantuta University in July 1992; and the torture of Leonor La Rosa Bustamente and the killing of Mariela Barreto, both agents of the Army Intelligence Service, in 1997.
The Secretary General of the OAS urged the Panamanian authorities to grant Vladimiro Montesinos political asylum. National and international human rights organizations reminded the Panamanian authorities that under international law those suspected of having committed crimes against humanity cannot be granted asylum and that under the UN Convention against Torture the Panamanian authorities had a duty to investigate and bring to trial those suspected of such crimes.
In October Vladimiro Montesinos returned to Peru and went into hiding. Without having apparently issued a warrant for his arrest. President Fujimori informed the nation that he was personally searching for him. There was evidence that Vladimiro Montesinos fled the country again. He had not been arrested by the end of the year.
National Intelligence Services
In September human rights defenders expressed concern that Julio Salazar Monroe, chief of the National Intelligence Services from 1991 to 1998, had been appointed Ambassador to Venezuela. They urged the Venezuelan authorities to exercise their duty to investigate those suspected of crimes against humanity (see Venezuela entry).
In October, a law was passed to dismantle the National Intelligence Services.
190
Amnesty International Report 2001
PER
Administration of justice
In November Congress passed measures approved in the Mesa de Diálogo to restore the functions previously taken away from the National Council of the Magistracy and to abolish the executive commissions of the judiciary and Public Ministry, which had been blatant interference by the executive in the administration of justice. The Attorney General resigned because of her alleged links with Vladimiro Montesinos. Three judges of the Constitutional Tribunal who had been sacked in i997were reinstated.
Prisoners of conscience
More than 200 people falsely charged with terrorism-related offences remained in prison at the end of 2000. During President Fujimori's last years in office very few of these prisoners were released despite the findings of the .4dWoc Commission established in 1996. In its final report, published in August, the Commission stated that it considered that 35 prisoners should be pardoned. Two members of the Commission also recommended that a further seven prisoners should be pardoned. However, the Minister of Justice had not made his recommendation by the end of the year. In addition the report stated that the Commission had passed 246 cases to the National Council for Human Rights and that 1,440 cases which had been rejected by the Commission should be reviewed by the Council. The government of Valentin Panigua released 31 prisoners in November and December.
Q Maria Montenegro Montenegro, a mother of four, was sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment in 1994 for the terrorism-related crime of "treason". She had already been acquitted twice by two military tribunals. The charges against her were based solely on statements by two arrepentidos— members of the armed opposition who supply information leading to the capture of other alleged members in return for exemption from prosecution, or reduction in or remission of their sentences.
Unfair trials
Anti-terrorism legislation continued to allow civilians to be tried by military courts which were neither independent nor impartial. At least 1,800 people had been tried by military courts for the terrorism-related offence of "treason" since 1992. Peru withdrew from the Inter-American Court of Human Rights in 1999, claiming that it could not comply with the Court's ruling that four Chilean citizens convicted of treason by military courts in 1994 had to be retried under international fair trial procedures.
Q Lori Berenson, a US citizen, was sentenced to life imprisonment in 1996 by a military court. In August 2000, in an unprecedented move and following international pressure, especially from the USA, the military justice system ruled that there had been no evidence to convict her of the terrorism-related offence of "treason" and transferred her case to the ordinary courts. Her trial before a civilian court was continuing at the end of the year.
Intimidation and death threats
Journalists, human rights defenders, members of the opposition and their families were intimidated and threatened. However, there were no signs that the authorities took these threats seriously. It was widely reported that the harassment and intimidation was organized from within the National Intelligence Services (see above).
Torture/ill-treatment
There were reports of torture and ill-treatment and dozens of deaths in custody as a result. Methods of torture reported included beatings, electric shocks, submerging the prisoner's head in water and sexual assault.
Prison conditions remained harsh and in many cases amounted to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Q The prison of Challapaica was located at over 4,600 metres above sea level in the department of Puno. Access to lawyers, relatives and medical attention was seriously hindered by the remote location. Q Conditions at a prison located in the Callao Naval Base near Lima remained harsh. Leaders of the two armed opposition groups—Movimiento RevolucionarioTupac Amaru {MRTA), Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement, and Sendero Luminoso, Shining Path—were held in solitary confinement in underground cells and had no direct contact with their relatives during the visits which were only allowed once a month.
UN Human Rights Committee
In October, the Human Rights Committee reviewed Peru's fourth periodic report. The Committee recommended that the 1995 amnesty laws be annulled and that the authorities refrain from adopting a new amnesty law in the future. The Committee also urged the Peruvian authorities to ensure the independence and impartiality of judges and to create a mechanism guaranteed by law which would prevent the executive interfering in the judicial system. In addition the Committee urged the government to review all cases of civilians who had been tried by military tribunals and deplored the fact that the military justice system continued to be able to try civilians. The Committee expressed its concern at conditions in Lurigancho prison in Lima and at Yanamayo and Challapaica prisons in Puno department. Finally the Committee urged the Peruvian government, among other things, to respect freedom of expression in all circumstances.
Al country reports and visits
Reports
•	Peru: Breaking the circle of impunity and restoring the rule of law in Peru - Tasks which must be undertaken without delay during the transition (joint statement by Al and the International Commission of Jurists)
(Al Index: AMR46/038/2000)
•	Peru: UN Human Rights Committee's recommendations must be implemented (Al Index; AMR 46/037/2000)
191	Amnesty International Report 2001

PHI
• Peru:Torturecontinues unabated (Al Index: AMR
46/40/2000) Visit
In November, priorto President Alberto Fujimori's dismissal, a joint delegation from Al and the International Commission of Jurists visited Peru. The delegates met with the members of the Mesa de Diálogo, the Attorney General, the Ombudsman, and staff of the human rights division of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The Minister of the Interior and the Ministerof Justice did not agree to a meeting with the delegation.
