ARGENTINA
ARGENTINE REPUBLIC
Head of state and government: Fernando de la Rúa
Capital: Buenos Aires
Population: 37 million
Official language: Spanish
Death penalty: abolitionist for ordinary crimes
2000 treaty ratifications/sign atures: Optional
Protocol to the UN Children's Convention on the
involvement of children inarmed conflict; Optional
Protocol to the UN Women's Convention
Reports of killings by police and of ill-treatment and torture of detainees in police stations continued. A transvestite died, allegedly as a result oftorture. Two "disappearances" were reported. Lawyers working on human rights cases were subjected to death threats and harassment Courts abroad continued investigations into past human rights violations.
Background
Throughout 2000 there were strikes and demonstrations against government economic policies, unemployment and lack of social welfare; some were violent. Scores of demonstrators were detained for short periods and several were injured in clashes with the police. In November, Anibal Veron was shot dead, allegedly by the police in the province of Salta, during the clearing of roadblocks set up by demonstrators on a national highway near the town of General Mosconi.
32
Torture/ ill-treatment
There were continued reports of violence by provincial police. More than 80 people were reportedly killed by police in circumstances suggesting excessive or disproportionate use of force. There were reports of torture and ill-treatment of criminal suspects and detainees by police officers. Although a number of police officers were charged, the outcome of the majority of the complaints was unknown. Q In June, two university students—Marcelo Burchinski and José Luis Gherardi — were arrested in the streets of Posadas, Misiones Province, by a provincial police patrol. They were reportedly beaten and taken to the 4th police station where they were subjected to further beatings, stripped naked and drenched with buckets of cold water. They were subsequently released.
Q Vanessa Lorena Ledesma, a transvestite activist, was arrested in a bar in Cordoba in February. She was held in the police station Precinto /Swhere she was segregated from the other detainees, apparently because she was HIV-positive. Five days later she was dead. A police report recorded that she had died as a result of a "cardiac arrest". However, an autopsy reportedly indicated that her body showed strong evidence of torture. An investigation initiated by the Control Court No. 3 was subsequently closed. The
Amnesty International Report 2001
ARC
president of the Asociación Travestís Unidas de Córdoba. United Transvestites Association of Córdoba, was threatened and harassed by police after pressing for an investigation into the death.
Prison conditions
There were credible reports of harsh prison conditions, overcrowding and ill-treatment of detainees by prison guards. There was a spate of riots in protest at conditions.
Q Following a violent riot in March by prisoners at the Mendoza Provincial jail prisoners were subjected to beatings, intimidation and restrictions on their use of lavatories. Lawyers were not allowed to see the prisoners for four days. A diabetic prisoner, Raúl Eduardo Cobo Espinosa, died, allegedly as a result of a lack of medical attention. The authorities announced improvements in conditions and investigations into complaints.
'Disappearances'
Q José Segundo Zambrano and Pablo Marcelo Rodríguez "disappeared" in March in Mendoza city, Mendoza Province, after one of them had allegedly arranged to meet a member of the Mendoza Investigations police. According to the habeas corpus writ filed by the lawyers acting for the men's families, José Zambrano had been subjected to death threats by a member of the local police. The bodies of the two men were found in July. An investigation was initiated into this case. Carlos Varela and Diego Lavado, human rights lawyers representing the "disappeared" men's relatives, faced a campaign of intimidation and harassment.
Past human rights viotations
Judicial proceedings and investigations in Italy, Spain and Germany continued during the year in relation to human rights violations committed under the military government (1976-1983). Requests for extradition were submitted in a number of countries against former members of the Argentine armed forces. In Argentina, human rights violations committed under the military government are covered by the Full Stop and Due Obedience laws. Italy
In September, Jorge Olivera, a former member of the Argentine armed forces was released and allowed to return to Argentina after the Rome Appeal Court applied the statute of limitations to the crimes of which he was accused. He had been detained in Italy in August, after an international arrest warrant was filed by France, for the abduction and torture of French citizen Marie Anne Erize Tisseau who "disappeared" in 1976 in the Argentine province of San Juan.
In December an Italian court sentenced seven former Argentine military officers to prison terms ranging from 24 years to life. The trial in absentia, initiated in Rome, related to the abduction and murder of seven Italian citizens and the kidnapping of the child of one of them in Argentina under the military government.
Mexico
In August, Ricardo Miguel Cavallo, a former Argentine Navy officer was arrested in Cancun. A Spanish judge subsequently requested his extradition to Spain in connection with accusations of torture in the context of investigations initiated in 1996 by the Spanish National Court into human rights violations committed by the military government in Argentina. A French judge also filed an official request to interrogate Ricardo Miguel Cavallo in connection with human rights violations committed against 15 French citizens including the "disappearance" in Î977 of two French nuns. Argentina
In October, a court in Buenos Aires requested the extradition of Augusto Pinochet and six former members of the Chilean secret police for their alleged involvement in the killing in Buenos Aires in 1974 of the former head of the Chilean army, Carlos Prats, and his wife. In November in the same case the court found Enrique Arancibia Clavel, a former member of the Chilean secret police, guilty of double homicide and sentenced him to life imprisonment.
LaTablada case
Members oi ihe Movimiento Todos por la Pa tria (MTP), All for the Fatherland Movement, serving sentences ranging from 20 years to life imprisonment imposed in previous years, staged two hunger strikes in May and September to protest at the failure of the Argentine government to comply with the recommendations made in 1997 by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, regarding the prisoners' right of appeal. The prisoners, including prisoner of conscience Fray Antonio Puigjane, were tried under the Defence of Democracy Law, which denies the right of appeal. Although two draft bills were submitted to Congress to modify the Law, by the end of the year neither bill had been debated in parliament. In December, the prisoners ended the hunger strike after the life sentences of 11 prisoners were reduced by presidential decree.
Intergovernmental organizations
In October the UN Human Rights Committee examined Argentina's third periodic report on its implementation of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. In its concluding observations the Committee recommended that measures be taken to ensure that military personnel involved in past human rights violations "are removed from military or public service". It included its concern at allegations of widespread practice of torture and ill-treatment by police, and requested information on remedies available to complainants, the outcome of such complaints and the sanctions imposed as well as the specific responsibilities of federal and provincial authorities.
AI country reports and visit
Public statements
• Argentina: Bringing the law into line with international obligations-a challenge for the legislators (AI Index: AMR 13/012/2000)
33	Amnesty International Report 2001

ARM
•	Argentina:Transvestite dies in detention (Al Index: AM R13/004/2000)
•	Argentina: Casesof "disappeared" facing judicial closure in Germany (AMR 13/003/2000)
Visit
In December an Al delegate observed the trial of a provincial judge accused of malpractice in cases of human rights violations in Mendoza.
