EL SALVADOR
REPUBLIC OF EL SALVADOR
Head of state and government: Francisco Flores
Capital: San Salvador
Population: 6.2 million
Official language: Spanish
Death penalty: abolitionistforordinarycrimes
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Optional
Protocol to the UN Children's Convention on the
involvement of children in armed conflict
Efforts to end impunity for past human rights violations suffered a serious setback when the Supreme Court of Justice declared the General Amnesty Law to be constitutional. Work by a nongovernmental organization on behalf of children who "disappeared" during the armed conflict (1980 to 1992) did not receive official support. The Policía NacionalC/V//(PNC), National Civil Police, were responsible for human rights violations including killings of civilians and ill-treatment of demonstrators.
Background
The main opposition party, the Frente Farabundo Marti de Liberación Nacional, Farabundo Martí National Liberation Frent, won the largest number of seats in parliamentary elections in March.
More than 1,000 members of the PNC faced investigation and there was official confirmation that members of the PNC were involved in criminal activities such as kidnapping and robbery. Lack of confidence in the police and fear of reprisals meant that victims did not always report violations.
The judicial system was also the subject of review, leading to recommendations that some judges should be removed from their posts. Serious concerns about the performance of the Office of the Procurator for Human Rights persisted throughout 2000 (see below).
Impunity
Impunity for past human rights violations continued to be a serious concern. The judicial authorities failed to implement the recommendations of international bodies.
Q In March the Inter-American Commission on -Human Rights (lACHR) concluded that the state had violated the rights to life, to justice and to judicial protection enshrined in the American Convention on Human Rights in the case of Archbishop Oscar Arnulfo Romero, who was assassinated in March 1980. The Commission recommended that the state should thoroughly and effectively investigate the murder of Monsignor Romero; bring those responsible to justice in a fair and impartial trial; implement reparations; and bring national legislation into line with the Convention, which would involve annulling the 1993 General Amnesty Law,
94
Amnesty International Report 2001
ELS
The authorities dismissed the decision, stating that "the decisions of the Commission are not binding, they are recommendations", and took no steps to implement the recommendations,
Q The authorities failed to implement any of the recommendations made by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights in December 1999 in the case of the extrajudicial execution of six Jesuits, a domestic helper and her daughter by military personnel in 1989, They also resisted appeals from the Compañía de Jesús. Society of Jesus, (Jesuits) to bring to justice those involved in planning and ordering the murders, among them a former President of El Salvador, Military personnel who carried out the murders were tried and sentenced to prison terms in 1991, but were released in 1993 when the General Amnesty Law was approved.
The decision on the General Amnesty Law (see below) opened the door for proceedings to move ahead and the Attorney General made some attempts to take action on the case. These did not prosper because, for example, the wrong procedure was invoked. In December the Attorney General's Office was reported to have conducted a study which concluded that it could proceed to seek the definitive dismissal of the charges against the suspects because a period exceeding 10 years had elapsed since the crime was committed and no evidence had been brought against them. The Attorney General then requested the Third Magistrate's Court of San Salvador to effect this dismissal. The judge ruled that those alleged to have been the intellectual authors of the killings would not face charges because the event had happened over 10 years earlier and therefore, according to national law, criminal responsibility had lapsed. The judge did, however, recognize that the amnesty law did not apply to the suspects, following the October ruling of the Supreme Court. The General Amnesty Law On 3 October the Supreme Court of Justice issued a decision on a petition to declare the 1993 General Amnesty Law unconstitutional. The Court ruled that the law was constitutional but that in cases involving military personnel or civil servants involved in crimes which contravened the Constitution and had been committed between 1989 and 1994, it should be judicial officials who decide whether to prosecute or not. Although the decision would allow some cases to be prosecuted, the majority of human rights violations committed during the armed conflict, including massacres in which hundreds of civilians were killed, took place before 1989.
The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights had made it clear in a number of decisions that amnesty laws "remove the most effective measure for enforcing human rights, i.e., the prosecution and punishment of the violators" and were incompatible with the American Convention on Human Rights.
Office of the Human Rights Procurator
The crisis in the Office of the Human Rights Procurator continued. After a long drawn out process, which
included petitions from civil society organizations to remove him and an investigation by the Legislative Assembly, Procurator Eduardo Pertate resigned in January. The Deputy Procurator assumed the post in an acting capacity while a replacement was found. Although a process to elect a new Procurator formally started in July, an appointment had not been made by the end of the year. The election of the new Procurator was the cause of considerable concern as there were clear indications that, contrary to the spirit in which the Office had been created, the process and the post had been thoroughly politicized.
National Civil Police
Members of the police force were responsible for human rights violations including abuse of authority, torture and ill-treatment, and killings of unarmed civilians. In some cases investigations were initiated and charges brought against police officers. However, the sentences imposed often did not reflect the gravity of the violation. The PNC was also responsible for injuring health workers taking part in peaceful demonstrations against the privatization of health care, A journalist covering the demonstration was shot in the legs with rubber bullets and needed hospital treatment. Many people, including patients in neighbouring hospitals, suffered from the effects of tear gas used by the police.
Human rights defenders
Although reports of attacks, death threats or intimidation against human rights defenders were greatly reduced compared to previous years, the authorities continued to accuse human rights defenders and organizations of seeking to damage the institutions of the state or the peace of the country, or of defending delinquents.
Children
The non-governmental Asociación Pro-Búsqueda de Niñas y Niños Desaparecidos (Pro-Búsqueda), Association Pro-Búsqueda for the Search for Disappeared Children, located more children during the year. Its work suffered a setback in September when its proposal that the Legislative Assembly create a commission to investigate the whereabouts of children who "disappeared" during the armed conflict was rejected. The army, which had initially expressed its willingness to participate, changed its position. The commission would have had power to call people to provide information and would have had access to archives which were not open to Pro-Búsqueda.
Updates
Q William Hernández, executive director of the nongovernmental organization Asociación Salvadoreña de Desarrollo Integral para Minorías Sexuales, Entre Amigos. Salvadoran Association for the Integral Development of Sexual Minorities, Among Friends, was granted police protection following death threats received in 1999, There were further instances of attacks on the organization, including break-ins at their offices during which membership lists were taken.
95	Amnesty International Report 2001

EQU
Al country report and visit
Report
• El Salvador: The Supreme Court ruling is an affront to
victims (Al Index: AMR 29/005/2000) Visit
Al delegates visited El Salvador between September and Octoberto carry out research into human rights violations.
