ROMANIA
ROMANIA
Head of state: Ion lliescu (replaced Emil Constanti nescu in December)
Head of government: Arian Nastase (replaced Mugur Isarescu in December) Capital: Bucharest Population: 22.5 million Official language: Romanian Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes 2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Optional Protocol to the UN Children's Convention on the involvement of children in armed conflict;Optional Protocolto the UN Women's Convention
There were numerous reports of torture and ill-treatment by law enforcement officials. The intimidation and harassment of victims and witnesses impeded prompt and impartial investigations. Reforms to improve procedures on the use of force and firearms by police and to establish an independent complaints investigation mechanism had not been initiated by the end of 2000. Reforms to the Penal Code, the Penal Procedure Code, the Law on the Execution of Penal Sentences and legislation
196
Amnesty International Report 2001
ROM
governing the police, proposed by the authorities in September 1999, were also not adopted by parliament Conscientious objectors to military service were threatened with imprisonment.
Background
In November and December, the voters returned to power Ion Iliescu and the PartidulDemoçratieiSociale din Romania (PDSR), Social Democratic Party of Romania, who had been defeated in elections four years earlier. The ruling coalition had failed to deliver promised reforms and to end widespread corruption, and had presided over instability and a further deterioration in living conditions, with close to 40 per cent of the population below the official poverty line. During the presidential and parliamentary elections the extremist PartidulRomânia Mare (PRM), Greater Romania Party, gained significant support, especially amongyounger voters. The PRM leader, Corneliu Vadim Tudor, had previously made xenophobic and anti-Semitic remarks and had incited intolerance against the ethnic Hungarian and Roma communities. Leaders of the PDSR claimed that they would not seek to form a coalition with the PRM, a party whose support they had enjoyed in the previous 10 years, and with whom they shared government between 1992 and 1996.
Torture/ ill-treatment
Ill-treatment and torture by law enforcement officers continued to be widespread. Many incidents occurred during police investigations into criminal complaints, when force was allegedly used to extract "confessions" from suspects. Police often charged their victims with a misdemeanour such as "insulting a police officer" or "disturbing the peace". In a few incidents the police ill-treated peaceful demonstrators or those who engaged in legitimate political activity.
A number of victims of il I -treatment who f i 1 ed complaints or whose cases were widely publicized were subsequently intimidated and harassed. As a result, some withdrew their complaints. As in the past, the authorities did not acknowledge that harassment took place, failed to provide adequate protection to the complainants and failed to investigate the incidents. Q In July Marian lonel Pavel was summoned to the police station in Ciochina to answer questions about the theft of a horse. When he refused to confess he was reportedly punched, beaten with truncheons and kicked by three police officers. He was subsequently released without charge. Q In January Silviu Rosioru and a friend were drinking at a bar on the BuzSu-Ploiesti road. Silviu Ro$ioru reportedly made a flippant remark about officers of the Buzau emergency intervention police sub-unit, who were sitting at a nearby table. On hearing it, theyallegedly threw him to the floor, handcuffed him, kicked him and beat him with their batons. When he and his friend tried to escape, the police officers dragged Silviu Rosioru out of the taxi-cab and placed him in their van where they beat him on the way to the police station. He was later fined for allegedly insulting the bar staff and refusing to provide identification. His
signature on a confession was allegedly forged. As a result of the beating, Silviu Rosioru suffered multiple bruises on his chest, abdomen, thigh and buttock, & In November the PDSR mayor of TSrgusor, Constanta county, apprehended three university students who were putting up election posters for Convenpa Democrats din Romania-2000 (CDR-2000), Democratic Convention of Romania—2000. They were taken to the mayor's office where one of them was allegedly beaten. After they left the town, they were stopped by a local police officer, who reportedly assaulted them and tried to run them down with his vehicle.
Investigations
Although the authorities reportedly initiated investigations into complaints oftorture or ill-treatment, in most instances investigations were not conducted promptly and impartially. Complaints were often dismissed on technicalities. Q In September, information was received from the Ministry of Justice concerning the investigation into the 1998 police raid in the village of Meri?ani when six people had been ill-treated. None ofthe police officers was charged, on the grounds that the victims "did not lodge complaints,,, accompanied by medical papers or other evidence". The Ministry did not comment on the fact that investigations into torture and ill-treatment are legally mandatory and not dependent on the victim's consent or ability to provide evidence. In this case the victims could not obtain a forensic medical certificate because the police had kept their identity cards for 11 days. The Ministry of Justice explained the legal procedures for retaining identity cards, but omitted to state whether these rules had been respected in this case.
Q Another report from the same ministry, concerning the a I leged i I l-treatment of Dumitru Auras Marcu and his wife in 1998, contained copies of 16 witness statements, including some by people who had denied any knowledge of the incident when approached after the event by an Al delegate. The statements contained contradictory views on the manner in which the victim had been restrained by police officers, casting doubts on the veracity of the officers' version of events. The authorities did not make public a full report of the investigation which would have explained how the acting prosecutor assessed the evidence when deciding not to charge the suspected officers with any criminal offence.
Failure to reform the police force
The relative impunity enjoyed by police officers who committed human rights violations was in part perpetuated by the government's failure to reform the Ministry of the Interior. The Law on the Status of Police Officers, which would have demilitarized the Ministry of the Interior, and amendments to the Law on the Police Force were not adopted by the end of 2000, Q In April, Adrian Pitu, a former major in the police force, was tried in absentia by the Bucharest Military Tribunal on charges of tampering with or destroying documents. He was sentenced to two years'
197	Amnesty International Report 2001

RUS
Imprisonment. He was apparently charged in violation of his right to freedom of expression following complaints by colleagues whom he had publicly criticized. The sentence was quashed on appeal in November, a month after his case was featured in a BBC radio program. Adrian Pitu joined the police in 1990, following the democratic changes in the country, but soon became disillusioned with the lack of reforms within the police and the growing corruption among his colleagues. In 1997 he publicly urged the newly elected authorities to investigate police abuses, including cases of torture and ill-treatment, and alleged that police gave protection to people with links to organized crime. Shortly after he met the then Minister of the Interior, Gavril Dejeu, Adrian Pitu and his wife started receiving threats. He was also harassed by colleagues and superiors, some of whom initiated criminal proceedings against him on fabricated evidence. He resigned and left the country in July 1998.
Use of firearms by police
Domestic legislation continued to allow officers to shoot "to apprehend a suspect who is caught in the act and attempts to escape without obeying an order to stay at the scene of the crime", in breach of international human rights standards. In September, the Ministry of the Interior issued new instructions on the use of force and firearms which restricted the above provision to cases of "crime, considered as serious". It remained unclear who would assess whether a crime was serious and on what basis. Q In May in Bucharest, a 20-year-old Romani man, Mugurel Soare, and his brother were chasing their former brother-in-law when they were stopped by three plainclothes police officers. Mugurel Soare was shot in the head, as a result of which he was paralysed and unable to speak. The officers later stated that Mugurel Soare had been armed with a knife and had stabbed a police officer in the abdomen, and that the officer shot him in self-defence. The officer reported his wound, a scratch, two hours later, but it required no treatment. Two witnesses reported seeing a man in civilian dress beating Mugurel Soare, hitting his head against a wall and sticking the barrel of a pistol against the back of his head. The witnesses were later taken to Bucharest loth precinct police station, where they were held overnight and questioned by an investigator and police officers in an intimidating way. One witness was allegedly warned that he risked being accused of "incitement to scandal" if he maintained his version of the shooting incident.
Conscientious objectors
Twenty-nine conscientious objectors to military service refused to carry out alternative service because they had reservations about its length and nature, and on the grounds that the law exempts from military service ordained ministers of recognized churches. All were ministers of the Jehovah's Witnesses. They were tried individually by military tribunals of first instance which acquitted all but three of the defendants, finding that the failure to carry out alternative service was not proscribed by any law in force.
Ruling on appeal, the Bucharest Military Tribunal convicted all 29 objectors and sentenced them to different terms of imprisonment. In July the Military Court of Appeal reviewed the cases of 13 of them and sentenced each to 18 months' imprisonment, suspended for a period of three years, six months. The presiding judge published a separate opinion in which he concurred with the first instance courts which had acquitted the conscientious objectors of the charges. In December, the same court acquitted three conscientious objectors, but convicted another and sentenced him to a suspended sentence of 18 months' imprisonment. The grounds for these apparent inconsistencies were not made clear.
Since the adoption in 1996 of the legislation providing for an alternative service, Al has urged the authorities to amend certain legal provisions which are at variance with internationally recognized principles. These provisions concern the grounds for applying for alternative service, its punitive length and restrictions on when applications for alternative service may be submitted.
