PHILIPPINES
REPUBLICOFTHE PHILIPPINES
Head of state and government: Joseph Estrada Capital: Manila Population: 71.5 million Official languages: Filipino, English Death penalty: retentionist 2000 treaty signatures/ ratifications: Optional Protocol to the UN Children's Convention on the involvement of children in armed conflict; Optional Protocol to the UN Women's Convention; Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
An escalation of armed conflict in central Mindanao led to the displacement of over 400,000 civilians amid reports of indiscriminate bombingsand human rights violations bythe Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP). The Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) withdrew from the peace process following the captureof its main bases.Tensionsinthe region intensified further following a series of kidnappings of civilians by the Abu Sayyaf armed group on the Sulu archipelago. After protracted negotiations, military assaults on Abu positions on Jolo island led to the displacement of thousands of civilians and reports of human rights violations. One person was executed before President Joseph Estrada announced a temporary moratorium on executions in March. In December President Estrada commuted 13 death sentences after declaring his support for the abolition of the death penalty. There were continued reports of the torture and ill-treatment of criminal suspects, including women, to coerce confessions.
Background
Armed conflict in the Mindanao region, including the protracted Abu Sayyaf hostage crisis, increased pressure on President Estrada's administration. Intermittent clashes with units of the communist armed opposition group the New People's Army (NPA), or with NPA breakaway factions including the Alex Boncayao
Brigade (ABB), continued in various provinces nationwide. In December, following a local peace agreement with the ABB's political wing, President Estrada pledged to release over 200 political prisoners convicted or being prosecuted for offences allegedly committed within the context of armed insurgency. Political uncertainty intensified in November as allegations of corruption led the House of Representatives to impeach President Estrada. An impeachment trial in the Senate was continuing at the end of 2000. Falls in the value of the currency heightened fears of an economic downturn.
Armed conflict in Mindanao
Moro Islamic Liberation Front
Armed conflict intensified in central Mindanao from April. AFP offensives resulted in the capture of a series of MILF bases, including the group's headquarters in July, Over 400,000 civilians were internally displaced amid reports of indiscriminate aerial and artillery bombardment of civilian areas suspected of containing MILF forces, and of extrajudicial executions, "disappearances" and torture of those thought to have links to the MILF. At least 300 civilians were reportedly killed in the conflict.
In July the MILF announced its withdrawal from the peace process and called for a jihad (ho\y war) against the government- Clashes between the AFP and MILF forces continued throughout 2000. Mobilization of expanded local militia units and of Christian civilian vigilante groups escalated tensions. MILF forces were responsible for breaches of international humanitarian law including bombing civilian targets, deliberate and arbitrary killings of civilians and hostage-taking. Abu Sayyaf
In March, members of Abu Sayyaf a Muslim separatist armed group involved in kidnapping for ransom, took hostage over 50 civilians, mainly schoolchildren, on Basilan island. In May, more than 25 of the remaining hostages were freed after military assaults during which six hostages were reportedly killed by Abu Sayyaf In May, Abu Sayyafunits kidnapped 21 foreign tourists and workers from a resort in Sabah (Malaysia) and held them hostage on Jolo island. After protracted negotiations, the seizure of more hostages and the payment of ransoms, some of the hostages were freed. In September, after the kidnap of three other Malaysians, the AFP launched assaults on Abu Sayyaf positions on Jolo, imposing a temporary media and travel ban on the island. At least 80,000 civilians were reported to have fled their homes to escape armed clashes and bombardments, often apparently indiscriminate. Although difficult to corroborate, there were persistent reports of human rights violations by the military, including extrajudicial executions, arbitrary arrests and "disappearances" of suspected Abu Sayyaf memhevs. Military operations continued at the end of 2000 as at least two hostages remained in captivity.
Torture/ ill-treatment
Reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees by police and AFP personnel continued. Victims included
192
Amnesty International Report 2001
POL
both those suspected of links with communist or Muslim armed opposition groups and ordinary criminal suspects, including women and minors. Methods reported included beatings with fists and gun butts, electro-shocks, partial suffocation, rape and sexual abuse. Safeguards such as valid warrants of search and arrest, and the right of detainees to have access to lawyers and relatives during custodial investigation, were not implemented effectively. Q In May, nine Muslim men who had been arrested, reportedly without valid warrants, on suspicion of links to a series of bombings in shopping mal Is in Manila alleged that they were kicked and beaten by police in an attempt to coerce confessions. Q At least seven female detainees reported that they had been raped or sexually abused in custody. In April, two police officers were reportedly arrested for raping an i8-year-old woman detained for alleged vagrancy.
Extrajudicial executions
Criminal suspects were periodically killed by police while allegedly "resisting arrest" or "attempting to escape". Suspected members of the NPA were reported to have been extrajudicially executed, some while wounded, in the aftermath of clashes with AFP units. Q 1 n J une murder charges were fi 1 ed against 10 members of a police unit who shot dead two Muslim men in Manila during an arrest operation against suspected MILF sympathizers.
Death penalty
In January Alex Bartolome, convicted of raping his daughter, became the seventh person to be executed by lethal injection since the Philippines resumed executions in 1999. Death sentences continued to be imposed throughout the year, and over 1,400 prisoners were reported to be under sentence of death by the end of 2000. Concerns that people were sentenced to death after unfair trials continued, particularly in light of allegations that police tortured and ill-treated criminal suspects in order to coerce confessions or to implicate alleged accomplices.
In March President Estrada declared a temporary moratorium on executions to mark the Christian jubilee year. In December he announced his intention to commute at least 107 death sentences confirmed by the Supreme Court. Thirteen commutation orders had been signed by the end of 2000. Noting that most of those sentenced to death were poor and underprivileged. President Estrada declared his support for a congressional review and the eventual repeal of the death penalty law.
Al country reports and visits Report
• Philippines: The Rolando Abadilla murder inquiry-an urgent need for effective investigation of torture (Al Index: ASA35/008/2000) Al also issued a series of statements calling on all sides of the Mindanao conflict to respect international humanitarian and human rights law. The organization condemned hostage-taking by armed opposition groups.
Visits
Al delegates visited the Philippines in March and June to research the torture and ill-treatment in detention of political and criminal suspects, including women and children.
