MACEDONIA
the former yugoslav republic of macedonia
Head of state: Boris Trajkovski
Head of government: Ljubco Ceorgievski
Capital: Skopje
Population: 2 million
Official language: Macedonian
Death penalty: abolitionistforall crimes
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Optional
Protocol to the UN Women's Convention
Torture and ill-treatment by police was the principal concern. One man may have been extrajudicially executed and another died in custody allegedly after being beaten by police. Detainees were held incommunicado for prolonged periods. The authorities generally failed to investígate allegations of human rights violations. At least four conscientious objectors were imprisoned.
Background
The shooting of three police officers in AraCinovo village in January raised tensions between the ethnic Albanian minority and Macedonian majority populations early in the year. The situation in Kosovo (see Federal Republic of Yugoslavia entry) remained an important political issue. However, political rivalries did not focus on ethnic divisions as the government was composed of members from a coalition of parties with either Macedonian, ethnic Albanian or mixed membership and support. Local elections held in several rounds from September were accompanied by allegations of widespread irregularities and violent incidents in which one person was killed and lo others were injured.
Several Macedonian soldiers were injured in a series of clashes on the border with Kosovo with armed gangs from Kosovo. In one incident in April soldiers were detained by ethnic Albanian paramilitaries and held in Kosovo for at least 24 hours. Their release coincided with the release on bail of Xhavit Hasani, an ethnic Albanian and a former commander of the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA), who was awaiting trial in connection with the wounding of police officers. The incident provoked claims by opposition parties that the soldiers had been held as hostages and that the authorities had given in to the kidnappers' demands by releasing Xhavit Hasani.
There was a noticeable increase in pressure on the media. For example, Bota Sot. an Albanian newspaper which was also printed in Macedonia and was openly critical of the Albanian party in the government coalition, was temporarily closed down in Macedonia.
Torture/ill-treatment
Torture and ill-treatment by police occurred in a variety of situations. The victims included Macedonians, Roma and ethnic Albanians. There were also reports that civilians assaulted political opponents but that they were not brought to justice because of their government connections. The response of the authorities to complaints of ill-treatment and other human rights violations was generally inadequate.
Q On 27 May, five Romani men were detained and beaten with wooden sticks by police and civilians in a forest near Stip. Three of them — Memet Redzepov, Orhan Aliov and Selajdin Mustafov—stated that they were again beaten or kicked at the Stip police station. Each heard the screams of the others as they were beaten one by one in an adjoining room, despite the sound of a radio which was allegedly used to hide their screams.
Q Eighty-year-old Ordan Jovanovski, a vocal opposition supporter, was seriously assaulted by a government official in a village near Prilep in May after an argument over politics. He suffered facial and other injuries. Although the incident was reported to the police, no charges had been brought by the end of the year.
The Aracinovo incident
Numerous human rights violations were perpetrated during house searches and arrests in the days that followed the killing of three police officers — two Macedonians and an ethnic Turk—in January. The killing of the three officers at a checkpoint in Araiinovo village near Skopje did not appear to be politically motivated, but the ethnicity of the victims and subsequent police actions gave the incident political dimensions.
Dozens of men and at least three minors were beaten in their homes, and women and children were allegedly threatened with firearms. A number of men were taken to police stations and beaten. Some were coerced into making "confessions" under torture. Officers reportedly beat them with truncheons, threatened to burn them with hot metal, made them drink urine, and put plastic bags over their heads. The detainees were held incommunicado, some for as long as 11 days, before being taken before a judge. Relatives and lawyers were denied information about their whereabouts and access to them.
The authorities admitted only that excessive force had resulted in damage to prx)perty during the Araiinovo raids and paid some compensation. Recommendations by bodies such as the national Ombudsman that criminal investigations should be initiated into the police actions were not acted upon by the authorities.
162
Amnesty International Report 2001
MAL
Q Sabri Asani was detained on i8 January by police in connection with the Araiinovo murders. He died on his way to the police station in circumstances suggesting he may have been extrajudicially executed. Officials claimed that he had suffered heart failure because he was intoxicated with drugs. However, pictures of his body indicated that he had been badly beaten and had most likely died of a bullet wound to the head. An autopsy was performed, but the authorities failed to make the report available to his family. No information on any criminal investigation connected with his death had been released by the authorities by the end of the year.
Samedin Guri, whose arrest may also have been connected with the Aracinovo murders, died in prison in May after reportedly having been severely beaten by police several days before.
In July, six ethnic Albanians were charged with the killing of the three police officers; their trial was continuing at the end of the year.
Conscientious objection
No purely civilian alternative to military service was available, Adraft defence law incorporating the possibility of civilian service was introduced to parliament but had not been passed by the end of 2000. There was concern that, although the new law provided for alternative civilian service, this would be punitive in length, would not be available to all those liable to military service and would not be under civilian corftrol.
Four conscientious objectors, all of them Jehovah's Witnesses, were known to have been imprisoned during the year for between one and three months; all had expressed their willingness to perform a civilian service in lieu of military service.
Refugees
Some 8,000 refugees were officially registered at the end of 2000. Most were Roma who had fled Kosovo in 1999. The situation in Kosovo (see Federal Republic of Yugoslavia entry) offered little prospect for their safe return and few did so during the year. The government renewed their temporary protection during the year. A draft Law on Asylum to regulate the protection of refugees and ensure that the state met its obligations under the 1951 UN Convention relating to the Status of Refugees was before the legislature at the end of 2000,
Al country reports and visits
Reports
•	The formerYugoslav Republic of Macedonia: Afterthe Aracinovo murders-Torture, ill-treatment and possible extrajudicial execution (Al Index: EUR 55/003/2000)
•	The formerYugoslav Republicof Macedonia: Joint appeal calling for rights for conscientious objectors (Al Index: EUR 65/012/2000)
Visits
An Al delegate was based in the country from April to gather information about human rights concerns in the region and work with local organizations on the promotion of human rights.
