ECUADOR
REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR
Head of state and government: Gustavo Noboa
Bejarano (replaced Jamil Mahuad Witt in January)
Capital: Quito
Population: 11.9 million
Ofilcial language: Spanish
Death penalty: abolitionistforall crimes
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Optional
Protocol to the UN Children's Convention on the
involvement of children inarmed conflict; Inter-American
Convention on Forced Disappearance of Persons _
Torture and ill-treatment remained a concern. Threats against lawyers and witnesses of human rights violations were frequent. Impunity remained institutionalized. There were reports of possible "disappearances". Transvestites were arbitrarily detained.
Background
In January indigenous groups, trade unions, and grassroots organizations staged mass demonstrations and protests against the government's economic policy, which included making the US dollar, rather than the Sucre, the official currency. On 21 January protesters forced President Jamil Mahuad Witt to resign. A National Salvation Junta was formed, which was dissolved almost immediately, and Vice-President Gustavo Noboa Bejarano, backed by the Chief of the Joint Command of the Armed Forces, was appointed to the presidency.
More than 15 army officers were detained because of their role in the ousting of President Jamil Mahuad Witt. The officers were charged with rebellion and detained in army barracks for over four months. By June all had been granted amnesty and released.
The newly appointed President continued with the previous government's economic policy. The US dollar became the official currency and an extensive program of privatization of state-owned enterprises was implemented.
An influx of refugees from the Colombian Putumayo region led to concerns about the future impact the US-backed military aid package, known as Plan Colombia, would have on Ecuador once it was implemented in early 2001. (See Colombia entry.)
Human rights during the January uprising
There were serious concerns for the safety of hundreds of people who were arbitrarily detained during the January demonstrations and protests. Among those detained were trade union leaders and leaders of opposition parties. All were released without charge a few days after their detention.
Impunity
Cases of human rights violations involving members of the security forces were not resolved. Many of these
90
Amnesty International Report 2001
ECU
cases were brought before police courts where the vast majority of those responsible for human rights violations were never punished. Disputes of jurisdictional competence between the police and civilian courts delayed the course of legal proceedings and resulted in victims of human rights violations having to wait for years to have access to Justice. Q Anibal Alonso Aguas Acosta died in police custody in March 1997. The Constitutional Tribunal ruled that the case fell within the jurisdiction of the police courts. By the end of 2000 the trial of those charged with his death had not yet finished, and there were concerns that delays in the judicial proceedings showed a lack of will to bring those responsible to justice. Q in the case of the attempted extrajudicial execution of Pedro Oeovanny Baque Tuárez and the extrajudicial execution of brothers Carlos and Pedro Jaramillo in February 1999, the Supreme Court of Justice decided in July that it should be judged by a civilian court. However, by the end of 2000 no judge had yet been designated to the case in a civilian court. Unresolved killings
Two Congressmen — Jaime Hurtado González and Pablo Vincente Tapia—as well as Jaime Hurtado's assistant, Wellington Borja Nazareno, were shot dead in February 1999. Their killing remained unresolved. Three men detained in connection with the killings soon after the murder were convicted of illicit association. One of them, Serguey Merino, sentenced to six years on illicit association charges, was reported to be innocent. Serguey Merino was also charged with terrorism and illegal possession of firearms, but the courts shelved the case in relation to these two charges for lack of evidence. Serguey Merino and the other two suspects still faced a trial for murder. There were credible allegations that the actual authors of the crime were linked to authorities whom Congressman Jaime Hurtado González was investigating for alleged money laundering and drug trafficking.
Torture/ ill-treatment
Torture and ill-treatment remained widespread. Methods of torture and ill-treatment reported included kicking in the face, stamping on feet, burning, and electric shocks on genitals, tongue and chest, as well as beatings. O Wilfrido Jaramillo Mera, brother of Carlos and Pedro Jaramillo who were extrajudicially executed in 1999 (see above), was detained in November on suspicion of robbery in the town of Manta. Manabi province. During the police interrogation he was blindfolded and was given electric shocks on the genitals and close to the heart.
Possible extrajudicial executions
There was serious concern at the number of possible extrajudicial executions in the city of Guayaquil during 2000. One human rights organization alone documented 18 cases of people whose bodies were found in the city's outskirts and who had been shot dead in circumstances which suggested they might have been extrajudicially executed. The majority had a criminal record and many showed signs of torture.
Prison conditions
In March an AI delegation visited the Provisional Detention Centre in the city of Guayaquil. The Centre holds detainees under investigation by the police who by law should be released or charged within 24 hours. AI found the conditions in which these detainees were held to be cruel, inhuman and degrading. The Centre had two cells for women but no female guards. The main cell is approximately 15m x lom. At the time of the delegation's visit there were approximately 120 people detained in the main cell. Many had spent more than two months in the Centre.
Harassment of lawyers and witnesses
There were continued reports of threats and harassment of those working on human rights cases. Q Julio Edison Román Muñoz was detained in February by two officers against whom he had filed a complaint for having tortured him. The two officers threatened him in detention before releasing him without charge.
Q The relatives and lawyers of Pedro Baque and the Jaramillo brothers (see above) were constantly threatened throughout 2000. By September, three of the lawyers had been granted military protection by the Attorney General.
Arbitrary detention of transvestites
Nine transvestite sex workers were detained for over three weeks in July on charges which are not punishable with imprisonment. AI considered that they were detained solely because they were transvestites and called for their immediate and unconditional release. According to reports, many transvestites in Ecuador are subjected to persecution by the police and are targeted for imprisonment, simply on the ground of their sexual orientation. In November 1997 homosexual acts between consenting adults were decriminalized in Ecuador.
Possible 'disappearances'
Elias Elint López Pita was detained by policemen in November in the town of Ambato and was not seen after that. The police denied knowledge of the arrest. Luis Alberto Shining Laso, who testified that he had been held in the same cell as Elias Elint López at the police Provisional Detention Centre in Ambato, was abducted a few days after he gave evidence before the prosecutor investigating the possible "disappearance". By the end of 2000 the whereabouts, of Elias Elint López and Luis Alberto Shining Laso remained unknown.
AI country reports and visit
Reports
•	Ecuador: Impunity-The long road to justice (AI Index: AMR 28/007/2000)
•Ecuador: Pedro Baque Tuárez and the Jaramillo brothers -Anothercase of human rights impunity (AI Index: AMR 28/013/2000)
•	Ecuador: Arbitrary detention of transvestites (AI Index: AMR 28/014/2000)
91	Amnesty International Report 2001

ECY
Visit
An Al delegation visited Ecuador in March. The delegation met Ecuadorian officials as well as human rights organizations and victims of human rights abuses.
