BRAZIL
FEDERATIVE REPUBLIC OF BRAZIL
Head of state and government: Fernando Henrique
Cardoso
Capital: Brasilia
Population: 170 million
Official language: Portuguese
Death penalty: abolitionist for ordinary crimes
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Optional
Protocol to the UN Children's Convention on the
involvement of children in armed conflict; Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court
The systematic use of torture and ill-treatment continued in police stations, prisons and juvenile detention centres. There were no reported convictions for torture. Conditions for common criminal prisoners and juvenile detainees constituted ill-treatment. Deaths in custody were rarely, if ever, investigated or documented. Killings by police and "death squads" linked to the security forces increased, especially in urban centres. Land reform activists and indigenous people involved in land disputes were harassed, assaulted and killed both by military police and by gunmen hired by local landowners, with the apparent acquiescence of the police and the authorities. Human rights defenders were threatened and attacked.
To rt u re/ i I l-trea tm e n t
Torture and ill-treatment were routinely inflicted by both military police during arrests and by civil police in overcrowded police stations. Beatings as a means of extracting confessions, extortion or maintaining control were regularly reported, and electro-shock torture, the so-called "parrot's perch" and other forms of torture were used with impunity. Prison guards used beatings and intimidation to control long-term detainees. Few allegations of torture were investigated, and many injuries were attributed to "resisting arrest". Many police suspected of practising torture were transferred to other postings and very few were prosecuted under the anti-torture law. By the end of 2000 there had been no reported convictions under this law.
Q On 28 July, a prison inspection in the Public Jail in the ctty of Sorocaba, Sao Paulo state, discovered that a number of prisoners had knives hidden in their cells. The prisoners were forced to "walk, in their underpants, between two rows of policemen, while being beaten with sticks, broom handles and electricity cables, punched and kicked. Sixteen of the prisoners were found on later medical inspection to have suffered severe injuries. Unusually, the public prosecutor's office charged 25 civil policemen and prison guards under the anti-torture law. However, the police and prison guards remained in active service within the same prison, where they reportedly continued to beat
the prisoners. Public prosecutors working on the case received several telephoned threats, warning them to abandon the prosecution. Q In April, Al delegates visited the Lemos Brito prison in Salvador, Bahia state. They were unable to complete the visit as the director and prison guards refused to let them speak to the prisoners alone, and military police insisted on filming all conversations, claiming this was for the delegates' security. When delegates asked the reason for stashes of iron bars and sticks at the guards' desk, the director said they were purely to uncover potential escape tunnels hidden behind posters in the prisoners' cells.
Deaths in custody
There were numerous deaths in custody. Some resulted from excessive use of force by guards and military and civil police officers, who were often poorly trained and outnumbered during prison riots and disturbances. Other prisoners died as a result of inadequate medical care and inadequate protection against violence from other inmates.
Q On II February 2000 Adroaldo Araujo was arrested in Sao Félix do Xingu, Para state, following a knife fight. He was detained by the military police and taken to the local police station, where his injuries were inspected by a male nurse, who authorized his continued detention. Adroaldo Araujo was left in his cell, and was found dead the next morning, having bled to death. The case was investigated by military police from the same jurisdiction. No.criminal charges were brought, although one police sergeant and the nurse were found culpable of professional negligence.
Children in detention
The loth anniversary of the Children and Adolescents Statute (ECA) was marked by the continued deterioration of the juvenile detention system. Reports ofwidespread torture, ill-treatment, intimidation and deaths in custody were compounded by the use of excessive force by military police and prison guards during riots and disturbances.
Juvenile detainees in detention units run by the Foundation for the Well-Being of Minors (FEBEM) in Sao Paulo state continued to suffer cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment; large-capacity units were extremely overcrowded and had poor sanitation and little or no educational facilities. A rebellion on 10 November in Paralheiros FEBEM Unit was the 28th such uprising during 2000 in FEBEM units in the state. Two juvenile detainees were tortured after they met the UN Special Rapporteur on torture during his visit to the Franco da Rocha unit on 23 August, in July Al released a report on the juvenile detention system in the state of Sao Paulo, documenting not only abuses suffered by detainees, but also the legal battle waged by the state authorities against attempts to force them to bring FEBEM up to the minimum standards required by the ECA.
Extrajudicial executions and 'death squads'
Deaths resulting from excessive use of force by police, or in circumstances suggesting extrajudicial executions.
54
Amnesty International Report 2001
BRA
continued. "Death squads", acting with the participation or collusion of the police, continued to operate in a number of states, including Acre, Bahia, Espirito Santo, Goias, Rio de Janeiro and Rio Grande do Norte. Moves to reform Rio de Janeiro's notorious police forces were undermined when political support was withdrawn, reportedly after hard-line elements within the police exerted pressure on the state authorities. O In Rio de Janeiro, two survivors of the 1993 Candelaria massacre, when eight street children were killed by a "death squad", suffered violent deaths. On 12 June, Sandro do Nascimento hijacked a bus in Rio de Janeiro and held a number of people hostage, at gunpoint, for several hours. Police shot and injured him, then took him to hospital in a police car. He was found dead on arrival, as a result of strangulation. Five police officers accused of involvement in his killing had preventive detention orders revoked by a judge, but the state public prosecutor's office appealed against that ruling and sought to bring them to trial.
Elizabeth Cristina de Oliveira Maia was shot dead outside her home on 26 September, just before giving evidence at the appeal hearing of one of the military police accused of involvement in the Candelaria massacre. Her murder suggested the involvement of a "death squad", and increased the fears of other witnesses in "death squad" trials. Q The office of Sao Paulo's police Ombudsman published a study on the use of lethal force by the police in the state during 1999. The study showed, among other things, that 56 per cent of those killed had no previous criminal record, 51 per cent were shot in the back and 54 per cent were black. Q Joao Elizio Lima Pessoa was driving to his home in Aguas Lindas, Goias state, on 7 February. The road was blocked by rocks and when he tried to clear them he was shot dead. His wife was also shot, but survived, Joao Elizio Lima Pessoa had been working with the Public Security Community Council, investigating "death squad" killings in the region. The authorities brought in police from other areas to investigate the killing, but Al continued to receive information about "death squad" activities.
Human rights defenders
Human rights defenders continued to suffer harassment, death threats, public defamation and killings. Those working in rural areas were especially vulnerable to attacks from gunmen hired by landowners, often with the acquiescence of the police.
Offices of police Ombudsmen, recently set up in a number of states, also came under increasing pressure, as moves were made to weaken their mandate in several states.
The implementation of a new federal witness program in July 1999 gave little security to those prepared to testify against police or local officials as it lacked the necessary financial support and political backing. Few places were offered to witnesses, and some potential witnesses were killed, especially those testifying in high profile cases such as the Federal Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry into drug trafficking.
Q Valdènia Aparecida Paulino, a human rights lawyer working in Sao Paulo, received several anonymous threats after she took up the cases of José Nunes da Silva and Ednaldo Gomes, reportedly killed by military police in Sao Paulo on 31 March 1999. Marcio Celestino da Silva, who witnessed the shooting of the two men, was detained by police in June 1999 and held for four months. He was beaten, subjected to electric shock torture, and ordered to withdraw his testimony. He was forced to go into hiding as he continued to receive threats.
Q In Belem, Para state, police Ombudswoman Rosa Marga Roth was taken to court by a police chief who was the main suspect in a torture case. The police chief accused her of crimes including libel and tampering with a witness. At the end of 2000 she faced two court cases.
Violence over land rights
Conflict over land rights continued to generate violence, as land activists were harassed, threatened and killed by military police carrying out evictions, or policing demonstrations. They were also attacked by gunmen hired by landowners, with the apparent acquiescence of the police authorities. Q On 9 September Sandoval Alves de Lima was shot dead in the street, in the municipality of Sapé, Paraiba state. He was one of the leaders of a land occupation at the Fazenda Antas esxaxe in the neighbouring municipality of Sobardo. The gunman shouted out as he escaped on horseback that there were several more names on his death list. The gunman was identified by several witnesses as being an employee of a local businessman with close links to the owner of the Fazenda Antas estate. Eldorado de Carajas massacre Q The 1999 trial of 153 Para state military police officers, charged with aggravated homicide for killing 19 landless peasants in Eldorado de Carajâs in April 1996, was closed by the state appeals court in April. The presiding judge stepped down and a retrial was set to begin in early 2001. Al delegates met survivors of the massacre in April and were told that of 69 wounded survivors, 20 were severely injured and some still had bullets in their bodies. Two survivors died during 2000, one from a bullet lodged in his head. Corumbiara massacre
Q In September, 12 military police and two land activists were tried for the killing of 10 land activists and two military police officers, in Corumbiara, Rondonia state, in August 1995, All but three of the military police were acquitted for lack of evidence. Other people, including a local landowner, reportedly implicated in the crimes were never brought to trial. The two land activists were convicted of the murder of two military police officers, despite the apparent absence of any evidence proving their individual criminal responsibility. The paucity of the police investigation and the apparent prejudice of the public prosecutor's office raised doubts as to the validity of the verdicts. Appeals against all the verdicts were lodged.
55	Amnesty International Report 2001

BUL
Indigenous peoples
Indigenous peoples protesting over land rights suffered threats, harassment and assaults by gunmen hired by local landowners, working with the acquiescence of the police and local authorities. Many indigenous peoples also suffered injuries as a result of excessive force used by military police during public demonstrations. Q On 13 January up to 50 heavily armed gunmen (pistoleiros) in military uniforms converged on the village of Potrero Guapu, Paranhos municipality, burning most of the 35 houses and many of the villagers' belongings. They reportedly raped several women and beat other villagers including a two-year-old child. Thirty of the villagers, members of the Guarani-Nhandeva indigenous community, were reportedly forced onto a truck and taken away, in an attempt to clear them off the land. Although the villagers returned to their land with the help of the Federal Police, they continued to receive threats. O On 22 April, the 500th anniversary of the Portuguese arrival in Brazil, the Bahia state military police reportedly used excessive force to prevent protesters reaching Porto Seguro, where official celebrations were taking place. The police used tear gas, rubber bullets and baton charges to break up two peaceful marches, injuring 34 protesters and temporarily detaining over soothers.
Al country reports and visits
Reports
•	Brazil: A waste of lives, FEBEM juvenile detention centres, Sao Paulo-A human rights crisis, not a public security issue (Al Index: AMR 19/014/2000)
•	Brazil: Police violence and the 500th anniversary (Al Index: AMR 19/029/2000)
Visits
Al delegates visited Brazil in March and April, and again in November During these visits they covered six different states, visiting prisons, police stations and women's detention centres. Theytook part in a meeting of over 100 indigenous peoples, prior to the 500th anniversary celebrations. Delegates also observed a trial and met politicians, non-governmental organizations and victims of torture.
