KAZAKSTAN
REPUBLIC OF KAZAKSTAN
Head of state: Nursultan Nazarbayev
Head of government: KasymzhomartTokayev
Capita I: Astana
Population: 16.2 million
Official language: Kazak
Death penalty: retentionist
2000 treaty ratifications/signatures: Optional
Protocol to the UN Children's Convention on the
involvement of children in armed conflict; Optional
Protocol to the UN Women's Convention
Reports of torture and ill-treatment in police custody and pre-trial detention continued unabated, despite official initiatives to combat corruption and to reform the judicial and penal systems. Kazakstan continued to come under pressure from China to forcibly return ethnic Uighurs from Xinjiang UIghur Autonomous Region (XUAR).
Torture/ Ill-treatment
In April President Nursultan Nazarbayev publicly admitted that the torture or ill-treatment of suspects and detainees by law enforcement officers was widespread and routine. He reportedly accused law enforcement officers of using torture methods that "can surprise the most out-and-out sadists" such as scalding detainees with a hot iron and pouring ice-cold water over them in freezing weather.
The Kazakstan International Bureau for Human Rights and Rule of Law (KIBHR), an independent nongovernmental human rights organization, publicized a number of cases of alleged torture in police custody. Most ofthe detainees claimed that they were severely beaten, choked, handcuffed to radiators, or had plastic bags or gas masks placed over their heads to force them to divulge information. According to KIBHR, at the beginning of the year three police officers were convicted of beating detainees in order to extract confessions from them.
SI Irina Cherkasova alleged that she was tortured by some 12 police officers at the Abaysk District Office of Internal Affairs in the city of Chimkent in southern Kazakstan in order to force her to confess to murder.
144
Amnesty International Report 2001
KEN
Irina Cherkasova was reportedly beaten with sticks, books, keys and a plastic bottle filled with water; sexually assaulted with a stick; beaten with an instrument that was connected to an electric current which caused excruciating head pains; handcuffed to a radiator overnight; deprived of sleep for three nights; and raped. She was convicted of murder after the court failed to take her allegations of torture into consideration. She reportedly continued to suffer from recurring headaches, a stammer and badly diminished eyesight as a result of torture.
Forcible deportations
The murder of two policemen and a subsequent shoot-out in Almaty in September between Kazak police and alleged ethnic Uighur separatists heightened concerns that China was increasing its pressure on the Kazak authorities to forcibly return ethnic Uighurs to China, where they were at risk of human rights violations.
Q It was feared that Hemit Memet and llyas Zordun were at imminent risk of execution. They had been deported from Kazakstan to China in February 1999 and imprisoned in XUAR. Reports were received that they had been executed in August 1999, However, unofficial sources reported in late 1999 that Hemit Memet and llyas Zordun were believed to be still in secret detention.
Al country report
• Concerns in Europe, January-June 2000: Kazakstan (Al Index: EUR 01 /003/2000)
