Jordan
Amnesty Intemational's concems during the year included the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience; the prolonged detention without trial of political prisoners; allegations of ill-treatment of prisoners; and the death penalty.
Martial law, proclaimed in 1967, continued to be in force in Jordan during 1984, and under its provisions political prisoners could be held for long periods without trial or be tried by military courts. On 15 May Prime Minister Ahmad Obeidat reportecUy stated before the House of Representatives that"... the competentbody has been instructednotto detain anyone longer than is absolutely necessary." Nevertheless, Amnesty Intemational had information about a number of individuals who had been held without trial for long periods - more than four years in some cases. The Prime Minister also denied that detainees held in Jordan could be termed political prisoners:
"The issue is related to national security . . .. Any detainee is detained for security reasons.... He is not detained just because he has a certain ideology. He is detained because he transforms this ideology into action . . .".
During 1984, however, Amnesty Intemational knew of two prisoners of conscience, and was investigating the cases of 16 possible prisoners of conscience. The two prisoners of conscience - Imad Milhelm and Hashim Gharaibeh - had each been sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment for belonging to the Jordanian Communist Party, under the anti-Communist law of 1953. Article 3 of this law punishes any communist activity, including the possession of communist literature, by imprisonment with hardlabourforupto 15 years. ImadMilhelm was a student at the University of Jordan in Amman when he was sentenced by a military court in Amman in September 1978. Amnesty Intemational leamed of his release in November 1984. Hashim Gharaibeh, a student from Yarmuk, had reportedly been freed in a royal amnesty in August 1980, but in 1984 Amnesty Intemational leamed that he had not been released.
Of the 16 prisoners whose cases Amnesty International was investigating, 15 were sentenced by a military court to 10 years' imprisonment for belonging to the prohibited Palestine Communist Workers' Party. One was Muhammad Omar al-Mallah, a medical student at the University of Jordan who was arrested in July 1980. He was among
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
several dozen political prisoners in al-Mahatta Central Prison in Amman who went on hunger-strike at least twice during 1984 toprotest against detention without trial and trials by military courts.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the detention without trial of political prisoners for long periods, frequently over 12 months. Untried detainees were reportedly held in a number of prisons, including al-Mahatta, Zerqa Military Prison and the General Intelligence (Mukhabamt) Building in Amman. In reply to Amnesty International's inquiries regarding 50 of these detainees, the govemment indicated in October that they had all been detained at various times on charges of "having joined armed factions": 21 of them were still held in untried detention, four had been sentenced, and 25 had been released. In November Amnesty Intemational leamed that of the 21 still not tried afurtherfivehadbeenreleased. On4 DecemberAmnestylnternational wrote to the Prime Minister expressing concem aboutthe longperiods-from 17 months to more than four years - for which the remaining 16 detainees had been held without trial, and urged that they be brought to trial quickly or released
During 1984 Amnesty Intemational received reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners. Methods allegedly used included beatings on all parts of the body- particulariy on the soles of the feet- with sticks, leather straps and electric cables; hanging upside down from an iron bar inserted between the knees with hands and feet bound (farri^j), and sleep deprivation. Although Amnesty Intemational was unable to confirm specific instances of torture, the extent, consistency and detail of these allegations suggested that it was frequently inflicted during interrogation in the General Intelligence Building to extract confessions and as a punishment.
Jordan retains the death penalty under both the penal code and martial law regulations. As in past years, death sentences were passed in absentia for the sale of property in territory now occupied by Israel. Jordanian law forbids the sale of such property to Israelis, and such action is considered high treason and punishable by death. On 13 Febmary the Jordanian Cabinet ratified the death sentences passed in absentia by the Military Court on 20 people convicted of selling land on the Israeli Occupied West Bank to Israelis and on 27 December it approved a further 15 such death sentences.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
