Uganda
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the detention without trial of hundreds of alleged political opponents of the government, including some prisoners of conscience. At least 80 political detainees were released in an amnesty in July but others continued to be held in military barracks or in prisons run by the National Security Agency (NASA). Amnesty Intemational received many allegations of torture from those who had been held in unlawful custody, and investigated a number of "disappearances" from military and security custody. The organization was also concemed about continued reports of extrajudicial executions of alleged political opponents by the army.
The internal security situation remained unstable throughout 1984. Activity by anti-govemment guerrillas was reported in the "Luwero triangle" northwest of Kampala, in Bunyoro and in West Nile, and the army mounted major operations against them. In Karamoja ¿le army launched a joint operation with Kenyan forces against cattle mstlers along the border.
Several hundred people remained in detention without trial throughout 1984 under the ^blic Order and Security Act, 1967. This permits the detention of anyone whom the President deems "dangerous to peace and good order in Uganda". Both the act and the constitution lay down safeguards for such detainees but they were often disregarded by the authorities. A judicial review tribunal established to review each detention within two months and thereafter at six-monthly intervals was not apparently active. Although the act stipulates that detentions should be notified in the official Uganda Gazette within 30 days, none were published in 1984 until November. This was the first list published since August 1983, although many people had been detained in the meantmie.
Over 600 prisoners, including at least 80 political detainees, were released in an amnesty in July. After these releases the Minister of Internal Affairs reportedly said that 1,142 people were still detained without charge in Luzira Upper Prison, the maximum security prison near Kampala where most Public Order and Security Act detainees were held. However, he did not specify how many of them were held under the Public Order and Security Act The list of such detainees published in the Uganda Gazette in November contained 251 names, but Amnesty Intemational believed that the number of long-term political detainees in civil custody was greater than that
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Several detainees held under the Public Order and Security Act were adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty Intemational. They included Onesimus Katalikawe, an opposition Democratic Party (DP) member of parliament He had been arrested at Bombo military barracks in Febmary when he inquired about three other people who had been arrested He had reportedly been whipped and beaten severely and held at a secret NASA detention centre before being transferred in late February to Luzira Upper Prison. He was still detained there at the end of 1984. Amnesty Intemational also adopted as prisonei^ of conscience six journalists detained under the act in November. Francis Kanyeihamba and Sam Kiwanuka were detained after being tried and acquitted of "writing and publishing a false and malicious publication" - a satirical article criticizing the government's proposed Women's Charter. Two others - Drake Ssekeba and Sam Katwere - were detained after publishing an article alleging corruption among govemment ministers. Anthony Ssekweyama, editor of the pro-DP weekly newspaper Murinami, was detained following publication of an article criticizing the presence in Uganda of North Korean troops. David Kasujja, another Munnansi journalist was charged with criminal trespass and detained after a court had ordered his release on bail. Two other Munnansi joumalists -Andrew Mulindwa and John Baptist Kyeyune - were also adopted as prisoners of conscience but were still held uncharged in police custody at the end of 1984. Both had been arrested by soldiers who reportedly tortured John Baptist Kyeyune while he was in their custody.
Conditions in Luzira Upper Prison were believed to be poor but there were no reports of torture. Several uncharged political detainees died there, including Nelson Kirya-Kalikwani, a 66-year-old DP official who died in July after being detained in April. The authorities did not divulge the cause of death, but it occurred at the time of a typhoid outbreak in the prisoa Amnesty Intemational expressed its concern to the govemment about this and other deaths and about allegations that detainees were denied medical attention.
In June a Repeal Act was passed which stripped members of the armed forces of liie power to arrest civilians conferred on them by the former govemment of President Idi Amin. However, Amnesty Intemational continued to receive many reports of civilians being unlawfully detained by the army or NASA, allegedly because of connections with the guerrillas, but in fact because of their political affiliations or ethnic origin. The government however, continued to refuse to acknowledge that anyone was held in military barracks, and it was impossible to find out the numbers detained. Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports that torture was routinely carried out by soldiers and NASA personnel, sometimes until the victim died The most common form of torture reported was beating, using iron bars, sticks with nails, rifle butts
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
and electric cable. The application of electric shocks, rape and other sexual tortures were also reported.
In July Amnesty Intemational issued an urgent appeal on behalf of Annette Florence Nnakandi, the 18-year-old daughter of a missing DP member of parliament, who was arrested at the end of May and detained in Makindye barracks - where she was reportedly tortured - and Nile Mansions military uitelligence centre. It was discovered that her eight-month-old daughter was detained with her. She was later transferred to police custody where the govemment said that she was being held for questioning. She and her baby were released without charge in September.
Amnesty Intemational received many reports of "disappearances" in military custody. In March the organization asked the government about Ludovico Mangeni and Joseph Wabwiire, two elderly DP officials. They were reportedly arrested at Tororo police station in eastem Uganda in March, along with six other DP officials, when they were applying for permission to hold a meeting in the town. The eight were transferred from police custody to Rubongi military barracks in Tororo. Six were later released but Ludovico Mangeni and Joseph Wabwiire had "disappeared". It was alleged that they were being held in Rubongi barracks where they were being denied food In July Amnesty Intemational received reports that they had died in custody. In August, in response to Amnesty Intemational's inquiries, the Ministry of Internal Affairs stated that an investigation had established that they had never been arrested and detained, and repeated the govemment's denial that any prisoners were held in military custody.
Several leading political opponents of the govemment were tried in 1984. They included Yoweri Kyesimira, a DP member of parliament who was previously detained without trial from Febmary 1981 to January 1982. He was rearrested in March 1983 and charged with treason on account of alleged links with guerrillas. No verdict in his trial had been given by the end of 1984 although two assessors reportedly recommended to the judge that he should be acquitted. Amnesty Intemational was concerned that Yoweri Kyesimira may have been a prisoner of conscience.
In November Paul Ssemogerere, the leader of the DP, Anthony Ssekweyama and another DP official were charged with sedition. They had publicized an alleged letter from the Chief Justice to President Milton Obote which discussed plans to detain DP leaders, and led Paul Ssemogerere to question the independence and political impartiality of the Chief Justice. However, they were released on bail and their trial had not begun by the end of 1984. It was while on bail that Anthony Ssekweyama was detained under the Public Order and Security Act(see above).
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
The trial of six men accused of treason took place in the High Court from November to December. They included Balaki Kirya, a former govemment minister who was abducted from exile in Kenya by Ugandan agents in 1982 and subsequently charged with treason. In December he was acquitted and charges against the other five defendants were withdrawa However, all six were immediately rearrested and they were still detained at the end of 1984. Amnesty Intemational expressed concem to President Obote about the rearrests and asked to be told the legal basis for the detention of the six men.
Ugandan refugees and political exiles outside the country faced continued threats to their security. In May Laurence Ssemakula, the leader of the opposition Federal Democratic Movement of Uganda (FEDEMU), was reportedly abducted from Nairobi. Six months later Amnesty Intemational received information that he had died at Kireka military barracks shortly after his abduction. The organization received reports of several other attempted abductions of Ugandan refugees in Kenya and in September and October Ugandan soldiers were alleged to have abducted Ugandan reftigees from Sudaa In December Amnesty Intemational expressed its concern to President Obote about such incidents and about reports of extrajudicial executions carried out by soldiers in the West Nile area, and called for an urgent inquiry.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports of widespread extrajudicial killings by the army. In addition to West Nile, the southem Buganda area was cited, especially the "Luwero triangle" where it was reported to Amnesty Intemational that a number of mass graves had been discovered Amnesty Intemational also received reports of killings of civilians by guerrillas. However, the organization believed that the majority of killings of civilians were carried out by the army. One particularly well-documented incident took place at Namugongo, near Kampala, at the end of May. Soldiers were reported to have killed up to 100 civilians, including the Reverend Godfrey Bazira, principal of the Uganda Martyrs' Theological College, and Sheik YusufMollo, Imam of the nearby Kito mosque. The govemment condemned the killings and admitted that soldiers might have been involved Subsequently one man, reportedly an army officer, was said to have been charged in connection with the killings. However, no formal inquiry was known to have been established In July Amnesty Intemational urged President Obote to establish an independent and impartial inquiry and to make public its findings.
In August 1984, the Ugandan Minister of Information reportedly stated that some 15,000 people may have been killed by both the army and guerrillas since 1981. This statement was issued in denial of an earlier estimate by the US Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs that between 100,000 and 200,000
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
people had been idlled by the army or deliberately starved to death since 1981. Amnesty Intemational stated that it did not imow exactly how many people had been killed, but that killings of civilians were taking place on a scale so large as to cause the gravest concem.
	
	V
	- ' >1 ----""x
	\ . :
