Paraguay
During 1984 Amnesty Intemational worked on behalf of about 30 prisoners of conscience, most of whom faced charges under Law 209 (in Defence of Public Peace and Liberty of Persons) which has been used increasingly to prosecute people for the peaceful e;q?ression of their beliefs. The organization was also concemed about dozens of short-term arrests of members of opposition parties, journalists, lawyers, trade unionists and peasants under Article 79 of the Constitution, which provides for a state of siege. Another major concem was that legal proceedings in political trials did not appear to conform to intemationally recognized standards.
In Febmary 1984 Amnesty Intemational published the Briefing on Paraguay describing a wide range of human rights violations, many of which resulted from abuse of the powers provided under the state of siege. The state of siege, which is now limited to the capital Asunción, has been in force almost continuously for 30 years. The briefing documented more than 50 cases of torture and extrajudicial execution reported to have occurred since 1980. Following its publication, Amnesty Intemational launched a worldwide campaign for the release of all prisoners of conscience and the lifting of state of siege provisions which have resulted in violations of human rights.
In the first half of 1984 Amnesty Intemational leamed of the release of 20 prisoners of conscience, including Sergeant Guillermo Escolástico Ovando who had been in detention for 21 years. Despite the fact that
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Sergeant Ovando completed his sentence in 1977, he was kept in detention under state of siege provisions for a further seven years. He had been detained in December 1962 with Captain Modesto Napoleón Ortigoza. Both were convicted of the murder of a militar>' cadet and of plotting to overthrow President Stroessner (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984).
Most of those released had been detained in 1982 and accused of membership of the "Chinese" wing of the banned Paraguayan Communist Party. In May 1984 a court sentenced 15 of them to two years four months' imprisonment, and so they were almost immediately freed. The remaining defendants, all of whom have been adopted as prisoners of conscience - Maria Margarita Báez Romero, Roque Ruiz Diaz, Emilio Asterio Lugo Valenzuela and Antonio González Arce - were given sentences of four years eight months' imprisonment Amnesty Intemational believed that most of this group had been tortured during the four months after their arrest when they were held in unacknowledged detention. On 16 December an appeals court confirmed the sentences against the three men but acquitted Margarita Báez and ordered her release. She remained in prison at the end of 1984, however, pending an appeal by the prosecution to the Supreme Court
Suspected critics of President Stroessner's govemment were repeatedly detained for short periods under Article 79 of the Constitution. On 16 March Aldo Zuccolillo, editor of the newspaperese Color, was detained for publishing interviews with an exiled leader of the Movimiento Popular Colorado (MOPOCO), Popular Colorado Movement a dissident faction of the ruling Colorado Party. Aldo Zuccolillo and joumalists working for his newspaper have been detained many times in recent years. Although he was released a week later, the authorities closed ABC Color on 22 March on the grounds that Articles 50 and 71 of the Constitution which prohibit the " preaching of hatred among Paraguayans" had been violated. The newspaper had regularly carried reports about human rights violations in Paraguay. On 29 November the home of the legal adviser of^SC Co/or was raided by the police who seized 20,000 copies of a report explaining the legal background to the newspaper's closure. Eight former employees were briefly detained.
In May Amnesty Intemational appealed for the release of three leaders of the Movimiento de Autenticidad Colorada (MAC), Authentic Colorado Movement. Dr Mario Milciades Melgarejo, Ruben Darío Verón and Celso Castillo Gamarra were arrested in Asunción on 11 May for allegedly writing a document proposing a dialogue with exiled Colorado Party dissidents. All three had been previously detained on several occasions. They were released on 7 June.
At the end of June Amnesty International sought clarification of the legal situation of over 80 peasants arrested in the eastern department of
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Alto Paraná, apparently after a dispute over land tenure. The arrests followed the eviction of some 135 families from their small holdings. During the police operation, peasants' homes were reportedly burned down and two women were allegedly raped. Most of the peasants were released after a few days, but 13 men were transferred to the Penitenciaria Nacional de Tacumbú, Tacumbú Prison, in Asunción, where they were held for over two months. Although the authorities originally said that the peasants would face criminal charges for illegal occupation of land, it later appeared that the legal action had been dropped
On 7 September Dr Heriberto Alegre Ortiz, a lawyer working for the Programa de Ayuda Cristiana (PAC), Christian Aid Program, a church organization which gives legal advice to peasants, was arrested. Dr Alegre was arrested at the police station in Puerto Presidente Stroessner where he was visiting a group of peasants from Reloj Cué, who had been detained on 4 September in connection with a land tenure dispute. On 11 September Dr Alegre was transferred to Tacimibú Prison in Asunción. He was charged with inciting peasants to occupy land illegally. Amnesty Intemational adopted Dr Alegre as a prisoner of conscience on the grounds that he had been arrested for legitimately defending the rights of peasants in the Alto Paraná and Canindeyü departments.
On 13 December Amnesty Intemational asked President Stroessner for clarification of the legal situation of six prisoners convicted in Febmary 1983 ofhijackingabus in the Caaguazü department in March 1980. Their sentence of five years eight months' imprisonment was reduced on appeal to four years six months but the prosecution then appealed to the Supreme Court of Justice for their sentence to be increased to seven years' imprisonment On 4 December the six prisoners went on hunger-strike complaining that the final appeal had been imduly delayed. Amnesty Intemational reiterated its view that legal proceedings against the six prisoners had failed to conform to intemational standards for a fair trial (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984). The prisoners ended their hunger-strike on 24 December 1984 after the President ofthe Supreme Court promised to expedite the hearing.
Throughout 1984 Amnesty Intemational received reports indicating that the torture and ill-treatment of prisoners and criminal suspects continued to be routine. On 10 January, for example, police officers in the town of San Antonio, near Asunción, arrested Antonio Páez following a domestic quarrel. The next moming his wife was summoned to the police station and was informed that her husband had died from a heart attack. Three police officers were later formally accused of beating the prisoner to death.
While official inquiries into allegations of torture of criminal suspects
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
are rare, Amnesty Intemational leamed during the year that two deaths in police custody had been investigated, resulting in charges being brought against a number of police officers. By the end of 19 84 the cases remained unresolved.
In January 1984 the Supreme Court dismissed a private action brought by Dr Joel Filártiga which sought to establish that his 17-year-old son, Hugo Joel Filártiga Speratti, had died under torture in police custody and was not the victim of a crime of passion as alleged by the govemment The court awarded substantial damages to the former Inspector General of Pohce in Asunción, Américo Peña Irala, and others. In the same month, however, a US Federal Court of Appeals mled that the Filártiga family was entitled to $ 10.4 million in damages from Américo Peña Irala for the torture and murder of Hugo Joel Filártiga Speratti. The civil action had been filed by the Filártiga family in 1979, when Sr. Peña Irala was found to be living in the USA. A provision of a Federal Law, dating from 1789, gives US courts jurisdiction over " any civil action by an alien... committed in violation of the law of nations". In this case the court ruled "that deliberate torture perpetrated under colour of official authority violates universally accepted norms of the intemational law of human rights regardless of the nationality of the parties". However, since Sr. Peña Irala had left the USA, it was doubtful whether the family would be able to collect any damages.
In April Amnesty Intemational submitted information to the UN under the procedure for confidentially reviewing reports of human rights violations. Amnesty Intemational asserted that the evidence revealed a " consistent pattem of gross violations of human rights" warranting UN investigation. It described cases of arbitrary detention for long periods without trial under Article 79 and incidents of torture and extrajudicial execution. On 13 March the UN Commission on Human Rights called on the Paraguayan Govemment to consider ending the state of siege to encourage respect for human rights in the country. Amnesty Intemational also submitted information to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights.
vili
Amnesty International Report 1985
