Italy
Amnesty Intemational's principal concern continued to be the excessive length of judicial proceedings in political cases. Amnesty Intemational continued to work for the release of imprisoned conscientious objectors.
Amnesty Intemational has consistently criticized the length of preventive detention allowed by Italian law, specifically the Urgent Measures for the Protection of the Democratic Order and Public Security of Febmary 1980 {see Amnesty Intemational Reports 1980 to 1984). Under this law, defendants accused of offences carrying prison sentences of 20 years or more could spend up to 10 yeai^ and eight months in preventive detention before the final verdict This period could be extended still further by filing multiple charges or by reclassifying the gravity of the circumstances in which the alleged offence took place.
The Italian Central Institute of Statistics (ISTAT) estimated that 67.3 per cent of a prison population of 40,225 were awaiting final verdicts at the beginning of 1984.
Legal measures to reduce the length of preventive detention, already acknowledged by the Minister of Justice as "excessive", were promulgated in July 1984. A new law, No. 398(onNewMeasures Relatingto the Reduction in the Terms of Preventive Detention and the Granting of Provisional Liberty), reduced the maximum permitted length of preventive detention from 10 years eight months to six years, which Amnesty Intemational still considered to be excessive. The law also sought to provide provisional liberty to people in preventive detention.
However, because of disagreements among public prosecutors, investigating magistrates and investigating judges of the courts of appeal regarding the interpretation of certain key articles, the law was not applied consistently. It was apparently not clear which prisoners were eligible for release under the provisions which took effect from 16 August 1984, and which prisoners were not eligible until the remaining provisions came into force. The Supreme Court ruled on the disputed articles in October. The remaining provisions were due to come into force on 1 Febmary 1985 but on 27 Novemberthe Council of Ministers approved a draft law postponing their introduction forpeople accusedof more serious crimes for a further nine months.
In June 1984, after two years, the trial known as "7 April" finally closed before the First Court of Assizes in Rome. Many of the defendants had been in custody since 1979. This case was of concem to
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Amnesty Intemational both because of the length of preventive detention and because of the legal procedures adopted during the investigation and hearing (see Amnesty International Reports 1980 to 1984). Fifty-five defendants were sentenced to a total of nearly 500 years' imprisonment Most were convicted ofparticipation in an armed band and subversive association. The Motivation for Judgment and Sentence had not been published by the end of 1984, nor had any date been set for appeal hearings. After conflicting mlings by the courts, all those "7 April" defendants whose cases had been taken up for investigation by Amnesty Intemational were released from prison underthe new law on preventive detention, including Professor Luciano Ferrari-Bravo and Emilio Vesce {see Amnesty International Report 1984). They were released on 12 September and, although first ordered to a designated place of residence, were allowed to return home on 2 November.
On 8 June Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Minister of Justice about Giovanni Mulinaris who was on hunger-strike in protest at being held in preventive detention for over two years awaiting trial, and at the apparent failure of the investigating m agistrate to allow him to question people who had made allegations against him. He had been arrested on 2 Febmary 1982 and the charges against him included belonging to an armed band. On 6 April 1984 he was charged in addition with "armed insurrection against the powers of the state" and provoking "civil war", for which life imprisonment is mandatory. On 6 June he was transferred to hospital on the recommendation of a prison doctor who feared he would suffer brain damage if his hunger-strike continued. Amnesty Intemational asked theMinistertotakeevery possible step to preventa further deterioration in the prisoner's health. It drew attention to its concem that excessive periods of preventive detention could be extended still further by filing fresh charges. No reply was received. Giovanni Mulinaris ended his hunger-strike on 22 June in anticipation ofbeing placed under house arrest, but this was not granted until 12 November and he spent the intervening time in hospital.
On 18 May Amnesty Intemational wrote to the President of the Second Court of Assizes in Rome, the supervisory judicial authority, about the health of Giuliano Nana in Rebibbia prison, Rome. Specialist medical evidence indicated that he might suffer irreparable damage to his health if he were not given specialist treatment, as provided for by the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. No reply was received. Giuliano Naria was first arrested in July 1976 on suspicion of kidnapping a Genoese industrialist After investigation the case was dropped. Since then he has remained in prison, for part of the time in preventive detention in connection with a series of fresh charges, and, for part of the time simultaneously servmg a sentence for
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985

participation in an armed band At the end of 1984 he was awaiting trial on a charge of armed insurrection against the state and charges in connection with a prison riot in December 1980. In October he was too weak to stand trial on these last charges. On 1 August 1984, following the news that GiuHano Nana had been transferred to the prison wing of the Molinette hospital, Turin, where his condition was reportedly "extremely grave". Amnesty Intemational again wrote to the Minister of Justice, reiterating its concems. Again, no reply was received. On 20 October Trani tribunal rejected his request for house arrest but allowed him to goto Parma hospital as a prisoner under permanent police guard.
Amnesty Intemational worked on the cases of eight imprisoned conscientious objectors to military service, aU of whom had applied for conscientious objector status and were willing to perform altemative civilian service eight months longer than military service. They were refused on the grounds that their ethical, philosophical or religious objections to military service had not been sufficiently proved.
