Tanzania
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the short-temi detention without trial of two prisoners of conscience and about allegations of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners.
The govemment made a number of important legislative changes during 1984. In October Parliament passed an act amending the constitution to include in it for the first time a bill of rights, including the rights to equality before the law and to freedom of thought, movement and worship. During the debate on the new constitution, and in his opening address to an Amnesty Intemational regional conference in Amsha in November, Prime Mininster Salim Ahmed Salim announced that the govemment was considering certain amendments to the Preventive Detention Act, which allows for indefinite detention without trial. They included establishing a time limit on detention; the publication of all detentions in the official gazette; and the right of detainees to contest the grounds for detention in the High Court. However, the precise proposals had not been made public by the end of 1984. In September the Economic Sabotage (Special Provisions) Act of 1983, under which there had been some 2,000 prosecutions, was replaced by the Economic and Organized Crime Control Act, 1984. The new law removed certain aspects of the previous one which were incompatible with intemational standards for a fair trial, such as the denial of the right to legal representation and to appeal. Amnesty Intemational learned of no prosecutions in 1984 under either act of. political opponents of the govemment
In January a political crisis over the union between the Tanzanian mainland and the i^slands of Zanzibar and Pemba led to the resignation oftheZanzibari President, AboudJumbe. WolfangoDourado, chairman ofthe Zanzibar Law Review Council and a formerAttomey General of Zanzibar, and Bashir Ebassuah Kwaw-Swanzy, the then Zanzibar Attomey General and chief legal adviser to the ZanzibariGovernment, were detained without charge. Wolfango Dourado was arrested in Zanzibar on 30 January, apparently because the proposals of the Zanzibar Law Review Council on the constitutional relationship between the mainland and the islands conflicted with those of the Tanzanian Government Bashir Kwaw-Swanzy, a Ghanaian citizen, was held under house arrest from 30 January, released on 13 Febmary and immediately deported. Wolfango Dourado was detained at Keko Remand Prison on the mainland until his release on 11 May. Amnesty
vili
Amnesty International Report 1985
International believed that the two men were prisoners of conscience and called for their release.
After the change of government in Zanzibar in January, 24 political prisoners were released who had been detained without charge under Zanzibar sseparatePreventiveDetentionAct(see/lwrte5'0'/rtierwai/ona/ Report 1984). Amnesty Intemational also learned of the re lease of S aid Lemke, anaturalizedKenyancitizen, who had been handed overtothe custody of the Tanzanian authorities by Kenya in November 1983. He returned to Kenya in May.
In November 1984 the trial began in the High Court of 19 people charged with treason for their alleged part in a plot to overthrow the govemment Most had been arrested in January 1983. Four of the defendants - Hatibu Gandhi {alias Hatty McGhee), Christopher Kadego, Eugene Maganga and Livinius Rugaimukamu- were reportedly among a group of refugees and political exiles forcibly returned from Kenya to Tanzania in November 1983. Amnesty Intemational was concerned about allegations some defendants made at the preliminary inquiry in a magistrates' court in September that they had been tortured during interrogation. In December Amnesty International expressed its concern to the govemment that eight of the accused had alleged that they were being kept in chains in their prison cells. The organization asked for assurances that, in accordance with the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, prisoners would not be chained under any circumstances and that other forms of restraint would be used only when the prisoner was in transit, on medical grounds, or to prevent injury or damage to property. The trial was adjoumed to allow the defendants to consult their lawyers, and was expected to resume in January 1985.
