Romania
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and about reports which indicated that defendants in political cases did not receive fair trials. The organization also received allegations that political prisoners had been ill-that political prisoners had been ill-treated. Amnesty Intemational leamed of the imposition of two death sentences during 1984.
Amnesty International continued to receive reports of people
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
imprisoned for having applied to emigrate. For example. Ion Olteanu, a 35-year-old railway worker from Dobreta-Tumu Severin, was reportedly arrested in September 1983. Shortly after he had applied to emigrate to the USA in August 1983 he received a call-up order obliging him to work on the Danube - Black Sea Canal. He reportedly refused to sign it believing that it had been issued to prevent him emigrating and then refused to appear before the military prosecutor. The police then allegedly threatened to assault Ion Olteanu and his wife. His wife sent letters of complaint to a number of officials and tried to send a telegram to the Military Procurator General, which the local post office reportedly refused to send. On 19 September the police allegedly broke into his flat, beat him severely and arrested him. Amnesty Intemational sought information as to his legal status.
Unauthorized crossing of the frontier is an offence punishable under Article 245 of the criminal code by up to three years' imprisonment and during 1984 Amnesty Intemational took up the cases of a number of people imprisoned under this article. For example, Annemarie Ebinger, aged 27, from Timisoara, and her brother Walter, aged 25, from Nerau, both members of the German ethnic minority, were arrested in late 1983 after trying to cross from Romania into Yugoslavia. They were both subsequently sentenced by the Court of Timisoara to nine months' imprisonment
On 10 August an amnesty was decreed to mark the 40th anniversary of Romania's liberation in the Second World War. People sentenced to up to five years' imprisonment or corrective labour were pardoned and released, sentences of between five and eight years were reduced by one third and between eight and 10 years by a fi^ The amnesty excluded recidivists and people convicted of violent crimes, bribery, cormption or escaping from prison. Amnesty International welcomed the release of many prisoners of conscience under this amnesty. It also welcomed the release on 20 August of FatherCalciu-Dumitreasa, a Romanian Orthodox priest who was sentenced in 1979 to 10 years' imprisonment (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1980). However, it received reports that he was subsequently kept under close police supervision at his home in Bucharest
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports of people who were imprisoned or harassed for the non-violent exercise of their right to freedom of expression. In May Amnesty Intemational adopted Radu Filipescu, a 28-year-old electronics engineer from Bucharest. He had been arrested in May 1983 after posting leaflets through letter-boxes in Bucharest These leaflets reportedly called on the citizens of Bucharest to assemble in one of the city's main squares on a certain date and demand the replacement of Nicolae Ceausescu as President and party leader. In September 1983 the military court of Bucharest found him
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
guilty under Article 166 - "propaganda or the undertaking of any action in order to change the socialist order or from which danger to the security of the state may result" - and sentenced him to 10 years' imprisonment
Individuals may also be imprisoned for the non-violent exercise of their human rights on charges of "parasitical" or "anarchic" conduct under decree 153/1970. This provides for summary trial without the right to legal defence and prescribes sentences of up to six months' imprisonment or "corrective labour without deprivation of liberty".
Amnesty Intemational was concemed by reports that some defendants charged with political offences were not accorded a fair trial. One case was that of Béla Pài, a 55-year-old teacher from Ditrau and a member of the Hungarian ethnic minority. On 25 May 1983 he was arrested at his home and for two months his wife reportedly received no information as to his whereabouts. A bill of indictment was drawn up but reportedly neither his wife nor his defence lawyer were allowed to see it and they were informed only that he was charged with "wanting to overthrow the socialist order". Full details of the charges were allegedly not given at the trial nor at the appeal hearing, and at the final hearing, where his original sentence of six years' imprisonment was confirmed, the defence lawyer was reportedly not allowed to enter the courtroom.
Amnesty Intemational received allegations that Béla Pal was convicted because he had written a letter to Romanian radio and television asking for more programs in Hungarian, and because in early 1983 he had attended the funeral of Gyula Illyés, a famous Hungarian poet who had protested just before his death at the plight of the Hungarian minority in Romania. Amnesty Intemational sought further information about the charges against Béla Päl and continued to ask for details of the charges against two other ethnic Hungarians: Làszló Buzäs, an economist and Emo Borbély, a high school teacher, who were reportedly arrested in November Ì9S2 {see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984).
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports of the arrest of religious believers, in most cases members of Protestant evangelical sects. It adopted as a prisoner of conscience Dorel Catarama, from Bacau county, who was a prominent Seventh Day Adventist. He was sentenced in August 1982 to 10 years' imprisonment and forced to pay a large sum of money to his former employers after being convicted of embezzlement and illegal possession of foreign currency. He was found guilty almost solely on the basis of statements which he had allegedly signed under duress and which he later retracted. The only evidence produced to show that he possessed illegal foreign currency was a cheque for $3,000 sent by a Chicago bank on 27 April 1982, when he was already in custody, which was retumed to the same bank on 11 June
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
1982 through official channels. Amnesty Intemational received allegations that the police had previously told Dorel Catarama's family that to procure his release they should raise this sum, which they did with the help of Seventh Day Adventist communities in the USA. Amnesty Intemational received copies of two signed affidavits from companies from which he was accused of embezzling money stating that he had no debts to them and that they had no complaints against him. On appeal his sentence was increased to 14 years' imprisonment and at a retrial on 25 October 1984 it was increased to \5Vi years. However, imder the amnesty (see above) his sentence was reduced again to 14 years. The major inconsistencies between the charges brought against him and the evidence produced led Amnesty Intemational to believe that the real reason for his imprisonment was his religious activities as a Seventh Day Adventist and his father's and brother's refusal to return to Romania after a visit to the USA in February 1982.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive allegations of ill-treatment of political detainees. In May it received reports that Geza Palfi, a Roman Catholic priest from Odorheiu Secuiesc and a member ofthe Hungarian minority from Transylvania, had been arrested after preaching a sermon on Christmas Day 1983 protesting at that day being designated an ordinary working day. He was reportedly beaten so badly by the police while in custody that he was taken to the Tirgu Mures hospital in a critical condition and subsequently died of liver failure, officially diagnosed as liver cancer.
Prison conditions under which prisoners of conscience were held were reported to be harsh, with poor food, hygiene and medical care. An account received by Amnesty Intemational of Calea Rahovei prison in Bucharest, written by a former prisoner of conscience, stated that as a pimishment prisoners were placed in solitary confinement for up to 15 days and shackled with handcuffs and leg-irons to a ring fixed into a concrete pyramid, approximately 40 centimetres high, in such a way that it was only possible for the prisoner to squat
Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about the use of the death penalty. In Febmary it wrote to the President of Romania urging the abolition of the death penalty in all cases and the cessation of executions, and asking for information about 12 people sentenced to death in 1983 (six of whom were sentenced for economic offences). Amnesty Intemational did not receive a reply. It leamed of the imposition of two death sentences during 1984, both for murder. In March Amnesty Intemational appealed to the authorities to commute the death sentence passed in 1983 on Ion lonescu, reportedly for the theft of meat, which was confirmed by the Supreme Court in March. Amnesty Intemational subsequendy leamed that his sentence was commuted to 25 years' imprisonment
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
