Angola
Amnesty International's main concerns were the prolonged detention without trial of suspected opponents of the government, including alleged supporters of armed opposition groups, and the use of the death penalty. At least 31 death sentences were imposed during the year, mostly by military courts, after trials which did not appear to conform to internationally recognized standards. In a number of cases, defendants reportedly said that they had been ill-treated under interrogation during their pre-trial detention.
The internal conflict between government security forces and guerrillas supporting the Uniao Nacional para a Independencia Total de Angola (UNITA), National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, continued throughout 1984. Both sides accused the other of killing civilians. Amnesty International remained concerned about the apparently arbitrary detention by UNITA forces of civilians not involved in the armed conflict. These included foreigners working in Angola and Zairian refugees, aswell as Angolan civilians. Anumberof foreign workers were released after being taken to the UNITA base m southeast Angola, but no information was available about other captives.
Amnesty International continued to receive information about large numbers of suspected government opponents held without trial for periods varying from six months to nine years. They included alleged supporters of the UNITA and other armed opposition organizations. Although no official figures were available about the total number of political detainees, unofficial sources estimated that more than 1,000 were held in detention centres in Luanda and provincial capitals, and in rural detention camps. Several hundred suspected members or supporters
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
of the UNITA were reported to have been arrested or captured during the fighting in 1984 and some were presented at public rallies or press conferences and reportedly compelled to make self-incriminating statements.
The law on criminal procedure requires prisoners suspected of committing offences against the security of the state to be charged or released within seven months. However, this appears to have been ignored in many cases and political detainees have been held without trial indefmitely under administrative detention procedures. Such detainees appeared to have no opportunity to have the legality of their detentions reviewed.
Amnesty International asked the government about the legal grounds for the imprisonment of a number of long-term detainees-some accused of violent offences, others apparently arrested for political reasons not connected with the internal conflict. Among these were Marie-Simon Zumu and seven other Zairian refugees who were arrested in March 1983 and subsequently held without charge or trial in Luena, the capital of Moxico province. They were still being held at the end of 1984.
The only long-term detainee whom Amnesty International had adopted as a prisoner of conscience, Fernando Costa Andrade ("Ndunduma"), was released uncharged at the end of January. He had been arrested in December 1982, after producing a play which satirized members of the government, and accused of insulting the head of state and of "fractionalism" (promoting a particular faction within the ruling party).
Amnesty International took up for investigation the case of one prisoner convicted during 1984: Bartolomeu Dias Femandes was sentenced to six years' imprisonment in April by the People's Revolutionary Tribunal in Luanda on charges of insulting the head of state. The precise nature of his alleged offence was not known.
Several prisoners charged with offences against the security of the state went on trial before the People's Revolutionary Tribunal in M ay in a widely publicized trial known as the "Kamanga" or diamond-smuggling trial. There were 124 defendants, two of whom - Francisco Carlos Fragata and Paulo Capita - were accused of spying for the USA as well as diamond smuggling offences. Amnesty International received reports before the trial that Francisco Carlos Fragata had been ill-treated in pre-trial custody. At the trial several defendants alleged that they had been beaten or otherwise ill-treated during interrogatioa Two months after the trial started the People's Prosecutor called for death sentences to be passed on the two defendants charged with spying and on three others accused of diamond smuggling. On 30 October the court sentenced Francisco Carlos Fragata to death, acquitted Paulo Capita,
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
and deferred sentence on the three others pending an inquiry into a c harge that they had tried to damage the reputation of the country and its institutions by alleging that they had been ill-treated in custody and by conspiring to alter the course ofjustice. By the end of 1984 no results of the inquiry had been made public. Amnesty International was concerned that an independent and impartial investigation of the allegations of ill-treatment should be carried out It believed that Francisco Carlos Fragata had been convicted on tenuous evidence and appealed for his deatii sentence to be commuted. One week later a Special Appeals Tribunal reduced his sentence to one of six years' imprisonment, having apparently concluded that he was not guilty of spying. (This tribunal was set up in 1980 to review sentences of death and more than 20 years' imprisonment imposed by the People's Revolutionary Tribunal.)
More than 80 alleged members or supporters of the UNITA were tried during 1984 before Regional Military Tribunals. While the People's Revolutionary Tribunal was established in 1976 with jurisdiction over all political cases, in July 198 3 miitary courts were empowered to try civUians in political cases in areas affected by the internal conflict and to impose the death penalty. Most political cases were tried by military courts during the year. The law governing the procedures of military courts gives defendants the right to defence counsel of their choice, to examine the prosecution's case against them 10 days before their trial opens and to call wimesses in their defence. However it was unclear whether these rights were respected The law also guarantees those convicted the right of appeal to the Armed Forces' Military Tribunal, the.highest military court.
The first trial of suspected supporters of the UNITA by a Regional Military Tribunal took place in February when eight people were tried in Huambo for offences against the security of the state. One of them -Isaias Jeremias Nangolo - who had worked in Huambo's telephone exchange, was sentenced to death for passing sensitive information to the UNITA. Unofficial sources reported that he was executed shortly after the sentence was announced, without any opportunity to appeal.
Twenty-nine other defendants are known to have been sentenced to death during 1984 on account of their UNITA activities. The charges against them included treason, espionage, sabotage and armed rebellion. Another 43 convicted on simUar charges received prison sentences. Several of those sentenced to death had been presented to journalists towards the end of 1983 when they had made self-incriminating statements. Although the verdicts of the military courts were communicated to the press, no information was available about appeals hearings or executions. The law provides for prisoners sentenced to death by military courts to be executed by firing-squad within 24 hours of being notified that the appeal court has upheld their death sentence.
vili
Amnesty International Report 1985
Amnesty International was concerned that trials of government opponents did not appear to conform to internationally recognized standards of fair trial in a number of respects. In particular, defendants were reportedly not given an adequate opportunity to present their defence and in many cases defendants appeared to have no opportunity to appeal. At a conference in Luanda in April a senior official in the ruling party condemned various abuses of authority and violations of citizens' rights. He noted in particular that few of those verdicts which are automatically subject to appeal according to Angolan law were in fact submitted to higher courts.
Following each trial at which death sentences were announced Amnesty International called on the authorities to uphold the right of appeal and, if death sentences were confirmed upon appeal, to commute them. However, no death sentences imposed by military courts were known to have been commuted during the year.
