Central African Republic
Amnesty International was concerned about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience; the detention without trial of other political prisoners, including some reftigees; and about certain aspects of trials before the Special Tribunal, a court with jurisdiction over political cases. Most prisoners ofconscience adopted by Amnesty International were freed at the end of December when the head of state ordered the release of more than 60 prisoners. Amnesty International received information about the ill-treatment of one political detainee and was also concerned that by the end of 1984 the authorities had still not commuted the death sentences imposed on three political prisoners in May 1982.
The armed conflict in neighbouring Chad resulted in many refugees entering the country. In November the border town of Markounda was attacked, apparently by Chad-based opponents of the military govemment. The head of state, General André Kolingba, claimed that this attack was carried out by supporters of Ange Patasse and former General Alphonse M'Baïkoua, both of whom were also accused of complicity in an unsuccessful coup attempt in March 1982.
During 1984 some Chadian refugees and asylum seekers were detained and some were allegedly threatened with refoulement {foTcible repatriation). Two who had been arrested in June 1983 - Ousmane Gam and Baradine Adoum- were released in January and allowed to leave the country. However, in November a group of Chadian asylum seekers was detained, including a local govemment administrator, Jean Marcel Clamoungou, and an army officer, Marouf Guemouroa Several were relatives of victims of extrajudicial executions in southern Chad who themselves would be at risk if they were returned to Chad Amnesty Intemational called on the authorities not to repatriate them
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
and asked why they had been detained Some were later released and allowed to leave the country but others were believed to be still detained at the end of 1984.
The ban on all political activity imposed in September 1981 when the military govemment headed by General André Kolingba took power remained throughout 1984 and was used by some govemment officials to penalize non-political acts to which they attributed a political motive.
Amnesty Intemational was concerned at the length of time that some suspected govemment opponents were held in prison without trial Criminal procedure laws were notrespected, particularly those limiting to one month the period for which political suspects might be held without reference to a judge. Furthermore, members of the govemment were reported to have overruled judicial decisions in some cases. In March, for example, ^juge d'instruction (investigatingjudge) reportedly ordered the release without charge of Joseph Potolot, who had been arrested in November 1983 and accused of assisting former Emperor Jean-Bedel Bokassa in an attempt to return to Bangui, the coital. However, the Minister of the Interior, Lieutenant Colonel Christophe Grelombe, is reported to have countermanded the release order Joseph Potolot remained in custody under an administrative detention order until his release at the end of December.
In January five people were arrested and accused of organizing opposition to the govemment shortly after students in Bangui went on strike in protest at a govemment decision to make recmitment into the civil service and the award of student grants dependent on examination results. However, the five were not accused of involvement in the student protests. They included two former prime ministers - Simon Bozanga and Henri Maidou - and Abel Goumba, the leader of the Front patriotique oubanguien -Parti du ira va//(F PO-PT), Oubangui Patriotic Front- Labour Party, who had only been releasedfrom prison a few months earlier. A number of students were also arrested but were released uncharged after a few weeks. The five detainees were not tried but banished in early Febmary to towns or villages far from Bangui and placed under house arrest under administrative orders issued by the Minister of the Interior. They were all adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty Intemational. Their restriction orders were imposed for six months and are not known to have been formally renewed However, the five remained under house arrest- they were each moved to different villages in March - until late December, when they were freed at the order of the head of state.
A further and related case was that of Patrice Endjimoungou, a friend of Abel Goumba. He was arrested and banished in August after asking the Minister of the Interior to ensure that Abel Goumba had
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
sufficient money to buy food in the village to which he was restricted Patrice Endjimoungou was adopted as a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty International He too was released at the end of December.
Amnesty Intemational also adopted as prisoners of conscience a number of people detained without trial for political reasons. They included Tandalet Hozi Okito, President of the Parti socialiste centrafiicain, Central African Socialist Party, and Michel Mangue, a teacher and former civil servant who had previously been detained without trial from March 1982 until September 1983. Tandalet Hozi Okito was arrested in January for allegedly violating the government's ban on political activities. Michel Mangue was arrested in August, apparently because he sought permission to visit the neighbouring People's Republic of the Congo and was suspected of intending to contact government opponents there. Both were released uncharged at the end of the year.
Amnesty Intemational received reports of a number of arrests in October following a violent demonstration at a military camp in Bangui where French troops were based Some students who had not been involved in the demonstration were arrested at the same time and released uncharged only at the end of December. Also arrested in early October were two government employees - Jean-Claude Ouaka and Pierre Sedo - who were accused of criticizing the govemment and insulting members of the security forces. Press reports indicated that they were brought to trial in November, but it was subsequently established that they were released uncharged at the end of the year.
At the end of December a total of 43 political detainees held while their cases were investigated were released, 12 of whom had been held for more than six months. Ten others who had been held under house arrest or in custody by administrative order were also freed A small number of untried detainees remained in prison such as Grégoire Miango, a senior army officer arrestedinOctoberl983 and accusedof conspiring to overthrow the govemment General Kolingba also decreed that 14 political prisoners convicted during 1983 and 1984 were to have their prison sentences halved at the end of the yean this was believed to have led to the release of 10 of them
InJuly six people arrested in 1982 and early 1983 were tried by the Special Tribunal for alleged involvement in the coup attempt of M arch
1982.	Five were convicted and sentenced to between five and 10 years' imprisonment and the other was acquitted The five who were convicted had all previously appeared before the Special Tribunal in November
1983,	whentheyhadhad their cases referred back to the prosecutionfor further inquiries. However, when they were tried again in July they were convicted largely ontheevidencewhichhad previously been considered by the same court to be insufficient One of the five, Théodore Bagua-
Amnesty International Report 1985	33
Yambo, was considered by Amnesty International to be a prisoner of conscience. He had been absent from Bangui at the time of the coup attempt but was found guilty of contravening the ban on political activities by allowing his house to be used in early 1982 for a meeting of the Political Bureau of the Mouvement de libération du peuple centrafricain (MLPC), CentralAfricanPeople'sLiberation Movement. He was sentenced to five years' imprisonment Some of the other defendants appeared to be possible prisoners of conscience, including Jean Methet-Yapende, a MLPC supporter who had been arrested in March 1982. He received a five-year prison sentence for allegedly inciting members of the public against the security forces shortly after the coup attempt An Amnesty International observer who attended Jean Methet-Yapende's first trial in November 1983 reported that insufficient evidence was available to convict him, but his conviction in July was based on virtually the same evidence. Both Théodore Bagua-Yambo and Jean Methet-Yapende were reported to have been released at the end of December, when their five-year sentences were halved
The three others convicted in July were army officers. Jérôme Allam and Gaston Ouedane were ministers in the military government at the time and were accused of failing to report to General Kolingba when he summoned them by radio during the night of the coup attempt. They were convicted of complicity in an attempt to overthrow the government and were sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment The third -Marc Gbenengaina - was imprisoned for eight years for helping one of the alleged leaders of the coup to escape. The prison sentences on the three were halved in December, they remained in prison at the end of 1984.
Amnesty International was concemed about certain aspects of this trial. One of those convicted was, in Amnesty Intemational's view, a prisoner of conscience. Others were convicted of complicity in a coup attempt and given long prison sentences although no convincing evidence of guilt was produced in court Moreover all those convicted by the Special Tribunal were denied the right of appeal.
Amnesty International received one report of serious ill-treatment of a prisoner. Donatien Ndamokodjiade Mboya, a soldier apparently suspectedofintendingtokill the head of state, was reportedtohave been beaten and held in handcuffs and leg-shackles for several days at a time during his interrogation in June. His alleged ill-treatment reportedly provoked other inmates of Ngaragba prison to protest to the authorities. No investigation into these allegations was known to have taken place. He was released uncharged at the end of the year.
Three political prisoners convicted by the Special Tribunal in May 1982 on charges of illegal possession of explosives remamed under sentence of death throughout 1984.
34
Amnesty International Report 1985
