Tunisia
Amnesty International was concemed about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience; the torture and ill-treat-ment of prisoners, particularly of some of those arrested in connection with disturbances in December 1983 and January 1984; and the death penalty.
During 1984 Amnesty International continued to work for the release of 25 adopted prisoners of conscience and investigated the cases of a further 30 prisoners. The 25 adopted prisoners of conscience were all released during the year: eight were among 366 prisoners released under an amnesty on 9 June and the remaining 17 were amnestied on 2 August, to mark President Habib Bourguiba's birthday. All were members of the Mouvementde la tendance islamique {}ATl), Islamic Tendency Movement, who were sentenced to up to 11 years' imprisonment in September 1981 on charges including membership of an unauthorized organization, defamation of the head of state and disseminating false information (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1982). Those released included Rached El Ghannouchi, the MTI President, and Abdelfattah Mourrou, the MTI Secretary General (who had been under house arrest since his release from prison in 1983).
Amnesty Intemational continued to investigate the cases of 29 members of the Islamic Liberation Party (ILP), tried and sentenced in August 1983 to prison terms ranging from two to eight years in proceedings which Amnesty Intemational considered to fall short of intemational standards for a fair trial (see Amnesty International Report 1984).
Following the govemment's decision to cut subsidies on bread and other staple foods from 1 January 1984, disturbances broke out as thousands of people in towns and cities demonstrated in the streets. The govemment declared a state of emergency on 3 January, which remained in force until 3 February. According to a govemment commission of inquiry, published on 13 March, 89 people were killed in the disturbances and938 injured, including348 members of the security forces. Opposition sources put the casualty figure higher. The security forces and the army eventually restored order after the government reversed its decision. Approximately 1,000 people were reportedly arrested in connection with the disturbances, many of whom were released soon afterwards.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed that people tried and sentenced during the January 1984 riots may have included individuals who were
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
being punished for non-violently expressing their opinions. One of the cases about which Amnesty Intemational was informed was that of Bechir Essid,a lawyer and the Secretary General of the Mouvement du rassamblement nationaliste arabe, Arab Nationalist Assembly Movement, an unauthorized opposition group. He was sentenced on 22 March by the tribunal correctionnel, criminal court, in Tunis to two years' unprisonment for defaming the President and members of the govemment The charges reportedly stemmed from his criticism of the govemment's handling of the January riots. An appeal hearing began before the Tunis Court of Appeal on 7 July but was postponed until 16 January 1985. Bechir Essid remained at liberty pending the appeal's outcome.
During 1984 Amnesty Intemational received reports that several detainees were tortured and ill-treated during questioning in at least two interrogation centres. Most such reports concemed people detained after the disturbances in January. One report cited the building of the Caisse de la soliarite sociale, frequently referred to as "Attadhamon" (Solidarity), in the Douali district of Gafsa in southem Tunisia, which was said to have been used by police for interrogations following the riots. Both men and women detainees reportedly had their hands and feet bound, were suspended upside down, and beaten with sticks or cables on various parts of the body, particularly the feet Cigarette bums and sexual assaults were also reported Amnesty International also received a number of reports alleging torture and ill-treatment of detainees during interrogation in the Ministry of Interior headquarters in Tunis.
On 20 January Amnesty Intemational wrote to Prime Minister Mohammed Mzali urging that detamees be allowed access to lawyers and that their relatives be promptly informed of their whereabouts and allowed visits, as safeguards against torture and ill-treatment. No response was received
During 1984 Amnesty Intemational leamed of 15 people sentenced to death, four of whom were executed- two for treason, on 14 January, and two for murder and attempted murder, on 28 May. Amnesty Intemational appealed for commutation of the death sentences on both occasions. On 26 May 10 youths were sentenced to death, after being convicted ofkilling two motorists during the food riots. On 14 June the Tunis Supreme Court of Appeal confirmed the sentences on eight of them, butorderedthe remaining two to be retried. On 19 June President Bourguiba commuted the eight confirmed death sentences to life imprisonment
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
United Arab Emirates
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the use of fomis of judicial punishment which it believed constituted cmel, inhuman and degrading punishment It was also concemed about the continued imposition of the death penalty, but welcomed the commutation of such sentences. Amnesty Intemational had insufficientinformation to assess whether it had other concerns in the United Arab Emirates.
On 7 March Amnesty Intemational sent a telex to the President of the United Arab Emirates and Ruler of Abu Dhabi, Sheikh Zayed B in Sultan Al-Nahayyan, conceming reports that in Febmary an Indian man, B. K. Kondila, and a Sri Lankan woman, Shahal Hameed Azeeza, had been sentenced to death by stoning by a court in A1 Ain for adultery. Amnesty Intemational requested clarification of the reports, explained its unconditional opposition to the death penalty and urged that the death sentences be commuted On 3 April Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Ambassador of the United Arab Emirates in London, asking him to convey to the Abu Dhabi authorities its request for information about the precise charges against the two people and the outcome of any appeal The sentences were subsequently reported to have been commuted to two years' imprisonment, 70 lashes and deportation for the man and one year's imprisonment, 35 lashes and deportation for the womaa Amnesty Intemational wrote again to the Ruler of Abu Dhabi and the Minister of Justice, welcoming reports that the two death sentences had been commuted and seeking confirmatioa However, it also expressed concem at the sentences of flogging and urged that they too be commuted. In December Amnesty Intemational leamed that Shahal Hameed Azeeza had been deported to Sri Lanka, having served between sbc and eight months of her sentence. She reportedly gave birth while in prison, butherbaby was takenfromherat birth and apparently died She had not been flogged but Amnesty Intemational had no further information on whether B. K. Kondila was flogged
In October an Islamic court in the Emirate of*Ajman was reported to have sentenced a man to have his hand amputated after convicting him of theft. He had reportedly been convicted on similar charges on previous occasions. Amnesty Intemational sent telexes to the President ofthe United ArabEmirates and tothe Ruler of Ajman, Sheikh Humaid BinRashidAl-Nuaimi, explainingthatAmnesty Intemational considered
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985

amputation to be a cruel, inliuman and degrading punishment, which contravenes Article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and Article 7 of the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and urging that the sentence be commuted. On 12 November Amnesty Intemational received a response from the Ruler of Ajman, which stated that ". . . we have resolved the matter in question by pardoning the offender subject of your communication, due to the fact thatwe hold so high the human ideals towhichyou have referred...". In its reply, on 23 November, Amnesty Intemational welcomed the news that the sentence of amputation had been commuted, and requested information conceming the number of similar sentences passed and carried out during 1984.
Yemen (People's Democratic Republic of)
Amnesty Intemational continued to seek the release of 20 prisoners of conscience and to investigate the cases of nine possible prisoners of conscience. All 29 prisoners were arrested between 1967 and 1977. Some were reportedly tried and sentenced to long prison terms, others were saidtobeheld withoutchargeortrial. The whereabouts of several of the prisoners remained unknown and they were possibly no longer alive. Little information on these cases was made available in 1984 and, as in previous years, no response was received from the authorities to Amnesty Intemational's inquiries.
Amnesty Intemational continued to appeal for the release of all the prisoners of conscience, a number of whose sentences might have expired but whose release had not been officially confirmed. In November 1983, Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Ambassador in London enclosing a list of all 29 prisoners and asking for clarification of their situation. By the end of 1984 Amnesty Intemational had received no reply to its letter.
