Indonesia and East Timor
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about continuing reports of extrajudicial executions, "disappearances", torture, and arbitrary arrests and detentions on political grounds by the security forces. The victims were mainly people suspected of supporting independence or resistance movements in Irian Jaya, Aceh, and Indonesian-occupied East Timor, and Muslim activists. Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the prolonged imprisonment of people sentenced in connection with a coup attempt in 1965 after trials which fell short of intemational standards. The organization was also disturbed at continuing reports of official complicity in the killing of criminal suspects. It remained concemed about the imposition of the death penalty and the rejection of appeals to commute death sentences.
Amnesty Intemational received reports during 1984 of human rights violations in Irian Jaya including extrajudicial executions and torture of detainees held on suspicion of sympathizing with the
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
separatist movement. Organisasi Papua Merdeka (OPM), Free Papua Organization. The deaths under suspicious circumstances of two men - Arnold Ap, a museum curator and the leader of a cultural group Mambesak, andEdouardMofu, amemberofMam6e5a/:-gavecause forconcem. Both were found dead afterescapingfrom the headquarters of the Jayapura police (KODAK XVII) on 21 April. Amnesty Intemational received reports that they may have been extrajudicially executed by members of the regional military command (KODAM XVII), and urged President Suharto to order an immediate investigation and to ensure the safety of other prisoners in Irian Jaya.
The deaths of Arnold Ap and Edouard Mofu came at a time of increasing conflict between the Indonesian authorities and Irianese. Both the Indonesian army andthe OPM intensified military operations in Febmary, leading to the flight of some 10,000 Irianese across the border to Papua New Guinea Shortly afterwards, Amnesty International began to receive reports of widespread arrests, torture and deaths in detention, and of massacres in Irian Jaya by soldiers of the Indonesian army. However, it was unable to verify these reports.
Amnesty Intemational was mvestigating the cases of 12 Muslim activists and opposition figures arrested in connection with a riot on 12 September in Jakarta's port area, TanjungPriok, and a related series of explosions on 4 October. On 8 September a police officer reportedly caused offence by entering a mosque in Tanjung Priok without removing his shoes. Reports of the incident spread quickly. Mosque officials demanded an apology, and an angry crowd reportedly assaulted him. Four men were arrested. Amnesty International was investigating the cases of three ofthem- Syarifuddin Rambe, Syafwan bin Solaeman and Achmad Sahi - who it believed may have been arrested because of their religious beliefs rather than involvement in the assault
Four days later an Islamic pre acher(/«wZ)iz/%^), Amir B iki, urged a crowd estimated at 1,500 to march to the police station where the four men were being held. The crowd was met by troops who opened fire. Many protestors, including Amir Biki, were killed( the official total was 18, unofficial counts ranged between 40 and 100). Hundreds were arrested. Several leading muballigh who reportedly took no part in the march were also arrested, apparently for having criticized the govemment in the preceding months. They included Tony Ardie, Abdul Qadir Jaelani, Rani Yunsih, MawardiNur, Usmanal-Hamidy andMarsahlin Dahlan. Amnesty International took uptheircases for investigation. All were expected to be tried on subversion charges in early 1985.
On 4 October bombs exploded at branches of the Bank Central Asia, and a group of Muslim activists, reportedly angered by the deaths at Tanjung Priok, were held responsible. At the end of 1984 Amnesty Intemational was investigating the cases of three people arrested in
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
connection with the bombings - Mohammed Sanusi, a former cabinet minister, retired Lieutenant General Dharsono, former Secretary-General of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN); and Haji Achmad Fatwa, a prominent Muslim activist. All three were closely identified with the moderate opposition group "Petition of 50" and Amnesty Intemational believed tfiey might have been arrested because of their political beliefs. Lieutenant General Dharsono and Haji Achmad Fatwa were said to be detained on suspicion of having attended a meeting where the bombings were planned, and Mohammed Sanusi on suspicion of having helped finance them.
Amnesty Intemational received reports that several of those arrested in connection with the riots, the bombings, or the distribution of literature criticizingthegovemmenfs explanation ofthe riots, were held in incommunicado detention and denied access to legal counsel. On 16 October it appealed to President Suharto to make public the names and whereabouts of all those arrested and urged that they either be charged or released.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the continued detention of approximately 200 so-called "A-category" prisoners who had been arrested and tried in connection with the alleged communist coup of 1965, about 60 of whom the organization had taken up for investigation as possible prisoners of conscience. The organization was concerned that they did not receive a fair trial and that many would have been eligible for release if the rules on sentencing, remission and parole were applied consistently (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984).
Remission and parole were not possible forprisoners under sentence of death, and Amnesty International repeatedly urged President Suharto to commute all death sentences. The organization believed that approximately 35 people remained under sentence of death for alleged involvement in the 1965 coup, and although the govemment had given informal assurances that they would not be executed, it did not commute their sentences. During 1984 President Suharto rejected appeals for commutation for three "A-category" prisoners, former members of the Partai Kommunist Indonesia (PKI), Communist Party of Indonesia. On 24 October Amnesty Intemational informed President Suharto of its concem at his rejection of the appeals of Gatot Lestario and Djoko Untung and urged him to commute their sentences. On 8 December it also appealed for commutation for Mohammed Munir, a former member of the Central Committee of the PKI.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed by reports of detention without trial and ill-treatment during detention. On 17 Febmary the organization issued an appeal on behalf of 26 alleged sympathizers with the National Liberation Front of Aceh Sumatra. Most were arrested during the second half of 1983, along with 13 others
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
whose names Amnesty Intemational had received earlier {see Amnesty International Report 1984). All but one were reported to be detained withoutcharge in the Kedah military prison, Bandar Aceh, andtohave been tortured after their arrest
Amnesty Intemational continued to investigate the cases of 10 villagers from Central Java who were detained in 1978 and 1979 on suspicion of belonging to an organization aimed at establishing an Islamic state. Six had still not been tried at the end of 1984. In July Amnesty Intemational took up for investigation the cases of eightyoung men, all associated with the Muslim newsletters ar-Risalah and al-Ikhwan. They were detained without charge reportedly on suspicion of inciting Muslims to rebellion through articles printed in the newsletters. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that they were detained for the non-violent expression of their political beliefs. By the end of 1984 all but one - Irfan Suryahardy, the editor of ar-Risalah, - had been released.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive sporadic reports of so-called "mysterious killings" of criminal suspects in what appeared to be the continuation of an officially sanctioned campaign against crime that reached its height in 1983. By early 1984 government officials were denying any responsibility for the deaths, attributing them to "gang warfare". However, Amnesty Intemational believed that there was strong evidence of security personnel involvement and that at least some of the victims were in the custody of the security forces when they were killed. It reiterated its appeals to President Suharto to investigate the killings.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about reports of human rights violations in the Indonesian-occupied territory of East Timor, including"disappearances", extrajudicial executions, arbitrary detention on political grounds without legal safeguards, and torture of individuals in the custody of the Indonesian armed forces.
On 20 February Amnesty Intemational issued an urgent appeal on behalf of 23 people reportedly arrested by Indonesian troops between August 1983 and late January 1984, who then "disappeared". They included FatherDomingos Soares, a priest from Ossu, Viqueque, East Timor. The whereabouts of most had been determined by the end of 1984; many had been sent to prisons outside East Timor.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports of extrajudicial executions of non-combatants by Indonesian troops. In March approximately 100 men living near the village of Hauba, near Bobonaro in the west of the territory, were reportedly taken into custody and killed by Indonesian troops. In a statement to the UN Special Committee on Decolonization on 20 August Amnesty Intemational noted that Indonesian forces had persistently resorted to arbitrary killings of
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985

non-combatants in East Timor and urged that reports of such killings be fully investigated, and monitored by outside observers.
In February Amnesty Intemational leamed that a number ofpeople associated with the Frente Revolucionara de Timor Leste (Fretilin), Revolutionary Front of East Timor, had been tried in Dili and that others were awaiting trial. Accordingly, on 12 March, Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Minister of Justice asking to be allowed to send observers to the trials to assess their conduct in terms of intemational legal standards. On 20 April the request was turned down on the grounds that the trials were "essentially a matter of domestic jurisdiction". Amnesty International remained concemed, however, that defendants may not have been allowed legal counsel of their choice, and that there had been no public announcements about the trials in East Timor to its knowledge. It understood that by November 79 people had been tried.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the imposition of the death penalty in Indonesia. In addition to appeals made on behalf of the former PKI prisoners mentioned above, it appealed to President Suharto during 1984 to commute death sentences passed on several people, including Azhar bin Mohammed Syafar whose second appeal against his death sentence was rejected in September. He was a member of the so-called "Imrongroup" in West Java, whose leader was executed in 19 8 3, and had been convicted of subversion after storming a police station, allegedly to obtain weapons for an Islamic revolutionary movement
In April Amnesty Intemational submitted information about its concems in East Timor under the UN procedure for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations. Amnesty Intemational asserted that the evidence revealed a "consistent pattern of gross violations of human rights" warranting UN investigatioa
