Togo
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the apparently widespread use of politically motivated detention without trial and about reports of torture and ill-treatment and harsh prison conditions. One prisoner died in detention, possibly as a result of ill-treatment, and the govemment failed to account for another detainee who reportedly "disappeared" in custody in 1981.
In May 1984 Togo acceded to the Intemational Covenant on Civil
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
and Political Rights and the Intemational Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
During the year Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports that significant numbers of people were arrested on suspicion of opposing the government or for other political reasons. All forms of political activity other than those run by the only authorized political party - the Rassemblement dupeuple togolais (RPT), Togolese People's Rally-were prohibited Failure to display enthusiastic support for the RPT and President General Gnassingbe Eyadema was apparently sufficient reason for arrest and prolonged detention without trial. The relatives and friends of political detainees were frequently discriminated against by the authorities, and themselves occasionally also detained Detainees were not permitted to consult lawyers or to seek redress before the courts and in most known cases were held incommunicado. All available reports suggested that the judiciary was not permitted by the authorities to question political detentions.
During 1984 Amnesty Intemational appealed to the authorities for the prompt trial or release of almost 20 people reportedly detained for political reasons. They included a former Vice-President, Idrissou Antoine Meatchi, who was arrested in June 1982 ostensibly in connection with alleged mismanagement of public funds 10 years earlier. In November 1983, he was transferred from Lome, the capital, to a prison in Mango in the north, where conditions were reportedly very harsh. Amnesty Intemational expressed its concem to the authorities and asked for an assurance that he was being humanely treated However, there was no response and he died in late March. His death was officially attributed to a "heart attack" but Amnesty Intemational received information suggesting that Idrissou Antoine Meatchi had been ill-treated and denied food and water for long periods. In late March Amnesty Intemational urged the authorities to investigate his death but no inquiry was known to have been held by the end of 1984.
Amnesty Intemational also renewed its appeals for information about M'Ba Hankpade Kabassema, a former government minister and managing director of the Office togolais des phosphates, Togolese Phosphates Board, but no response was received He apparently "disappeared" in mid-1981 following his arrest in Lome and banishment to his home village of Niamtougou. In May 1981 the government told Amnesty Intemational that he had been arrested on suspicion of involvement in bomb explosions in Lome in April 1981. However, he was not reported to have been charged or tried and he may have been arrested because he was suspected of alleging corruption within the govemment
Amnesty Intemational also took up with the authorities the cases of several other people reportedly detained without trial for political
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
reasons. They included Adabra Kodjo Marcellin, a university lecturer apparently arrested in September 1983 on suspicion ofbeing in contact with exiled opposition movements, and Foevy Goudeagbe, a medical auxiliary. Foevy Goudeagbe was reportedly arrested in January for criticizing the government, released briefly after some months and then detained again until September. The organization also intervened on behalf of Aboudou Cheaka Toure, a senior RPT official and Head of Protocol at the Presidency who was arrested in May, apparently because of disagreements with President Eyadema over regional policy.
Amnesty Intemational continued throughout 1984 to press for an independent judicial review of the cases of Kodjovi Emmanuel de Souza, Kouao Stephan Sanvee and Kwassi Jean Savi de Tove, who were convicted by the State Security Court in August 1979 on charges of conspiracy to overthrow the govemment (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984). An Amnesty Intemational observer who attended the proceedings found that their trial failed to meet intemational standards of fairness. Amnesty Intemational, which has taken up all three prisoners for investigation, appealed particularly to the authorities during the year to disclose the place of imprisonment of Kodjovi Emmanuel de Souza and to ensure that all three prisoners received humane treatment and adequate medical care.
There were further reports of torture and ill-treatment of political detainees and of harsh conditions in several detention centres. The majority of detainees appeared still to be held in ihegendarmerie camp in Lome or in Tokoin military barracks just outside the towa In both places there were reports of severe overcrowding, and low standards of nutrition, sanitation and health care. Amnesty Intemational received information that political detainees were regularly tortured or ill-treated, particularly by being beaten, hit repeatedly on the ears and being given electric shocte. Conditions in Mango prison were also reported to be harsh, and detainees were apparently ill-treated by prison guards and denied adequate medical treatment The military camps at Lama Kara and Temedja also appear to have been used for detention purposes. Amnesty International was informed that conditions in these camps were especially harsh and that brutality towards prisoners was so severe that it caused a number of deaths, although no detailed cases were reported to the organizatioa
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
