Argentina
Following the inauguration of the civilian govemment of President Raúl Alfonsin in December 1983, Amnesty Intemational was chiefly engaged in studying the wide-ranging program of legislation and other initiatives by the new administration to remedy past human rights violations, in particular "disappearances", and to prevent future abuses. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that there should be a prompt review of the cases of more than 100 prisoners, convicted over the previous 10 years of politically-motivated crimes, on the grounds that the proceedings had not conformed to internationally accepted standards for a fair trial. The organization believed that virtually all the prisoners had been tortured or ill-treated In April the Deputy Secretary General of Amnesty Intemational and another staff member visited Argentina to discuss with the new govemment the measures it had adopted to protect and promote human rights. The delegatioh was received by the President, Dr Raúl Alfonsi'n, the Vice-President, the Foreign Minister, the Minister of the Interior, the Minister of Justice and Education and the President of the Supreme Court The delegates also met members of the Comisión Nacional sobre la Desaparición de Personas	National Commission
on Disappeared People, and representatives of the eight Argentine nongovernmental human rights organizations.
Amnesty International, which had campaigned over the previous eight years for a full and impartial inquiry into "disappearances", was particularly interested in following the work of CONADEP, the govemment-appointed commission established in December 1983 "to clarify the tragic events in which thousands of people disappeared". On 20 September CONADEP presented its findings to President Alfonsin,
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
and on 28 November a two-volume report, titled Nunca Más (Never Again), was made public. The report catalogued 8,960 unresolved "disappearances" but warned that the true figure might be higher. It also listed 340 clandestine detention centres throughout Argentina which, it said, were in use at the height of the repression. The CONADEP report concluded that human rights were violated in an organized way by the armed forces using state machinery. The report rebutted assertions that torture and enforced "disappearance" were exceptional excesses: "Such atrocities were widespread and daily occurrences; they were common practice, routinely carried out". CONADEP had interviewed thousands of witnesses including relatives of "disappeared prisoners, former prisoners and members of the police, army and security forces, and had examined numerous former torture centres. Over 1,080 cases of "disappearance" were submitted by CONADEP to civilian courts for a judicial investigation into prima facie evidence of human rights violations. Among the recommendations put forward by CONADEP was a call for legislation making responsibility for "disappearances" a crime against humanity.
In September CONADEP was dissolved and a new human rights bureau was created within the Ministry of the Interior to continue collecting evidence about "disappearances". In particular, the bureau was to search for the children of "disappeared" people. In 1977 the organization Abuelas de Plaza de Mayo was formed by grandmothers searching for about 145 children who had "disappeared" after the abduction of their parents. The majority had allegedly been bom in clandestine detention centres. Since 1979 some 24 such children had been found alive, about half of whom were again living with their original families in 1984. In a few cases, investigations showed that children had died violently. In January the remains of the Lanuscou family were discovered in an unmarked grave in the Boulogne cemetery in Buenos Aires Province. Although death certificates signed by the medical officer of the Buenos Aires police force in September 1976 did not name the victims, the place and date of death, and the physical description given fitted the family: two adults and three children aged six, four and six months. The cause of death in each case was given as a single gunshot wound to the head The Lanuscou family "disappeared" after security forces raided their home in September 1976. In January 1984 the grave was exhumed; in the smallest casket it was discovered Üiat a bab/ s shawl and dummy had been placed beside bone fragments of an adult male. The remains were examined in June 1984 by a US forensic scientist who confirmed that the parents and the two older children had died from gunshot wounds, but failed to find any trace of the baby's remains. CONADEP subsequently received allegations that the Lanuscou baby, Matilde, was alive and had been illegally adopted by a naval officer after the 1976 raid.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Amnesty Intemational monitored legal proceedings in six cases in which it was alleged that children had been illegally adopted by people connected with the police, military and security forces. On 13 December a Federal Court of Appeal ordered that Paula Eva Logares should be returned to the care of her grandmother. The child had "disappeared" in 1978 after she and her parents were abducted in Uruguay (where they had gone to avoid persecution) when she was 23 months old She had been falsely registered as the natural daughter of a former police officer. The ruling came after complex genetic tests conclusively established Paula Eva Logares' tme identity. Amnesty Intemational groups continued to seek clarification of the whereabouts of more than 70 missing childrea
Throughout 1984 the number of remaining prisoners convicted of politically motivated offences gradually decreased Twenty prisoners who had been sentenced by military courts were provisionally released under a new mechanism permitting habeas corpus petitions to review their sentences. At the beginning of August a further 50 prisoners were freed after Congress approved a law reducing prison sentences. The law provided for the time spent in prison during the period of military mle to be counted as double its actual length. A similar provision led to the release of 500 ordinary criminal prisoners.
On 12 October Amnesty Intemational asked President Alfonsin to clarify the legal status of 17 remaining political prisoners. They had gone on hunger-strike on 10 September when Congress failed to find time to consider a draft law which would have enabled them to be conditionally released while their cases were being reviewed Their hunger-strike ended on 27 October after four prisoners had to be given medical treatment
Amnesty Intemational was concemed by renewed bombings and assaults on human rights activists, trade unionists, members of left-wing political parties and students during 1984. These attacks were attributed by the authorities tp right-wing paramilitary groups linked to the security forces. Amnesty Intemational was particularly disturbed because many of the attacks appeared to be designed to obstruct investigations into past human rights violations. Members of CONADEP were a major target In three cities - Mar del Plata, Córdoba and Rosario - the homes and offices of CONADEP delegates were bombed In October the main court building in Rosario was raided by a right-wing commando group allegedly linked to the army intelligence service. Documents and other evidence collected by a judge investigating the alleged involvement of a former chief of police in past "disappearances" and torture were seized.
The govemment took steps to investigate and bring to justice those responsible for past human rights violations: in December 1983 it
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
ordered that the nine members of the three juntas who had ruled Argentina between 1976 and 1981 should be court-martialled before the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces on charges of illegal privation of liberty, torture and homicide. In February 1984 Congress approved reforms to the Code of Military Justice (Law 23.049) which transferred jurisdiction over all criminal prosecutions involving military, police or security persormel accused of human rights violations to the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces. The new law stipulated that all decisions and sentences of the military court should be subject to automatic review by a civilian court of appeal. The Supreme Council of the Armed Forces was' given 180 days to complete its proceedings against the former junta members. Preventive detention orders were issued against the three members of the first junta in August, after the Court of App>eal in Buenos Aires had criticized the Supreme Council for unnecessary delays. On 22 September the Supreme Council declared that it was unable to proceed with the court-martial and that the conduct of the nine former members of the juntas had been "irreproachable". Following this decision the trial of the former junta members passed to the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal. The defendants applied to the Supreme Court to rule that the trial of military officers by a civilian court was unconstitutional, but the application was rejected on 27 December.
Despite the transfer of jurisdiction over cases of alleged human rights violations by police, military or security personnel to the Supreme Council of tiie Armed Forces, relatives of victims and CONADEP continued to file complaints before civilian judges, some of whom attempted to proceed with criminal investigations. In all cases, however, appeals courts ordered the civilian judges to transfer the complaints to the Supreme Council.
On 14 November 1984 all nine members of the Supreme Council resigned, saying that the court had been unfairly criticized All further proceedings on several hundred cases were suspended and at the end of 1984 the govemment had still to designate new judges.
In October 1984 Congress amended Article 144 of the penal code increasing penalties for those found guilty of torturing detainees. Possible sentences now range firom five years to life imprisonment, and similar penalties were introduced for those who fail to report torture.
On 5 September 1984 Argentina deposited the instmment of ratification of the American Convention on Human Rights and recognized the jurisdiction of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
