Syria
The main concems of Amnesty Intemational continue to be: wide powers of arrest and detention used by the security forces under Syria's 22-year-old state of emergency to detain thousands of political prisoners; the imprisonment ofover260 prisoners of conscience; long-term detention without trial of most political detainees; the routine use of torture by the security forces; "disappearances"; extrajudicial executions; and the death penalty.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
During 1984 no response was received from the govemment to Amnesty Intemational's repeated proposal to send a delegation to Damascus to discuss the issues and recommendations raised in its Report from Amnesty Intemational to the Govemment ofthe Syrian Arab Republic, published in November 1983 {sqq Amnesty Intemational Report 1984). To Amnesty International's knowledge, none of the recommendations put forward in the report were implemented
Amnesty Intemational worked for the release during 1984 of 262 adopted prisoners of conscience and was investigating the cases of 234 possible prisoners of conscience. Amongthem were officials ofprevious governments, members of the professions, including lawyers, doctors and engineers, and members of banned political parties. Amnesty Intemational leamed of the release of 63 prisoners on whose behalf it was working, including 53 adopted prisoners of conscience. It also received reports of the extrajudicial killing in 1980 and 1981 of 39 prisoners whose cases it was investigating.
In March Amnesty Intemational leamed of the release of three adopted prisoners of conscience, who were among a number of lawyers arrested in April and May 1980 after a one-day strike by the Syrian Bar Association on 31 March 1980 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984). However, the organization remained concemed about 13 lawyers from this group who continued to be held without charge or trial, and launched an appeal on their behalf in mid-October.
Amnesty Intemational continued to investigate the cases of 94 doctors and 68 engineers who were also believed to have been detained in April and May 1980 because of their support for the one-day strike. The organization leamed of the release of two doctors from this group during the year, Ma'mun al-'Adhma and Mustafa Mujawaz. Amnesty Intemational continued to seek the release of 146 adopted prisoners of conscience who were members of the banned Communist Party Political Bureau (CPPB) and had not been charged or tried. During 1984 Amnesty Intemational learned of the release of 43 of them. Among those still detained was Ahmad Fa'iz al-Fawwaz, a51-year-old doctor and member of the CPPB's Central Committee who had been detained since 6 October 1980.
In October Amnesty Intemational leamed of the arrest between June and August of 32 members ofanother banned party, the Party for Communist Action (PCA). According to reports, they were arrested on the orders of President Assad following the publication by the PCA of articles about divisions within the Syrian leaderehip. Two members of this group, both women, were released in November. At the end of the year, Amnesty Intemational was seeking further information on the 30 members still in detention. The organization also sought the release of 69 other PCA members whom it had adopted as prisoners ofconscience
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
in 1982 and 1983, none of whom has been charged or tried However, it leamed of the release in November of one of this group: Fatima al-Lazkani, a 27-year-old former medical student and novelist who had been held in Kafr Sousseh Prison since September 1981. Her husband, Wa'il Sawwah, a 30-year-old writer and party member, was arrested in August 1981 and continued to be held in a Damascus prison
Amnesty Intemational continued to seek the release of 18 people who had served in or were connected with the pre-1970 government {sQQ Amnesty Intemational Report 1984). The group included a former President, five former cabinet ministers and a former ambassador, all of whom have been held without charge or trial for over 14 years in al-Mezze military prison in Damascus.
As in previous years Amnesty Intemational was concemed about allegations of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners by the security forces. In July the organization published a four-page File On Torture, in which it cited several torture testimonies from former detainees. One was that of a doctor from Damascus arrestedbecause of his connections with the banned Muslim Brotherhood who was tortured during two and a half years in detention. His last place of detention was Tadmur Prison, where inmates were reported to have been beaten, whipped and otherwise ill-treated daily. A number were said to have died as a result, and also because of the appalling conditions in which they were held The testimony also stated that official medical care in Tadmur was virtually non-existent, and that it was left to imprisoned doctors to try to cope with sick prisoners and to treat the after-effects of torture.
During 1984 Amnesty Intemational made a number of urgent appeals on behalf of detainees who had reportedly been tortured while undergoing interrogation by the security forces. In January the organization appealed on behalf of Riad al-Turk, First Secretary of the CPPB, after receiving reports that his life was in great danger following torture in the military intelligence headquarters in Damascus in December 1983. The organization had received a series of similar reports since his arrest in October 1980.
In April Amnesty Intemational appealed on behalf of one member of the PCA, and in August on behalf ofthreeothers, who were reportedly seriously ill as a result oftorture during interrogation. Amongthem was KhadijaDib who was arrested on 29 July, allegedly as a hostage, while the authorities searched for her husband Reports indicated that in August she had been tortured in an attempt to force her to reveal her husband's whereabouts and that she hadbeenhospitalizedseveral times as a result, on one occasion having suffered from a haemorrhage of the womb. The organization subsequently leamed that she was released in early November.
At the end of July Amnesty Intemational appealed on behalf of
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Ghassan Najjar, a mechanical engineer from Aleppo and one of the group of 68 engineers whose cases the organization was investigating. Reports indicated that Ghassan Najjar had gone on hunger-strike in June in protest at his continued detention without charge or trial, and was subsequently beaten by prison guards in an attempt to force him to abandon his hunger-strike. As a result of this treatment he was hospitalized in mid-July, apparently with a spinal injury and possible paralysis.
At the beginning of 1984 Amnesty International received reports that 3 9 prisoners whose cases it was investigating had been extrajudicially executed. They included 38 youths who had been arrested in March 1980 and detained in the town of Deir al-Zor following an anti-govemment demonstratioa They were transferred to an unknown destination three months later, and in early 1984 Amnesty International received reports indicating that they were among the prisoners killed in a massacre atTadmur Prison on 27 June 19S0 {see Amnesty Intemational Report 1981). Also reportedly killed in the massacre was Dr Tawfiq Draq al-Siba'i, a 37-year-old neurologist who "disappeared" in June 1980. Amnesty Intemational sought official confirmation of these reports but received no response.
Amnesty Intemational leamed of 16 officially confirmed executions in 1984. Fifteen were civilians convicted of murder of whom nine had also been convicted of robbery, and three had been convicted of abduction and sexual assault. The other execution was of a soldier convicted of desertion from military service, dmg trafficking and the murder of a police officer. During the year Amnesty Intemational expressed its concem to the President aboutexecutions which had taken place and reiterated its unconditional opposition to the death penalty.
Amnesty Intemational also received unconfirmed reports that one doctor and one engineer whose cases it was investigating- Muhammad Khadr 'Ajjaj and Bassam Najm al-Din Siba'i - were executed in Tadmur Prison after being summarily tried and sentenced to death. In previous years the organization had received numerous unconfirmed reports of executions inside prisons after trials by military courts with summary r\x\esoipToced\\Te{see Amnesty Intemational Report1983). Another doctor from this group, Muhammad Fattahi, was said to have been killed outside Tadmur Prison by members of the security forces. The organization was not able to obtain further information on the circumstances surrounding his death.
In April Amnesty Intemational submitted information about its concerns in Syria under the UN procedure for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations. Amnesty International stated that the evidence revealed a "consistent pattem of gross violations of human rights" warranting UN investigation.
340
	
	
	
' -'•if	
Amnesty International Report 1985
