Sierra Leone
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about reports of ill-treatment of prisoners, in some cases said to have resulted in death. It was also concerned about the continued detention without trial of suspected political opponents of the government at least two of whom were prisoners of conscience. At the beginning of 1984 more than 100 people detained in connection with acts of political violence in the Pujehun region were reported to be held in prisons or police cells in Pujehun and Bo. Some had apparently been held without trial for more than a year. Amnesty Intemational received information that their conditions of detention were grossly inadequate, and in particular that prisoners were not given adequate food or medical attentioa As a result at least five prisoners were reported to have died from malnutrition at Pujehun in the preceding six months. On 22 March Amnesty Intemational wrote to President Siaka Stevens to express its concern about these reports and to urge that all prisoners should be humanely treated It also sought clarification of the number and identities of all those held in connection with the violence in the Pujehun region. However, there was no response from the govemment and Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports of ill-treatment
In early July, after receiving information about further deaths of prisoners since January 1983, Amnesty Intemational publicly appealed to the govemment to investigate the deaths of some 19 prisoners whose
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985

names were known to the organization. Ten were reported to be political detainees who had died in custody at Pujehun. The nine others, detained for reasons not reported to Amnesty International, had reportedly died in Koidu prison in Eastern Province. On 12 July the authorities publicly denied Amnesty International's allegations. They stated that two people had died in Pujehun prison and three in Koidu prison between January and July 1984 - none of them from malnutrition - and that all detainees and prisoners were fed three times a day. However, they did not account for any of the individuals named by Amnesty International, nor did they institute an investigation of the type requested Moreover, Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports that prisoners were seriously malnourished and that this had led to more deaths.
On several occasions people were detained for criticizing the government Most were released uncharged within a few days. However, Christopher Coker, a joumalist arrested in September for criticizing the government, was held in Pademba Road prison for some four months. J. L. Olu Mammah, an accountant was also imprisoned there after being detained in September, reportedly for possessing literature issued by an illegal political group, the Sierra Leone Democratic Party. Amnesty Intemational considered both men to be prisoners of conscience.
