Albania
Amnesty International was concemed about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience under legislation which severely restricted certain human rights; the lack of legal safeguards for people arrested and tried for political offences; allegations of ill-treatment of detainees; and harsh prison conditions. The organization remained concerned about the number of offences for which the death penalty could be imposed, but was not informed of any executions during the year.
In a report published in December 1984, Albania: Political Imprisonment and the Law, Amnesty Intemational set out its concerns. The report stated that owing to official censorship and restrictions on freedom of movement. Amnesty Intemational was unable to assess accurately the number of political prisoners detained in Albania. It had received in recent years the names of abnost 400 political prisoners who were serving sentences in the 1970s and 1980s and the available information indicated that many were prisoners of conscience. However, the organization believed that this was only a fraction of the total number of political prisoners in Albania. According to reports by former political prisoners, approximately 1,200 political prisoners were detained in Ballsh labour camp before an amnesty in November 1982. Similar figures were given for Spac labour camp. In addition, some 300 political prisoners were reportedly held in Burrel prison in 1982 and political prisoners were reportedly also held in Tarovic, Kosove and Tirana prisons. After the 1982 amnesty the population of both labour camps was reportedly reduced although Amnesty Intemational has received allegations that there have been further arrests since then of
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
those considered to be supporters of senior government officials disgraced and arrested in 1982.
Albania has not ratified the intemational human rights covenants and its constitution justifies the restriction of certain human rights on the grounds that "the rights of citizens are inseparable from the fulfilment of their duties and cannot be exercised in opposition to the socialist order". In practice many people have been imprisoned for the non-violent exercise of basic human rights under various loosely formulated charges such as "anti-state agitation", "sabotage" and "treason".
The criminal code states that its aims are primarily political and ideological and the concept of impartial justice for individuals is expressly rejected in official texts. Article 55 on "anti-state agitation and propaganda" makes the expression of views critical of economic or political conditions, even if voiced in private conversations, or the possession of literature containing such views, an offence punishable by three to 10 years' imprisonment. If the offence is committed in time of war or has "especially grave consequences" the penalty is 10 to 25 years' imprisonment or death. People arrested while trying to leave the country illegally face conviction under Article 47 dealing with "treason", "flight from the state" and "refusal to retum to the fatiierland on the part of a person sent on service or allowed temporarily to leave the state". These offences are punishable by not less than 10 years' imprisonment or death. Amnesty International has received reports of prisoners serving sentences of up to 25 years for having exercised their right to freedom of expression or for having attempted to leave the country without official permission.
In addition to imprisonment, the criminal code provides for a supplementary penalty of banishment or intemment (generally on a state farm or enterprise) for up to five years. This penalty may be imposed administratively, without trial, and for unspecified periods on people considered by the authorities to represent a danger to the country's social system and on "members of the family of fugitives living inside or outside the state". Amnesty Intemational has learned of a number of such cases in recent years.
The Amnesty Intemational report on Albania focused also on the lack of legal safeguards for political prisoners during investigation and trial proceedings and the absence of provisions entitling them to visits from relatives or defence counsel during investigation. Almost all former political prisoners who have given testimonies to Amnesty Intemational asserted that during investigation they were held in small, dark basement cells. Many apparently had to sleep either on the cement cell floor or on boards with blankets but no mattress. They complained that they were given very little to eat and were allowed little or no exercise. Most said they had been denied access to their families and to
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
legal counsel. They said also that they were interrogated daily for long periods - several that they were interrogated at night and deprived of sleep. Most alleged that they were beaten during investigation.
Since 1967 the institution of advocacy has been effectively abolished and reports of political trials in recent years indicate that most defendants were not allowed defence counsel and had to conduct their own defence. Amnesty Intemational knows of only one case since 1967 in which a court granted an adult Albanian citizen accused of political offences the services of a legal adviser. It knows of no political trials in which the defendant was acquitted.
The publication included reports of conditions in Spac and Ballsh camps and Burrel prison, which were described as harsh, with poor food, hygiene and medical care. In addition, conditions under which copper and pyrite were mined by prisoners in Spac camp were said to be often dangerous.
In 1967 Albania was officially proclaimed an atheist state and all places of worship were closed. Several people reportedly intemed or imprisoned on account of their religious activities were named in the Amnesty Intemational report Among them were Fran Mark Gjoni, said to have been sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment in 1977 for possessing Bibles, and the Jesuit priest Ndoc Luli from Mali Jushit near Shkoder, who was reported to have been imprisoned in 1980 after he had baptized a relative's children.
Amnesty Intemational submitted the publication to the Albanian Govemment in December with a request for comments which it undertook to make public. There was no response to this request
Under the criminal code, death sentences may be imposed for 34 offences, including 12 political and 11 military offences. The death penalty may be imposed in peacetime for a number of non-violent political offences, including "flight from the state" (Article 47); "anti-state agitation and propaganda", when this has "specially grave consequences" (Article 55); "creation of a counter-revolutionary organization or participation in it" (Article 57); and "concealment of a person who commits a crime against the state" in "specially grave circumstances" (Article 59). However, no official figures on death sentences have been made public and no reports of death sentences or executions reached Amnesty Intemational during 1984.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
