Dominican Republic
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about numerous short-term arrests of individuals, some of whom it believed may have been held on suspicion of non-violent opposition to the govemment. The organization continued to investigate the cases of two men who "disappeared" following arrest in previous years.
Amnesty Intemational issued urgent appeals following reports that more than 4,000 people had been detained and over 50 killed during demonstrations in various cities between 23 and 25 April in protest at govemment economic policy, particularly at sharp rises in food prices. The organization called for all those detained solely for exercising their right of peaceful assembly to be released and for the other prisoners to be charged and tried without delay, or released. Reports were subsequently received that all those detained had been released. In view of allegations that some of the deaths arose from deliberate, targeted killings of demonstrators by law enforcement officials. Amnesty Intemational urged an immediate inquiry.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
In June there was a series of arrests of trade union leaders and senior members of opposition political parties. Among them were Julio de Peña Valdez, General Secretary of the Central General de Trabajadores (CGT), General Union of Woiicers, and a former prisoner of conscience, and leading members of the Dominican Communist Party, including Narciso Isa Conde, its General Secretary, Juan Persia and Sully Suneaux. Amnesty Intemational issued urgent appeals for them to be charged or released and for their protection in custody. The govemment replied that the trade unionists had been suspected of planning "an imminent attack against public order and security" and after investigation had been released In August and November there were fuither reports of short-term arrests of trade unionists and opposition leaders.
Two trade imion leaders detained on 8 May and held for some days -José Galván Alcántara and Arsenio de la Rosa Garadino- alleged that prisoners were tortured in the custody of the national police. They asserted that more than half the 93 prisoners they saw in detention bore marks of beatings, whippings and other forms of torture. They also denoimced the prison conditions in which they were held.
Amnesty Intemational continued to investigate the case of Luis Samuel Roche, a Haitian citizen who had been living in the Dominican Republic since 1963 as a refugee recognized by the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, and who had "disappeared" following arrest on 4 June 1982 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1983). The authorities maintained that an investigation had been conducted which showed that Luis Samuel Roche had not been arrested but reports continued to be received contradicting this. Amnesty Intemational called for the inquiry to be reopened The organization also continued to investigate the case of a Dominican citizen, Pablo Liberato Rodriguez, who "disappeared" after arrest in 1974 in San Francisco de Macoris.
	
J	
