Pakistan
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the detention of prisoners of conscience. It was also concemed that hundreds of other political prisoners were tried before military courts whose procedures fell short of intemationally accepted standards for a fair trial. The absence of legal safeguards to protectprisoners resulted in some beingheld incommunicado after their arrest for several weeks or longer, and A mnesty Intemational continued to receive reports of prisoners being tortured during interrogation. The organization also received reports of the deaths of criminal suspects in police custody, allegedly due to torture. Prisoners continued to be held in bar fetters and shackles, contrary to international standards for the treatment of prisoners. Death sentences and floggings were frequently imposed.
Political parties and political activities continued to be banned under martial law regulations. Political activities were further restricted at the end of 1984 when the penal code was amended to provide three years' imprisonment for anyone advocating a boycott of elections or referendums. Although political parties continued to function the movement of political leaders was often restricted and protests against martial law resulted in frequent arrests.
Several hundred prisoners were held without charge or trial for participating in the 1983 demonstrations of the opposition alliance, the Movement for the Restoration of Democracy (MRD). Most were released by mid-1984. Many of these prisoners had protested non-violently and were considered prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International. Other prisoners of conscience released included three leading opposition politicians held under house arrest for at least three years, and a few people convicted by military courts in earlier years mainly for possessing printed material considered subversive. They were often freed before the expiry of their sentences.
At the end of 1984, a few hundred people arrested during the MRD's 1983 protests remained in detention, almost all in Sind province. The majority had been tried by summary military courts on criminal charges such as damage to property but some continued to be held without charge or trial. Moreover, a few dozen prisoners held in the Hyderabad area who had been tried andsentenced were reportedly kept in prison under detention orders following the expiry of their sentences. Amnesty Intemational had adopted as prisoners of conscience many of the prisoners in the last two groups, including Mairaj Mohammad
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Khan, leader of Quomi Mahaz-i-Azadi (QMA), the National Liberation Front, and Fazil Rahu, President ofSindAwami Tehrik, the Sind People's Movement, both of whom had been held under renewable detention orders since 15 August 1983.
A few hundred people were arrested around the time of the referendum held on 19 December to seek endorsement of President Zia-ul-Haq's Islamization policies. The President stated that the positive result of the referendum constituted a mandate to continue in office for a further five years. Political activists were arrested throughout the country, some of them taken from their homes, others arrested at meetings protesting againstthereferendumor in possession of pamphlets criticizing it Some were detained for only a short time, others for an initial period of three months.
Among other prisoners of conscience arrested during 1984 were members of the Ahmadiyya sect In April President Zia-ul-Haq promulgated an ordinance amending the penal code which banned Ahmadis from calling themselves Muslims, using Muslim practices in worship and"preachingorpropagatingtheirfaith". Penalties includeda three-year prison sentence. Particularly in the weeks following this announcement, Amnesty Intemational received numerous reports of Ahmadis being arrested under these provisions. Amnesty International wrote to the govemment expressing concern that members of the Ahmadiyya community were reportedly imprisoned for their nonviolent religious beliefs and activities, and asking for intemational standards for the freedom and tolerance of religion and religious practice to be guaranteed to all its citizens.
The year was marked by the increased use of military courts to try political prisoners, some of whom had already been held for one to three years. However, several dozen suspected political opponents, some detained since 1981, remained in Haripur Jail, North West Frontier Province, without trial at the year's end Smaller numbers of untried political prisoners continued to be held elsewhere, especially in Kot Lakhpat Jail in Lahore and Karachi Central Jail.
In August two major trials before special military courts commenced in Rawalpindi and Lahore. Special military courts have three members, two of whom are military personnel who need not have had legal training. Amnesty Intemational has long been concemed at the lack of independence of these courts from the executive; moreover there is no judicial appeal against their decisions. Both trials were held in camera under provisions of President's Order No. 4 of 1982. This permits special rules of evidence, shifts the burden of proof onto defendants to show innocence and removes the court's discretion in sentencing. Defendants and lawyers are also subject to prosecution under the Official Secrets Act if information is disclosed about the trial proceedings.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
An Amnesty Intemational delegate was sent to Pakistan to obtain infomiation and to discuss with officials and others its concern over these trials, having earlier been refused permission to attend one of them. The Rawalpindi trial involved 18 prisoners accused of conspiracy to overthrow tiie govemment Although most of the defendants had been arrested during 1981, they were not formally charged until July 1984. In Lahore 54 people were charged with criminal conspiracy and sedition for alleged involvement witha group considered by the authorities to be a terrorist organization committed to the overthrow of the govemment Amnesty Intemational has been concemed over the years that the blanket charge of association with Al-Zuifikar may be used to imprison some people involved in non-violent political dissent Amnesty Intemational received reports that in both cases the accused were held permanently in bar fetters and that some had been tortured when held incommunicado for interrogation after arrest Amnesty Intemational appealed for all civilian prisoners to be tried before ordinary courts with full legal safeguards, and for allegations of torture to be promptly investigated by an independent body. At the end of 1984 both trials were drawing to a close.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive complaints of the incommunicado detention and ill-treatment or torture of people arrested during 1984. It launched international appeals on behalf of Raza Kazim, a lawyer arrested from his home on 9 January. In spite of persistent inquiries his family had been unable to discover his whereabouts, and during the first six months of his detention their only access was four meetings at a private house to which the prisoner was brought by unidentified military personnel. Only when a habeas corpus petition was heard by the Lahore High Court in July did the authorities formally acknowledge his detention. Raza Kazim suffered from a heart complaint before his arrest and his health was reported to have deteriorated considerably through inadequate medical treatment Arrested at the same time were a group of military personnel, at least 17 of whom were charged, with Raza Kazim, with sedition and waging or attempting to wage war against Pakistan. They were also held incommunicado in military custody and Amnesty Intemational has received allegations that they were tortured by being beaten, deprived of food and sleep and in some cases given electric shocks. Amnesty Intemational appealed for independent investigations into these allegations. Police officers as well as members of the armed forces' intelligence agencies were accused of torturing political prisoners. Following a ban on student unions in early 1984 large numbers of students were arrested throughout the country. In Lahore some 27 students were arrested in March and taken to various police stations in the city. While held in police custody for several days, some of the students were reported to have been beaten
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
with batons and pieces of leather, to have had haii pulled out and eyebrows and pubic hair burned In October students were reportedly tortured at Hyderabad Central Jail by army personnel. They had been arrested when two buses in which they had been travelling were stopped by police and army units. Army personnel allegedly opened fu-e at the buses without warning and without due provocation. A judicial inquiry was ordered by the Sind authorities since at least five people were killed, including, apparently, one law enforcement officer. During subsequent interrogation some students were reportedly beaten, hung upside down and given electric shocks.
Deaths of criminal suspects in police custody, allegedly as a result of torture, were reported regularly in Pakistan's press. Although inquiries were sometimes ordered and two cases were reported during 1984 of police officers being tried and convicted of torturing prisoners, effective measures to prevent such treatment were not implemented.
Some prisoners continued to be held in bar fetters and shackles. Amnesty International urged the government to include the immediate abolition of bar fetters and shackles in the recommendations of the Commission on Jail Reforms, and calledon the President to write it into law. At the end of 1984 the Commission had yet to complete its report Petitions submitted to the High Court on behalf of prisoners held in fetters were dismissed because the judiciary had no jurisdiction over the martial law authorities' actions.
Amnesty Intemational received reports of the execution of more than 70 prisoners during the year, more than two-thirds of whom had been tried by military courts. One prisoner hanged in August was believed to have been under 18 years old at the time of his arrest Amnesty Intemational also recorded more than 100 prisoners sentenced to death, at least half of whom were tried by special military courts. Amnesty International does not believe this record of executions and death sentences is complete. In November it sent urgent appeals seeking clemency for four prisoners sentenced to death by a special military court and urging their retrial before an ordinary court. The four hadbeen convicted of abetting the hijack of an aircraft in 1981. The organization had received detailed documentation showing that three of these prisoners had originally been sentencedto imprisonment and were given death sentences only after the martial law authorities directed the court to reconvene and consider passing death sentences. At the end of 1984 no decision had been announced on the prisoners' clemency appeal to President Zia-ul-Haq. Their cases were among a number involving the imposition of the death penalty by special military courts submitted by Amnesty Intemational during 1984 to the UN Special Rapporteur on Summary or Arbitrary Executions.
Sentences of flogging were routinely imposed w ith terms of imprison-
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
ment for a variety of criminal offences and offences under Islamic Ordinances governing breaches of morality such as adultery. Floggings were inflicted in public as well as in jails and Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports of prisoners losing consciousness as a result
	
\ k	
	fy ■■■■
	
	
