Guatemala
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed that the regular security and military forces - as well as paramilitary groups acting under govemment orders or with official complicity (the so-called "death-squads") - were responsible for massive human rights violations, mcluding arbitrary arrest, torture, "disappearance" and extrajudicial executions. The victims came from all sectors of Guatemalan society.
An Amnesty Intemational mission which visited Guatemalan refugee camps in Mexico in May collected first-hand testimony concerning such abuses, which had occurred both under the govemment of General Efi-ain Ríos Montt(March 1982 to August 1983) and after the coup which brought General Oscar Humberto Mejía Víctores to power in August 1983. Recently arrived refugees testified that a number of people had been extrajudicially executed in the Santa Lucia del Quiché area inDecember 1983. OÁers reported"disappearances" and killings by security forces in Horn, Quiché, in the period to January 1984, when they left the area.
The delegation also found convincing evidence that the Guatemalan army had been responsible for killings and abductions of Guatemalan refugees and Mexican citizens on Mexican territory (see entry on Mexico).
Amnesty Intemational repeatedly called upon the Guatemalan authorities to investigate reported abuses as an indication of its commitment to preventing future violations. However, the govemment of General Oscar Humberto Mejía Víctores followed the practice of previous administrations and maintained that abuses were perpetrated by extremist groups of the right and left which were out of the government's control. Referring to the current civil conflict, the
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
govemment also maintained that many peasants had died in guerrilla attacks and in armed confrontations with govemment forces. Amnesty Intemational condemns the torture or execution of prisoners by anyone, including opposition groups. The organization believes, however, that the majority of killings and other abuses of non-combatant civilians were carried out by uniformed and plainclothed military and security agents acting under orders.
Amnesty Intemational reiterated its concerns in letters to General Mejia Víctores in January and April, but no substantive response was received However, in May, Guatemala's Ambassador to France declared to representatives of Amnesty Intemational's French Section his government's willingness to discuss human rights issues with Amnesty Intemational. Amnesty Intemational subsequently commimi-cated with the Guatemalan authorities several times in an attempt to arrange a mission to Guatemala.
Amnesty Intemational had expressed concem to General Ríos Montt about Decree 46-82 of July 1982, which created Military Tribunals empowered to pass the death sentence for politically related offences following secret proceedings falling short of intemationally accepted fair trial standards. Fifteen people were executed under this legislation. Amnesty International therefore welcomed the suspension of the Military Tribunals by General Mejia Víctores from 1 September 1983, and the pardon - under Decree 74-84 of July 1984 - of some 60 people who had been convicted by them. However, it remained concemed about political detainees arrested while Decree 46-82 was still in force who had not been accounted for. Reports indicated that the number of such missing detainees exceeded 300, and that they included trade unionists, members of Indian leagues and other opponents of govemment policies. Some of them had originally had their detention acknowledged, others had been seen in custody by former detainees. Those who were not accounted for had to be considered as victims of "disappearance".
Anmesty Intemational was concemed about the reported increase in individual "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions by the "death squads" in cities during 1984. Trade unionists and staff at the University of San Carlos (USAC) were particular targets. Between March and May 1984, for example, almost the entire executive committee of the USAC's student association was abducted In March Anmesty Intemational called for inquiries into human rights violations suffered by USAC staff and students, both before and since the incumbent govemment took office.
Among the trade unionists for whom Amnesty Intemational issued appeals during 1984 was Amancio Samuel Villatoro, formerly Secretary General of the Adams Products' trade unioa He was abducted and
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
"disappeared" on 30 January. Another trade unionist, Alvaro René Sosa Ramos - one of the few people known to Amnesty Intemational to have survived detention and torture in recent years - testified that while detained in March he saw Amancio Samuel Villatoro at a govemment torture centre. Alvaro René Sosa Ramos escaped to a foreign embassy which took responsibility for his safety while he recovered in hospital from gunshot wounds and the effects of torture. (Several people were abducted from their hospital beds and murdered in 1984.) Later, in exile abroad, Alvaro René Sosa Ramos testified that he had been beaten, burned and given electric shocks while held for 52 hours by the kaibiles, the special army counter-insurgency unit He reported hearing others being tortured and said that, as well as Amancio Samuel Villatoro, he had recognized trade unionist Silvio Matricardi Sala, whose tortured body was recovered on 14 March near Escuintla.
As it had repeatedly in the past Amnesty Intemational called for official investigations into reports that named military installations and private homes had been used as torture centres. To Amnesty International's knowledge such reports had never been systematically investigated However, in an unprecedented move, the Head of Public Relations of the National Police acknowledged in Febmary that 117 people who "disappeared" in 1983 were in fact in the custody of the National Police. Eighty-six were named; the majority of them reportedly common criminals. Similarly, in July, after three prisoners were reportedly killed by prison guards at Pavón prison, the Director General of Prisons declared Üiat 18 prisoners had been found in secret cells in the prison basement and called for an investigation of all jails to determine if other clandestine cells existed. The Supreme Court President also called for a search of all prisons, where "clandestine cells may be used to hide prisoners, later making them 'disappear' ".
In June 1984 relatives of "disappeared" people formed the Grupo de Apoyo Mùtuo por el Aparecimiento con Vida de Nuestros Familiares {GAM), Mutual Support Group for the Appearance Alive of our Relatives. Responding to GAM'S appeals, and hundreds of writs of habeas corpus filed on behalf of the "disappeared", govemment officials promised that inquiries would be initiated. However, no findings had been made public by the end of 1984.
One case of concern was that of Edgar Femando García, USAC student and trade unionist at Industria Centroamericana de Vidrio, S.A (CAVISA), Central America Glass Industry. He was abducted in Febmary by armed men believed to be members of the National Police. CAVISÁ manufactures bottles iox Embotelladora Guatemalteca S.A. (EGSA), Guatemalan Bottiers, which bottles under franchise to Coca Cola and smaller soft drinks forms. Sources in Guatemala believed that Edgar Garcia and a number of other students and trade unionists who
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
"disappeared" in 1984 may have been abducted because they supported workers involved in a dispute at the EGSA plant The plant was occupied by its workforce in February in protest at management's announced intention to close it, which was widely interpreted as an attempt to break the plant union. The occupation continued throughout 1984 and the plant became a gathering place for relatives of the "disappeared". The army placed EGSA under constant surveillance and, in March, shot and killed one man and injured two others who they said had failed to stop at a roadblock outside the plant Amnesty Intemational called on the authorities to investigate this shooting and previous abuses of EGSA workers and their supporters, including Edgar Garcia, and to take all necessary steps to prevent trade unionists from being subjected to further human rights violations. Amnesty Intemational also appealed to the management of the Coca Cola Corporation to use its influence to those ends. The Corporation stated that it intended to ensure fair treatment for the EGSA workers, and to find new investors to continue the plant's operation.
In 1984 Amnesty Intemational also communicated to the govemment its concem about large-scale arrests in Guatemala City of people who the police considered did not have adequate documentation. In September 1984 about 1,000 people were reportedly arrested in surprise raids, with displaced persons and returned refugees apparently being major targets. Some of them reportedly then "disappeared" or were extrajudicially executed three catechists from El Quiché working with refugees in the capital were among those detained and their bound and tortured bodies were found some days later.
Some of the returned refugees and displaced persons who were subjected to arrest, torture and extrajudicial execution in 1984 had reportedly witnessed earlier massive extrajudicial executions of non-combatant civilians in the countryside by military personnel and civil defence squads under military command during a counter-insurgency campaign conducted by General Ríos Montt The aim of the counter-insurgency campaign was apparently to eliminate civilians in contested areas so that opposition groups would not get logistical support While such killings reportedly decreased under the government of General Mejia Víctores, individual "disappearances" and killings of people suspected of sympathizing with the armed opposition continued.
In 1984 Amnesty Intemational submitted information to the UN Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR) which included details of the reported execution in October 1983 of 14 peasants by the civil patrol of Chijtinimit, Chichicastenango, El Quiché. It also submitted information to the UN Special Rapporteur on Guatemala; the UN High Commissioner for Refugees and the UN Special Rapporteur on Summary and Arbitrary Executions. The organization's submission to the UN
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Working Group on Disappearances included information on the large-scale unacknowledged detention and torture of villagers by the army in the San Idelfonso Ixtahuacan area of Huehuetenango in December 1983 and January and February 1984.
The September 1984 Annud Report of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States (OAS) stated that "illegal detentions occur on a daily basis, while the government evades the protection that petitions of habeas corpus should provide" by "denying responsibility for the detentions" while in fact holding prisoners in "clandestine jails where they are kept incommunicado and are subjected to torture".
In his November 1984 interim report on the situation of human rights in Guatemala, the UN Special Rapporteur on Guatemala noted that a Constituent Assembly with limited powers had been installed in August to prepare a new constitution and measures to protect human rights. He foimd, however, numerous "murders, disappearances and woundings" and also that the Commission for Peace established by the govemment in June 1984 to protect human rights and punish violations had thus far completely failed to function. Reacting to the Special Rapporteur's report the December UN General Assembly asked the Commission on Human Rights to study the human rights situation in Guatemala. It repeated the Commission's March call for effective measures to ensure that all authorities and agencies, including the security forces, fully respect human rights, and for the establishment of necessary conditions to enable the judiciary to uphold the rule of law.
Amnesty Intemational continued work in 1984 for a number of prisoners of conscience and others whom it considered symbolic of the many thousands who have "disappeared" in recent years because of suspected non-violent opposition to the government Among them were: 25 members of the Central Nacional de Trabajadores (CNT), National Workers Congress, abducted from CNT headquarters in June 1980 while National Police surrounded the area; Jorge Alberto Rosal Paz, abducted in August 1983; and Lucrecia Orellana Stormont missing since her abduction in June 1983. Amnesty Intemational believes that she was tortured to death shortly after her arrest
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985

