Mali
) j'	xj Amnesty Intemational was concemed by
^r	,	reports that both political and criminal
prisoners continued to be subjected to cmel, inhuman or degrading treatment in Taoudenit and Kidal prisons, where conditions have for many years been reported to be very harsh. Both are situated in remote and inhospitable desert locations in the north of Mali, to which civilian access is forbidden. The organization also learned of several short-term political detentions.
At least nine political prisoners were reportedly held in Taoudenit throughout 1984 together with an unknown number of criminal prisoners. The political prisoners were convicted in October 1978 in connection with an alleged coup plot and sentenced to between seven and 20 years' imprisonment with hard labour. In November 1983 Amnesty Intemational appealed to the authorities to release 16 prisoners who had received five-year prison sentences in the same trial but who were reported to have been kept in prison after their sentences expired in September 1983. In March Amnesty Intemational learned that 14 of these prisoners had been released by early 1984. One was reported to have died in custody but the whereabouts of the last, Boureima Mmga, were unknown.
Amnesty Intemational appealed to the government during 1984 to improve conditions in Taoudenit and Kidal substantially or to close
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
both prisons and move the inmates to prisons where conditions conformed to the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. Conditions in Taoudenit were reported to be particularly harsh because of the high salt content of the local water - which apparently caused serious ill-health among prisoners - and because prisoners were forced to work in open-cast salt mines. In both prisons hygiene and sanitation standards appeared to be very low and prisoners reportedly received a grossly inadequate diet Medical facilities were virtually non-existent, and all visits by friends and relatives were forbidden.
Amnesty Intemational learned of the arrest of six people, teachers and auxiliary staff at the Ecole normale supérieure (ENSUP), Higher Teachers' Training College, in late September. They were apparently suspected of distributing a leaflet criticizing the government in Bamako, the capital. Four were reportedly released in early October but two teachers - Yoro Diakite and Issa N'Diaye - were held without charge until late October.
