Czechoslovakia
Amnesty Intemational's main concems were tlie continued detention of prisoners of conscience and the imposition of the death penalty. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about the application of the Law on Protective Surveillance to some prisoners of conscience released during 1984. At the end of the year, there were 15 prisoners who had been adopted as prisoners of conscience or whose cases were being investigated by Amnesty Intemational, although the total number of prisoners of conscience was believed to be higher. Amnesty Intemational leamed of fewer people sentenced to long prison terms for exercising their human rights than in previous years, but was informed that many such people were sentenced to short terms of imprisonment, given suspended sentences, charged without being remanded in custody or harassed in various ways.
Among those detained for expressing their opinions was Miklos Duray, a 39-year-old geologist from Bratislava and a leading spokesperson for the Hungarian minority in Czechoslovakia. He was arrested on 10 May 1984 for campaigning againstlaws to reduce the teaching of Hungarian in Slovak schools. He had previously been arrested for activities on behalf of the Hungarian minority in November 1982, but was later released without trial. In 1982 he had been charged with "subversion" (Article 98 of the penal code). Judicial proceedings on this charge were started again and he was reportedly charged also with "damaging the interests of the Republic abroad" (Article 112) and "spreading alarming news" (Article 199). A lawyer was nominated by Amnesty Intemational to observe this trial but he was refused an entry visa. At the endof 1984 Miklos Duray was still in pre-trial detention in Bratislava.
Ten young Catholics were convicted in July 1984 of "incitement" (Article 100) by the District Court in Olomouc. They had been detained briefly in April 1983 after performing a play called "As You Don't Like It". They received suspended prison sentences ranging from six to 18 months. The play was alleged to be anti-socialist and liable to provoke a hostile attitude to the socialist and state order of the Republic.
Amnesty Intemational learned of the arrests of a number of people for engaging in religious activities without official permission, in most cases for "obstructing the state supervision of churches and religious bodies" (Article 178). For example, on 17 and 18 July the District Court in Usti nad Orlici used this article to convict Ludmila Polakova, a
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
pensioner, and Josef Kajnelc, a Catholic priest, who had been detained briefly in March 1984. Ludmila Polakova received a sentence of eight months' imprisonment suspended for one year. She was accused of deputizing for Josef Kajnek, teaching religion to children in the local school, giving religious instruction in her flat, and taking part in the preparation of children for Holy Communion in the church without official permission. Josef Kajnek, who was sentenced to six months' imprisonment, also suspended for one year, was charged with enabling her to carry out these activities.
On 20 November Jan Zar, Jan Burian and Jitka Danhelova were arrested in Liberec. They were charged under Article 178 with participating in the activities of the Franciscan Order. At the end of 1984 they were believed to be still in detention. Four other members of the Franciscan community which they had entered, who were detained and interrogated by the police the same day, were later released.
In April Amnesty Intemational submitted information on its concerns in Czechoslovakia to the UN under the procedure for confidentially reviewing reports of human rights violations. As well as including information on the continuing detention of prisoners of conscience the submission described the restrictions imposed under the Law on Protective Surveillance on some released prisoners of conscience. Its provisions include restrictions on movement which Amnesty Intemational believes are so severe in some cases that they constitute a form of detention. The law, which had previously been applied only to some common criminals and to certain mentally sick people, was first applied in a political case in 1981. Terms of protective surveillance were imposed on a number of released prisoners of conscience in 1984. Amnesty Intemational was particularly concemed about prisoner of conscience Ladislav Lis. After his release in March 1984 on expiry of a 14-month prison sentence{see Amnesty Intemational Report 1981 and 1984), he was subjected to three years' protective surveillance. He had to report daily to the police, ask permission to travel outside Prague two weeks in advance and he was also subjected to harassment by the police who visited his home at night and confiscated papers and other items. In May 1984 he was again taken into custody for leaving his permanent residence without obtaining official permission, and was sentenced to three months' imprisonment InDecemberl984 Amnesty Intemational leamed that even more severe restrictions of movement had been imposed on Ladislav Lis.
Amnesty Intemational remained concemed about the health of prisoner of conscience Jaromir Savrda, held in Ostrov Prison (see A mnesty Intemational Reports 1980 and 1984). Jaromir Savrda, a 51 -year-old writer, was reported to be suffering from many serious
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985

complaints for which doctors recommended surgery. This was refused by the authorities. On 23 July Jaromir Savrda requested the District Court in Karlovy Vary to quash the remainder of his 25-month prison sentence on the grounds that to continue serving the sentence would endanger his life. His request was refused and he was released on expiry of his sentence on 24 October.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the imposition of the death penalty. It received reports of three death sentences, but did not learn of any executions during the year. In February 1984 Amnesty Intemational launched an actioncallingfor the abolitionofthe death penalty and appealed for the commutation of the death sentence in a number of specified cases.
