Ireland
Amnesty Intemational continued to follow the case of Eamonn {"Nicky'') Kelly and was concemed about allegations of physical ill-treatment of prisoners.
On 17 July Eamonn Kelly was released "on humanitarian grounds" from Portlaoise Prison. He had served just over four years of a 12-year prison sentence passed when he was convicted in 1978 of taking part in a train robbery. At his trial, he claimed he had been subjected to ill-treatment and prolonged, exhaustive questioning and that the resulting confession was the sole basis for his conviction. Shortly before his release the European Commission on Human Rights had mled that an application to have his trial declared unfair was inadmissible because it had not been lodged in time. The Commission did not mle on the merits of the case. Amnesty Intemational had on several occasions expressed concem to the authorities about the fairness of his trial, specifically as regards the standards used to admit his confession in evidence (see Amnesty International Reports 1981 to 1984).
On 9 August Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Justice urging him to establish an independent inquiry into reports alleging a consistent pattern of ill-treatment of prisoners in Portlaoise Prison and make the findings public. On 30 October 1983 prison warders allegedly beat approximately 80 prisoners, some of whom were so badly injured that they required hospitalization. In 1984 minor breaches of prison mles allegedly continued to be punished by beatings. Two prisoners- Dessie O'Hare and Eddie Hogan - were reportedly beaten unconscious in May. It was also alleged that^artiiz/(police officers) were often on the landings while the beatings took place and in some cases even tookpart. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about the reported use of solitary confinement for up to two months as punishment. An inquiry was held into the allegations of beatings in prison and Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Minister again, on 30 November, requesting the findings, but it had not received a reply at the end of 1984. However, in a written reply to Dail Eireann (House of Representatives), the Minister said that neither the investigation by t\iQgardai nor a separate intemal investigation had provided grounds for disciplinary proceedings.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
