Burma
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about reports of human rights violations - including arbitrary arrests and in some instances torture - relating to members of ethnic minorities and the Muslim community. At least four people were sentenced to death during the year.
Fighting continued between the armed forces and ethnic groups seeking the overthrow of the government and greater autonomy in a federal stmcture. There was a marked increase in Burmese army operations in Karen state. Amnesty Intemational was informed that it was established practice in areas of armed conflict for army personnel to abduct local civilians to serve as porters, carrying supplies. It was reported that these porters were often made to walk in front of army units to detect land mines. Unless wounded or killed, they were reportedly kept in conditions of detention until the conclusion of the military operation. Amnesty International obtained accounts of several villagers from the Ye and Kyaikmayaw areas of Mon state who said they were abducted in March and April to serve as porters during an offensive against Karen bases along the Thai border. All reportedly suffered serious injuries due to gunfire or exploding mines. Other villagers from the same area were reportedly arrested and detained without trial for periods of up to several months, accused of contact with anti-govemment groups. Amnesty Intemational was informed that some of these prisoners were held in stocks for so long that they could not walk normally after release.
Amnesty Intemational also received information on human rights violations in the Mong Pan/Mong Ton area of Shan state. On 22 April, the 18th batallion of the army's 55 th division reportedly entered Tong Su village, rounded up 72 villagers, and kept them confined for two days for interrogation, during which some were said to have been kicked, beaten, andmadetodrinklargequantitiesofwater. Sixty-eightvillagers were then released but the remaining four were said to have been taken away for interrogation for a fiirther six days. The village headman reportedly died in Mong Pau township hospital as a result of injuries sustained during interrogatioa
Arrests also occurred in Arakan state, bordering Bangladesh, an area with a substantial Muslim population. In August Amnesty Intemational asked the Minister of Home and Religious Affairs for information about eight villagers from Nakora, Maungdaw township, who had been arrested on 22 and 23 April. On 20 April soldiers had
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
reportedly assaulted some of the villagers attending prayers at the principal mosque of Nakora Thirty-four people were arrested of whom 26 were released by July. Of the eight remaining in Maungdaw township prison most were said to have been denied access to relatives and none had been charged Amnesty International urged a prompt examination of the grounds of detention of these prisoners and their immediate release if no charges were to be brought against them. By September three more had been released, although one was said to have been arrested together with his wife and mother. Amnesty Intemational was also informed that 15 of the34villagers arrested inApril wereagain being sought by the police. By the end of 1984 Amnesty Intemational had received no reply to its inquiry.
Four people were sentenced to death during 1984. Thein Myat was convicted of high treason in February, having been accused of causing an explosion which killed six people, allegedly on behalf of the Kachm Independence Army. In May, three people were sentenced to death in Rangoon. They were accused of belonging to the armed wing of the Karen National Union and of being behind an attack on the Burmese Broadcasting Service headquarters in September 1982. In February the Supreme Court rejected an appeal by two North Koreans sentenced to death for a bomb attack at the Aung San Mausoleum in Rangoon in October 1983 ; no decision wasmade known on their subsequent appeal for clemency to the C ouncil of State. According to information available to Amnesty Intemational, no executions took place during 1984.
