Zimbabwe
Amnesty International was concerned about the detention without trial of suspected opponents of the government, including prisoners of conscience, and about renewed allegations of torture of prisoners and extrajudicial executions of civilians by government security forces engaged in counter-insurgency operations. Amnesty Intemational was also concerned about the use of the death penalty.
There was a high level of political violence throughout 1984. Armed opponents of the government, commonly termed"dissidents", remained active in several areas and were alleged by the govemment to have been responsible for killings of supporters of the mling Zimbabwe African National Union - Patriotic Front (ZANU-PF) party, particularly in Matabeleland and in Midlands province. The govemment mounted major security force operations in an apparent attempt to suppress the dissidents, who were alleged to include former supporters of the Zimbabwe People's Revolutionary Army (ZIPRA) - before independence the military wing of the opposition Zimbabwe African People's Union (ZAPU) party headed by Joshua Nkomo- and to receive support from South Africa In the course of these anti-dissident operations, govemment troops were accused, as in 1983,ofcommitting widespread violations of human rights against the civilian population of Matabeleland from which ZAPU has long drawn most of its support. Most allegations against the security forces in 1983 concerned events in Matabeleland North but in 1984 they related mostly to Matabeleland South. The govemment took a number of measures in this area, apparently in response to increased dissident activity. It was placed under a dusk-to-dawn curfew at the beginning of Febmary. The authorities closed food stores and for a time withheld foodstuffs from the area - already badly affected by drought - and restricted travel both into and within Matabeleland South. There were also reports of a wave of beatings and killings of civilians by government security forces, particularly the army's Fifth Brigade, which was widely held to be responsible for most of the extrajudicial executions committed in Matabeleland North in 1983.
The first allegations of killings were made shortly after the curfew was imposed but they were denied by the authorities. In early April, however, the Roman Catholic Commission for Justice and Peace was reported to have submitted to the govemment a dossier which it had compiled detailing enforced starvation, widespread detentions, beatings.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
torture and killings of civilians by security forces in Matabeleland South. The leaders of the Roman Catholic Church expressed their "very grave concem". Prime Minister Robert Mugabe responded by denying allegations of human rights violations by security forces and by accusing church leaders in Matabeleland of supporting ZAPU which, he alleged, was responsible for sustaining the dissidents. In early April restrictions were relaxed in Matabeleland South although the dusk-to-dawn curfew was not lifted until early August.
Further allegations of human rights violations by security forces were made by joumalists who visited Matabeleland South after the restrictions were eased They reported the existence of makeshift detention camps to which large numbers of civilians suspected of possessing information about dissidents had beentaken for" screening" and interrogation. Some of those detained were allegedly tortured and others summarily killed and buried in "mass graves". The government countered these claims by arranging an official visit by journalists into Matabeleland and by challenging their accusers to point out any mass graves. Local church s ources reportedly claimed that this challenge was issued only after the security forces had removed or destroyed evidence of political killings.
Amnesty Intemational was concerned both by the new reports of detentions, torture and killing in Matabeleland and by the government's failure to publish the findings of a commission of inquiry established to investigate similar allegations relating to 1983. The four-member commission, whose establishment in June 1983 was only announced some three months later by the Minister of State for Defence, did not begin hearing evidence until January 1984. It was widely reported to have established a reputation for independence and, sitting in Bulawayo, was believed to have received considerable evidence from local people and the churches concerning security force abuses in 1983. By late June, the commission had apparently completed its investigations and was preparing its report. However, in early July the government indicated for the first time that the report might not be made public. It had not been released by the end of 1984. Nor was any similar inquiry established to investigate the killings and other abuses allegedly committed by the security forces in 1984.
The national state of emergency, in force continuously from 1965 until independence in 1980, has been reimposed at six-monthly intervals since then. In July 1984 its renewal was opposed for the first time by ZAPU members of parliament who alleged that the emergency powers had provided licence for abuses by the security forces.
Many suspected political opponents of the govemment were detained during 1984 under the Emergency Powers (Maintenance of Law and Order) Regulations. By farthe majority- Amnesty Intemational
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
was not able to estimate theirnumber and no official figures were known to have been disclosed - were believed to have been held under a section of the Regulations which empowers the security forces to detain suspects without charge for an initial 30-day period which may then be extended for a further 30 days at the discretion ofthe Minister of Home Affairs. Other detainees were held indefinitely under Section 17 of the Regulations, which empowers the Minister ofHome Affairs to authorize detention without trial if the Minister considers it "expedient in the interests of public safety or public order". Detainees held under this provision receive formal written notice ofthe reasons for their detention. Their detentions are required to be reviewed by a specially established ReviewTribunal within 30 days and thereafter at six-monthly intervals, but the Tribunal meets in camera and its recommendations are not binding.
Those detained under Section 17 included several prominent political figures and long-standing opponents of the government They included Bishop Abel Muzorewa, leader of the opposition United African National Council (UANC) party, who was arrested in late October 1983 shortly after returning from a visit to Israel. The government publicly accused him of subversive activities but brought no charge against him. He was held until early September 1984 when he was released unconditionally. Amnesty International considered that he was a prisoner of conscience detained on account of his non-violent opposition to the govemment
Three leading ZAPU supporters were among those held throughout 1984. Vote Moyo, a member of parliament and former prisoner of conscience, was arrested in June 1982 allegedly on suspicion of involvement in an abortive attack on the home of the Prime Minister, which actually occurred after his arrest Several ZAPU supporters were tried and convicted in 1984 in connection with this attack but Vote Moyo remained in detention without trial in Chikurubi Maximum Security Prison at the end of the year and was considered by Amnesty Intemational to be a prisoner of conscience. Two former senior ZAPU military officials - Dumiso Dabengwa and Lookout Masuku - were held with him. They had been arrested in 1982 and brought to trial on treason charges in 1983. They were acquitted but immediately rearrested under detention orders which remained in force at the end of 1984. Those detained without trial after acquittal by the courts included Philip Hartlebury and Colin Evans, two former security police officers accused of espionage but acquitted when tried in 1983. Four of 10 former ZIPRA guerrilla fighters charged with the 1982 attack on the Prime Minister's residence were also detained for some time afterthey were acquitted by the High Court in March,
Like Vote Moyo, some of those arrested and held without trial in
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
1984 were formerprisonersofconscience who had beendetainedunder the same Emergency Powers Regulations for long periods during the former administration of Ian Smith. They included George Marange, the National Organizing Secretary of ZAPU, and the Reverend Elia Masiyane, a Lutheran Church minister in southern Matabeleland, both ofwhomwere arrested in November. George Marange had earlier been detained without trial from October 1982 to July 1984. Their arrests, together with those of other ZAPU officials, occurred after inter-party fighting between supporters of ZAPU and ZANU-PF following the murder of a leading member of the ruling party at Beitbridge on 9 November. Similar serious inter-party fighting occurred in the Midlands area in June when many ZAPU supporters were killed apparently in retaliation for the murder of govemment supporters. Most of those arrested in connection with the disturbances atBeitbridge were released uncharged after a short time but other ZAPU officials who had gone to the area to investigate, as well as George Marange and the Reverend Masiyane who were arrested elsewhere, were placed in indefinite detentioa The Reverend Masiyane, whose whereabouts were unknown and whose detention was not officially confirmed for some time after his arrest, was believed to have been tortured during his first weeks in custody. He and George Marange, whose health was reported to have been damaged by his many years in detention, were adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International. They were still held at the end of 1984.
Unofficial reports suggested that the Reverend Masiyane might have been held for a time at Stops Camp, an interrogation centre administered by the Central Intelligence Organization (CIO) within Mzilikazi Police Station in Bulawayo. Amnesty International received information that many people detained for political reasons were taken to Stops Camp for interrogation and tortured by CIO personnel. Amnesty Intemational was concerned by these reports and by the lack of adequate safeguards toprotect detainees from torture or ill-treatment. The organization was concerned too by the government's apparent failure to take action against police officers found by the High Court in 1983 to have been responsible for torturing six air force officers detained in 1982, and by the continued existence of provisions granting immunity to members of the security forces for actions committed "in good faith" for the purpose of preserving "the security of Zimbabwe".
Amnesty Intemational remained concerned about the use of the death penalty. At least 12 people, including some alleged dissidents, were sentenced to death for murder during 1984 and in at least six cases the Supreme Court rejected appeals and confirmed death sentences imposed prior to 1984. There were at least two executions. In May, Prime Minister Mugabe reportedly stated that the govemment would
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
consider abolishing the death penalty once the dissident problem had ended. This was repeated in December by the Minister of Justice, only weeks after the provincial governor of Matabeleland South called for the public execution of dissidents by firing-squad.
