United States of America
A marked increase in tlie number of executions was Amnesty Intemational's main concern. Twenty-one prisoners were executed in 1984 - the highest figure in any one year since 1963 - bring-to 32 the number of executions since 1977. Amnesty Intemational investigated the fairness of trials of members of political, ethnic and religious groups and allegations of ill-treatment of prisoners in a maximum security prison. It also expressed concem about procedures for Salvadorian asylum-seekers.
On 20 December, 1464 prisoners were awaiting execution in 33 states - the highest figure ever recorded Many had exhausted their appeals and Amnesty Intemational was concerned that executions would be carried out with increasing frequency. The 21 prisoners executed in 1984 were from the following southern states: Florida ( 8); Louisiana (5); Texas (3); Georgia (2); North Carolina(2); Virginia(l). The executions in North Carolina were the first there for 23 years. Executions were by lethal injection in Texas and North Carolina, and by electrocution in the other states. Amnesty Intemational had appealed for clemency in every case.
James Autry was executed by lethal injection in Texas on 14 March. He had previously been scheduled for execution in November 1983 and was reportedly strapped down and undergoing the first stage of the lethal injection process when his execution was stayed ( see Amnesty International Report 1984). According to press reports, at his execution in March he took at least 10 minutes to die and for much of that time appeared to be conscious, moving about and complaining of pain.
On 2 November Margie Velma Barfield, convicted in 1978 of poisoning her fiancé, was executed in North Carolina. She was the first woman to be executed in the USA for 22 years and the first in North Carolina for more than 40.
Alpha Otis Stephens was executed in Georgia on 12 December. The first two-minute electrical charge reportedly failed to kill him and he "stmggled for breath for eight minutes" before he was examined by a doctor and a second charge applied. He was pronounced dead 20 minutes after the execution began. Prison officials later disclosed that he had tried to commit suicide a few hours before his execution. Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Georgia Board of Pardons and Paroles on
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
10 December about this case. At the time of his execution the Court of Appeals was reviewing three cases in which it was alleged that the application of the death penalty in Georgia discriminated against offenders on racial grounds, particularly those whose victims were white. Alpha Otis Stephens, who was black and had been convicted of murdering a white man in 1974, had been granted a last-minute stay of execution by the Supreme Court in December 1983 after lodging an appeal on the grounds of racial discrimination. However, the Supreme Court suddenly lifted the stay on 27 November, even though the Court of Appeals had not yet ruled on the three analogous cases before it The Supreme Court rejected his appeal because he had not raised the issue at an earlier stage. Amnesty Intemational stated that it was concemed that the stay of execution "was lifted on what appear to be essentially technical grounds, while the merits of a related issue have not yet been decided" and that it would be "contrary to the interests of justice to allow [the] execution to take place . . .".
Alpha Otis Stephens' case reflected a growing reluctance by the Supreme Court to allow late or prolonged appeals in death penalty cases, and an unwillingness by state authorities to intervene to delay executions.
In January the President promulgated new regulations to bring the Uniform Code of Military Justice into line with Supreme Court guidelines on the death penalty. This invalidated all existing death sentences imposed under military law, since the new regulations applied only to offences committed on or after 24 January. Seven members of the armed services sentenced previously had their sentences commuted to life imprisonment In November Todd Andrew Dock, a US soldier serving in the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG), was sentenced to death for murder under the new regulations by a US military court in the FRG. Appeals were pending.
Amnesty Intemational continued to investigate the cases of numerous Indians charged in the previous two years with violating fishing regulations along the Columbia river in the states of Oregon and Washington. Amnesty Intemational was investigating allegations that the defendants were being unlawfully discriminated against on the grounds of their ethnic origin (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984). On 14 Febmary an Amnesty Intemational observer attended the trial in Wasco County, Oregon, of Howard Jim, an Indian fisherman charged with illegal sale of fish worth $160. He was acquitted by the jury after a four-day trial. In 15 other state prosecutions in Oregon the accused were also acquitted. Two defendants were convicted of fishing violations and received suspended sentences plus probation; one of the two, who had a prior conviction for fishing violations, also had to serve a 30-day jail sentence. Amnesty Intemational did not find that the state
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
trials had been conducted unfairly, or that the state prosecutions had been racially selective. However, it continued to investigate allegations that some of the sentences passed on Indian fishermen for similar offences in the federal courts were excessive. The defendants, two of whom had been sentenced to five years' imprisonment, had been released pending appeals which had not been heard by the end of 1984.
On 4 September an Amnesty Intemational observer attended a pretrial hearing in Corpus Christi, Texas, in the case of Jack Elder, charged with transporting illegal aliens. The charges (which carry a maximum 15-year prison sentence) were based on his having driven three Salvadorians who had not reported to an Immigration Officer from a relief centre to a nearby bus statioa The hearing was adjourned and had not reopened by the end of 1984. Amnesty Intemational sent an observer to the hearing to assess whether Jack Elder would be a prisoner of conscience if he were imprisoned for breaching immigration regulations to assist Salvadorian asylum-seekers on humanitarian grounds.
In April the Court of Appeal in Missouri granted an evidentiary hearing to consider a retrial of Leonard Peltier, a leading member of the American Indian Movement (AIM) who had been convicted in 197 7 of the murder of two Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) agents. The defence alleged that the FBI had suppressed evidence at the time of the trial (see Amnesty International Report 1984). An Amnesty Intemational observer attended the hearing on 1 October before the District Court in Bismarck, North Dakota. The defence argued that an FBI document released under the Freedom of Information Act after the trial showed that tests matching Leonard Peltier's gun against bullet casings found at the murder scene were negative. The prosecution argued that the document in question was only a progress report on some of the bullet casings found and that the casing which did match positively with Peltier's gun (and was produced in evidence at the trial) had not been tested at that stage. Leonard Peltier alleged that he had been "targeted" for prosecution because of his activities in AIM. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that evidence may have been deliberately withheld to secure a convictioa The hearing was adjourned, and had not resumed by the end of the year.
On 8 October an Amnesty Intemational observer attended a hearing in the case of AIM leader Dermis Banks who had been convicted by a South Dakota court of assault and battery and of rioting with a dangerous weapoa He had fled from South Dakota before sentencing but in September 1984 gave himself up. In 197 3 a delegation of AIM members and others went to the Custer County courthouse in South Dakota to see the county prosecutor about the leniency of the charges brought against a white who had killed an Indian. Only some of the delegates were allowed inside the courthouse and a riot developed,
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
during which 22 people were arrested. At the sentencing hearing in October 1984, nine years later, Dennis Banks was sentenced to three years' imprisonment on each of the charges, to run concurrentiy. Amnesty Intemational had received allegations that he had been singled out for prosecution because of his AIM activities. He had been inside the courthouse when fighting started, and was not arrested at the time. He was charged several days later with burglary, arson and criminal damage, but was acquitted The two charges on which he was convicted had reportedly not been laid until late 1974, when a police officer alleged that Dennis Banks had hit him with a piece of wood Amnesty Intemational was still investigating the case at the end of 1984.
On 22 March Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Director of the Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) expressing concern at allegations that inmates of Marion penitentiary, a maximum security federal prison in Illinois, had been ill-treated by prison guards in November 1983. The ill-treatment allegedly occurred while the entire prison was being "locked down" (confined to cells); this followed the killing of two prison guards and a prisoner by inmates. Amnesty Intemational referred to a report by a group of lawyers which described the cases of 37 prisoners who had testified to being severely beaten and otherwise ill-treated by groups of guards in separate incidents between 27 October and mid-November 1983. Amnesty Intemational asked if an investigation had been carried out into the allegations. The Director of the BOP replied in April, stating that the lockdown operation had been monitored by senior staff and that, although force had been necessary at times, the prison guards had not acted improperly. He stated that the allegations would be investigated by a federal court, with which some of the inmates had filed complaints. In August inmates of Marion prison applied to a federal court for an injunction to restrain the prison administration from continuing certain practices, includmg alleged beatings and unwarranted strip searches. Anmesty Intemational informed the inmates' lawyers that it intended sending an observer to the hearing, which had not been held by the end of 1984.
In April Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs about Salvadorian asylum claims which the State Department had advised against accepting. A significant proportion appeared to demonstrate a well-founded fear of persecution, including possible danger to applicants' lives if retumed to El Salvador. Amnesty Intemational presented details of four rejected applications which it felt merited acceptance, in accordance with the UN Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees of 1967 and the US Immigration and Nationality Act of 1980.
vili
Amnesty International Report 1985
