Peru
"	V Amnesty International was concerned about
j tiie detention of prisoners of conscience; the / long delays in trials of political prisoners; poor prison conditions; evidence of the widespread use of torture; and, in an Emergency Zone under military control which covered 13 provinces, a pattern of unacknowledged detention, "disappearance", and extrajudicial execution of people suspected of sympathizing with the guerrilla group Sendero Luminoso (Shining Path).
Amnesty International was also concemed about frequent reports of torture and execution-style killings by Shining Path guerrillas. The victims included government officials, leaders of peasant communities and cooperatives, and leaders of the legal opposition political parties of the Izquierda Unida (lU), United Left, coalition who have condemned Shining Path's aims and methods and refused to collaborate with it An estimated 2,000 political prisoners were in detention at the end of 1984. Amnesty International had taken up the cases of 75 of them as prisoners of conscience or probable prisoners of conscience. Most political prisoners were held under Decree 046 of 10 March 1981, which defines a broad range of crimes related to public order and state security as terrorism. About 450 political prisoners were held at Lima's Lurigancho prison, including some 200 associated with political parties of the lU coalition, and with legal peasant and labour organizations. About 390 political prisoners — the majority avowed adherents of Shining Path, but also some 100 associated with lU — were held at El Fronton island prison, near Lima. About 100 women political prisoners were held at the Cárcel de Callao, the major women's prison near the capital. Conditions in the three prisons remained poor, with fresh water supplied irregularly, food poor in quality, medical facilities inadequate, and tuberculosis, hepatitis, and intestinal ilhiesses endemic.
Most prisoners of conscience were leaders of peasant communities and organizations, trade union leaders and advisers, or members and officials of lU parties. Some prisoners of conscience were detained after private estate owners involved in land disputes with peasant communities filed complaints against the peasants' elected representatives. In one such case, Carlos Taype Campos, a leader of the peasant community of Colcabamba, in Tayacaja, Huancavelica, was arrested by the Civil Guard on 17 March while attending a rural confress of the Confederación Campesina del Perú (CCP), Peruvian Confederation of Peasants. He was detained on five separate charges, including terrorism All were reportedly filed by a small group of private estate ovraers with
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
long-standing grievances against the Colcabamba community and against the regional peasant organization of which he was a leader. Carlos Taype, who was said to have been repeatedly beaten during a two-day interrogation, was released imconditíonally after 10 months' imprisonment when the court dismissed all charges against him. In 1983 similar charges had served as the basis for the detention of his brotiiers Milton and Godofredo, and of Colcabamba's then president, Juan Alonso Tunqui, all of whom were released within some months. Former Colcabamba president Clemente Quispe was held for almost two years in the Huancayo jail before he was cleared of all charges and released on 12 December 1984. In each case, the courts ruled that the charges on which rural magistrates had initiated proceedings and issued detention orders were groimdless.
Juan Quispe Asto, a teacher and elected lU mayor of Carmen Alto, near Ayacucho, was detained on 26 February 1982. Amnesty Intemational believed he was detained solely for his prominent role in Ayacucho local govemment and in lawful organizations: the left-wing teachers' union Sindicato Unico de Trabajadores de la Educación del Perú (SUTEP); the Front for the Defence of the People of Ayacucho and the Federation of Ayacucho Neighbourhoods. Juan Quispe Asto was one of many prisoners of conscience charged with collat)oration with the Shining Path who had in fact been threatened with death by that group for participating in electoral politics and "collaborating" with the govemment He was sentenced to five years' imprisonment on a charge of terrorism; an appeal was pending at the end of 1984.
There were widespread reix)rts during 1984 of torture of both political and non-political suspects by the Policía de Investigaciones del Perú (PIP), investigative police, and by the major uniformed force, the Civil Guard The methods reported included beatings with sand-filled leather implements, suspension by the arms, near drowning, electric shocks and threats of summary executioa Reports of torture by army and marine infantry forces were also widespread in areas under military administration.
Torture of women political prisoners was said to frequenüy involve sexual abuse. One victim, Juana Lidia Argumedo, aged 26, was reportedly detained because she testified that regional military commanders were responsible for the seizure and killing on 26 January 1983 of eight journalists and the "disappearance" of their guide at the remote community of Uchuraccay (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984). The sister of Juan Argumedo, the guide, she was detained briefly in Uchuraccay on 27 January 1983. She became one of the key witnesses testifying that civilians who killed the journalists acted on the orders of military commanders. She was detained on 16 September 1984 without charge by officers of the navy's marine infantry detachment at Tambo,
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
La Mar, near Uchuraccay, and "disappeared" until the judge presiding over the Uchuraccay inquiry learned of her detention and ordered her to be brought to Ayacucho, seven days later. She subsequently told the court that in the presence of a navy physician she had been severely beaten, suspended by her wrists and nearly suffocated, and that she had been given electric shocks, and repeatedly raped by marines. The court ordered her to be hospitalized for urgent treatment and a full examination; medical findings were reportedly consistent with her allegations. She was subsequently released, but moved to Lima, the capital, after reportedly receiving death threats from Ayacucho military personnel.
Laura Zambrano Padilla, detained on 20 July, said she was tortured while under interrogation in incommunicado detention, first by the Civil Guard in Lima, and then at the headquarters of the special anti-terrorist unit of the Dirección Contra el Terrorismo (DIRCOTE), Peruvian Investigative Police. The findings of an examination ordered by a judge on 24 August, which were made public by the court, were consistent with her allegations of torture: she had a broken nose, bruises on her face and body, and injuries to the rectum and vagina.
Although civil courts recommended in several cases that medical evidence of the rape and other physical abuse of prisoners be considered grounds for criminal prosecution of police and military personnel, no such prosecutions were known to have been initiated.
Amnesty Intemational made frequent appeals on behalf of people who "disappeared" after arrest in 13 provinces of the Ayacucho, HuancaveUca and Apurimac departments under military control. This area was under a state of emergency and administered by an armed forces "political-military" command established in December 1982 at the army's "Los Cabitos" barracks {Batallón de Infantería Motorizada No. 51 "Los Cabitos'^ in Ayacucho city. Arnnesty Intemational recorded over 1,000 cases of"disappearance" from the Zone between January 1983 and the end of 1984, most of them involving young people. Victims of "disappearance" and extrajudicial execution were often tortured: evidence included the testimony of prisoners who "disappeared" for up to three months before being released and forensic examinations of the bodies of "disappearance" victims later found to have been extrajudicially executed
Arrests in the Zone were not normally notified either to relatives of prisoners or to the courts or public prosecutors, despite a constitutional provision which states that even under a state of emergency arresting authorities "... are required to indicate without delay the place in which a person is detained" (Article 2). The Political-Military command refused to respond to persistent requests for information on prisoners from civil court judges and provincial and departmental public prosecutors, and to
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
deny these civilian authorities access to detention centres. The remedy of habeas corpus proved wholly ineffective in establishing the whereabouts of unacknowledged political prisoners in the Zone, because of the lack of cooperation by police and military arresting authorities. Public prosecutors, however, continued to assist relatives of the "disappeared" by entering into the public record sworn testimonies by witnesses to arrests, and some civil court judges sought to investigate abuses.
The principal detention centres to which "disappeared" prisoners were taken were the "Los Cabitos" barracks, in Ayacucho city, and the marine infantry headquarters for the provinces of Huanta and La Mar-a concrete sports stadium on the outskirts of the city of Huanta. Another was a rural camp at Luisiana, La Mar, in which prisoners were reportedly kept in holes in the ground. A modem three-storey house near the Ayacucho city airport known as the "Casa Rosada" (Pink House) was believed to be a secret interrogation centre where many of those detained were taken for questioning. After former prisoners claimed that they had been tortured there, and that other "disappeared" prisoners were held there, the Chief Prosecutor of Ayacucho obtained a court order to inspect it on 24 February. However, he was refused entry. At a subsequent news conference he said that over 1,500 "disappearances" had been formally reported to his office. He decried the military command's obstmction of efforts to clarify the cases and protested against telephoned death threats warning him to cease his investigations. On 28 Febmary he was transferred to a post outside the Emergency Zone. His successor took office on 6 March, but resigned on 30 April, blaming military non-cooperation and reporting that his office had received 641 reports of" disappearances" in the province of Huamanga alone between 1 January and mid-April.
In the Emergency Zone "disappearance" was often a prelude to extrajudicial execution. Amnesty Iritemational compiled information on 420 individuals reportedly detained by the security forces and subsequently found dead since January 1983. The bodies of these and many other apparent victims of extrajudicial executions were found in mass graves and dumping grounds near main roads. They were generally naked and bore marks of torture; they were blindfolded, with hands bound behind their backs, and had single gunshot woimds to the head.
Amnesty International made frequent appeals to authorities for investigations into cases of "disappearance" and subsequent killing. Following the discovery on 22 August of the bodies of 49 men and one woman, each with a gunshot wound in the head, in several shallow graves at Pucayacu, Huanta, Amnesty Intemational cabled President Femando Belaunde to express concem at evidence that the victims had been in the custody of govemment forces before their execution, and
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
requesting a full investigation. As in other cases, there was evidence that the killers had tried to prevent identification of the victims: fingertips were severed, faces obliterated and clothes burned. Evidence that the victims were prisoners put to death by marines was made public unofficially by investigators of the Attorney General's office. They had found at the site an identity card belonging to Cirilo Sánchez Barboza, a peasant farmer last seen alive at marine headquarters in Huanta Stadium. Witnesses testified to the provincial public prosecutor that he was arrested onl5 August One ofthe few bodies positively identified was that of75-year-old Nemesio Fernández Lapa, who was reportedly detained by marines on 15 July with his daughter Crista and her husband Juan Ramirez Hurtado (both of whom remained "disappeared"), and subse-quenüy held at the Huanta Stadium.
The Attorney General's office was reported to have charged Huanta marine commanders before the civil courts with murder in the case of the Pucayacu killings. However, as in previous cases, it appeared likely that the military court system would have exclusive jurisdiction over the accused To i^nnesty International's knowledge the armed forces did not release any military personnel charged with crimes related to "disappearance" or extrajudicial execution to the jurisdiction of the civil courts, nor did they initiate proceedings before military courts on such charges.
Torture, "disappearance" and extrajudicial executions were reported in the Emergency Zone in the context of military operations to combat Shining Path. This group, in turn, continued to carry out frequent mock-trials, torture and execution-style killings- generally in the presence of the assembled families and neighbours of the victims. Amnesty Intemational condemned the torture or killing of prisoners by Shining Path.
Amnesty Intemational submitted cases of "disappearance" and extrajudicial executions to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, to the UN Working Group on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances and to the UN Special Rapporteur on Summary or Arbitrary Executions.
Amnesty International Report 1965
