Zaire
Amnesty Intemational was concemed by the imprisonment or restriction to isolated towns and villages of prisoners of conscience, many of whom were arrested during 1984. It was also concemed about the incommunicado detention without trial of other political prisoners, some of whom were reportedly tortured, and about allegations of torture and deaths in custody of suspected criminals. Amnesty Intemational learned of a number of death sentences imposed by military courts, but no executions were announced.
A number of people were arrested after bomb explosions in Kinshasa in March but some appeared to be detained simply because of their ethnic origins or political views. Some were reportedly tortured at the headquarters of the national security service, the Agence nationale de documentation (AND), National Documentation Agency. The majority were released after periods ranging from a few days to several weeks but others were still detained at the end of 1984. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that some of them - such as Ekongo Odimba and Masudi Mongatende, both of whom had been imprisoned for political reasons on previous occasions - were detained because of their connections with an opposition political party, the Mouvement national congolais/Lumumba (MNC/L), Congolese National Movement/Lumumba. Amnesty Intemational was concemed also because another of those still held, Tshishinga Kanyinda, was arrested in June in the neighbouring People's Republic of the Congo, and forcibly repatriated to Zaire without any legal proceedings. Amnesty Intemational was investigating the cases of a number of these detainees.
Shortly before a congress of the vwXvag Mouvement populaire de la révolution (MPR), People's Movement for the Revolution, in May, Djelo Yempenge, a former govemment minister and law professor at Kinshasa University, was arrested apparently for refusing to address the congress on the theme of "Zaire as a state of law". He was reportedly questioned about the March bomb explosions but he appears
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
to have been suspected only because of his ethnic origin. Like many others arrested on suspicion of involvement in the bomb explosions, he was a member of the Batetela ethnic group. Amnesty Intemational adopted Djelo Yempenge as a prisoner of conscience and appealed for his release. He was eventually freed uncharged after five months in custody.
The MPR Congress in May reselected President Mobutu Sese Seko as the only candidate for presidential elections in July. During the election a number of people-were reported to have been briefly detained for insisting on receiving ballot cards to vote against him.
Amnesty Intemational received details of more than 50 suspected govemment opponents arrested during 1984 and was informed that many others were detained Many of the 50 were considered to be prisoners of conscience, detained for a variety of reasons: suspected support for opposition parties; possession of documents considered subversive; and links with government opponents living outside Zaire. Some were released after a few months but others were still detained at the end of 1984 or restricted to towns or villages under administrative banishment orders.
Prisoners of conscience were held in the capital, Kinshasa, in certain provincial towns and in rural areas. For example, Umba Kabulo, a secondary school teacher, was arrested in January at Likasi in Shaba region, after writing to the provincial govemor criticizing the govemment for failing to implement stated policies. He was detained incommunicado for five months at the AND headquarters in Lubumbashi and reportedly badly beaten. He was released uncharged in May but "relegated" ( banished) to a town over 200 kilometres from Likasi. He was still there at the end of 1984.
A number of teachers were arrested during a strike in Febmary and March in Shaba region. Most were released after a short time, but a teacher named Kabeya who was accused of instigating the strike was held in custody in Lubumbashi for at least five months.
Several people were arrested apparently because they were relatives of suspected govemment opponents. In January, for example, the parents of some young people who had left Zaire for Bumndi or Tanzania were arrested in Kivu region and apparently accused of encouraging their children to join opposition groups based outside Zaire. Most were reportedly released after paying sums of money. In August the wife and two children of a headmaster in Bas-Zaire region, who was apparently suspected of possessing MNC/L literature but who evaded arrest himself, were arrested and detained without charge for several months before being released.
Amnesty Intemational continued throughout 1984 to press for the release of six former People's Commissioners (members of the
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
National Assembly) and others arrested for supporting an opposition party, the Union pour la démocratie et le progrès social (UDPS), Union for Democracy and Social Progress. The six former People's Commissioners, together with a former member of the MPR Central Committee, Kibassa Maliba, were among 13 people arrested in January 1981 who spent long periods in detention or in internal banishment until they were released under an amnesty in May 1983. They were arrested again in November 1983 and restricted, together with their wives and children, to isolated villages in Kasai Oriental and Shaba regions, although the restrictions on their families were reportedly lifted in July 1984.
One of the six former People's Commissioners, Lusanga Ngiele, was beaten and knocked unconscious at a public meeting in February after he refused to confirm his allegiance to the ruling MPR The assault took place in Mwene Ditu, Kasai Oriental region, in front of the provincial governor. The following month, publicity outside Zaire suggested that he had died as a result. This led the authorities to return him to Kinshasa and present him to foreign]oumalists. He later said that the AND's Administrator General had apologized to him and told him that the provincial governor had not been acting under orders. However, no disciplinary action is known to have been taken against the governor. Lusanga Ngiele was reportedly kept under house arrest for the rest of the year in Kinshasa.
Four other suspected UDPS supporters arrested in 1983 were kept in internal banishment throughout the year. They included Birindwa ci Birkashirwa, a businessman, and Professor Lihau Ebua, former President of the Supreme Court. In addition, at the beginning of 1984, there were over 40 other suspected UDPS supporters detained without trial by the AND. Some were arrested in Kinshasa in October and November 1983, others in parts of Kasai Oriental region between August and December 1983. Many were adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty Intemational. Most were released uncharged during 1984, but some were reportedly then banished. Among those still detained without charge at the end of 1984 were Kyungu Mukange and Kitenge bin Kawengo, who were arrested in Shaba region in January and Febmary on suspicion of having contacts with UDPS supporters who had been "relegated" within the region.
Amnesty Intemational received reports from most parts of the country asserting that both political detainees and criminal suspects were tortured. The organization repeatedly appealed to the govemment to prevent the use of torture, but received no response. In an interview on Belgian television in April, First State Commissioner (Prime Minister) Kengo wa Dondo denied that torture ever took place in Zaire.
In early 1984 Amnesty Intemational received allegations of the
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
torture of political detainees who included Ngwashi Chola and four others arrested in January in Lubumbashi and accused of planning to disrupt the presidential elections. They were said to have been detained for four months incommunicado in an unlit cell and repeatedly beaten and whipped. They were reportedly still detained incommunicado without charge or trial at the end of 1984. Other cases of torture were reported at the AND detention centre in Lubumbashi later in the year. Allegedly three of the victims were severely burnt, while two others were suspended upside down and beatea
In July the government was urged to take steps against torture by the Human Rights Committee established under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which was acceded to by Zaire in 1976. The committee found that allegations by a former political prisoner, Muteba Tshitenge, that he had been tortured at the end of 1981, were true, and urged the government to pay him compensation. The authorities are not known to have responded to any of the Committee's recommendations.
In February Amnesty International expressed its concern to the government over reports that more than 100 people had been extrajudicially executed in custody during 1982 and 1983. Most ofthe victims had apparently been arrested on suspicion of complicity in violent crime. Some were allegedly strangled in 1982; others were reportedly tortured or starved to death in 1983. Several similar deaths were reported in January 1984, but measures then appear to have been taken to prevent further killings- at least at the detention centre in Kinshasa's Lingwala district where deaths were reported in late 1983. However, there were reports of similar extrajudicial executions from other parts of the country such as Bukavu where, in February, several young men detained in the town's Kadutu district were reportedly killed in custody. In its appeal to President Mobutu Amnesty International called on the authorities to prevent further killings and to issue orders stressing that extrajudicial executions were forbidden in all circumstances. The organization received no reply, but in November the President told foreign journalists that no prisoners had been killed or starved to death in Zaire. However in the same month, further extrajudicial executions were reported from Sange, a village in Kivu region, where soldiers were said to have carried out reprisals after a member of the armed forces had been robbed and murdered Other extrajudicial executions were reported near Moba, in Shaba region, after the town was briefly occupied by armed opponents of the government in November.
Amnesty International learned of a number of death sentences imposed by military courts on members of the armed forces, some of which were believed to have been confirmed upon appeal. The total number of death sentences imposed by civilian and military courts was
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
not known. Neither was it known whether any executions took place; none were known to have been announced by the authorities.
In April Amnesty Intemational submitted information on its concerns under the UN procedure for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations. The organization stated that the evidence revealed a "consistent pattern of gross violations" warranting UN investigation.
