Bangladesh
Several hundred political prisoners were released during 1984. However, Amnesty Intemational remained concemed that govemment opponents engaged in non-violent protests against martial law continued to face arrest and detention, generally for short periods. A few people were arrested during 1984 under legislation permitting detention without trial, apparently for political reasons. Summary military courts were abolished, but special military courts empowered to try civilian political prisoners continued to function. Reports of the torture of criminal suspects in police custody persisted and some allegations of ill-treatment of detained students were received. Reports continued to reach Amnesty International of extrajudicial executions by law enforcement personnel in the Chittagong Hill Tracts. Several people were sentenced to death on criminal charges but no executions were known to have taken place.
Martial law remained in force throughout the year, although with some modifications. The ban on political activities was lifted for indoor political meetings in January and for outdoor activities in mid-March.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Summary military courts were abolished from 1 August. As part of a package of measures to be introduced in the months leading up to the general elections planned for April 1985, President Ershad announced on 15 December that special military courts would be abolished within a month. He also stated that "fundamental rights" would be "restored by 15 January 1985" and the High Court given back jurisdiction over certain - unspecified - rights through "the partial revival of the suspended constitution".
Hundreds of political prisoners were freed in the first four months of 1984, beginning with the release of 215 on 25 March. Among these were six former govemment officials convicted by special military courts for offences including "abuse of official position" and " anti-state activity". Amnesty Intemational had raised these prisoners' cases with the govemment several months earlier (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984). Some of the others released had been held only briefly after being arrested for political activities. By 8 April a further 224 prisoners had been freed. According to officials, the releases were intended to facilitate discussions between the opposition and the President Amnesty Intemational wrote to President Ershad in May welcoming the releases. Among those released were Sunil Kanti De, a correspondent for the newspaper Sangbad imprisoned since June 1981, and Golam Mazed, the editor of the Dainik Runner, arrested in early 1983. Both had been adopted by Amnesty Intemational as prisoners of conscience. The organization urged President Ershad to release the remaining prisoners of conscience, of whom there were reportedly 70 on 8 April. Amnesty Intemational concluded by urging the repeal of those provisions of the 1974 Special Powers Act ( SPA) which permitted participants in non-violent political activities to be arrested and detained without trial. (Of those released by 8 April, 340 had been held under the SPA.) In June, 31 political prisoners held under the SPA were released, 36 SPA detainees were released in September and 92 in December.
Among the prisoners released in late March and April were opposition politicians, party workers, trade unionists and students arrested in late Febmary before a national strike called by two coalitions made up of 22 opposition parties. This strike was the first of several major opposition protests held in 1984. During a 24-hour strike on 28 April called by the trade union federation Sramik Karmachari Oikya Parishad (SKOP), several labour leaders were again briefly arrested Strikes were also called by the opposition on 27 August 27 September and 8 December and by SKOP and opposition parties on 22 and 23 December. Mass rallies of the opposition parties were held throughout the country on 14 October. Several hundred people were arrested in connection with these protests, most of whom were released after a few days. While much protest activity was non-violent, six
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
people died in September in clashes between opposition groups and govemment supporters, during which the police used firearms reportedly to disperse the crowds. Two people died in December, reportedly shot by the police. Govemment officials stated during the strike on22 and 23 December that those arrested would be released once the strike ended but Amnesty Intemational received reports at the end of December that not all detainees had in fact been released then, and that some political and labour leaders had been arrested after the end of the strike. The organization asked the govemment whether all those taken into custody had subsequently been released
There were a few other, apparendy political, arrests during 1984. Local leaders of the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP) - Abu Sufian, of Noakhali district, and Rezaul Huq Sarkar, a lawyer from Rangpur-were arrested in mid-September and mid-October respectively. Rezaul Huq Sarkar was detained under the SPA. By the end of 1984 no formal charges were known to have been brought against them. Amnesty Intemational was also investigating the detention of Mohammad Munir, a student at the University of Dhaka and a leader of the Jatiyatabadi Chhatra Dal, a student organization affiliated to the BNP. He was arrested at his home on 24 July under the SPA, reportedly because of his political activities.
Amnesty Intemational continued to appeal to the govemment for political prisoners to be tried in courts with full legal safeguards. The decisions of special military courts were not subject to judicial review and summary procedures applied In August Oli Ahad, senior Vice-President of the Democratic League, a political party, and editor of Ittehad{\JmV<i), a banned weekly joumal, was brought to trial, with four students, before Special Military Court No. 7, Dhaka. Oli Ahad was arrested on 5 May and charged under Section 17 of Martial Law Regulation 1 with "prejudicial" activities, including damage to property. According to information received by Amnesty Intemational these charges were politically motivated Although Oli Ahad was released on bail by the High Court on 24 June, he was rearrested on 30 July. Judgment was due on 31 October, but on that day the court reportedly announced that proceedings had been stayed by order of the martial law authorities. A subsequent application for bail was refused. Amnesty Intemational sought clarification of this case and urged its immediate transfer to a civil court
Allegations were received that members of student associations affiliated to opposition parties, in particular the BNP m(\Jatiyo Samaj-tantric Dal{3SD), were ill-treated while detained for a few days at times of increased opposition activity. Amnesty Intemational received complaints that several students arrested in October and December by armed forces security personnel of the Defence Force Intelligence
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
(DFI) had been physically ill-treated and threatened, to coerce them into joining student groups supporting the government.
Several reports alleging torture of criminal suspects in police custody were published in the Bangladesh press. In June there was considerable news media coverage of the arrest and alleged torture of a student nurse, Mahmuda Begum, in connection with a murder case. The Inspector General of Police then issued an order which reportedly stated: "... It has come to the notice of the Inspector General of Police that accused persons in custody are sometimes being tortured by the police for extortion of confession. In the recent past such torture resulted in the death of some accused persons. . . ." Amnesty Intemational wrote to the authorities in September welcoming all measures to protect prisoners and urging investigation by an independent body in all cases involving allegations of torture in police custody. In July a complaint was lodged by Mahmuda Begum against three police officers. After a magistrate's inquiry, proceedings were instituted against one of the three police officers while the other two were exonerated According to the information available to Amnesty Intemational, this was the firet time that a magistrate's inquiry found against the police in a case of ill-treatment of a prisoner. In December an application was made to the High Court for the other two police officers to be prosecuted also.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports of human rights violations in the Chittagong Hill Tracts, an area in the southeast of the country to which access was severely restricted. Conflict between non-Bengali tribal inhabitants and Bengalis resettled there under govemment policy directives persisted, and there was fighting between the tribal Shanti Bahini (Peace Force) and the police and army. Amnesty Intemational received information on arbitrary arrests and alleged extrajudicial executions committed by law enforcement personnel during 1984. Members of the Shanti Bahini were also reported to have killed civilians. On 31 May, Shanti Bahini units killed at least 77 Bengali settlers at Bhusanchara, near Barkal, an area close to the Indian border. The incident was widely covered by the Bangladesh news media. The following day tribal families living in six mouzas ( an administrative unit comprising a few villages) in the Barkal area were reportedly attacked by army forces. At least 110 villagers were said to have been killed, and Amnesty International has received the names of the families reportedly killed No coverage was given to the incident by the domestic news media. Amnesty Intemational was also investigating the deaths of two villagers on 25 June at Santipur, near Khagrachari also in the Chittagong Hill Tracts. Soldiers reportedly fired on unarmed civilians, a few dozen of whom were gathered at one villager's home for a private celebratioa
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Thirteen people, all convicted of murder, were sentenced to death during the year, two of them by special military courts. Amnesty Intemational appealed for clemency on behalf of Golam Mustafa, a former member of parliament, who was sentenced to death by special military court in January. Golam Mustafa was granted presidential clemency and his sentence commuted in July. At around the same time the death sentence on Biswajit Nandi was also commuted. He had been sentenced to death in 1977 by a special military court during an earlier period of martial law. Amnesty Intemational did not leam of any executions during 1984.
