Kuwait
Amnesty Intemational was concemed that political prisoners were tried in camera by the State Security Court, with no right of appeal, and about the continued imposition of the death penalty, although it leamed of no executions during 1984. Amnesty International was also concerned that some of the hundreds of people reportedly deported from Kuwait during the year could become prisoners of conscience, or face torture or execution, if retumed to their own countries.
Following a series of bomb attacks in December 1Amnesty Intemational Report 1984) and related large-scale arrests, Amnesty Intemational wrote toPrime Minister Sheikh Sa'ad Abdullah Al-Salem Al- Sabah seeking assurances that all those arrested, detained and tried would be given their full legal rights. In particular it urged the authorities not to hold anyone in incommunicado detention, especially during interrogation, as a minimum s afeguard against torture and ill-treatment. Amnesty Intemational called for detainees to have prompt access to a lawyeroftheir own choosing, andtobe brought before a court as soon as possible after arrest Amnesty International also said that prisoners should have access to a doctor at regular intervals, and medical treatment when necessary. On 26 March Amnesty International received a response from Kuwait's Ambassador in London referring to articles of the country's criminal procedure and penal codes which limit the period of preventive detention, guarantee defendants' right to representation by counsel, prohibit torture and provide for trials to be held in camera in exceptional circumstances. The Ambassador added: "We share with Amnesty Intemational the general concern for the rights of all accused to a fair treatment and a fair trial. We feel however that concem for the rights of a few accused individuals should not overshadow a more serious threat to the rights of millions . . .". In its reply on 27 July Amnesty Intemational drew attention to Article 14 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which sets down the principles for fair trial, including the right of appeal.
On 11 February the trial began before the State Security Court of 25 people charged with murder, arson and possession of explosives and firearms in connection with the December 1983 explosions. Amnesty Intemational was concerned that proceedings were held in camera and that the defendants had no right of appeal. On 27 March the court sentenced six people to death, including three in absentia; 14 received
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
sentences ranging between two years and life imprisonment and five were acquitted Death sentences in Kuwait may not be carried out until they have been confirmed by the Emir, Sheikh Jaber Al-Ahmad Al-Sabah. Amnesty Intemational appealed to the Emir on 28 March to commute the s ix death sentences. During 1984 it leamed of three others passed by criminal courts for" murder and appealed to the Emir to commute them. Amnesty Intemational leamed of no executions in 1984.
During the year Amnesty Intemational received reports that between 250 and 300 individuals were deported from Kuwait following the bomb attacks of December 1983. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that they could include Iranian and Iraqi citizens who, because of their political affiliations, could face imprisonment as prisoners of conscience, torture or execution if retumed there. Amnesty International raised this concem in a letter to Kuwait's Prime Minister on 18 January and reiterated its concem in a letter to Kuwait's Ambassador in London on 27 July. Amnesty Intemational noted the Ambassador's explanation that "deportation is a corollary punishment prescribed for certain crimes, it is a compulsory expulsion of the convict . . ." but drew attention to a reported statement on 27 April by the Under-Secretary at the Ministry of the Interior that among the reasons for the deportations were the deportees' "political beliefs". Amnesty International sought assurances that such individuals would not be forcibly returned to countries where they could become prisoners of conscience, or face torture or execution.
