Haiti
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience. During 1984 the organization received reports of the arbitrary short-term detention of people who appeared to be held solely because of their suspected nonviolent opposition activities. They included joumalists, community development and social research workers, and members of the church. Long-term prisoners of conscience were among the many political prisoners who continued to be held - often in unacknowledged detention -without charge or trial. Reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees continued to reach Amnesty Intemational throughout 1984. Members of the security forces, among them the Volontaires de la sécurité nationale (VSN), National Security Volunteers, commonly known as tontons macoutes were implicated in many reports of human rights violations. Amnesty Intemational also continued to be concemed about the fate of a number of "disappeared" political prisoners.
On 3 March the Président-à-vie (President for Life) Jean-Claude Duvalier wrote to the Minister of Justice and to the Chief of Staff of the Haitian Armed Forces making detailed recommendations for the upholding of legal and constitutional provisions for the protection of human rights. The President instmcted the Chief of Staff to "stricdy prohibit members of the Armed Forces from attacking the physical or moral integrity of any individual, particularly using torture in any of its
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
forms", to produce a legal warrant at the time of arrest and to bring any detainee suspected of criminal acts before a judge within 48 hours of arrest The letter to the Minister of Justice asked him to "work scrupulously for the respect of the principle of habeas corpus and of all other constitutional provisions concerning the rights of accused persons, questioning and interrogation procedures . . .". However, following publication of the letters in the Haitian press, Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports of violations of the principles referred to by the President Indeed, it was reported that in May two priests were briefly detained for translating these letters from French into Creole and distributing them.
Many people were reportedly detained for short periods or placed under house arrest for the non-violent exercise of their human rights during 1984. In June, for example, several joumalists were arrested, apparently because they had published material considered critical of the govemment They included Grégoire Eugène, publisher of the magazine Fraternité and founder of the Parti social chrétien haïtien (PSCH), Haitian Christian Social Party, who was arrested by the police at his home and taken to the Casernes Dessalines (military barracks) in the capital, Port-au-Prince. Copies of Fraternité were confiscated, as were his car and printing equipment. He was released the following day, but placed under house arrest until September. Fifteen people who went to visit him were reportedly arrested and detained overnight before being released Dieudonné Fardin, editor of the independent weekly Petit Samedi Soir, and Pierre Robert Auguste, publisher of the weekly independent magazine L'Information, were detained on 18 June and taken to the Casernes Dessalines. Dieudonné Fardin was released shortly afterwards. Pierre Robert Auguste was released without charge on 20 Jime, but he was said to have been beaten in detention. Although no official reason was given for his arrest, it was believed to have been in connection with articles published in his magazine about widespread anti-govemment protests which took place in May. Before these arrests, the Interior Minister issued two communiques, one ordering the suspension of all newspapers and periodicals not officially authorized and the other banning all political activities and groups until such time as a law governing political parties came into force. In October the President announced the formation of a commission to draft the law, but there was no indication of when it would be completed.
Among those Amnesty Intemational believed to be short-term prisoners of conscience during the year was Dr Hubert de Ronceray, a professor and former government minister, who was arrested on 4 July without warrant Dr de Ronceray was President of the Committee of Conventions and Recommendations of UNESCO (the United Nations
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization), a committee which investigates reports of human rights violations. He was also director of the private Centre haïtien d'investigation en sciences sociales (CHISS), Haitian Social Science Research Centre. Dr de Ronceray was released without charge after three days, but placed under house arrest until September. His arrest was apparently motivated by the publication of two interviews in which he criticized injustice in the administration. André Laviolette, the CHISS administrator, was arrested on 26 June also without warrant and Dr de Ronceray's driver, Joseph Simon, was taken into custody on 5 July. They were not released until 3 October and had reportedly been held incommunicado without charge in the Casernes Dessalines. They were believed to have been arrested solely because of their links with Dr de Ronceray. Amnesty Intemational appealed on behalf of the three and submitted information on their cases to UNESCO.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed that many political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, continued to be held in unacknowledged or incommunicado detention for long periods, without charge or trial. However, several people who were believed to have been arrested between January and March 1983, and to have remained in unacknowledged and incommunicado detention since then, were finally brought to trial in September 1984 and sentenced to life imprisonment with hard labour for alleged offences against the security of the state. They were Schneider Merzier, Frantz Joachim, Frid Esper, Frantz Héraux and Eugène Nazon. For 18 months their families had been unable to obtain any information from the authorities about them, and the govemment had on several occasions denied that Schneider Merzier was in detentioa Amnesty Intemational had been investigating their cases.
The govemment persisted in its refusal to acknowledge that it was holding Bienvenu Théodore, Jocelyn Bochard, Eric Alcindor and Frank Maître, all of whom were arrested in 1979 and were believed to be held without charge or trial in the National Penitentiary in Port-au-Prince. Amnesty Intemational had adopted them as prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty Intemational continued to investigate the cases of other political prisoners detained without charge or trial for several years in the National Penitentiary - they were Vladimir Jeanty, Jean-Roland Denis, Jean-Claude Bastien and Roosevelt Blaise Moise, all of whom had been there since 1981.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about several people who had "disappeared" following their detention by the security forces. For example, Joseph Pardovany, a 40-year-old mechanic, was
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
one of several people reportedly arrested in Bon Repos on the outskirts of Port-au-Prince, on 9 September 1983. They were arrested by police officers who were apparently trying to locate Sylvio Claude, the President of the Parti démocrate chrétien haïtien, (PDCH), Haitian Christian Democrat Party. Joseph Pardovany's arrest had never been acknowledged, and his whereabouts were still unknown at the end of 1984. Other missingprisoners included LabbéRémy, a lawyer detained in January 1982; Wilson Pierrelus, a language teacher arrested in April 1982; and William Josma, an engineer, whose detention was acknowledged, but who had not been seen since January 1982, when he was seen being taken away handcuff"ed from the National Penitentiary. Amnesty Intemational had adopted William Josma as a prisoner of conscience.
Church workers, priests and those connected with development projects continued to be detained and harassed during 1984. In November some 30 people throughout the country were arrested, among them agronomists, community development organizers, a Protestant minister and a doctor. According to church reports, they were detained without warrant and were not presented before a judge within 48 hours, in violation of Articles 24 and 25 of the Constitution. Some of those detained were well-known for their work in local communities or educational projects, such as Pierre André Guerrier, who worked with the Institut diocésain d'éducation de l'adulte, Diocesan Institute of Adult Education, and Pasteur Antoine Leroy, an ordained minister from the Mission la foi apostolique, Apostolic Faith Mission. On 7 December the Minister of the Interior and National Defence issued a communique stating that the police had discovered a Marxist-Leninist plot against the internal security of the state. It said that the main instigators had been arrested, and that those suspected of collusion had been detained for questioning. It mentioned only five of those allegedly involved by name, two of whom were later found not to have been arrested. The accusations included involvement in a plot to murder the President for Life. The Minister also announced that those detained had been referred to the public prosecutor (cammei d'instruction). However, in response to Amnesty International's appeals, the National Commission of Human Rights informed Amnesty Intemational that it was not until 20 December that those detained had been referred to the public prosecutor, apparently contradicting the communique. The Commission also informed Arrmesty Intemational that on 22 November a law had been passed to create within the civil court of Port-au-Prince a Court of State Security, with authority to judge offences against state security in peace time, and that those arrested in November would be tried before it Amnesty Intemational was concemed that many of those detained may have been prisoners of conscience. By the end of 1984 at
162	Amnesiy International Report 1985
least 16 people were still reportedly detained incommunicado and the organization feared they were at risk of being tortured or otherwise ill-treated in custody.
The Conférence èpiscopale d'Haïti, Haitian Bishops' Conference, and the Conférence haïtienne des religieux, Haitian Conference of Religious Orders, publicly criticized the way in which the November arrests had been carried out and the lack of respect for constitutional safeguards. Subsequently, a number of incidents were reported of church activists and priests being harassed by tontons macoutes. Priests, including bishops, were also reported to have received threatening letters and telephone calls.
In April 1984 Amnesty Intemational submitted information about its concerns under the UN procedure for reviewing communications about human rights violations. The organization reported a "consistent partem of gross violations of human rights" warranting UN investigatioa
