Kampuchea (Cambodia)
Amnesty Intemational's concerns in those areas of Kampuchea administered during 1984 by the People's Republic of Kampuchea (PRK) were: long-termdetentionof political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, without charge or trial; the use of the death penalty; reports of systematic torture and ill-treatment; and reports of the death in custody of political detainees. Amnesty International's concerns in areas of Kampuchea administered during 1984 by the party of Democratic Kampuchea (pDK) were: long-term detention of political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, without charge or trial, and reports of ill-treatment and deaths of political prisoners. Amnesty Intemational's concems in areas of Cambodia administered during 1984 by the Khmer People's National Liberation Front (KPNLF) were: long-term detention of political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, without charge or trial; reports of random torture and ill-treatment of prisonei^; and reported
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
extrajudicial executions. Amnesty Intemational had no information about conditions in areas of Cambodia administered during 1984 by the National United Front for an Independent, Neutral, Peaceful, and Cooperative Cambodia (FUNCINPEC).
Political and military strife continued in Kampuchea throughout 1984 and the level and extent of armed conflict was greater than in previous years. Vietnamese troops and advisory "experts" remained present in significant numbers in the PRK. The warintensifiedbetween the armed forces of the Viet Nam People's Army and the Phnom Penh-based PRK on the one side, and, on the other, the pDK, the KPNLF, and the FUNCINPEC. (The leaders of the pDK, KPNLF and FUNCINPEC were parties to the border-based CoalitionGovernment of Democratic Kampuchea, which continued to be recognized by the United Nations as the country's representative.) The intensification of armed conflict was accompanied by a greater emphasis on uncovering and arresting suspected "enemy agents" and "opposition elements", and appeared to be a factor in many of the human rights violations reported during the year. Particularly heavy fightingtowards the end of 1984 drove large numbers of people out of areas administered by the pDK and KPNLF into Thailand
Amnesty Intemational learned ofthe existence of several detention centres administered by the PRK in which large numbers of political prisoners were reportedly held The two detention centres administered by PRK central authorities with the largest numbers of prisoners were reportedly "T-3" (in Phnom Penh) and "T-5" (in the province of KompongCham),eachreportedlyholding400to500 inmates. Prisons administered by the PRK provincial authorities in Battambang and Posât-provinces where the level ofarmedconflict was high-reportedly held more than 800 and 1,800 people respectively. A prison administered by the PRK provincial authorities of Kandal - where there was relatively little fighting- reportedly held approximately 200 people. A special detention facility in Phnom Penh, reportedly jointly administered by the PRK and Vietnamese personnel, and three ordinary district prisons located in different provinces, each reportedly held from 50 to 90 people. While significant numbers of criminal suspects were apparently included in these figures, former prisoners and former PRK officials stated that most detainees were considered political offenders. On the basis of these incomplete but illustrative reports Amnesty Intemational believed that during 1984 several thousand people were being held in the PRK for political reasons. Reports indicated that some of them may have been prisoners of conscience. Former PRK officials said that among those arrested were people "who speak out and say the wrong things" and people dubbed opposition elements "simply because they are dissatisfied and unhappy with the current regime". They may
220	Amnesty International Report 19S5
also have included Buddhist clergy or teachers of Buddhism whom the PRK authorities termed "impure, defective elements" and a number of astrologers, fortune tellers, soothsayers and Christians whose views or practices were considered unacceptable.
Amnesty Intemational received reports that very few prisoners were brought to trial and statements by PRK officials in August 1984 seemed to confirm this. The Minister of Defence announced that "190 hidden enemy agents" had been taken into custody during the first quarter of 1984. The Vice Minister of Justice said that only 11 trials of all types had been conducted by PRK courts during the first six months of the year. It was not known whether any of these trials were of people charged with political offences. In contrast to earlier years, during 1984 the official PRK news media disseminated no information on political trials. Moreover, the PRK Vice Minister of Justice revealed that one of the 11 trials resulted in the execution of the defendant according to reports received by Amnesty Intemational, a number of other people accused of murder and armed robbery were executed without announcement during 1984.
Amnesty Intemational received reports that people taken into custody in the PRK because they were suspected or accused of involvement with the armed oppositions were routinely tortured during interrogation by PRK and Vietnamese personnel in order to extract confessions and information or inflict punishment Among the forms of torture said to be employed were severe beatings while the detainee was suspended, electric shocks, and near-suffocation with a plastic bag. Many politicaldetainees in the PRK were also reportedly kept shackled for long periods in solitary confinement or in unlit cells in which it was impossible to sit up. Inadequate food and medical care reportedly resulted in the death of some detainees.
Amnesty Intemational learned that in areas administered by the pDK during 1984, political prisoners were held without charge or trial in what were officially termed"instmction halls". Amnesty International estimated that the pDK was holding several hundred people for political reasons, among whom were apparently some prisoners of conscience suspected ofmaking critical remarks about the pDKleadershipor, more generally, of "speaking out" in "a way that adversely affects the govemment". Amnesty Intemational received reports that some ofthe political detainees held during the year in pDK "instmction halls" had been beaten, and that others had died from lack of medical care or from injuries sustained when taken to work in areas where there were known to be mines.
Amnesty Intemational learned that in areas administered by the KPNLF during 1984 it maintained stockades in which political detainees were held without charge or trial. Amnesty International
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
believed that there were several dozen political detainees in such stockades during the year. Some were accused of espionage, while others were apparently prisoners of conscience suspected of making critical remarks about the KPNLF leadership. It was reported that beatings and rapes were common in one of the stockades during much of 1984. Amnesty Intemational also received information that KPNLF military personnel had killed people suspected of political dissidence or espionage.
