Congo
Amnesty International was concerned about the long-term detention without trial and torture of political prisoners, some of whom were believed to be prisoners of conscience. It was also concerned by the use of the death penalty.
Amnesty Intemational knew of 15 detainees held without trial apparently accused of being responsible for bomb explosions in Brazzaville in March and July 1982 or of supplying explosives to an opposition group in the neighbouring Central African Republic. Most of the detainees were held in Brazzaville either at the headquarters of the Direction générale de la sécurité de l'Etat (DGSE), General Directorate of the Security of the State, or in prison. However, some were reportedly taken to the Cité des 17, an estate on the edge of Brazzaville, and tortured during interrogation by the DGSE. The detainees included Bernard Kolelas and his close relative, Philippe Bikinkita, both of whom were
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
arrested in 1982 apparendy in connection with one of the bomb explosions. Most of the 10 others detained in connection with the incident were freed in an amnesty in August 1983. At that time, the President of the Supreme Court told Amnesty International that Bernard Kolelas and all the others had been released but the organization learned later that in fact Bernard Kolelas, Philippe Bikinkita and Eugène Madimba were still being held in incommunicado detention. They were still being held in detention without trial at the end of 1984.
The code of penal procedure requires all detainees' cases to be referred for investigation by a. juge d'instruction (investigating judge), but it appears that in practice the DGSE has unchallenged powere to keep detainees in custody indefinitely, incommunicado and without charge or trial. The judiciary appears to have no jurisdiction over such detainees and in April the President of the Supreme Court told Amnesty Intemational that he could provide it with no information about Bernard Kolelas; only the DGSE could do so.
Bernard Kolelas had previously been detained in August 1978 and held for a year for alleged complicity in a plot to overthrow the government, but he was not brought to trial and there seems actually to have been no plot He is reported to have been tortured then, and again following his arrest in May 1982. An official commission of inquiry in 1982 reportedly found no evidence implicating him in the bomb explosions, which he is known to have condemned He was adopted as a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty Intemational.
Five other people were arrested in late 1983 or in 1984 for alleged complicity in bomb explosions in Congo and the Central African Republic in 1981 and 1982. They included Claude-Ernest Ndalla, a former senior official of the ruling Parti congolais du travail (PCT), Congolese Labour Party, who had previously been imprisoned several times and had been adopted as a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty Intemational from 1977 to 1979. He was arrested in March and reportedly held incommunicado at the Cité des i 7 by theDGSE, where he is alleged to have been induced by drugs to confess to involvement in the explosions. In July Jean-Pierre Thystère-Tchicaya, PCT Secretary for Ideology, was dismissed and later reportedly arrested because Claude-Ernest Ndalla's confession apparently implicated him in the explosions. At the end of 1984 Claude-Ernest Ndalla was still held without trial. His case was taken up for investigation by Amnesty International.
Several soldiers arrested in late 1983 and during 1984 and accused of complicity in the 1982 bomb explosions remained in detention without charge or trial at the end of the year. They included Daniel Biampandou, who is alleged to have been beaten and tortured with
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
electric shocks after arrest, Pascal Nyanga and Lieutenant-Colonel Blaise Nzalakanda
Amnesty International was also concerned about the detention without charge of two men arrested in mid-1983, apparently because they had worked closely with Florent Ntsiba, a government minister dismissed from office in April 1983. Madzou and Missie were reportedly tortured after their arrest and were held incommunicado at the DGSE headquarters in Brazzaville during the first half of the year. It was not known if they were still in custody at the end of 1984.
In November, President Denis Sassou Nguesso announced the release of former President Joachim Yhombi-Opango, who had been detained without trial since being deposed in February 1979. Amnesty International had repeatedly expressed concern about his long-term detention without charge or trial. When he announced hispredecessor's release. President Sassou Nguesso also indicated that other political prisoners were being freed However, according to unofficial sources, the only prisoners set free were a group of soldiers arrested in 1977 in connection with the assassination of President Marien Ngouabi. Two months eariier the only convicted political prisoner known to Amnesty Intemational was released Jacob Bantsimba had been sentenced in his absence to 20 years' imprisonment in January 1978 for his alleged part in digging up the corpse of former President Massamba-Debat soon after his summary execution in March 1977. Jacob Bantsimba returned from exile in 1981 and was arrested and taken to Brazzaville prison to serve his sentence, although all the other prisoners convicted at the same trial had been released in August 1979. Amnesty International had been investigating his case.
Amnesty International learned of two death sentences imposed in January and April on prisoners convicted of murder. Both were allowed to appeal, but the results were not known at the end of 1984. It was not known if any executions took place.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
