Bulgaria
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and restrictions on released prisoners of conscience. It was also concemed about allegations of ill-treatment of political prisoners and leamed of the imposition of five death sentences and three executions.
The constitution does not guarantee freedom of movement and only rarely are citizens who seek to emigrate permitted to do so. Those who attempt to leave the country without permission may be punished by up to five years' imprisonment under Article 2 79 of the criminal code, or up to six years if the offence is repeated People who express views not approved of by the authorities or who possess literature containing such views may be imprisoned for up to five years for "anti-state agitation and propaganda" under Article 108. Also, the People's Militia Law allows internal banishment for up to three years and other restrictions on freedom of movement for up to six months to be imposed administratively, that is without trial, on certain categories of people. These categories include former political prisoners and people who "carry out anti-social activities affecting the security of the country". These restrictions, which can be indefinitely renewed, have been imposed on released prisoners of conscience and in Amnesty International's view themselves constitute a form of detention.
For example, Ilija Minev, aged 68 from Septemvri, was sentenced in 1976 to five years' imprisonment under Article 108. He had reportedly sent letters alleging violations of constitutional rights and freedoms in Bulgaria to the President of the United States of America and to the UN Commission on Human Rights in Geneva. He was released in 1980 but in 1984 Amnesty International leamed that he was obliged under the People's Militia Law to report to his local police station twice daily and that he was forbidden to leave Septemvri. These restrictions were such that Amnesty Intemational considered him to be a prisoner of conscience.
Amnesty Intemational continued to seek information about a number of political prisoners whose cases it was investigating. These included Nicolas Chamurlisky, a former clerk in a cooperative in Sofia who was sentenced to death ( later commuted to 20 years' imprisonment) in 1975 on charges of espionage. He was arrested after his second request for a passport to visit his brother in the USA. At his trial he was accused of passing on information to Italy via a family friend in the Italian Embassy in Sofia. In another case, the organization continued to
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
ask for details of the charges against and the current legal status of Mr Bunzev (given name unknown). He was sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment in 1973 after taking part in protests against an official ruling requiring Pomaks (Bulgarians of Muslim faith) to change their Muslim names to Bulgarian ones.
Information about political trials was severely restricted by official censorship and Amnesty Intemational believed that the cases which came to its notice during 1984 represented only a fraction of the total. Several former prisoners of conscience have estimated that at the beginning of the 1980sthere were about 250 political prisoners in Stara Zagora prison, where most political prisoners are held. The majority had been convicted of attempting to leave the country without permission. Amnesty Intemational believed that these figures had not substantially changed by 1984.
On 31 May an amnesty was decreed to commemorate the 40th anniversary of the modem Bulgarian state. Under its terms, prisoners sentenced to up to three years' imprisonment for premeditated crimes and up to five years for unpremeditated crimes were to be released. To Amnesty International's knowledge no adopted prisoners of conscience benefited from this amnesty.
During 1984 Amnesty Intemational received information alleging that in some cases political prisoners had been ill-treated In September the Italian press carried reports by the Italian citizen Paolo Farsetti(see Amnesty International Report 1983), who was sentenced in Sofia to lOVi years' imprisonment for espionage in 1983 but released in September 1984, which alleged that he had been beaten, forced to take medication and denied adequate food during his imprisonment in Bulgaria.
Amnesty Intemational leamed of three executions and five death sentences imposed during 1984. On 25 September it was reported that Veselin Georgiev Slavchev and Stefan Ivanov Atanasov were executed after being convicted of attempted murder and armed robbery. On 6 July it was reported that Plamen Antonov Penchev had been sentenced to death after being convicted of killing a number of people with a parcel bomb on 6 April 1984. Amnesty Intemational appealed to the Chairman of the State Council to commute his sentence, but on 4 Octoberit was announced that he had been executed. Four other people were sentenced to death: two for murder, one for rape and murder, and one for drunken driving causing death.
vili
Amnesty International Report 1985
