Somalia
Amnesty Intemational's main concerns were the imprisonment of prisonei^ of conscience, some of whom had been detained without trial for more than six years; the indefinite detention without trial of other political prisoners or their conviction after unfair trials; and the death penalty. Prison conditions for political prisoners were reported to be harsh and there were allegations of extrajudicial executions by the security forces.
President Mohamed Siyad Barre's govemment continued to face armed opposition from the Democratic Front for the Salvation of Somalia and the Somali National Movement two opposition organizations based in neighbouring Ethiopia. Many people suspected of supporting these armed opposition groups, particularly in the north, were detained Amnesty Intemational continued throughout 1984 to press for the release of long-term prisoners of conscience. They included two untried detainees held since 1978, Yusuf Osman Samantar{"Barda'ad"), a left-
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
wing politician, and Jama Ali Jama, an army colonel. Amnesty International was investigating the cases of Ahmed Abdi Hashi, a former director-general of the Ministry of Justice, and Abukar Hassan Yare, a university law lecturer, both of whom had been detained without trial together with other alleged critics of the government since January 1981.
Amnesty International made renewed appeals for the release of six members of parliament who were adopted as prisoners of conscience after their arrests in June 1982. They included Ismail Ali Abokor, a former Vice-President, Omar Arteh Ghalib, a former foreign minister, and Mohamed Aden Sheikh, president of the Somali Academy of Sciences. They had been charged with treason but had not been tried by the beginning of 1984. In February, in response to aii Amnesty International inquiry, the Attorney General stated that investigations into their cases had been completed and that the six would soon be tried in open court. He added that they were permitted by law to engage defence lawyers of their choice and that they were in good health and well-treated in prison. However, despite these assurances, the six had not been tried by the end of 1984 and were apparently still being denied access to legal counsel and to their families. They were held in harsh conditions at Labatan Jirow Prisoa
Amnesty International continued to investigate the imprisonment of 20 doctors, teachers and traders arrested in Hargeisa in November 1981. In February 1982 they were convicted by the National Security Court of participating in a subversive association and sentenced to prison terms ranging from three years to life. Amnesty International believed that they mi^t be prisoners of conscience and ¿lat they had not received a fair trial.
Many new politically-motivated arrests occurred during 1984. In July there were mass arrests in Hargeisa of students and teachers allegedly involved in distributing anti-government pamphlets. On 2 October 28 of them were tried in Hargeisa before the National Security Court on charges of treason and other offences under the National Security Law. They were not all legally represented and the trial proceedings were summary. All the defendants were convicted Seven students - including Abdi Damar Abdi, Abdirahman Mohamed Barud and Yusuf Mohamed Issa- were sentenced to death and eight defendants were sentenced to life imprisonment The 13 other defendants received prison terms ranging from three to 20 years. Defendants before the National Security Court have no right of appeal to a higher court but death sentences are subject to review by the President Amnesty International appealed for the seven condemned prisoners not to be executed, and stated its view that the defendants had not received a fair trial The organization considered that all 28 might be prisoners of conscience.
On 24 November three army officers hijacked an aircraft on an
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
internal flight and forced it to land in Ethiopia. They threatened to blow up the aircraft and its passengers unless the Somali Govemment released into exile the seven students under sentence of death- whom they alleged were about to be executed - and 14 untried political detainees. The govemment refused to accede to these demands but reportedly agreed not to execute the students and to review the cases of the 14 detainees, who included the six former members of parliament mentioned previously. The hijack ended peacefully, three days after it had begun. There were reports later that suspected associates of the hijackers had been arrested in Mogadishu. By the end of 1984 the govemment had neither confirmed commutation of the seven death sentences nor announced the outcome of any review of the detainees' cases.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed that political prisoners were held in harsh conditions, particularly in the maximum security prisons of Labatan Jirow, near Baidowa, and Lanta Bur, near Afgoi. They were denied visits from, or correspondence with, relatives and lawyers, and some prisoners were allegedly subjected to prolonged solitary confinement Medical facilities were poor. Amnesty Intemational appealed in particular for Yusuf Osman Samantar and Jama Ali Jama to be given urgently needed medical treatment which they were reportedly being denied. The organization was investigating allegations of beatings and ill-treatment of prisoners held for interrogation in the National Security Service headquarters in Mogadishu.
At least 20 people were sentenced to death by the National Security Court in 1984. They included six people convicted of crimes against the state who were tried in Hargeisa in January, and the seven students sentenced to death in October. Amnesty Intemational appealed for commutation of the death sentences. It protested at a public execution for murder which was carried out on 12 July in the police academy square in Mogadishu. Five people convicted of armed robbery were also executed there on 30 September.
Reports were received of extrajudicial executions of people accused of collaborating with the opposition Somali National Movement The reports alleged that security forces had killed a number of military officers in Hargeisa in August and up to 50 civilians in Hargeisa and Berbera in November. On 23 November Amnesty Intemational asked the govemment to investigate these allegations but received no reply.
90
Amnesty International Report 1985
