Uruguay
Amnesty International's concerns included the large number of prisoners of conscience; the continuing use of military courts - whose procedures failed to meet internationally recognized standards - to try civilians on political charges; torture; and inhumane prison conditions. Amnesty Intemational was concemed about deaths in custody which it believed might have been prevented had there been proper medical care. Numerous political prisoners were released during 1984 under a special measure introduced by the govemment but a few prisoners of conscience were arrested during the year.
On 25 November the first general elections were held since the armed forces took control and dissolved the elected legislature in June 1973. The Colorado Party won the election and its leader, Dr Julio Maria Sanguinetti, was to become President on 1 March 1985. The 1967 Constitution would then come back into force, annulling most of the Institutional Acts promulgated under the military government, many of which eroded constitutional guarantees.
The leader of the other main party, the Blanco (National) Party, Wilson Ferreira Aldunate, was arrested on 16 June on his retum to Umguay after 10 years in exile. His son, Juan Raúl Ferreira Sienra, also a leading opposition politician who had just returned from exile, was arrested with him. Aninesty Intemational issued urgent appeals on their behalf and adopted them as prisoners of conscience. They were accused of subversion, but Amnesty Intemational believed they were held for being outspoken critics of the military government They were held in separate military barracks in the interior of the country. Charges against Juan Raúl Ferreira Sienra were dropped and he was released on 20 August Wilson Ferreira Aldunate was released on 30 November, after the elections, but trial proceedings against him were continuing at the end of 1984.
In July political rights were restored to the Socialist and Christian Democratic parties, enabling them to participate in the elections. Both parties had been part of the left-wing coalition. Frente Amplio, Broad Front which was banned in 1973. These two parties took part in negotiations between the military authorities and the legal political parties before the elections. These negotiations, which were boycotted by the National Party in protest at the imprisonment of Wilson Ferreira Aldunate, led in August to an agreement that the military courts would review the cases of all political prisoners who had completed half their sentences. Some 400 cases were then reviewed and 154 prisoners
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
released, including 62 who had been adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty Intemational or whose cases were being investigated. In December further reviews were announced
José Luis Massera Lerena, a former mathematics professor and deputy in the Umguayan parliament, was released on 3 March after nearly eight and a half years' imprisonment He had been sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment, but in Febmary the sentence was reviewed by the Supreme Military Tribunal and reduced to 14 years. This entitled him to apply for early release, having served over half the final sentence. On 19 March General liber Seregni, a former presidential candidate (or ihe Frente Amplio, was released after eight years' imprisonment, but not allowed to vote or stand for election for two years. He had been detained on a number of occasions and in January 1976 he was arrested again and sentenced to 14 years' imprisonment Both men had been adopted by Amnesty Intemational as prisoners of conscience. Also released during 1984 were a number of students and young people who had been detained in June 1983 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984). They included Lucia Arzuaga Gilboa who was tortured in incommunicado detention. The release of 86 other prisoners for whom Amnesty Intemational was working was confirmed in 1984. At the end of the year the organization was still working for the release of 149 adopted prisoners of conscience and investigating the cases of a further 63 prisoners, including 32 who had been kept in detention on new charges after their prison sentences expired Ten of them had reportedly been convicted on the new charges and given fresh prison sentences of seven to 10 years. Amnesty Intemational believed that the trial proceedings against them, conducted in military courts, failed to meet intemationally recognized standards for a fair trial.
An autopsy performed on Vladimir Roslik in April confirmed reports received by Amnesty Intemational that he had died in custody as a result of torture. A doctor, he was one of seven people from San Javier (a colony of former Russian immigrants) who were detained on 15 April on suspicion of belonging to the banned Communist Party of Umguay (PCU). He died later that day. A death certificate signed by a military doctor gave the cause of death as heart failure. Amnesty Intemational appealed for an inquiry into his treatment and for the release of the other six detainees, whom it believed to be prisoners of conscience. Following widespread publicity about the case both within Umguay and abroad, an independent autopsy was carried out which concluded that Vladimir Roslik had died from massive intemal bleeding, with signs of asphyxiation; there were also said to be large bmises on his body. Two high-level officials from the military barracks where he died were dismissed and were reported to have been tried in connection with the death, but the result of the trial was not published.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Four of the other six detainees were released shortly afterwards but two - Esteban Balachir and Román Klivzov- were charged and transferred to Libertad Prison, Establecimiento Militar de Reclusión No. 1 (EMR1), the main military prison for men, where they were held for several months. Amnesty Intemational adopted them as prisoners of conscience.
At the Seventh National Medical Convention held in Montevideo in July, a resolution was passed setting up an ethical tribimal to examine cases of doctors alleged to have been involved in torture or ill-treatment In October this tribunal agreed to expel the doctor who signed the death certificate on Vladimir Roslik from the Medical Federation.
In April nine leaders of the Movimiento de Liberación Nacional -Tupamaros (MLN), National Liberation Movement - Tupamaros, who had been held in separate military barracks for over 10 years, were retumed to Libertad Pr^on. Amnesty International had issued numerous appeals calling for an end to their inhumane treatment (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984). The organization sent a message to President Gregorio Alvarez welcoming the move and expressing the hope that the transfer would mean an end to the solitary confinement they had suffered for a decade. However, Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the health of one of the men, Adolfo Wassen Alaniz, who had had cancer for several years. The organization had frequently called for specialized medical attention for him. Adolfo Wassen Alaniz died in the Military Hospital in Montevideo on 17 November- the fifth political prisoner to have died of a serious illness during the year.
On 8 October Amnesty Intemational expressed its fears to the President about the health of 180 named political prisoners, six of whom it believed might die without prompt medical attention. It appealed for improved medical care in Libertad Prison and in Punta de Rieles, Establecimiento Militar de Reclusión No. 2 (EMR 2) - the main military prison for women.
One of the six, Antonio Mas Mas, had a long history of mental problems since his detention in 1972 and was reported to have been subjected to almost continual harassment by prison guards in Libertad Prison. Appeals were issued in April when it was leamed that he was being held in a punishment cell following a mental crisis. He had attempted suicide on several occasions.
Two prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty Intemational committed suicide in Libertad Prison in 1984; Roberto Rivero in Febmary and Rubén Martínez Addiego in August Both had suffered from depression before their deaths. Rubén Martínez had signed the papers confirming his early release under the govemment review measure and would have been freed shortly afterwards. Amnesty Intemational appealed on both occasions for a full investigation into their deaths and into the prison regime. The organization believed that
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
due attention had not been paid to the mental health of the prisoners and urged the authorities to take immediate measures to protect the lives of prisoners in their custody.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concerned at consistent allegations that prison conditions in Punta de Rieles women's prison did not meet intemationally recognized standards. In July the organization issued a short report outlining its concems. Testimonies suggested that prison life was organized in such a way as to contribute directly to the psychological destabilization of prisoners, and that punishments were used in a deliberately arbitrary manner to this end. Reports had been received that a group of women were isolated from the rest of the prisoners and subjected daily to psychological pressures including threats, insults and harassment Some had been allowed only two family visits in six months; restrictions on visiting rights were reported to be continuing.
Amnesty Intemational continued to appeal for information concerning the whereabouts or fate of three prisoners reported to have "disappeared" in 1981 and 1982, Omar Antonio Paita Cardozo, Félix Ortiz Piazoli and Miguel Angel MatoFsLgimi{sQQ Amnesty Intemational Report 1984). The govemment had repeatedly stated that the men were not detained and Amnesty Intemational was unable to elicit further information. The organization was also investigating the cases of 14 other prisoners reported to have "disappeared" following their detention between December 1974 and January 1978.
In April 1984 Amnesty Intemational submitted information about its concems in Umguay under the UN procedure for confidentially reviewing reports of human rights violations. Anmesty Intemational alleged that tiie communication revealed a "consistent pattem of gross violations of human rights" warranting UN investigation. Amnesty Intemational also submitted information to the UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances. During the year the Human Rights Committee, established under the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, published its views on four Umguayan cases. In all four cases the Umguayan Govemment was found responsible for violations of the Covenant, particularly of Article 10 referring to the ill-treatment of prisoners, and Article 14 referring to trial procedures. Rosario Pietrarroia Zapala, whose release the Committee had called for in 1981, was released in 1984.
194
Amnesty International Report 1985
