Turkey
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the imprisonment of a considerable number of prisoners of conscience, widespread and systematic torture and ill-treatment of political prisoners and the use of the death penalty. The organization was also concemed about the effects of inadequate access to lawyers and the use of confessions allegedly induced by torture on the faimess of trials before military courts.
At the end of 1984 martial law was still in force in 34 of Turkey's 67 provinces and a state of emergency existed in a further nine provinces. The exact number of prisoners of conscience in Turkey was not known. On 1 August a govemment spokesman was reported by Agence France Presse to have stated that 7,500 "extremist militants" were held in military prisons, but this figure did not include political prisoners serving sentences in civilian prisons, or detainees held under martial law for up to 45 days before being charged or released Amnesty Intemational knew of several hundred prisoners of conscience who had been charged or convicted on account of their hon-violent political or religious beliefs or activities, but believed that the actual number might be much higher. Many new prosecutions for non-violent political offences were initiated during 1984, but in some cases the defendants were allowed to remain free while their trials continued. One such was that of 59 intellectuals charged with violating Martial Law Decree 1402 by signing a petition which called for greater freedom and an end to human rights violations, including torture. The petition had been signed by 1,383 people.
Prisoners of conscience known to Amnesty Intemational included members of political parties and groups, trade unionists, journalists, publishers, writers, translators, academics, members of the Kurdish ethnic minority and members of religious groups, both Islamic and Christian. Left-wing political activists and those imprisoned in connection with published material were usually charged under Articles 141 and 142 of the penal code which respectively prohibit "membership of an illegal organization" and "making communist propaganda". They
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
included hundreds of alleged members of the illegal Turidsh Commimist Party as well as members of parties which had been legal before they were banned after the September 1980 military coup. In one such trial, 102 members of the Turkish Workers' Party (TIP) were sentenced on 26 January to from five to 12 years' imprisonment under Article 141. On 14 November the Military Supreme Court ratified i 3 sentences and quashed 15 others which had been passed on the leaders of the Turkish Workers' and Peasants' Party (TIKP) in May 1983. They had also received sentences of five to 12 years' imprisonment under Article 141. Those whose sentences were quashed were ordered to be retried The trial of 42 members of the Turkish Socialist Workers' Party (TSIP) under Articles 141,142 and 159 ("insultingthe authorities") was still in progress at the end of the year. In October, 18 members of the Progressive Youth Association (IGD) were sentenced to from four to 21 years' imprisonment under Articles 141 and 142.
On 29 August a military court of appeal ruled on the appeal of 23 members of the Turkish Peace Association (TPA) sentenced in November 1983 to five or eight years' imprisonment under Article 141 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1983 and 1984). The case was referred back to the court of first instance for further investigation on the grounds of procedural flaws. The defence lawyers' application for the release of all imprisoned defendants was rejected. On 8 November the court of first instance upheld its original verdict, but ordered the provisional release of those defendants who had five-year sentences, and of Mahmut Dikerdem, the President of the TPA, who had cancer. On 21 November the trial of a further 48 membere of the TPA under Article 141 opened, but the defendants remained free.
Prosecutions under Article 142 and the Press Law of writers, translators, journalists and publishers continued throughout the year. Many remained free pending the completion of legal proceedings; others were detained or imprisoned for short periods or were permitted to convert their prison sentences to fines. Recep Marasli, the director and editor of Komal Publishing House in Istanbul (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984), in prison since January 1982 and already sentenced to a total of 19 years' imprisonment in three separate trials, received two further prison sentences in 1984 of eight years one month and of two years. The first sentence, passed in May, was in connection with the alleged separatist activities of an iUegal Kurdish organization known as iizz^arz (Liberation), which was not known to have engaged in violent activities. The second sentence, passed in the latter half of the year, was under Article 159 ("insultingthe authorities") and referred to statements he had made in court as part of his defence.
Trials of Kurds, charged with separatist activities under Articles 125 and 171 of the penal code, continued throughout 1984. Among
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
those considered by Amnesty International to be prisoners of conscience were Mehdi Zana, former Mayor of Diyarbakir, and Miimtaz Kotan, a lawyer. In May Mehdi Zana, already serving a sentence of 24 years one month (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984), was sentenced to a further seven years eight months for shouting separatist slogans and insulting the court during his trial in October 1983. Amnesty Intemational was also informed of another trial in progress against Mehdi Zana on charges that he misused his authority as Mayor. Miimtaz Kotan, who had been imprisoned previously on political charges, was arrested in April 1980 and sentenced in July 1982 to eight years' imprisonment for belonging to Rizgari and for alleged separatist activities. On 4 September 1984 a military court of appeal quashed the sentence and mled that he should be retried An Amnesty Intemational observer attended a hearing of the retrial in Diyarbakir on 3 December.
The trial of leaders, officials and advisers of the Confederation of Progressive Trade Unions (DISK), which started in December 1981, continued throughout the year (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1983 and 1984). All the defendants were granted provisional release during 1984, with the exception of four who were held in connection with other trials. The trial of members of 30 DISK affiliated unions was added to the main DISK trial, bringing the total number of defendants to 1,474. The prosecution demanded the death penalty for 78 of them.
In May 1984 a military court of appeal overtumed prison sentences passed in Febmary 1983 on leading members of the National Salvation Party under Article 163 of the penal code for intending to adapt "the basic social, economic, political or judicial orders of the State to religious principles and beliefs" (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984). The trial reopened before the court of first instance and in December it confirmed the appeal court decision, but ordered a retrial. The defendants remained free.
Also prosecuted under Article 163 were 23 Jehovah's Witnesses who were detained in June and July and sentenced on 12 December to prison terms of between four and six years. On 10 July, 2 August and 5 September Amnesty Intemational appealed to the Minister of Justice, Necat Eldem, for the release of all the imprisoned Jehovah's Witnesses, as prisoners of conscience, and for an investigation into allegations that they had been ill-treated in detention. No response was received Later in December eight Jehovah's Witnesses were detained in Izmir during a meeting and subsequently charged under Articles 142,143 and 163 of the penal code.
Political offences continued to be tried by military courts, but on 1 May eight newly established State Security Courts began to function in Ankara, Diyarbakir, Erzincan, Istanbul, Izmir, Kayseri, Konya and Malatya. These courts are to deal with offences committed after 1 May
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
1984 relating to state security and breaches of the firearms and smuggling laws. The case of the 23 Jehovah's Witnesses referred to above was heard before the Ankara State Security Court.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports that lavi^ers acting in political cases had insufficient access to their clients and no private consultations. Conversations between lawyers and clients were reportedly stopped by the prison authorities when any mention of ill-treatment was made by the prisoner. Amnesty Intemational also received reports of increasing pressure put on lawyers acting in political cases: in June five lawyers acting in a trial of alleged members of the Turkish Communist Party (TKP) in Diyarbakir were charged with insulting the court under Articles 64 and 268 of the penal code, and Martial Law 1402. Their trial had not finished by the end of 1984.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the length of time - 45 days - a political detainee might be held incommunicado before being brought before a court. In many cases families were unable to discover the whereabouts of detainees. Information received by Amnesty Intemational strongly suggested that all but a few political detainees were ill-treated during this period and in some cases tortured to death. On 10 October Amnesty Intemational asked the authorities about Hakki Erdogan who died in custody after being detained in September the organization received allegations that he had died as a result of torture. On 17 December the Turkish Ambassador in London, Rahmi GumriikQuoglu, replied that Hakki Erdogan had been detained in Istanbul on 18 September and transferred to a military hospital on 29 September. After diagnosis of kidney and heart failure he had been sent to a civilian hospital, but had died the next day. The Martial Law Command was said to have initiated an investigation which was continuing.
During the year political prisoners went on hunger-strike in several military prisons in protest inter alia at alleged ill-treatment In January Amnesty Intemational urged the authorities to investigate reports that hunger-striking prisoners in Diyarbakir Military Prison had been tortured FoUowing further reports that three prisoners had died in the prison, an Amnesty Intemational delegate visited Diyarbakir from 27 to 31 January to seek information on the cause of these deaths. The martial law authorities informed the delegate that Yilmaz Demir had committed suicide and that Necmettin Buyukkaya had died of a brain timiour. They denied any knowledge of the third person. After the visit Amnesty Intemational received further reports of deaths and upon inquiry was informed by the authorities that Remzi Aytul had committed suicide and Ismet Karak had died of cancer of the pancreas. The authorities subsequently acknowledged that two other prisoners -Cemal Arat and Orhan Keskin - had died as a result of tiie hunger-
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
strike. Four prisoners died in hunger-strikes in Metris and Sagmalcilar prisons in Istanbul between April and June.
There were two executions in October 1984, both in connection with politically-motivated killings. Over400 p>eople were under sentence of death at the end of 1984, including more than 30 whose sentences were before parliament for ratificatioa Aninesty Intemational appealed throughout 1984 for a halt to executions and for the abolition of the death penalty.
In April 1984 Amnesty Intemational submitted information about its concerns in Turkey imder the UN procedure for confidentially reviewing reports of human rights violations. Amnesty Intemationd asserted that the evidence revealed a "consistent pattem of gross violations of human rights" warranting UN investigatioa
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
Amnesty International was ccxicemed that many Soviet citizens were imprisoned or confined in mental hospitals solely for the non-violent exercise of their human rights. It received reports of ill-treatment from prisons, corrective labour colonies and psychiatric institutions. During 1984 it learned of 53 death sentences and 16 executions. Amnesty Intemational had adopted as prisoners of conscience orwas investigating the casesof more than560 individuals, butbelieved the total number of prisoners of conscience to be much higher. Official sources rarely reported on cases of concem to Amnesty International, while individuals who tried to gather such information independently themselves risked imprisonment.
In April Konstantin Chemenko was elected Chairman of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet in place of Yury Andropov, who died in February. Amnesty Intemational wrote to the new President asking to meet representatives of his govemment to discuss its concems in the USSR, but received no reply. In October the USSR presented its second periodic report to the Human Rights Committee set up to monitor compliance with the Intemational Covenant on Civil
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
and Political Rights, in which it said that the USSR Constitution and Soviet legislation guaranteed the rights enshrined in the Covenant.
Throughout the year Amnesty Intemational received evidence to the contrary. At least 132 Soviet citizens were imprisoned under laws specifically restricting freedom of religion and expression. Some individuals, previously persecuted for their exercise of human rights, were imprisoned on criminal charges which Amnesty Intemational believed to be false.
Soviet law required religious believers to register their congregations with the authorities and to give up their right to evangelize, do charitable work and teach religion to childrea Around 70 religious believers who rejected these restrictions on their religious freedom were sentenced to imprisonment and internal exile of up to 10 years for "violating the laws separating church from state" and "engaging in anti-social religious activity". They were mostly unregistered Seventh Day Adventists, Pentecostalists and Baptists. Five Hare Krishna devotees in Moscow who had been denied permission to register as a group were also imprisoned for "engaging in anti-social religious activity". Amnesty Intemational adopted as prisoners of conscience five young men arrested for refusing to do military service on religious grounds. All were mled unfit to stand trial and confined in psychiatric hospitals.
In a paper issued in September Amnesty Intemational described the imprisonment in 1983 of two Lithuanian Roman Catholic priests, and drew attention to the persecution of active Ukrainian Greek Catholics (or Uniates) whose church had been banned in 1946. In 1984 it leamed of the arrest of another Uniate and four officials of the Roman Catholic Church whom it believed to be imprisoned for their religious activities.
Some of those imprisoned for exercising their freedom of expression were convicted - often in closed trials - of "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda" and given sentences of up to 15 years' imprisonment and intemal exile. However, imprisonment of up to three years for "circulating anti-Soviet slander" was more commoa Amnesty Intemational leamed of no instances in which a prisoner tried on these charges was acquitted People were imprisoned fon remarks allegedly made to other prisoners (Nikolai Baturin, Mykola Horbal); private letters to the authorities or personal friends (Mustafa Dzhemilev, Adam Zarivny, Zakhar Zunshain); taping foreign broadcasts of religious music (Gennady Bedarev, Aleksandr Semchenko); photocopying foreign literature (Vitaly Cheverev and five library employees); researching controvereial literary or historical themes (Aleksandr Bogoslovsky, Liúdas Dambrauskas); and associating in imofficial groups to preserve Jewish culture (Yakov Levin, Mark Nyepomnyashchy, Leonid Shrayer, Yakov Rosenberg and losif Zisels).
Most of those imprisoned under these laws, however, were convicted
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
of systematically preparing samizdat, that is literature which bypassed official censors. They included two advocates of independent trade unions as well as Roman Catholics, Pentecostalists, Seventh Day Adventists and Baptists.
Individuals suspected of documenting official abuses of human rights were also targets for prosecutioa In January Yelena Sannikova, a kindergarten teacher, was arrested afi:er a samizdat bulletin called The Chronicle ofthe Human Rights Movement had been confiscated from her home. She was sentenced to one year's imprisonment and four years' internal exile for "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda". In September a Moscow mathematician, Yury Shikhanovich, was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment and internal exile on the same charge for editing 30 issues of the samizdat human rights journal A Chronicle of Current Events.
In February an amendment came into force which increased the penalties for first-time offienders convicted of "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda" using money or other material aid from foreign organizations. The penalty rose from 12 to 15 years' imprisonment and internal exile. To Amnesty Intemational's knowledge no one was sentenced under this section of the law in 1984.
In May the prisoner of conscience Academician Andrei Sakharov went on hunger-strike to demand that his wife, Yelena Bonner, be allowed abroad for surgery. Amid intemational protest, permission was refused and Yelena Bonner was sentenced in August to five years' internal exile for "circulating anti-Soviet slander". Dr Sakharov was reportedly hospitalized and forcibly fed, and returned to his place of exile in September. Amnesty Intemational leamed of other individuals and an entire Pentecostal community on hunger-strike because they were refused permission to leave the country. At least four people were imprisoned for up to eight years for allegedly trying to emigrate without permission. They were convicted ofillegal exit abroad" or "treason-in the form of flight abroad". Amnesty Intemational also adopted as prisoners of conscience nimierous individuals imprisoned on charges not directly related to their attempts to leave the country. For example, Aleksandr Yakir, a Jewish would-be emigrant of long standing, was imprisoned for refusing military call-up. Twenty-three would-be emigrants were imprisoned for "violating the passport regulations", since they had returned their identity papers to speed their visa applications. They were mostly Pentecostalists and citizens of German origin. In May Amnesty Intemational issued a paper analyzing the use of the law against "parasitism" to imprison would-be emigrants and other prisoners of conscience for the exercise of human rights. In 1984 at least four people who had lost their jobs after applying to emigrate were imprisoned as "parasites". Amnesty Intemational also investigated the
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
cases of 11 Jews imprisoned on criminal charges, all of whom had a history of harassment for their attempts to leave the USSR
The Soviet authorities continued to use forcible psychiatric confinement as a means of punishing known dissenters. In 20 reported cases individuals were said to have been put in mental hospitals against their will for indefinite periods following conflict with officials that centred on their exercise of human rights. Amnesty Intemational believed they were confined for political, rather than medical, reasons, and that they had neither used nor advocated violence. Most of the cases involved religious believers and would-be emigrants, committed without criminal charges to ordinary psychiatric hospitals and released after a few months. Some reported that they had been forcibly treated with dmgs which caused them intense physical discomfort Amnesty Intemational also leamed of one Roman Catholic confined to a special psychiatric hospital under the criminal procedure: Sandr Riga was arrested in February and charged with "circulating anti-Soviet slander" and "engaging in anti-social religious activity". He was accused of printing an unofficial ecumenical journal called Prizyv (Summons) and of holding prayer meetings in Moscow without permission. Ruled unaccountable for his actions, he was tried in his absence and confined to a maximum-security psychiatric hospital in Blagoveshchensk, 9,000 kilometres from his only relative. In January it was reported that Aleksei Nikitin, a miner, had died only weeks after he had been released from three years' psychiatric confinement as a prisoner of conscience. Valentin Sokolov, a poet, also died, in ChemyalÂovsk special psychiatric hospital in September, after more than 24 years as a prisoner of conscience.
Most prisoners of conscience served sentences in corrective labour colonies. According to ref>orts reaching Amnesty Intemational they suffered from persistent hunger and medical neglect and were forced to do taxing compulsory labour. Officials often punished prisoners arbitrarily, cutting their already limited food rations and cancelling their rights to letters and visits. Although entitled to complain to the prociu^acy, prisoners were commonly powerless to obtain redress when their rights were violated often their letters were censored, or their complaints were sent for investigation by the very officials complained of. As a protest many prisoners went on hunger-strike, itself a punishable offence.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed by the deaths of three prisoners of conscience imprisoned in special regime institution Perm 36-1. All were serving 15-year terms of imprisonment and intemal exile for "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda". It is not known what medical treatment they had received before their deaths. Oleksa Tykhy, a member of the unofficial Ukrainian Helsinki monitoring group set up
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
in i 977 to document human rights violations, died of stomach cancer in May, at the age of 57. In 1979 doctors had recommended his release on grounds of ill-health, but their recommendation was rejected In August the death was reported of another Ukrainian Helsinki monitor, Yury Lytvyn. Aged 50, he had previously spent 18 years as a prisoner of conscience. The cause of his death was not known. Amnesty Intemational appealed to the Soviet authorities to release a third inmate of Perm 36-1 on grounds of ill-health. At his trial in March Valéry Marchenko, a Ukrainian journalist, was reported to be suffering from chronic nephritis and acute hypertension. Six months into his sentence, he died of kidney failure, aged 37.
Amnesty Intemational received disturbing allegations that some prisoners of conscience had been systematically beaten, either by officials or with official consent In 1984 eight such cases of systematic official brutality were alleged Although Amnesty Intemational was unable to verify all these allegations, it was concemed that not one had apparently been thoroughly investigated by the competent authorities. In August it appealed for an urgent inquiry into the case of Anatoly Marchenko, who was reported to have been handcuffed and beaten unconscious by officials at his corrective labour colony in Perm region after submitting a formal complaint about conditions in the colony to the procuracy.
One prisoner of conscience had his term extended under Article 188-3 of the Russian Criminal Code which forbids "wilful disobedience" in a corrective labour institution. Vladimir Poresh, a young Russian Orthodox believer from Leningrad, had been sentenced in 1980 to eight years' imprisonment and intemal exile for "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda" in connection with his religious activities. In October he was retried in Chistopol prison and sentenced to a further three years' imprisonment for sending a complaint to the procuracy alleging that prisoners had been beaten and Ûiat officials had broken the arm of another prisoner of conscience, Sergei Grigoryants. To Amnesty Intemational's knowledge this was the first time Article 188-3 had been applied to a prisoner of conscience since it was introduced in 1983.
Amnesty Intemational leamed of 53 death sentences and 16 executions during the year, but believed the total number of death sentences passed to be much higher. It appealed for the commutation of every death sentence of which it leamed. Yermak Lukyanov, a 70-year-old Belgian citizen of Kahnyk origin, against whose death sentence Amnesty Intemational had protested in 1983 ( see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984), was reportedly executed on 14 May. In December Amnesty Intemational publicized information about an unofficial petition in the Georgian republic, protesting against death sentences passed on four convicted hijackers. Three thousand Georgians were
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
said to have signed the petition, among them two deputies of the republic's Supreme Soviet It was not known if the hijackers had been executed.
