Taiwan
At the end of 1984 Amnesty International was continuing to appeal for the release of 23 prisoners of conscience serving sentences ranging from five years to life imprisonment on political charges, and was investigating the cases of about 70 other political prisoners. During the year 20 prisoners Amnesty Intemational had adopted as prisoners of conscience were released on parole, 10 ofwhom had been in prison since 1950. Amnestylntemational was alsoconcemed about reports of torture and ill-treatment of criminal prisoners. Four executions are known to have taken place.
On 22 January 1984 eight prisoners of conscience, who had been sentenced to life imprisonment in 1950 on charges of pro-communist activities, were released on parole. On 16 December the remaining two prisoners detained on similarcharges were also released on parole. Also released in January 1984 was Lin Cheng-ting, a journalist arrested in 1957 for an article about a riot outside the US Embassy in Taipei.
Four prisoners of conscience were released on parole on 15 August Lin Yi-hsiung, a lawyer and former member of the Taiwan Provincial Assembly, arrested in December 1979 after the Kaohsiung Incident (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1981)\ and the Reverend Kao Chun-ming, Secretary General of the Presbyterian Church in Taiwan, and two other people detained for helping or failing to report to the authorities a fugitive wanted in connection with the Kaohsiung Incident.
During 1984, six prisoners of conscience convicted by civilian courts in connection with the Kaohsiung Incident were released on parole six to 15 months before completing their sentences of five to six years. However, one of them, Wei Ting-chao, was immediately transferred to the military detention centre in Hsin-tien, near Taipei, to serve the remainder of a previously suspended sentence for a political
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
offence. Amnesty Intemational had adopted Wei Ting-chao as a prisoner of conscience during his imprisonment from 1971 to 1976 and continued to appeal for his release.
Seven other prisoners of conscience arrested after the Kaohsiung Incident and sentenced by a military court to terms of imprisonment of between 12 years and life remained in detention (see Amnesty International Report 1981). Amnesty International continued to appeal for their unconditional release. One, Shih Ming-teh, was of special concem to Amnesty International because of recurring reports that he was not being adequately treated for chronic back pain which he ascribed to ill-treatment during a previous detention from 1962 to 1977.
Amnesty Intemational also continued to appeal for the release of Chen Ming-chong, ChenChin-huo and WangNai-hsin, arrested inJuly and August 1976 on suspicion of being communist agents. They had previously been imprisoned in the 1950s for allegedly belonging to the Communist Party of Taiwan or its affiliates. They were rearrested in 1976 for exchanging banned books on the People's Republic of China and for supporting opposition politicians. Amnesty Intemational was concemed about serious shortcomings in their trial in 1976, in particular, reports that they had been forced under torture to confess to violent offences. It adopted them as prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty Intemational also expressed its concern about reports of the torture and ill-treatment of several prisoners detained on criminal charges and urged that these reports be fully investigated One of the prisoners was Chang Ming-chuan who was arrested in 1982 and sentenced to death on charges of murder and robbery. He claimed that he had been tortured into admitting these charges by being beaten, and having chilli and water poured down his nose. Twice during 1983 the Supreme Court returned his case forreviewtothe High Court and on 1 July 1984 the High Court acquitted him for lack of evidence. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about the death of Lai Wen-liang on 16 June, nine days after his detention following a conviction for thefi Photographs of his body showed marks of injuries. In an indictment brought against four guards of the Taipei detention centre and four detainees working as orderlies in the centre's infirmary, the prosecution charged that they had assaulted Lai Wen-liang, who was protesting at his detention, in order to calm him down. The court, however, did not fmd that the assault was the cause of the prisoner's death. On 23 November 1984 the PanchiaobranchofTaipeiDistrictCourtsentenced them to terms of imprisonment ranging from six months to three years and six months for assault.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed that six prisoners convicted of homicide were executed Twenty-one death sentences were reportedly passed by district courts and four by military courts. Under martial law
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
the Cabinet has the power to instruct miHtary courts to try criminal cases that are considered seriously to affect social order. Amnesty Intemational continued to appeal for the commutation of all death sentences and for the abolition of the death penalty.
