Yugoslavia
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the imprisonment of over 200 prisoners of conscience. It received allegations of ill-treatment during investigation from several political prisoners and was also concerned about ill-treatment and conditions in some prisons where political prisoners were held. It called for the release of two prisoners of conscience forcibly confined to psychiatric institutions. Amnesty Intemational learned of allegations that the govemment had been involved in assassination attempts on Yugoslav emigres. It also learned of the imposition of three death sentences and one executioa
In June 1984 the Federal Public Prosecutor stated that 545 people had been charged with political offences during 1983, of which 76 per cent were "verbal". In 1984 Amnesty Intemational learned of 60 political trials involving more than 210 people. Most were ethnic Albanians from Kosovo province, where calls continued for the province - which is part of the republic of Serbia - to be granted republican status within the Yugoslav federation. In the first seven months of 1984 the official Yugoslav press reported the trials of at least
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
139 ethnic Albanians (including 12 minors) for "nationalist" activity. All but one were found guilty and sentenced to up to 15 years' imprisonment In many cases the charges were unrelated to the use or advocacy of violence.
During 1984 Amnesty Intemational took up the cases of 88 ethnic Albanians, making a total of over 150 ethnic Albanians adopted as prisoners of conscience. Among them were Asilan Ramadani and 10 others, mostly fellow high-school pupils or students (including two minors), who were sentenced to between one and five years' imprisonment by the district court of Prizren on 16 July. They were accused of having written "hostile" pamphlets and slogans, of organizing nationalist demonstrations and of organizing help for poor relatives of Albanians imprisoned because of nationalist activity.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about people convicted for the non-violent expression of dissenting views under Article 133 of the federal criminal code, dealing with "hostile propaganda". It leamed of 11 sentences of up to seven years' imprisonment on charges based solely on the contents of private conversations. All but one were imposed in Bosnia-Hercegovina. For example. Amnesty Intemational adopted Dr Ivan Zografski, a 70-year-old Bulgarian citizen residing in Yugoslavia who was sentenced by the district court of Sarajevo on 17 January 1984 for allegedly making "hostile" remarks about the sociopolitical situation and about the Yugoslav leadership in "his own home, the homes of his friends and in cafés and restaurants". He was sentenced to six and a half years' imprisonment (reduced on appeal by one year), confiscation of his property and permanent expulsion from Yugoslavia on expiry of his sentence.
Amnesty Intemational adopted other people convicted of "hostile propaganda" on charges relating to the possession of published material or recordings. For example, Muharrem Zamaku, a US citizen bom in Albania was sentenced to three years' imprisonment by the district court of Bjelo Polje reportedly for possessing "propaganda materials" and a tape-recording of a speech calling for the secession of the Albanian-inhabited territories of Yugoslavia and their incorporation into Albania.
Amnesty Intemational continued to call for the release of Radomir Veljkovic, forcibly detained in Belgrade Prison Psychiatric Hospital since 1973 on account of the non-violent exercise of his right to freedom of expTession(see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984), andit adopted as a prisoner of conscience Milisav Zivanovic who had similarly been confined in psychiatric institutions since 1976. In June 1976 he was charged with "damaging the reputation of the state" after writing to leading officials in Macedonia allegedly accusing the Federal Public Prosecutor and other senior officials of cormptioiL At his trial by
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
the district court of Pancevo neither Milisav Zivanovic nor iiis family were allowed to be present and he was defended by a coiut-appointed lawyer. The court found him guilty but ruled that he was not accountable for his actions and that he should be confined to a psychiatric institution.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about allegations of ill-treatment and torture during investigation. In June it wrote to the Federal Secretary of the Interior about detailed allegations it had received following a raid by the state security police on an apartment in Belgrade in April when 28 people were taken into custody. Jovica Mihailovic alleged that he was repeatedly beaten and a medical certificate of 24 April, the day he was released, recorded injuries to his head and body. Tomislav Jeremic alleged that he was beaten on the sole of his bare foot and hit 20 times on the back of the head Dragisa Paunic alleged that he was kicked in the abdomen and hit on the back of the neck. Amnesty Intemational also received reports that Zoran Matic had been beaten by four officials with mbber tmncheons. Amnesty Intemational also expressed its concem about the death of Radomir Radovic, one of the 28 detained, whose body was found in mysterious circumstances. He had disappeared a week previously, shortly after his release from custody. The official verdict of suicide was contested by his lawyer, family and friends.
In December Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Federal Secretary of Justice about allegations it had received conceming the treatment of Ivo Tubanovic, Stjepan and Filip Baglic and a number of other Croats arrested during August. Reports received by Amnesty Intemational alleged that they had been indiscriminately beaten and that Filip Baglic had been beaten with a sock filled with either salt or sand. Amnesty Intemational was informed that one of those arrested, Ante Davidovic, died in custody and that his family were first informed that his death was due to a heart-attack, but later told that he had committed suicide. No reply was received to either of Amnesty Intemational's letters.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed also about reports of poor conditions in certain prisons where political prisoners were held, in particular the alleged ill-treatment of prisoners. One account concemed Croatian political prisoners in Lepoglava prison who had signed a petition addressed to the presidency protesting at the detention and interrogation of the 28 intellectuals in Belgrade in April. One of the signatories, Tonci Marinkovic, was reportedly beaten so badly that he had to be taken by ambulance to Varazdin hospital. All the signatories, who included two adopted prisoners of conscience, were given terms of solitary confmement of between 15 and 30 days. In a subsequent petition to the UN Secretary-General the same prisoners alleged that
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
prison warders in Lepoglava were encouraged by their superiors to ill-treat prisoners.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about reports alleging that agents of the Sluzba drzavne sigumosti (SDS), the Yugoslav state security police, were involved in attempted assassinations of Yugoslav emigres. In July the trial of Josip Majerski ended in Munich in the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG). He reportedly admitted to being a long-time employee of the SDS and implicated prominent members of the Yugoslav diplomatic corps in SDS activities. He reportedly stated that he had been given the task of infiltrating various emigre organizations as an agentprovocateur \jo encourage the use of violence and that he had been ordered by the SDS to kill the Croat emigre Bmno Busic (who was murdered in Paris in 1978) but had refused to do so. Also in July, the trial of three people accused of the attempted assassination of the Yugoslav emigre Rasim Zenelaj in May 1981 {sqq Amnesty Intemational Report 1984) ended in Frankfurt in the FRG. The court reportedly implicated the SDS and Yugoslav consular officials in the attempted murder, and the presiding judge referred after the trial to "... a secret service using murder to accomplish its goals".
Amnesty Intemational leamed of the imposition of two death sentences and one execution, all for murder.
