Bolivia
Amnesty International continued to follow the progress of administrative andjudicial investigations into "disappearances" and extras judicial executions which occurred under previous governments. It was concerned at the apparent failure of some sections of the armed forces to cooperate with the civilian authorities in these investigations. Amnesty International was similarly concerned by the open refusal of a military court, the Tribunal Permanente de Justicia Mí7íVar(TPJM), Permanent Tribunal of Military Justice, to implement an amnesty for seven political prisoners decreed by President Hernán Siles Zuazo in Octçber 1984. The organization also called for an investigation into a death in military custody in December 1983 allegedly resulting from torture.
An Amnesty International delegation visited Bolivia between 25 February and 6 March to discuss the protection of human rights with members of the government and local human rights organizations. These included officials of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of the Interior and the Comisión Nacional de Investigaciones de Desaparecidos, National Commission of Inquiry into Disappearances, established by government decree in October 1982 to investigate "disappearances".
By the end of 1984 the National Commission of Inquiry into Disappearances had reportedly received information on 207 "disappearances"
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
since 1964; 96 ofwhich took place in November 1979 (during the brief period of govemment of General Natusch Busch) and successive periods of military govemment between July 1980 and September 1982. By the end of the year the Commission had concluded its investigation into 5 2 cases. Some of the victims were found to have been released but the majority were found to have been killed and secretly buried by military personnel or civilians working with the security forces. The Commission's work was said to have been hampered by financial constraints and the failure of both military personnel and civilians to cooperate wi^ its investigations. Key witnesses were said to have failed to answer summons to give evidence in court Amnesty Intemational was concemed at reports that members of the Commission had been threatened and intimidated in the course of their work by groups linked to the armed forces. In a letter to President Siles Zuazo on 15 August 1984 the organization asked what steps would be taken by the govemment to ensure that the Commission was able fully to carry out its investigations.
There continued to be delays in bringing military personnel and civilians accused of involvement in past human rights violations to trial. These arose largely because of legal disputes about which court had jurisdiction over these cases. Investigating judges almost invariably discharged themselves from these proceedings by invoking Article 274 of the Code of Penal Procedure. This stipulates that cases involving offences committed by the president, vice-president and ministers of state "in the exercise of their fijnctions" should be heard before Congress, which - if it decided that there was a case to answer- would refer it to the Supreme Court Local human rights organizations took the view that ordinary criminal offences had been committed and that cases should therefore be heard before ordinary courts. They further argued that the procedure should not apply to members of governments that had only de facto authority or to civilians who had no official position. This view was supported by the Attomey General, Dr Hernando Achá.
In Febmary 1984, despite the debate about the applicability of the procedures, two political parties, úye Movimiento de Izquierda Revolucionario, Movement of Revolutionary Left, and the Partido Socialista 1, Socialist Party No. 1, opened proceedings against former Minister of the Interior, Colonel Luis Arce Gómez and former President General Luis Garcia Meza on charges of assassination, genocide, organization of irregular armed groups and misappropriation of public fiinds.
The failure of the armed forces to cooperate with the civilian authorities was apparent also in the case of seven prisoners arrested in October 1983 by army persormel in the town of Luribay, La Paz department Repeatedly in 1984 Amnesty Intemational expressed concem at reports that the prisoners - two Chileans and five Bolivians -
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985

had been tortured in military custody following arrest, held in incommunicado detention and denied adequate medical attention. Moreover Amnesty Intemational believed that the proceedings before the TPJM did not conform to intemational standards for a fair and impartial hearing. On 12 October the TPJM sentenced the prisoners to between two and six years' imprisonment for possessing military equipment On 26 October President Siles declared an amnesty for the prisoners and ordered their immediate release. However, the military court refused to implement the presidential amnesty and although the prisoners were transferred from military barracks to a civilian prison in La Paz, they were still in detention at the end of 1984 awaiting a ruling by the Supreme Court.
Amnesty Intemational pressed for an investigation into the death in military custody, reportedly as a result of torture, of Cadet Alfredo Ribs Saavedra. Cadet Rios was reportedly detained by naval authorities on 7 December 1983 and he died later that month following his transfer from the Escuela Naval Militar, Military Naval Academy, to a COSSMIL (military) medical unit An autopsy which found that cardiac arrest was the cause of death was questioned by local forensic experts and others in the light of evidence indicating that Cadet Rios had been tortured in military custody.
