Egypt
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about legislation which the organization considered was being applied in a manner inconsistent with the Intemational Covenant on C ivil and Political Rights, such as the lack of the right to appeal against judgments of state security courts, prolonged pre-trial detention of political detamees and inadequate safeguards against torture and ill-treatment. Amnesty I ntemational continued to work on behalf of one prisoner of conscience, but had insufficient information to determine whether other political prisoners were prisoners of conscience. Amnesty Intemational appealed for the commutation of six death sentences during the year.
In January 1984 Amnesty Intemational published	Update
to 1983 Report {stt Amnesty Intemational Report 1984). This consisted of an exchange of memoranda and letters with the Ministry of Justice, dealing with Amnesty Intemational's concerns in Egypt legislation relatingto arrest and detention procedures, lackofthe right of appeal against conviction by state security courts, prisoners of conscience, allegations of torture and ill-treatment and the application of the death penalty. In August, Amnesty Intemational delegates observed part of the trial before the (Emergency) Supreme State Security Court of 176 people in connection with the banned Islamic JzTiai/ organization The delegates held talks with the President and Counsellors of the Court, a representative of the prosecution and defence lawyers. The trial has since been postponed indefinitely, and all defendants released.
On 7 December Amnesty Intemational submitted a document entitled Egypt- Evidence of Torture 1981-1983 to the government for comment and planned to make it public in early 1985. It referred to
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
testimonies of torture given to Amnesty International by former political detainees, and to more than 90 forensic medical reports relating to the period October 1981 to August 1983. Amnesty I ntemational drew attention to the large number of allegations and to the high degree of consistency between them, and said that it feared that torture and ill-treatment of detainees could continue unless immediate steps were taken. In a covering letter to the goverrmient Amnesty Intemational welcomed the statement by the Minister for People's Assembly and Consultative Assembly Affairs, as reportedby the daily newspaper/iMAram on 19 November, that an investigation into torture was nearing completioa Amnesty Intemational urged the govemment to make public both the procedures and the results of the investigation and recommended that those responsible for torture be brought to justice, and compensation awarded to the victims. Amnesty Intemational proposed a study of all legislation governing arrest and detention procedures including state of emergency provisions (in September 1984 the state of emergency was further extended to April 1986) with a view to introducing further safeguards for detainees.
Amnesty Intemational continued to call on the authorities to lift all physical restrictions on the Coptic Pope, Shenouda III, an adopted prisoner of conscience who has been confined to a monastery in Wadi Natroun since September 1981. Reports indicated that the Pope would be released in time to celebrate the Coptic Christmas on 7 January 1985, but he was still confined in December.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the prolonged pre-trial detention ofmany political detainees. For example, some defendants in three Jihad-related cases spent up to three years in detention before their trial was either concluded or indefinitely postponed, when they were released. Amnesty International received reports that some were rearrested and detained after being released It was also informed that other detainees, alleged to be members of a banned communist group, had remained in detention despite court orders for their release. On 20 Febmary Amnesty Intemational asked the government forclarification of these cases and for information on the status of a number of juveniles detained in connection with the Jihad organization, but no response was received
Several political trials continued during 1984, including two Jihad-related cases, both of which were postponed indefinitely, and several trials relating to banned communist groups, which were still in progress in December. Only one major political trial was concluded. This concemed 302 defendants charged in connection with the Jihad organization who were tried by the (Emergency) Supreme State Security Court on charges which included murder and attempting to overthrow the govemment The prosecution had demanded the death
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
penalty for 299 of the 302 defendants. The trial ended on 30 September when the court acquitted 175 of the 302 defendants. Sixteen were sentenced to life imprisonment, 90 received sentences of between two and 15 years' imprisonment, 19 who had escaped arrest were not sentenced, and two had reportedly died in detention. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that in this case, as in other trials before state security courts during a state of emergency, defendants were denied the right of appeal. Their convictions and sentences were instead subject to ratification by the President. Amnesty Intemational considers this denial of the right to appeal to a higher tribunal to be at variance with Article 14(5) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights which Egypt ratified in 1982.
The (Emergency) Supreme State Security Court - having directed that defendants who claimed to have been tortured should be examined by forensic doctors - found that a large number had been tortured after arrest, and that many had been held in pohce custody for longer than necessary. The court rejected as evidence all those confessions which had been obtained by coercion, and called for responsibility for the physical abuse of the detainees to be established without delay.
No substantiated reports of torture in 1984 reached Amnesty International. Nevertheless, it believed that safeguards against such treatment were still inadequate.
Mass arrests took place in Kafr Ad-Dawwar and other towns at the end of September and October in connection with factory protests against the introduction of stringent economic measures. Arrests also followed disturbances at A1 Azhar University at the end of November. After both these events Amnesty Intemational sought assurances from the govemment that certain basic safeguards against torture or ill-treatment had been observed. Amnesty Intemational urged that all those arrested be given prompt and regular access to a lawyer of their own choosing, that their families be told their whereabouts without delay and that they be given adequate medical treatment whenever necessary.
During 1984 Amnesty Intemational appealed to President Mulham-mad Hosni Mubarak to commute six death sentences. Five of those sentenced had been convicted of murder, some with additional charges, and one of rape. Amnesty Intemational leamed of no executions.
Egypt ratified the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in 1982, and in compliance with Article 40 submitted a report to the UN Secretary-General on the measures adopted to implement the Covenant. Its report was subsequently examined by the Human Rights Committee at its 21 st session between 2 and 5 April. Members of the committee raised questions concerning the state of emergency and related legislation. Particular reference was made to the powers of the
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
executive to order that a person already convicted or acquitted should be tried again for the same offence, which the committee considered to constitute double jeopardy and therefore to be contrary to Article 14(7) of the Covenant Questions were also asked about measures to abolish capital punishment and steps to prevent ill-treatment in police and military custody. In response, Egypt's representative stated, among other things, that the state of emergency was introduced to ensure stability, that Egypt considered thatretainingcapital punishment was a safeguard to society, and that prisoners received normal and humane treatment The representative said that Egypt would submit a supplementary report to supply further information in response to the committee's questions.
