Honduras
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the arrest without warrant of political detainees, their detention without trial in both unofficial and recognized detention centres, torture, "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions. Victims included university staff and students, opposition politicians, trade unionists, human rights workers, lay religious leaders and peasants, as well as Salvadorian and Nicaraguan refugees.
Amnesty International also received reports that Honduran forces had cooperated with their Salvadorian counterparts in carrying out such abuses on both Salvadorian and Hondwan territory; the victims included Salvadorian and Honduran nationals. Among those cited as responsible for the abuses were military and security units acting in uniform and in plain clothes, as well as paramilitary groups, including the civilian Comités de Defensa Civil, Civil Defence Committees, formed while General Adolfo Alvarez Martinez was commander of the Honduran Armed Forces from January 1982 to March 1984.
Reports indicated also that Honduran forces had provided logistical support to irregular units opposed to the govemment in Nicaragua, known as the "contras" or counter-revolutionaries, who operated from Honduras. The "contras" were allegedly responsible in 1984 for "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions of Nicaraguans and Hondurans on both sides of the border. For example, in October six
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
members of the Nicaraguan Brigada Educativa, Education Brigade, were seized on the Nicaraguan side of the border by irregular soldiers believed to be "contras" and taken off towards Honduras. They remained "disappeared". (See also entry on Nicaragua.)
Such abuses occurred throughout 1984 both before and after the dismissal and expulsion from the country of General Alvarez Martinez in March. Following his expulsion President Roberto Suazo Cordova asserted that General Alvarez Martinez had been responsible for implementing the seciuity policy which had led to increasing reports of human rights violations. The authorities promised the families of victims and human rights groups that complaints of past abuses would be investigated by a special investigatory commission. However, when the commission reported in December it failed to clarify alleged extrajudicial executions reported in 1984 and in previous years. No information was given, for example, about 14 Salvadorian refugees found dead on 3 February in San Marcos, Ocotepeque, although Honduran church sources had accused the army of responsibility.
The commission reported on only eight of the more than 1(X) "disappearances" reported in Honduras in recent years. They were all Salvadorians who, the inquiry said, were either living in Honduras or had been deported back to El Salvador. However, their families told Honduran human rights workers that the whereabouts of their relatives remained unknown. One of the missing Salvadorians was Santos Gilberta Iglesias, a Salvadorian refugee captured on 20 February near the Salvadorian border by armed men believed to be members of the Honduran Army. Foreign aid workers reported that she had left the refugee camp where she had been living, to avoid being moved further from the border under the Honduran Govenunent's relocation plan for Salvadorian refugees. Honduran officials claimed, however, tíiat she had been injured and arrested during a confrontation between the Honduran army and an armed Salvadorian guerrilla group operating in Honduras and handed over to the Salvadorian army 24 hours later. Amnesty Intemational asked the Honduran authorities what guarantees had been received for her safety once she retumed to El Salvador, and called for the rights of all reñigees in Honduras to be respected
Another of the "disappeared" about whom Amnesty Intemational expressed concem during 1984, and whose case was not clarified by the investigatory commission, was Rolando Vindel González, president of the Sindicato de Trabajadores de la Empresa Nacional de Energía Eléctrica (STENEE), the National Electricity Workers' Union. He was abducted in Tegucigalpa by men believed to be members of the Honduran security forces on 18 March, during a wage dispute between STENEE and the government In response to widespread protests at this abduction, the army took over power plants and offices throughout
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
the country, evicting v^orkers and arresting several hundred people. Most were released after a few hours; 15 were charged with sedition, but released by July. Rolando Vindel González, however, remained missing at the end of 1984.
Also still missing at the end of the year was student leader Manfredo Velásquez, who "disappeared" on 12 September 1981. On 5 January 1984 Amnesty Intemational launched intemational appeals after the arrest of his sister, Zenaida Velásquez, calling for her detention to be acknowledged and for humane treatment As President of the Comité de Familiares de Desaparecidos de Honduras (COFADEH), Committee of Relatives of the Disappeared of Honduras, she was active in trying to find her brother and otiier "disappeared" prisoners. She was released after some seven hours in detention, during which she was reportedly verbally abused because she had publicized abroad the plight of the "disappeared".
Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about death threats received by local representatives of the independent Comité para la D^ensa de los Derechos Humanos en Honduras {CODEH), Committee for the Defence of Human Rights in Honduras, during 1984. According to reports, detainees were shown pictures of well-known human rights activists during interrogation and urged to identify them as subversives.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the reported torture of detainees under interrogation. One of the detainees on whose behalf the organization appealed was Humberto Vásquez, arrested in Febmary by soldiers at the Centro Regional de Entrenamiento Militar {CREM), Regional Military Training Centre, a military base at Puerto Castilla, near Trujillo, where US soldiers train Salvadorian and Honduran troops. Humberto Vásquez, a cleaner at the base, was reportedly detained because he had seen some maps which had been thrown away by soldiers. He was held in a number of places including the headquarters of the Dirección Nacional de Investigaciones (DNI), National Directorate of Investigations, inTmjillo, before being released without charge on 16 March. Relatives who saw him in custody stated that he appeared to have been tortured, and when released he reportedly showed marks of ill-treatment
Similar allegations of torture were made in court by Osiris Villalobos and Ali Espino Sequeira - arrested by agents of the Fuerza de Seguridad Pública (FUSEP), Public Security Force, in San Pedro Sula on 30 June - and César Amílcar Castellanos, detained two days later. When Osiris Villalobos was leaving the court where he had been charged he attempted to repeat his accusations to the press, but a heavily armed DNI agent clamped his hand over Villalobos' mouth. To Amnesty Intemational's knowledge all three were still in custody at the end of 1984, reportedly suspected of involvement with armed opposition
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
groups. Amnesty Intemational asked for the allegations of torture to be investigated, and, if verified, for those responsible to be brought to justice; it also asked for details of the charges against the detainees.
Amnesty Intemational made similar inquiries on behalf of 19 people arrested in September and October, who "disappeared" before being presented at a news conference in October by the armed forces, who also alleged that they had been tortured to make them say they were members of an armed opposition group. The 19 were believed to have been arrested under Decree 33 of May 1982, which defmed a large number of acts such as occupying private or public property and distributing subversive propaganda as subversion against the state. Amnesty Intemational interviewed people during 1984 who had been held in unacknowledged detention under this legislation for periods exceeding the legal limits and had been tortured to make them confess to being " subversives". One such released detainee appeared to have been detained and tortured because of her legal advice work for trade union and peasant organizations.
Testimony collected by Amnesty Intemational from people held under Decree 33 also told of overcrowding, harassment and substandard food in detention centres including the men's prison in Tegucigalpa and the women's detention centre in Támara
In the course of 1984 Aitmesty Intemational presented its concems in Honduras to various regional and intemational bodies including the UN Working Group on Disappearances and the UN Special Rapporteur on Summary and Arbitrary Executions.
The Committee on Freedom of Association of the Intemational Labour Organisation (ILO) noted in 1984 that it had received no response to its November 1983 request to the Honduran Government for information on the death of several trade union leaders in the agricultural sector. On 28 March 1983 four leaders of the Sindicato de Trabajadores de la Compama Agrícola y Ganadera de Sula ( SITRA-COAGS), Union of the Agricultural and Livestock Company of Sula, were killed and four other union members wounded by soldiere. The soldiers responsible were arrested after repeated expressions of concem by Amnesty Intemational and other organizations regarding the killings, but then escaped, allegedly with the help of soldiers guarding them.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
