Saudi Arabia
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the detention of prisoners who may have been prisoners of conscience; inadequate detention and trial procedures inpolitical cases characterized by lengthy pre-trial detention; allegations of torture and ill-treatment; and the imposition of floggings, amputations and the death penalty as judicial punishments.
In December 1984 Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Minister of the Interior about reports that between August andDecember 62 people had been detained in connection with an attempt to organize a political party. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that as politicalparties are banned, those arrested were being prevented from exercising their fundamental rights to freedom of expression and assembly as guaranteed by intemational human rights standards. Amnesty International was also concemed because the whereabouts and legal status of the detainees remained unknowa
Amnesty International also requested information about a further 19 people reportedly detained at various times since 1981, possibly on political grounds, whose whereabouts were also unknown.
Amnesty International remained concerned about procedures which led to long delays before those detained on political grounds were charged and tried. Saudi Arabia has no habeas corpus provision and as a result detainees were often held - sometimes incommunicado and in solitary confinement- forperiodsof afewmonths toover ayear, while the police or govemment prosecutors carried out their investigations and prepared the case for trial. During this period the detainees were often unaware of the charges against them and were not informed of their status nor of pending trial procedures. In addition, notification of arrest was not automatically given to the prisoner's family, or, in the case of foreign nationals, to the employer or embassy.
During 1984, as in previous years, Amnestylnternational received a number of allegations of torture and ill-treatment of detainees. Most of
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
the allegations related to people detained for ordinary criminal offences and suggested that ill-treatment generally occurred immediately after arrest Several first-hand accounts named the Drug Detention Centre (DDC) in Dammam as an interrogation centre where torture or ill-treatment frequently took place. Detainees alleged that common practices included being forced to stand for hours at a time, and being beaten on the soles of the feet or all over the body with sticks, rubber hoses, wire clothes hangers, knotted rope or electric cables.
One detainee released from Dammam central prison in February 1984 testified that in a room on the second floor of the DDC, detainees were bound and hung upside down from a hook in the ceiling and then beaten while being interrogated. In another room detainees were allegedly tied to a table and beaten with sticks.
Allegations of torture or ill-treatment at Dhahran police station also reached Amnesty International. One detainee alleged that his arms were tied to chains which were pulled when he reftised to answer questions, thereby dislocating his shoulder joints; that he was shackled, hung upside down and beaten with wooden sticks; that cigarettes were put out on his arms and genitals and that he was submerged in a large oil-drum full of cold water.
Amnesty Intemational was also concemed that cmel, inhuman and degrading punishment was judicially imposed in the form of flogging. In one case which came to its attention four Danish citizens were each caned 75 times in Najran prison on 9 October. They were detained in May after their Yemeni cook died of intemal bleeding. They reportedly denied any connection with his death initially, but after 51 days in detention confessed that they had accidentally knocked him down with a van. They were convicted by the criminal court of Najran of "lying to Allah", sentenced to flogging and also ordered to pay 100,000 Riyals {over £21,000) compensation to the cook's wife. According to officials, flogging is designed to humiliate and rehabilitate rather than cause paia The strokes to the clothed back and buttocks are reportedly not allowed to draw blood, however, an official from the Danish company employing the four stated that these canings did draw blood. Amnesty Intemational appealed on 25 September to the Minister of the Interior to commute the sentences of flogging on humanitarian grounds.
On 6 December the Bangkok newspaper Thai Rath reported that Said Kamolman Chiangpien, a 27-year-old Thai woman working in Riyadh, had been sentenced to 150 strokes of the cane and one year's imprisonment for adultery with another Thai national. Amnesty International appealed for this sentence also to be commuted on humanitarian grounds.
Islamic law (al-Shari'a) as practised in Saudi Arabia prescribes amputation as the punishment for repeated theft when there are no
vili
Amnesty International Report 1985
mitigating circumstances. During 1984 Amnesty Intemational leamed of three amputations. On 3 Febmary in the town of Tabmk, two Thai nationals - Wishay Witmn and Yaijit Yumant- had their right hands severed after being convicted of robbery. On 9 March in the town of Jizan, a Yemeni national, Ahmad Rajihi, had his left hand and the fingers of his right hand amputated. He had been convicted of attacking his wife with a sword, severing her left hand at the wrist and amputating the fingers of her right hand. On both occasions Amnesty Intemational issued urgent appeals stating that amputations werecmel, inhuman and degrading punishments which violated intemationally agreed human rights standards and urging the authorities to stop this form of punishment.
During 1984 Amnesty Intemational learned of 23 executions. In all cases the prisoners had been convicted of murder and the sentences were carried out in public. In at least two cases the executions were carried out many years after sentencing. Thamer al-Shihri was executed on 17 Febmary in Asir, 17 years after the murder of Taff ibn Gharib; on the same day, in the town of Sirat, ' Ali al-Bishri was executed for the murder, 13 years earlier, of Thamer al-Bishri. Under Islamic law the relatives of a murder victim may demand retribution Qisas) in the form ofthe death ofthe murderer, or they may waive such a claim freely or by settlement In both the above cases the sentences could not be carried out until the heirs of the deceased had reached the age of majority and had all agreed on the form of retribution. During 1984 Amnesty Intemational addressed the Minister of the Interior several times, expressing regret that executions had been c arried out and reiterating its unconditional opposition to the death penalty. On 17 August Amnesty Intemational told King Fahd bin 'Abd al-'Aziz al-Sa'ud that it was continuing to monitor with concem the use of the death penalty.
