Kuwait
Amnesty Intemational was concemed during 1986 about trials before the State Security Court of political prisoners, some of whom might be prisoners of conscience. The organization received allegations of torture or ill-treatment of detainees and was concemed about the use of the death penalty.
Amnesty Intemational teamed of six trials before the State Security Court during 1986, all held in camera. Kamil Husayn 'Ali Dashti and 'Abd al-Rahman Muhammad 'Ali Fakhm were convicted of having written leaflets which the authorities said called for the overthrow of the govemment. Their cases were investigated by the organization as possible prisoners of conscience. Kamil Husayn 'Ali Dashti was sentenced in November 1985 to five years' imprisonment (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1986). Army Major 'Abd al-Rahman Muhammad 'Ali Fakhru was sentenced in April 1986 to 10 years' imprisonment. Also among those sentenced to imprisonment by the State Security Court were 'Abd al-'Aziz 'Ali Karim, found guilty in April of planning to blow up a water plant in Doha and sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment, and 'Ala' Muhammad Reda al-Atrash, an Iraqi national sentenced to death in November on charges of involvement in an attempt on the life of the Amir in May
1985.	In all these cases Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the secrecy of the proceedings and about the lack of any right to appeal against the court's verdicts.
Allegations of torture or ill-treatment by the State Security Intelligence Agency were received by Amnesty Intemational during
1986.	Most reports concemed foreign nationals who were detained for short periods and subsequently deported. Alleged methods included beatings and having hot water thrown on the head. Detainees were also reportedly threatened with being sent to
356	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
countries where they risked human rights abuse. In December 1985 and February 1986 Amnesty Intemational expressed concern about reports that nine people were tortured following their arrest in March 1985 and that eight others had died under torture between March and November 1985 (see Amnesty International Report 1986). The organization urged the authorities to investigate the reports, and, if they were verified, to bring to justice those found responsible. No reply was received.
Two prisoners, both convicted of murder and sentenced to death, were known to have been executed in 1986. Nadi Abu al-Hamad 'Uthman, an Egyptian national sentenced in 1983, was executed in January, and Ranja Suwami Tobal, an Indian national sentenced in 1984, was executed in March. The organization had appealed for their sentences to be commuted. In November Amnesty Intemational sought clarification of reports that Turki Muhammad Nasir, a Saudi national sentenced to death in April for murder, may have been insane at the time of the crime. He was reported to have committed suicide in the prison hospital where he had been undergoing psychiatric treatment shortly after having been sentenced to death. In December Amnesty Intemational appealed to the Amir to commute the death sentence passed on 'Ala' Muhammad Reda al-Atrash and all other outstanding death sentences.
A bill introducing the death penalty for crimes against aviation safety was submitted in March by the govemment to the National Assembly for approval. Amnesty Intemational appealed to the govemment and members of the National Assembly not to adopt it.
