Brazil
Amnesty International was concemed about the failure of the authorities to investigate and prosecute those responsible for numerous killings of rural workers^ community leaders and trade unionists and their advisers, allegedly committed by hired gunmen in the pay of local landowners, in the context of land disputes. Amnesty International believed that the apparent unwillingness of local, state and federal authorities to investigate these killings effectively and to prosecute those responsible could constitute acquiescence in these crimes. The organization also received a number of reports of uniformed police killing criminal suspects in circumstances suggesting they were victims of extrajudicial executions. Amnesty Intemational also investigated torture and ill-treatment of detainees in police stations and prisons throughout the country.
In February Amnesty Intemational wrote to the President of the Republic, José Samey, about human rights abuses in mral areas in the context of disputes over land ownership. In July and August an Amnesty Intemational mission visited areas of the states of Para, Goias, Maranhao and Bahia, where the highest incidence of violence related to land conflicts had been reported. Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the growing number of peasants, rural
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	137
community leaders, trade unionists, lawyers and church workers who received death threats, some of whom were killed, allegedly by hired gunmen in the pay of local landowners. Amnesty Intemational believed that the victims of such threats and assaults were targeted because of their role in disputes over land and labour rights. There were also reports that private militias were being organized to threaten and attack rural workers.
Of particular concern to Amnesty Intemational was the evidence of a persistent failure by local and state authorities to investigate these killings effectively or to bring criminal prosecutions, with the result that those responsible acted with impunity and further abuses were encouraged.
Amnesty International's preliminary findings from the mission were that the authorities at local, state and federal levels had consistently omitted to take the necessary measures to prevent attacks on rural workers and their advisers. The total number of killings related to land disputes officially reported in 1986 was 298. Amnesty International's delegates also received reports of an increase in the number of short-term arrests without warrant of peasants engaged in land disputes. For instance, over 700 peasants were reported to have been arrested in the state of Para during 1986. Although Amnesty Intemational could not verify the circumstances of all these arrests, it appeared that many were arbitrary and carried out in order to harass the victims rather than to enforce the law. In the majority of cases rep)orted, no charges were brought following the arrests. Amnesty International's delegates were also told that peasants were beaten and ill-treated in the custody of military police during land evictions. In a number of such cases the military police appeared to have been accompanied by men known locally to be hired gunmen.
On 12 May the organization expressed its concern about the assassination of Father Josimo Moraes Tavares, a Roman Catholic priest who was shot on 10 May by a gunman in the town of Imperatriz, Maranhao state, in what is known as the Bico do Papagaio region of northern Brazil. Five bishops had previously appealed to the federal govemment in person about the level of violence towards mral workers seeking land rights in the Bico do Papagaio region, and had sought guarantees for the priest's life following an earlier attempt on his life on 15 April. Amnesty Intemational believed that Father Tavares was killed because of his activities as coordinator of the Church Land Commission for the Diocese of Tocantinopolis, his work advising rural workers of their land and labour rights, and his reporting of human rights abuses against them. A gunman who confessed to having killed Father
138	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
Tavares was arrested in June, and claimed to have been employed by a local politician and landowner to carry out the assassination. Amnesty International had previously appealed on Father Tavares' behalf following his arrest in November 1984 (see Amnesty International Report 1985). Two weeks before Father Tavares' arrest in 1984, four peasants were arrested and reportedly tortured in an attempt to make them implicate him in an ambush in which a landowner had been killed. Amnesty International had appealed on their behalf.
In its letter to President Samey in February, Amnesty Intemational said that for some of Brazil's law enforcement agencies, torture had apparently become an established practice during criminal investigations. The organization noted that a number of official inquiries had been established to investigate reports of torture, and asked to be kept informed of their findings and of any prosecutions or disciplinary measures against law enforcement officers alleged to be responsible.
In October an Amnesty Intemational delegate visited Brazil to investigate allegations of torture and ill-treatment in police stations and prisons in Sao Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, Porto Alegre and Brasilia. One of the cases examined was that of Antonio Clovis Lima dos Santos and Cleber Leal Goulart, who were tortured in the central police station in Porto Alegre, Rio Grande do Sul State, in September 1984 (see Amnesty International Report 1986). The organization received no reply from either the President or the state governor to its inquiries on this case. On 1 March 1986, three weeks before he was due to testify to an official inquiry into the torture allegations, Antonio Clovis Lima dos Santos was killed in suspicious circumstances. Following the death of the main witness, the inquiry absolved four police officers who had been suspended and accused of torture, for lack of proof. The court refused to accept as evidence authenticated photographs, taken by another police officer, which appeared to show the dead youth and Cleber Leal Goulart being tortured at the central |X)lice station. Cleber Leal Goulart, who went into hiding in fear for his life after Antonio dos Santos' death, did not testify. He claimed that he was tortured again by military police when they rearrested him in November 1986 in connection with another offence.
A number of prison riots took place during 1986 and the press reported prisoners' allegations of regular torture and ill-treatment in Brazilian prisons. In December Amnesty International asked the Minister of Justice for information about an escap)e attempt at Papuda prison in the federal district of Brasilia on 17 September. One of the prisoners was reported to have been killed in police custody when he was recaptured and members of the special federal commission investigating the incident were reported to have dis-
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	139
covered "torture cells" in regular use in Papuda prison. Amnesty International also asked the Sao Paulo authorities about the findings of an official inquiry into a prison riot protesting about conditions in the prison in Presidente Venceslau, in the interior of Sao Paulo state, on 15 September. The inquiry report confirmed that 13 unarmed prisoners were beaten to death by the military police. Nine of them had remained in their cells and not taken any part in the rebellion. The other four prisoners were killed after surrendering.
Amnesty International examined reports that the frequent use of lethal force by police in certain urban areas suggested a pattern of deliberate killings of criminal suspects, who were often unarmed, and many of whom were juveniles. According to official statistics the military police of Sao Paulo shot dead 220 people in the first nine months of 1986. In one of the rare cases which led to convictions, three military police officers were sentenced to 32 years' imprisonment on 10 June for the murder of Teodoro Hoffman and Dirley Rodriguez Matos. Both boys were 17 years old and had no criminal record. They were detained near the shanty town of Heliopolis, Sao Paulo city, on 28 January, beaten, shot, their throats cut and their bodies dumped on a rubbish pit outside the city. Although the police authorities originally denied the boys' arrest, persistent campaigning by the boys' families led to the discovery of the bodies on 17 March. All three of the military police officers sentenced had previously been investigated for killing criminal suspects and juveniles, but had never been convicted.
On 11 July Orlando Correia, a sugar worker, and Sibele Aparecida Manoel, aged 19, were shot dead and seven sugar workers were wounded when military police fired into a crowd during a sugar workers' strike in the town of Lerne, in Sao Paulo state. A number of trade unionists were beaten by military police in their homes and in police custody. Amnesty International was concerned at evidence that particular strikers and membere of the Partido dos Trabalha-dores. Workers' Party, were singled out for beatings. A state inquiry into the shootings had not been completed by the end of 1986.
Amnesty International urged the government to establish a commission of inquiry to investigate the "disappearance" of 125 political prisoners between 1964 and 1977 under previous military governments. There was evidence that a number of the "disappeared" had died under torture in custody and been secretly buried. Following national pressure including representations from relatives and human rights groups, the Minister of Justice announced in December that the government's human rights council would set up a commission to investigate the "disappearances".
Amnesty International was concerned alx)ut prosecutions under
140	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
the National Security Law. In April Ruth Escobar, a member of the Sao Paulo legislature, and Vicente de Paula da Silva, a Sao Paulo Metal Workers Union leader, were sentenced by military courts to six months and one year's imprisonment respectively. Ruth Escobar was convicted of "offending the honour of the armed forces" because of election speeches she made in 1982, and Vicente de Paula da Silva was convicted of making statements at a metalworkers' assembly in 1983 which might "generate an adverse psychological war between the group and the President". Ruth Escobar was given a suspended sentence, and the union leader's conviction was overturned by a higher military court.
In May Amnesty International's Secretary General met the Congressional Foreign Affairs Committee, representatives from the Foreign Ministry, and the Minister of Justice. He urged Brazil to ratify the UN Convention against Torture, the American Convention on Human Rights and the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The Secretary General was assured that the government intended to forward these human rights instmments to Congress for ratification, and by the end of 1986 Amnesty International had welcomed the news that this had been done.
