Nepal
Amnesty International was concerned about short-term detentions of people who participated in peaceful political activities or expressed criticism of the government and the "non-party" political system. Dozens of other political prisoners, some of whom had been held for over 18 months, remained in jail without formal charge or trial under the Public Security Act (PSA), although about 100 PSA detainees were released. A small number of Christians were arrested on charges of propagating their beliefs and trying to convert others to the Christian faith. Amnesty International received reports of torture of criminal suspects in police custody and of ill-treatment of political prisoners in a Kathmandu jail.
Under the constitution, introduced in 1%2, political parties are officially prohibited, but in recent years political parties have continued to organize. During 1986 some political meetings were disrupted and those present taken briefly into custody. Politically active students were also arrested for holding meetings and demonstrations or for possessing allegedly seditious literature. In mid-July several people collecting signatures on a petition calling for the release of political prisoners were arrested, some of whom were still in jail at the end of 1986.
At the time of the elections to the Rastriya Panchayat (National Assembly), held on 12 May, several candidates and their supporters were reportedly arrested because during the election campaign they had made or distributed political statements deemed objectionable or anti-constitutional. One of them, Govinda Nath Upreti, was later charged under the Treason (Crime and Punishment) Act with accusing members of the Royal Family of responsibility for electoral malpractice. Under the Act, anyone convicted of fomenting "hatred, malice or contempt" towards the Royal Family may be sentenced to three years' imprisonment. For such offences, the Zonal Commissioner acts as both prosecuting authority and judge, a provision contravening internationally recognized legal standards.
A few other political prisoners, including people likely to be prisoners of conscience, were also arrested and charged under the Treason (Crime and Punishment) Act. They included several journalists. In November Amnesty International appealed for the release of Keshav Raj Pindali, the 71-year-old editor of Saptahik Bimarsha (Weekly Thought), and Rup Chand Bista, a member of the
254	Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe
Rastriya Panchayat, both of whom were reportedly charged under the Act. They were accused of spreading hatred and malice towards the king following the publication of a satirical poem written by Rup Chand Bista in Saptahik Bimarsha during the election campaign.
The majority of political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, were held without formal charge or trial under the PSA. PSA detainees are served with nine-monthly detention orders, renewable up to a maximum of three years. The orders may not be challenged in court and the only means of review is through an Advisory Board, appointed at the government's discretion and restricted to making recommendations. During the first half of 1986 most of the prisoners held under the PSA in connection with the teachers' demonstrations and satyagraha (civil disobedience movement) of 1985 (see Amnesty International Report 1986) were released. One exception was Bishnu Bahadur Manandhar, a communist leader who had been arrested on 4 June 1985 during the satyagraha. In August Amnesty Intemational wrote to the newly-elected Prime Minister, Marich Man Singh Shrestha, expressing concern that under the provisions of the PSA detainees could be held arbitrarily, without charge or trial, on executive orders. TTie letter also raised a number of cases from among the dozens of prisoners detained under the PSA, including that of Bishnu Bahadur Manandhar. Amnesty Intemational urged that these prisoners should be released unconditionally if no criminal charges were to be brought against them.
Of the 100 or more prisoners still held in January 1986 in connection with the 1985 bombings some remained in incommunicado police custody in Kathmandu, most of them reportedly at the District Police Office at Hanuman Dhoka. During the first four months of the year they were gradually transferred to various jails where other prisoners arrested during the bombing campaign were already held. All these prisoners were understood to have been arrested under the Destructive Crimes (Special Control and Punishment) Act 1985, which allows suspects to be held in police custody for up to 180 days. In late 1985 and eariy 1986, the special court established under the Act ordered the release on bail of at least some of the prisoners, but before their release they were served with further detention orders under the PSA. Many of them were eventually released in June and early October. Among those remaining in detention were Dr Jitendra Mahaseth and Mahadev Shah, both in Nakhu Jail, Kathmandu. In late October the trial of some 100 people charged with involvement in the bombings began before the special court in closed session.
Amnesty International was also investigating the alleged "disappearance" of at least three people arrested at the time of the bomb
Amnesty Intemational Report 1981 Asia	255
explosions. One was Dr Laxmi Narayan Jha, a medical practitioner in Janakpur. Arrested in late June 1985, he was kept in police custody in Janakpur for some two weeks before being transferred to Kathman-du. He was initially reported to be held there in the District Police Office. In response to a habeas corpus petition filed by his family in the Supreme Court, police officials denied that he was in their custody. His whereabouts remained unknown at the end of 1986.
Among the other detainees held under the PSA and released during 1986 were seven prisoners held beyond the expiry of sentences imposed for politically motivated criminal offences: six were freed in June, and Radha Krishna Mainali, whom the Supreme Court had ordered to be released in January 1985 before it was made known that he was held under the PSA, was freed in December.
The Nepalese Constitution prohibits efforts to convert any person from one religious faith to another. The penal code provides for three years' imprisonment for propagating religious faiths so as "to disrupt the traditional religion of the Hindu community", and six years for conversion. The sentence for any person who is converted is up to one year. Several Christians were arrested on charges of seeking conversions and two Muslims for propagating their faith. On 5 April a priest and two nuns, all Indian nationals, together with several Nepalese Christians, were arrested by the police in the eastern part of the country and charged with seeking conversions. They were reportedly beaten in police custody and forced to sign confessions they had not read. They were released on bail 12 days later. Other Christians who were prosecuted and sentenced were also granted bail while awaiting trial and pending appeal after conviction.
During 1986 Amnesty Intemational received reports that prisoners arrested for criminal offences had been tortured in police custody. One prisoner is reported to have died as a result of police torture in November 1985 in Rajbiraj, Sagarmatha Zone. Chaudhry was reportedly beaten and had a wooden stick pressed against his throat to stop him breathing. The local police reportedly stated that he committed suicide by hanging himself. The doctor who conducted the post-mortem found that Chaudhry's body showed bmising on the neck and chest and substantial swelling on the front of the neck. Four police officers were subsequently tried in connection with the death. One was convicted of the offence and three were acquitted. The doctor responsible for the post-mortem report was understood to have been dismissed from government service in January, for "involvement in politics". In July some political prisoners held at the Central Jail, Kathmandu were reportedly beaten by prison warders. They also complained of being held for several days in handcuffs and in solitary confinement.
256	Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe
