Laos
Amnesty International continued to be concemed about the detention and physical restriction- of several thousand people without charge or trial, among them many prisoners of conscience. They had not been allowed to return home since being taken into custody for "re-education" at the time of a change in govemment in 1975. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about reports of the imprisonment without charge or trial of people accused of involvement in armed opposition activities or "espionage". It was concerned about allegations that some people held on political grounds had been subjected to torture or ill-treatment during interrogation or had been punished by being shackled, sometimes while being kept in dark cells. Another allegation of concern was that Laotian troops had extrajudicially killed 35 Laotian refugees in Thailand.
Thousands of people continued to be held for "re-education" in remote parts of at least seven provinces: Houa Phanh, Xieng
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Europe	249
Khouang, Khammouan, Savannakhet, Salavan, Xekong and Attapeu. Most of them were restricted to camps where they did forced labour, including road construction, logging and clerical work. Some were restricted to agricultural settlements growing crops such as rice, coffee and sugar cane. Others were restricted to small towns where they worked in factories, as artisans, or in minor administrative posts for the local govemment. According to information Amnesty Intemational received from people currently and formerly held for "re-education", from their relatives and from foreigners who had talked to them, they remained where they were involuntarily. Amnesty Intemational believed that most were held not because of any offences they might have committed before 1975, but on account of the authorities' suspicions that they were opposed to the policies and practices of the current government. It considered that many of them could be prisoners of conscience. People held for "reeducation" whom Amnesty International had adopted as prisoners of conscience included Khamkhing Souvanlasy, a former educationalist and secretary general of the Unesco National Commission for Laos; Samlith Ratsaphong, a former official in the pre-1975 Ministry of Information and a journalist, and Pane Rassavong, a former economic planner. The first two were restricted to Sop Pan camp and Pane Rassavong was held in Xamtai camp, both in Houa Phanh province. Amnesty International called for the government to release all prisoners of conscience held for "re-education", and to release any other people held for "re-education" if they were not to be promptly charged with criminal offences and fairly tried.
Amnesty Intemational had appealed in April 1985 on behalf of more than 2,600 named individuals reportedly held for "reeducation". During 1986 Amnesty Intemational received reports that about 260 of them were released in 1985 or 1986, and also leamed the names of nearly 200 people previously held for "re-education" who had been released before 1985. Most of those released had been held in Houa Phanh province in northeast Laos. Among them were the prisoner of conscience Khamtan Khanhalikham, a meteorologist who had been restricted to the province's Xamtai camp, and Kamseng Vorasane, a former police official. Amnesty Intemational had appealed on their behalf for many yeare. Two people, former low-ranking army officers, were released in mid-1986 from Attapeu province in the southeast. Bansisomphonevong had been restricted to Samakhixay town, and Sonexay had been restricted to a camp known as Katamtok. They were among 180 former low-ranking military and civil service personnel held for "re-education" without charge or trial in Attapeu province on whose behalf Amnesty Intemational had been appealing since April.
250	Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe
Some people released from "re-education" were given official documents issued by the Ministry of the Interior, copies of which Amnesty Intemational was able to examine. Called "Authorization for Leaving to Be a Citizen", the documents had a space for the reason why the individual had been "liberated" (potpoy), and stated ihat the holder was "authorized to go to make a living ... at home".
The organization interviewed several people who had been arrested after attempting to "jump" (ton) "re-education" without such documents and had been retumed to restriction or imprisoned without charge or trial. According to their accounts and other reports, escaped detainees who had been rearrested had in recent years been imprisoned in jails in Sop Hao in Houa Phanh province, in Xai Settha and Xamkhe in Vientiane municipality, in Nong Pat in Vientiane province, in Keng Khan, Xepon, Phabang and Ban Dong in Savannakhet province, in Xanxay, Done Makkheua (Boeung Vay) and Samakhixai in Attapeu province, in Pakxe and Pakxong in Champassak province and in a secluded place near the Vietnamese border in Xekong province. Amnesty International received reports that in recent years, including 1986, people who were imprisoned after attempting to escape from "re-education" had been held in shackles for prolonged periods, sometimes in dark underground cells.
The organization also interviewed several people who had been imprisoned without charge or trial for allegedly supporting the armed opposition activities of "national salvation" (kouxat) groups, "spying" or "making trouble" in "re-education". They reported that they and people arrested on suspicion of organizing escape attempts had been tortured with electric shocks and severe beatings in recent years in Nong Pat, Samakhixai and Xamkhe prisons, and had also been shackled and in some instances held in dark cells.
In July Amnesty Intemational wrote to Kaysone Phomvihane, Chairperson of the Laotian Council of Ministers, and other govemment officials about allegations that in June govemment armed forces had killed 35 Laotian refugees, including 11 women and 18 children, at a settlement near the border in northem Thailand. It received information suggesting that the killings may have been punishment for having left Laos and for suspected involvement in armed opposition activities. The organization called on the govemment to initiate a full investigation into the allegations. In response, the govemment provided Amnesty Intemational with an official statement denying responsibility for the incident.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Europe	251
