Uganda
Amnesty International continued to investigate reports of the detention of government opponents and of the ill-treatment, "disappearance" or extrajudicial execution of civilians in areas of armed conflict between government and rebels. However, Amnesty Intemational noted a significant improvement in respect for human rights in Uganda in 1986.
In January the capital, Kampala, fell to the National Resistance Army (NRA), which had waged a guerrilla war against successive governments since 1981. A new government was formed, headed by NRA leader Yoweri Museveni and including representatives of all the country's political parties. By March the government had established control over the entire country. With the formation of the new government and the replacement of the previous army, the Uganda National Liberafion Army (UNLA), by the NRA, abuses by soldiers against the civilian population reportedly came to a halt. Although Amnesty Intemational later received reports of ill-treatment and killing of civilians by the army, it nevertheless appeared that this general improvement was maintained as a consequence of the government's clear public statements on the need to protect human rights and the high level of discipline in the NRA.
In May the govemment announced the formation of a commission of inquiry, headed by a High Court judge, to investigate violations of human rights from independence in 1962 until the NRA came to power. The commission began hearing evidence in December and it was expected to sit for some years. Although it was not part of the commission's brief to initiate prosecutions, both the Minister of Justice and the commission's chairman said that they expected the Director of Public Prosecutions to initiate prosecutions as a result of the commission's findings. In 1986 charges relating to human rights violations were brought against several ministers and officials of previous governments. The new govemment also established the post of Inspector-General of Government, or Ombudsman, whose terms of reference included investigating complaints of human rights abuses by the government in power.
In April an Amnesty International mission visited Uganda. The delegates were able to confirm the impression of other outside observers that an atmosphere of general respect for human rights prevailed in the areas that they visited. They travelled to the "Luwero triangle", the area to the northwest of Kampala which had seen many
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	115
of the worst human rights violations under the governments of President Milton Obote and Major General Tito Okello. In Luwero the delegates saw large quantities of human remains and heard accounts from local residents of widespread and systematic torture and extrajudicial killing by soldiers of the previous governments. Amnesty international's delegates met government members, including the Prime Minister, the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice. Amnesty International submitted a memorandum to the government in September, detailing the organization's recommendations for safeguards against future human rights violations. These included: ratification of international human rights instruments; ref)eal of laws permitting detention without trial; tightening of legal safeguards against incommunicado detention; regular independent inspection of places of detention; introduction of human rights training for members of the police and armed forces; and abolition of the death penalty.
Many hundreds of prisoners were reported to have been detained without trial during 1986, although the government stated that no one was held under the provisions of the Public Order and Security Act, 1%7, which permits indefinite detention. However, Amnesty International had some difficulty in establishing how many of these were held for political reasons, since large numbers of criminal suspects were also detained without trial by the army. In the course of its April mission, Amnesty International asked the government about the arrest of members of former President Obote's party, the Uganda People's Congress (UPC), in the eastern Ugandan area of Busoga in February and March. The reason for their arrest was their alleged association with an organization called Force Obote Back Again (FOBA), which apparently sought the armed overthrow of the government. In all the named cases that Amnesty International drew to the government's attention, the prisoner was either subsequently released or charged with a criminal offence, or else had already been charged or released.
In the second half of 1986 Amnesty International expressed concern to the government about the detention of many people, mainly Acholis from northern Uganda, in the aftermath of armed incursions from southern Sudan by guerrillas loyal to the previous governments of President Obote and Major General Okello. Among the cases mentioned by Amnesty International was that of Pasca Lalweny Okello, the younger daughter of lieutenant General Basilio Okello, chief of the armed forces under the government of Major General Okello. She was arrested in Kampala in late August and held at Lubiri barracks in the capital until her release without charge in November. Also reported to have been arrested was Milton
116	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
Odongopiny, aged 17, an adopted son of Major General Okello. He was said to have been arrested by soldiers in Kampala in June and taken to various private houses, where he was beaten, before being transferred to police custody and released in July. In both c^es Amnesty International believed that they may have been detained solely because of their family associations with members of a previous government. Amnesty Intemational remained concerned about the large number of apparently arbitrary arrests, particularly in the north, in the course of operations against the insurgents.
In August, 25 alleged supporters of the restoration of the monarchy in the southern region of Buganda were arrested and charged with treason. They were alleged to have plotted to overthrow the government by force. In October about 20 people were arrested and charged with treason; again the allegation against them was that they had plotted the violent overthrow of the government. Those charged included three government ministers: Evaristo Nyanzi of the Democratic Party, which was strongly represented in the government; Andrew Kayiira, leader of the Uganda Freedom Movement (UFM); and David Lwanga, leader of the Federal Democratic Movement of Uganda (FEDEMU). Both the UFM and FEDEMU were small guerrilla organizations which had participated in the armed struggle against the government of former President Obote. Also arrested was the former Vice-President in President Obote's government, Paulo Muwanga. He was subsequently charged with alleged human rights violations when he was in government. Among the 20 charged in October was Anthony Ssekweyama, editor-in-chief of the Democratic Party paper The Citizen, who had been detained several times under President Obote's government and had been adopted by Amnesty Intemational as a prisoner of conscience. In the cases of all those charged with treason. Amnesty Intemational sought assurances from the govemment that they were being property treated, that they had access to lawyers of their choice and that they would receive a fair and prompt trial. None of them had been brought to trial by the end of 1986.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about reports of the detention without charge of members of the UFM and FEDEMU by the NRA, particulariy around the time of the arrest of their party leaders. At the end of 1986 Amnesty Intemational was still trying to establish the numbers involved and to investigate whether the reason for their detention was their affiliation to a minority political group.
In previous years Amnesty Intemational had been concemed about the widespread and systematic use of torture against political detainees. This practice did not apparently continue in 1986. The conditions of imprisonment of political detainees in military custody
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	117
were reported to be very poor but did not appear, in general, to constitute deliberate ill-treatment by the detaining authorities. However, Amnesty International was concerned about the persistent use of a practice known as kandoya or "three piece-tying", which involved a prisoner's upper arms being tied tightly together behind his or her back. It was reported that this sometimes led to restricted breathing and death. It was unclear to Amnesty International whether kandoya was intended as a method of torture or a severe means of restraint, but in either case the organization considered it to be a form of ill-treatment, in October Amnesty International asked the government to investigate two reported instances of the use of kandoya by NRA soldiers. In one case Valent Okello was reported to have l^en arrested at Lacor trading centre in Gulu District, northern Uganda, in August, apparently because his poll tax card was said not to be in order. He was reported to have been tied kandoya-stylc, causing him to collapse and die on the spot. In the other instance, Geoffrey Okumu of Pece, in Gulu district, was reported to have been arrested at his home in late August, tied kandoya-stylQ and taken away. He was reported not to have been seen since.
Another reported "disappearance" investigated by Amnesty International was that of Ben Ocan, of Pece Gulu. He was reported to have been arrested by NRA soldiers on 28 August during an army raid on his village. He was said to have been shot and then taken away in a military vehicle. Amnesty International asked the government to investigate these reports and said that if Ben Ocan was found to be in the custody of the NRA he should be handed over to civilian custody where he should either be charged or released. The government later stated that it was investigating this case, as well as the reported cases of kandoya submitted by Amnesty International, but it had not made any results available by the end of 1986.
Amnesty International received a number of reports of killings of civilians in the course of army of)erations against rebels in northern Uganda and sought to establish whether these were extrajudicial executions. In one incident, an elderiy couple, John and Magdalene Omoya, were reported to have been killed by the NRA in October at their home in Opette village near Kitgum. John Omoya was a retired teacher who was partially paralysed and bedridden. In another incident, also in October, Valenta Otto, an elderly woman, was reported to have been shot dead on the road near Kitgum by NRA soldiers. In neither case was Amnesty International able to establish the exact circumstances, but the identities of the victims, who were unlikely to have been engaged in armed opposition to the government, gave rise to fears that they had been the victims of extrajudicial executions on account of their political affiliations or ethnic origin.
118	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
