Rwanda
89
Amnesty International was concerned about the continuing imprisonment of several prisoners of conscience convicted in 1981 and about the arrest and imprisonment of several hundred people convicted in October of belonging to illegal religious groups. Amnesty International was also concerned that more than 500 prisoners were under sentence of death, although no executions were reported to have been carried out.
Two Amnesty International delegates visited Rwanda in May at the invitation of the government and met representatives of the judiciary, law enforcement agencies and the prison services. They visited a number of prisons and detention centres. The delegates were given information about a range of safeguards introduced to prevent arbitrary detention and ill-treatment of detainees, including measures to ensure that laws on detention procedures were respected. The delegates also discussed with the authorities the cases of 167 people arrested between November 1985 and May 1986 for belonging to four unofficial religious sects, the Abantu b'lmana bihana (Rep>entant People of God), the Abarokore (the Elect), the Abatampera (Temperance Movement) and the Abayohova (Jehovah's Witnesses).
In September Amnesty International submitted a 19-page memorandum to the government, summarizing its observations and presenting nine recommendations on human rights. These included measures aimed at preventing the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and stopping the use of torture and ill-treatment. The organization also expressed concern that at the time of its mission in May, 560 prisoners were reported to be under sentence of death although no executions had been reported since 1982, and it recommended steps to reduce the use of the death penalty. The government replied in December with comments on a number of the points raised in the memorandum and referred to safeguards already introduced to prevent arbitrary detention and the use of torture.
At the beginning of 1986 Amnesty International was concerned about eight prisoners of conscience convicted by the State Security Court in November 1981 and August 1984 on charges of sedition. Five were still in prison at the end of the year, while three were released on or shortly before the expiry of their sentences. One, Alphonse Utagirake, who was sentenced to three years' imprisonment in August 1984, was seriously ill with tuberculosis when he was freed in September. Another, Apollinaire Bikolimana, was released
90	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
in April after completing a six-year sentence imposed in 1981, but was rearrested in June on the orders of the national security service. His relatives were not informed of his arrest or where he was being detained. His case was taken up for investigation by Amnesty Intemational and in December the Minister of Justice informed the organization that Apollinaire Bikolimana was awaiting trial on charges of subversion, but did not give details of the allegations against him.
In October 296 people were tried and convicted by the State Security Court on charges relating to membership of four religious sects which the authorities considered to be subversive. The main group involved, the Abarokore, some 200 of whom were among those convicted, are part of the revival movement in the East African Protestant churches, which began in Rwanda in the 1930s. This was the first time since the present government came to power that members of the Abarokore were known to have been detained, although Jehovah's Witnesses had been arrested since they began recruiting in the early 1980s when a formal request for legal recognition of their sect was refused. The number of arrests increased sharply from November 1985 onwards. Amnesty International's delegates were told in May 1986 that 167 people had been arrested and referred for possible prosecution in connection with their membership of sects, but arrests continued until at least August when a prominent civil servant, Augustin Murayi, Director General in the Ministry of Education, was arrested with his wife after refusing to recant his beliefs as a Jehovah's Witness. The 296 people tried in October were charged with a variety of offences, including distributing subversive information, encouraging people to disobey government orders and holding illegal meetings. The charges arose from the four sects' refusal to take part in séances d'animation (political meetings) organized by the ruling party, the Mouvement révolutionnaire national pour le développement (MRND), Revolutionary National Movement for Development. Under the terms of the constitution, all Rwandese are required to be members of the MRND and to pay dues to it. All the defendants were convicted. One, who renounced his religious views during the trial, was sentenced to two months' imprisonment. The 50 or so Jehovah's Witnesses were mostly sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment, but three were given 12-year sentences: they were Augustin Murayi, his wife, Rachel Ndayishimiye, and a reserve soldier, Justin Rwagasore, who had told the court that he would not be willing to take up arms if Rwanda was invaded. Most members of the three other sects received eight-year sentences, while 11 who were aged 18 or less at the time of their arrest were sentenced to four years' imprisonment.
Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa	91
Following the trial Amnesty International sought information about the charges on which each defendant was convicted in order to establish if they were prisoners of conscience. Most of those convicted were apparently sentenced simply for belonging to one of the four sects. Amnesty International was concerned that, as at previous political trials, the law on sedition was interpreted by the authorities so as to make the expression of non-violent views punishable by imprisonment. Amnesty International was also concerned that members of sects which preached non-involvement in politics were sentenced to terms of imprisonment for refusing to take part in political activities. By the end of 1986 it had adopted Augustin Murayi and Rachel Ndayishimiye as prisoners of conscience and was investigating the cases of some 290 others imprisoned.
Amnesty International was also concerned that those convicted may not have received a fair trial as none of those tried in October had legal counsel. Nor did three other people tried by the State Security Court at the beginning of October. The court deferred judgment on one on the grounds that he might be mentally unstable, but Boniface Kanyabitabo and Charles Ndoli, who had spent six years in pre-trial detention, were both convicted of helping a suspected government opponent to evade arrest and of illegal possession of firearms. During the trial, Charles Ndoli reportedly alleged that he had been tortured while in detention. He was found guilty and sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment, while Boniface Kanyabitabo was sentenced to 10 years.
In addition to the allegations of torture made in court. Amnesty International was also concerned by other reports that some prisoners were subjected to severe beatings. For example, a group of Jehovah's Witnesses arrested in Nyakabanda in August were reported to have been severely beaten and to have been bleeding from injuries when they arrived at prison.
Although the death penahy continued to be imposed no executions were reported. The 560 p>eople reportedly under sentence of death in May had been convicted of a variety of offences, including murder and armed robbery, and had all had their appeals turned down. Others were still awaiting the outcome of appeals. Amnesty International was particularly concerned that very few of those sentenced to death had had legal counsel at their trials and recommended to the government that legal assistance be made available in all capital cases.
Amnesty International was concerned about five people, including Theoneste Lizinde, the former head of the security service, who were sentenced to death in June 1985 after being convicted of participating in extrajudicial killings of political prisoners in the mid-1970s.
92	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
Although their convictions were due to be reviewed by an appeal court, by the end of 1986 no appeal hearings were known to have occurred. Amnesty International expressed concern to the authorities that the five prisoners under sentence of death, as well as others convicted with them, were not permitted visits.
