Romania
Amnesty Intemational worked for the release of prisoners of conscience imprisoned for the nonviolent exercise of their right to freedom of expression and for attempting to leave the country. The organization received allegations that political prisoners had >een ill-treated in detention and denied access to family and legal representatives for long periods.
During 1986 Amnesty International leamed of a number of prisoners convicted in previous years under Article 166 of the criminal code. This covers "propaganda against the Socialist State" and carries a sentence of five to 15 years' imprisonment. Ion Bugan was arrested in March 1983 after driving his car through the centre of Bucharest displaying a picture of Nicolae Ceausescu, the President
Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe	309
and leader of the ruling Romanian Communist Party, under which he had written the caption "We don't want you, hangman". He was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment under Article 166 and adopted as a prisoner of conscience. Another prisoner of conscience was Gheorghe Nastasescu, a building worker from lasi, who was sentenced in 1982 to nine yeare' imprisonment under Article 166 because he made a speech and handed out leaflets in Bucharest calling on the populace to demonstrate their dissatisfaction with President Ceausescu.
On 2 June an amnesty was granted by presidential decree. People sentenced to up to five years' imprisonment or corrective labour were pardoned and released, sentences of between five and eight years were reduced by one third; those between eight and 10 years by a fifth. Excluded from the amnesty were people sentenced for murder or other violent crimes which resulted in death, robbery, illegal abortion, rape, "crimes against social property with serious or particularly serious consequences", bribery, intimidation, the use of force and escaping from prison. Amnesty Intemational welcomed the release of 13 adopted prisoners of conscience under this amnesty. It also welcomed the release on 18 April of Radu Filif)escu, sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment in 1983, and Dorel Catarama, whose 10-year prison sentence imposed in 1982 had been raised to 14 years on appeal. Amnesty International had adopted both as prisoners of conscience (see Amnesty International Report 1985).
However, some prisoners of conscience were not released despite the amnesty. For example, Laszlo Buzas and Erno Borbely, toth members of the ethnic Hungarian minority, were arrested in 1982 and each sentenced to six years' imprisonment for "propaganda against the Socialist State" under Article 166 of the criminal code. They were reportedly accused of having sent abroad the text of an anti-Hungarian leaflet which they alleged had been produced and distributed with the aid of the Romanian authorities (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984). Adalbert (Bela) Pal, also a member of the Hungarian minority, was sentenced in August 1983 to six years' imprisonment under Article 166 after complaining of cormption within the mling Romanian Communist Party and protesting at the lack of opportunities for ethnic Hungarians to be educated in Hungarian (see Amnesty International Report 1985). All three remained imprisoned despite the amnesty and a previous similar amnesty in 1984. Amnesty Intemational was particularly concemed about the continued imprisonment of Adalbert Pal as it learned that he suffered from Huntington's Chorea, which was diagnosed before his arrest, and that his health had seriously deteriorated during his detention. Between May and October his wife was refused
310	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
permission to visit him. He was released on 21 December, before the expiry of his sentence, but the other two were still imprisoned at the end of 1986.
The right to emigrate is severely restricted. Although a certain number of Romanians leave the country legally each year, Amnesty Intemational knows of many people who have repeatedly been refused permission to emigrate. A Romanian citizen who applies to emigrate runs the risk of harassment, loss of work or demotion, and, in some cases, imprisonment. Those who attempt, or make preparations for, unauthorized border crossings face prosecution under Article 245 of the criminal code which allows for prison sentences of six months to three years. Dan Chitila was arrested in June by the Yugoslav authorities after having crossed illegally into Yugoslavia from Romania. On 26 July he was returned to Romania and subsequently convicted under Article 245. Eugen Brecheci was reportedly arrested on 2 August after discussing with two friends the possibility of fleeing the country. Amnesty Intemational sought details of the charges against him from the Romanian authorities. It believed he may have been charged under Article 245. Both men were subsequently released.
Individuals are also imprisoned under decree 153/1970 for the non-violent exercise of their human rights on charges of "parasitical" or "anarchic" conduct. This provides for summary trial without the right to legal defence and prescribes sentences of up to six months' imprisonment or "corrective labour without deprivation of liberty". For example, Florin Rusu, a teacher, was reportedly arrested in June and sentenced to four months' imprisonment for "parasitism". He had previously served a similar sentence for "parasitism" in 1984. On both occasions he had reportedly been refused employment by the state, the sole employer, because of his political activities for the National Peasant Party — one of Romania's leading political parties before it was banned by the authorities in 1948.
Amnesty International believes that some detainees have been tried on false criminal charges for exercising their right to freedom of expression. For example, loan Ruta was demoted from his job as head of a Bucharest factory when his wife defected to the USA and was granted political asylum there. He complained in writing to the authorities about this demotion and was arrested on 27 Febmary. He suffered a heart attack and contracted hepatitis in pre-trial detention and was denied access to his family and legal representation until early June, shortly before his trial began. On 6 November he was sentenced to seven years' imprisonment for accepting bribes in exchange for granting employment. He denied the charges and stated that the real reason for his arrest was his refusal, despite repeated
Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe	311
requests from the authorities, to divorce his wife after her defection. One of the prosecution witnesses reportedly retracted his evidence in court, saying that his original statements were made under duress. Amnesty International sought further details of the charges and evidence produced.
Amnesty International continued to receive allegations of ill-treatment of political detainees. Gigi Mocanu was arrested in early May on charges of possessing foreign currency. The real reason for his arrest may have been because he had made a cassette recording of events concerning the detention of his brother Emil Mocanu, a prisoner of conscience arrested in September 1984 for helping another brother flee from Romania. Following his arrest Emil Mocanu was allegedly beaten by officials, as was Gigi Mocanu, who was reportedly beaten on the soles of his feet with iron bars. Emil Mocanu and Gigi Mocanu were released in March and July respectively.
Amnesty International did not learn of any death sentences imposed or carried out during 1986.
