Niger
Amnesty International was concerned about the continued long-term detention of several political prisoners, some of whom had reportedly completed prison sentences imposed after an attempted coup in 1976. Some of the restrictions placed on the movement of former President Hamani Diori were reported to have been lifted. No death sentences were known to have been carried out during 1986.
Amnesty Internationa! remained concerned about reports of the continued detention without trial of more than 20 people, many of whom were arrested following coup attempts in 1976 and 1983. They included Kariman Matachi, a former army officer apparently held in Dirkou, who was reported to have been given a five-year prison sentence in 1977 in connection with the 1976 coup attempt, and who was one of seven prisoners believed held beyond the expiry of their sentence without legal sanction. Another detainee, Lieutenant-Colonel Adama Harouna, former Prefect of Niamey, was arrested in February 1983, apparently on political grounds. A group of about 20 people were also reported to be still held without trial, following a coup attempt in October 1983 which took place while President Seyni Kountche was out of the country. They included some of his closest advisors, among them Mahamane Sidikou, formerly a senior government official, who was reported at the end of 1986 to be seriously ill in prison. Other people believed by Amnesty International to be still held in detention from this time were Modieli Amadou, a former government official, and Amadou Seydou, a former army commander.
In April Amnesty International asked President Seyni Kountche about the legal status of seven long-term detainees, most of whom had reportedly been held since the coup attempt in October 1983. It called for them to be released if they were not brought to trial within a reasonable time. In the letter, the organization cited the Interna-
Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
85
tional Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which guarantees freedom from arbitrary arrest and the right to a fair and prompt trial, to which Niger acceded in March 1986. The government did not respond to this letter. Amnesty International later learned that one of the detainees, Dia Ardo Ibrahimou, had been released.
Amnesty International was concerned about reports that detainees continued to be held in hai^h conditions. A number of detainees were reported to have been moved to a military fort in Dirkou in the east of Niger during 1986. The remoteness of this outpost made family visits almost impossible. It was alleged that prisoners in Dirkou were held in underground munitions cellars in conditions of extreme heat and cold. Conditions were also reported to be poor in the mihtary camp at Tillabery near the capital, Niamey.
Former President Hamani Diori remained under house arrest in Niamey, although it was reported that some of the restrictions on his movements were lifted during 1986. After six years in detention without trial from 1974 to 1980, he was placed under house arrest until 1984. He was again put under house arrest in June 1985, allegedly because of the opposition activities outside the country of one of his sons.
Twelve members of the Tuareg ethnic minority who were sentenced to death following an attack on government buildings in Tchin Tabaraden in May 1985 (see Amnesty International Report 1985) were not known to have been executed during 1986. A stay of execution was reported to have been granted by presidential order in late 1985.
