Zimbabwe
Amnesty International's main concerns were the detention without trial of large numbers of political opponents of the government, including prisoners of conscience, and the torture of prisoners in the custody of the Central Intelligence Organization (CIO). However, many political detainees were released during 1986. The organization was also concerned about continued use of the death penalty.
In January Amnesty Intemational submitted a memorandum to the government detailing evidence of torture by the police and CIO gathered by the organization during a mission to Zimbabwe in October 1985. The memorandum recommended that the government establish an independent inquiry into reports of torture and proposed a further Amnesty Intemational mission to the country to discuss the organization's concerns. The government did not reply to this
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	125
document, which was made public in May, but on many occasions during 1986 there was public criticism of Amnesty International by members of the government and in the semi-official press. In particular, it was repeatedly claimed that Amnesty International had failed to respond to a government invitation to visit Zimbabwe. In fact the only such invitation received by the organization, in November 1985, was conditional upon Amnesty International providing the government with the names of people in Zimbabwe who had given it information, which it was not prepared to do. In its memorandum to the government. Amnesty International pointed out that international human rights instruments, such as the UN Declaration Against Torture, recognized that torture victims would often be reluctant to make a complaint to the authority which was alleged to have tortured them and that any investigation should not be conditional upon such a complaint. In August government ministers declared that Amnesty International was an "enemy of Zimbabwe" and threatened that anyone who supplied the organi2a-tion with information would be detained.
At the same time, however, Amnesty International noted the release of at least 70 untried political detainees in July and August and welcomed the government's announcement that it would review the cases of all other security detainees and those serving sentences for political crimes. Also, in July the Minister of Home Affairs stated that the government would not tolerate the use of torture by the police. Earlier, in January, Stops Camp in Bulawayo — a major torture centre named publicly by Amnesty International — was emptied of political detainees, although reports later in the year indicated that the centre was still used on occasions for political detention and torture.
In May Nicholas Ndebele, acting director of the Catholic Commission for Justice and Peace in Zimbabwe (CCJPZ), w^ detained under emergency powers regulations. This followed a statement by the Home Affairs Minister that Amnesty International had "infiltrated" local churches. In its annual report, published in April, the CCJPZ stated that it had investigated a number of reports of torture similar to those reported by Amnesty International: "All reports were investigated and found to be correct, with remarkable similarity in the methods used in all cases." The report pointed out that the CCJPZ had not collaborated with Amnesty International in gathering evidence of torture. The same point was made clear by Amnesty International in its appeals to the government to release Nicholas Ndebele, whom the organization believed to be a prisoner of conscience. On 4 June the High Court ordered Nicholas Ndebele's release, but he was briefly redetained by police along with the
126	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
Commission's chairman, Michael Auret. Both were released apparently on the orders of Prime Minister Robert Mugabe.
Two prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International were released in December: Dumiso Dabengwa and Norman Zikhali, both senior officials of the minority Zimbabwe African People's Union (ZAPU). They had been held under regulations in force under the state of emergency which has existed since the 1960s and which must be renewed every six months by parliament. Dumiso Dabengwa, a former leader of ZAPU's military wing during the country's war of independence, was acquitted of treason and arms charges in 1983. Three others acquitted with him were also still detained at the beginning of 1986 and had been adopted as prisoners of conscience: Lx)okout Masuku died of meningitis shortly after his release from custody in March, while Tshaka Moyo and Nicholas Nkomo were released on the orders of the High Court in June. The Constitution provides for a specially established tribunal to review all detainees' cases at six-month intervals. In October the Review Tribunal for the first time recommended Dumiso Dabengwa's release. This decision was overruled by presidential order but the government ordered his release less than two months later. Norman Zikhali, a pioneer of the Zimbabwean trade union movement and a former long-term prisoner of conscience for his opposition to the Rhodesian Government, was arrested in November 1984 when he was sent by ZAPU leader Joshua Nkomo to investigate inter-party disturbances in the southern town of Beitbridge. He was not charged, but was detained indefinitely under section 17 of the Emergency Powers (Maintenance of Law and Order) Regulations until his release in December 1986.
Other prisoners of conscience released during 1986 included Welshman Mabhena, a ZAPU member of pariiament, and Nevison Mukanganga Nyashanu, an unsuccessful ZAPU parliamentary candidate in the 1985 general election. They were apparently held as state witnesses against 10 prominent politicians and army officers charged with plotting to overthrow the government. They were reported to have been ill-treated to force them to incriminate the accused but both men apparently made it clear later that they were not prepared to testify against the accused. In August charges against the 10 were withdrawn and Welshman Mabhena and Nevison Nyashanu released with them.
At the beginning of 1986 Amnesty International was investigating the cases of large numbers of uncharged political detainees to determine whether or not they were prisoners of conscience. Most of these were members or supporters of ZAPU who were alleged to have supported armed anti-government "dissidents" who were active in the south and west of Zimbabwe. The government repeatedly
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	127
alleged that the "dissidents" were supported by ZAPU, an allegation that the minority party denied. Amnesty International was concerned that in many cases it was the detainee's political allegiance rather than any evidence of armed opposition that was the reason for imprisonment. The organization received the names of more than 100 detainees released in 1986. In December the Minister of Home Affaire stated that 31 remained in detention.
Among those still in detention at the end of 1986 was Makhatini Guduza, a former member of ZAPU's central committee who fled to Botswana in 1983. The government repeatedly alleged that he had recruited refugees in Botswana to join the armed opposition to the Zimbabwean Government. In February he was arrested by the Botswana authorities and handed over into Zimbabwean custody. He remained uncharged and was apparently held incommunicado at the end of 1986. In August the Zimbabwean Government acknowledged to Amnesty International that Makhatini Guduza was in custody but did not disclose his place of imprisonment or the legal basis for his detention.
Also still detained at the end of 1986 were two senior customs officials, Neil Harper and John Austin, who were first arrested in February. They were initially detained under the Emergency Powers (Maintenance of Law and Order) Regulations and subsequently charged under the Official Secrets Act with spying for South Africa. However, the Supreme Court released them in April, finding no reasonable suspicion "such as would make it lawful to deprive them of their liberty". A month later they were redetained under the emergency powers regulations. Their detention without trial was repeatedly challenged in the courts. On several occasions judges ordered their release, only for them to be redetained by the CIO.
Amnesty International continued to receive reports of torture in 1986, although considerably fewer than in 1985. In February a delegation from the CCJPZ is reported to have visited Stops Camp, a police detention centre in Bulawayo where torture had been frequently reported. They found few prisoners there and no evidence of ill-treatment. Reports reaching Amnesty International indicated that this improvement was maintained for those detained in police custody. However, the organization remained concerned about continuing reports of torture of prisoners in the custody of the CIO, some of whom were held in Stops Camp. A number of such reports referred to Esigodini, near Bulawayo, where prisoners are reported to have had their heads forced into bags filled with water, causing them to lose consciousness. Sometimes this was re|X)rted to have been accompanied by the use of electric shocks. Amnesty International also received reports of prisoners of the CIO being held naked
128	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
and handcuffed for days, and deprived of sleep and food.
In July Kembo Mohadi, a ZAPU member of parliament who had been detained without trial for several months during 1985, was awarded 30,000 Zimbabwe dollars' compensation for illegal arrest and torture. He told the Harare High Court that he had had his head forced into a canvas bag full of water and that his stomach had been trampled on. In another case the same month, five ZAPU supporters were acquitted of the murder in 1984 of govemment senator Moven Ndlovu, when the High Court found that they had been tortured into making confessions. The accused testified that they had been whipped and had had their heads forced into buckets of water.
In January and Febmary Amnesty Intemational appealed to the govemment to set up an impartial investigation into the killing of Luke and Jean Kumalo, a Methodist headmaster and his wife, at Thekwane school near Plumtree in November 1985. Evidence gathered by Amnesty International cast serious doubt on the official version that the two had been killed during an attack on the school by "dissidents", who were responsible for many killings in western Zimbabwe throughout 1986. There were fears that their killing may have been an extrajudicial execution by the security forces. In particular Amnesty Intemational believed that an inquiry should seek to establish: why soldiers at an army camp three kilometres away did not intervene, although the attackers were reportedly at the school for several hours, firing shots and buming buildings; why the attackers were wearing military uniform; and why the attackers left a note stating that Luke and Jean Kumalo were being killed for passing information to Amnesty Intemational. The govemment rejected the call for an inquiry and said that it had captured a member of the "dissident" band responsible for the killings. At the end of 1986 Amnesty International was still seeking to establish whether he had been charged in connection with the killings.
Amnesty Intemational remained concemed about the use of the death penalty, which had sharply increased in 1985 compared with previous years since independence, and which remained at a similar level in 1986. At least 18 people are reported to have been sentenced to death, all for murder. Most were members of "dissident" bands. Four were members of the army convicted of a politically motivated killing of a superior officer and one was a member of the ruling Zimbabwe African National Union-Patriotic Front (ZANU-PF) convicted of the murder of members of a minority party during the 1985 general election campaign. At least five executions are reported to have been carried out, all at the same time in April amid considerable publicity.
