Finland
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the imprisonment of conscientious objectors to military service. It was also concemed about procedures for asylum-seekers which could result in their being returned to countries where they would risk becoming prisoners of conscience, being tortured or executed.
In 1986 Amnesty Intemational adopted three conscientious objectors to military service as prisoners of conscience. Their applications for alternative civilian service were rejected and they were given nine-month prison sentences by the courts. Under the legislation then in force a person could object to military service only on "profound conscientious grounds based on religious or ethical convictions". From January 1987 new legislation allows those who request it to perform altemative service. Lassi Tapio Kurittu applied on three separate occasions for permission to carry out altemative civilian service, but was ordered instead to present himself for unarmed military service. When he refused, he was sentenced to nine months' imprisonment. He began his prison sentence on 4 Febmary, was pardoned by the President on 21 Febmary, and released. Raul Otso Mannola also refused to do unarmed military service after his application for altemative civilian service was turned down. He began his nine-month prison sentence on 11 November 1985. In June Amnesty Intemational took up the case of Niilo Markus Louhivouri, who was sentenced in Deceml^r 1984 to nine months' imprisonment. The sentence was upheld by the Court of Appeal. The Minister of Justice replied in August that Niilo Louhivouri had the right to make a new application if he wished. However, he began his sentence on 10 November.
Amnesty Intemational has been concemed for many years that the procedures for individuals seeking asylum in Finland did not guarantee that they would not be sent back to countries where they would face becoming prisoners of conscience, or being tortured or executed. In particular. Amnesty Intemational w^ concemed about people who were forcibly retumed to the USSR where they were subsequently held as prisoners of conscience. The organization sent two delegates to Finland in June to meet govemment officials and representatives of non-govemmental organizations in order to obtain further information about the legal position and official practice. At
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Europe	289
the end of 1986 Amnesty Intemational was finalizing a submission to the govemment on its findings.
