Algeria
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the continued imprisonment of prisoners of conscience; the arrest of human rights activists; trial proceedings which did not conform to internationally recognized standards for fair trial; allegations of torture and ill-treatment during detention; allegations of deaths in custody as a result of torture; and the death penalty.
During 1986 Amnesty International appealed for the immediate and unconditional release of 22 prisoners of conscience, sentenced to terms of between six months' and three years' imprisonment by the State Security Court in Medea in December 1985. The charges against them included membership of two unauthorized associations, the Algerian League of Human Rights and the Association des fils des martyrs. Sons of the Martyrs. In March Amnesty International replied to the Algerian Minister of Justice's letter of December 1985 (see Amnesty International Report 1986) repeating its reasons for considering them to be prisoners of conscience, stating that the prisoners had been convicted for exercising non-violently their fundamental rights to freedom of expression and association. Amnesty International learned of the release of 11 of these prisoners. A twelfth, Fettouma Ouzegane, remained in detention after completing her sentence. She was convicted of contempt of court in another trial. Among those released was Maitre Ali Yahia Abdennour, President and founding member of the Algerian League of Human Rights.
In November Amnesty International received reports that a large number of people had been arrested following demonstrations in Constantine and Setif during November and that four
334	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
people had died during the events in Constantine. Amnesty International wrote to the authorities about trials in which 186 of those arrested were sentenced to between two and eight years' imprisonment, reportedly for public order offences. Amnesty International requested details of the charges against them, the legal position of those still untried, and details of the trial proceedings, following reports that a large number of those tried had been denied the right to defence lawyers. Amnesty International also asked whether the reported deaths had occurred, and if so, for details of the circumstances surrounding them.
In December Amnesty International telexed the authorities about the reported re-arrest on 15 December of Maitre Ali Yahia Abdennour. Amnesty International asked for the reasons for his arrest, his place of detention and what his legal position was. Amnesty International urged his immediate release if he were not to be charged with a criminal offence.
In December Amnesty International submitted to the authorities its report on the trial before the State Security Court in Medea in December 1985 of 40 people on charges including conspiracy against the security of the state, forming an armed gang and possession of arms. Amnesty International was concerned that the defendants had been kept in garde a vue (incommunicado) detention in police or military security custody longer than the legal maximum period. Most of the defendants alleged that they were subjected to torture and other forms of ill-treatment during interrogation, and that confessions invoked as evidence in court had been extracted under torture or the threat of torture. It appeared that the pre-trial investigation before the juge d'instruc-tion (investigating judge) was mostly carried out in the absence of defence lawyers, and that not all of the defendants were informed of their rights, including the right to be assisted by defence lawyers, nor immediately informed of the charges against them. The majority of the defence lawyers were appointed by the court at the opening of the trial and therefore had little knowledge of the case. The court refused the defence request to postpone the trial for a few days in order to prepare a defence. The prosecution appeared to be based principally on statements by the defendants made during interrogation by the police or military security. No witnesses were called by the prosecution. Amnesty International asked to be informed of any inquiries into the allegations of torture and, if none had been undertaken, urged impartial and public investigations. It also stated that if the allegations were confirmed, a public retrial or an independent judicial review of the verdict and the sentences should be ordered; the victims should be
Amnesty International RefX>rt 1987 Middle East/N. Africa	335
compensated and those found responsible should be brought to justice.
In November Amnesty International asked the authorities for details of the circumstances of two reported deaths in detention and one reported death after release from police custody. According to Amnesty International's information, Abdelwahab Abderrahman was called for questioning by police in mid-July, kept in secret detention at the Central Commissariat in Oran, and his body later returned to his family. The police reportedly stated that he had died in a car accident. Mustapha Arris was arrested by security police in late September and returned to his home suffering from serious injuries. He died in Oran Hospital soon afterwards. Salem Lamali, reportedly detained without charge since October 1983 in Berrouaghia Prison, is believed to have died between 15 and 20 September following an operation.
Amnesty International learned of five executions carried out during 1986 and of five death sentences passed on individuals convicted of murder. Amnesty International appealed to the authorities in all cases, expressing the organization's unconditional opposition to the death penalty and urging that all death sentences be commuted.
