United Arab Emirates
Amnesty International's concerns during 1986 were the imposition by courts of floggings and death sentences and the introduction of new capital offences. The organization was also concemed about the possible deportation of Iranians who might become prisoners of conscience or face torture or execution if returned to their own country.
On 8 July Amnesty Intemational appealed to Shaikh Zayed Ibn Sultan al-Nahayyan, President of the United Arab Emirates, following reports that four people had been flogged in Abu Dhabi on 20 June for intoxication and breaking the fast during Ramadan. Hussain 'Ali Ahmad, a Somali, 'Abd al-Karim Muhammad Jasim, an Indian, and Gharib Muhammad, a Oatari, were each sentenced to 80 lashes, and Mahmud Muhammad Da'ala, a Somali, was sentenced to 40 lashes. The organization reiterated its opposition to the judicial penalty of flogging as a punishment which constitutes cmel, inhuman and degrading treatment. No response was received.
Amnesty Intemational received reports of two death sentences. On 28 November it leamed that Khalid Maho 'AH, an Indian, had been sentenced to death by a criminal court in Dubai for murder. Amnesty Intemational appealed to Shaikh Rashid Ibn Sa'id al-Maktoum, Ruler of Dubai, to commute the death sentence, stating its unconditional opposition to the death penalty. On 15 December it appealed for the commutation of the death sentence passed on Paul George Nadar, an Indian national convicted of the premeditated murder of nine members of two Pakistani families. No responses were received to any of Amnesty International's appeals, and the organization did not know whether either sentence was carried out.
Amnesty International was concemed about the introduction of new capital offences. On 17 March Federal Law No. 6 of 1986 was passed, providing the death penalty for five dmg-related offences. However, Amnesty Intemational did not leam of any death sentences passed under this law in 1986.
During 1986 Amnesty Intemational appealed on behalf of 14 Iranian nationals at risk of being forcibly returned to Iran, where they could have become prisoners of conscience, or been tortured or executed. On 20 January Amnesty Intemational sought official confirmation of reports of the arrest and detention in Sadri Prison of 10 Iranians in the previous week. Amnesty Intemational believed
Amnesty International RefX>rt 1987 Middle East/N. Africa	377
that they would be at risk of torture or execution because of their political activities if returned to Iran and sought assurances that they would not be returned. No response was received. On 31 January Amnesty Intemational appealed on behalf of two other Iranians — 'Ali Akbar Khalvati and Abdul Reza Salimi — who risked being forcibly retumed to Iran. They were reportedly arrested on 24 January and held in Abu Dhabi Prison. On 5 March and 17 April Amnesty Intemational renewed its appeals on their behalf after receiving reports that the Iranian authorities had requested their return. No response was received. On 26 February Amnesty Intemational appealed on behalf of Hamid Hosham, who had reportedly fled to Dubai from Iran, where he had been tortured. He was said to have been detained at Dubai airport and to be in danger of forcible retum to Iran. The authorities responded to Amnesty Intemational's appeals on 15 April, stating that no such person was detained in the United Arab Emirates. The organization subsequently leamed that Hamid Hosham had been released and that his claim for political asylum was being examined by the United Nations High O^mmissioner for Refugees. On 21 October Amnesty International sent appeals on behalf of Gholamabbas Riathi, an Iranian refugee who was reportedly detained on or around 13 October and was being held near Abu Dhabi. The organization sought assurances that he would not be forcibly returned to Iran. No response w^ received.
Yemen (People's Democratic Republic of)
Amnesty International was concemed about the fate of eight prisoners of conscience and 20 possible prisoners of conscience it knew of before fighting broke out in January, and about the reported detention of possible prisoners of conscience following the fighting. Some were held without charge, others were brought to trial and faced the death penalty. The organization was also concerned, following the changes in government, about the systematic use of torture and about reports of extrajudicial executions and of possible "disappearances".
On 13 January heavy fighting broke out in Aden between rival factions of the ruling Yemeni Socialist Party. Street clashes erupted following the assassination that day of a number of leading party and
378	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
government officials, reportedly on the orders of the Head of State, 'AH Nasir Muhammad. The civil strife lasted until the end of January and resulted in casualties officially estimated at over 4,000 dead. 'Ali Nasir Muhammad was ousted from power and Prime Minister Haydar Abu Bakr al-'Attas was elected Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme People's Council on 8 February.
During 1986 Amnesty International remained concemed about the fate of eight prisoners of conscience and eight possible prisoners of conscience arrested between 1%7 and 1975, and received confirmation of the release of one of them. Assafa Ainalen, an Eritrean civilian pilot arrested in 1975 and held in al-Mansura Prison in Aden, was released in July 1980. Amnesty Intemational had been investigating his case since 1977 but had never received a response to its inquiries from the authorities, and only in 1986 was it able to confirm his release. Amnesty Intemational also continued to seek information on 12 possible prisoners of conscience, members of the pro-Iraqi Ba'th Party, three of whom were sentenced to death in November 1985 (see Amnesty International Report 1986). The organization leamed in November from the exiled former authorities that the death sentences had been commuted in December 1985, but the subsequent fate and whereabouts of the 12 prisoners remained unknown. Despite repeated appeals by Amnesty Intemational, no information was made available by the new authorities on any of these cases, and the organization feared that several of the prisoners may have died in previous years or during the fighting in January.
Following the fighting in January, thousands of people were arrested by the new authorities and detained in prisons, military camps, schools and other public buildings. Many detainees appear to have been arrested solely because of their place of origin, particularly those from the provinces of Aden, Abyan and Shabwa, whose inhabitants were assumed to be sympathetic to 'Ali Nasir Muhammad. Detainees were released during the year, most of them under a general amnesty declared on 29 March. In September the authorifies announced that 3,700 people had been released since the fighting. According to official figures, 700 people were in detention at the end of 1986, although opposifion sources maintained that the number was still in the thousands. Amnesty Intemational was concerned about several individuals arrested in January or Febmary who were reported to be still held without charge or trial at the end of 1986. They included journalists, trade unionists, former government officials and military personnel. The organization believed that some of them may have been prisoners of conscience, detained because of their political beliefe or their personal relafionships with former prominent government personalities. Appeals sent by Amnesty
Amnesty International RefX>rt 1987 Middle East/N. Africa	379
Intemational in April and July remained unanswered.
Ninety-four detainees arrested following the fighting in January were brought to trial on 2 December before the Supreme Court of the Republic in Aden, together with the former head of state and 47 others tried in absentia as they were abroad. All 142 defendants were charged with treason and faced the death penalty. Amnesty Intemational was concerned that the defendants, some of whom might be prisoners of conscience, were reportedly held incommunicado for prolonged periods and might be sentenced to death with no right of appeal. On 28 December an Amnesty Intemational delegate arrived in Aden to observe part of the trial.
Testimonies gathered by Amnesty Intemational from victims and eye-witnesses revealed that, at least during the first months of the year, torture was used systematically in numerous detention centres. Reported methods included beating with rifle butts and wooden sticks; flogging with plastic-coated electric wires or cables; burning with cigarettes or with hot iron rods; and electric shocks. A few detainees were reportedly blinded by having their eyes gouged out. A method of torture reported to have been widely used — particularly in the Yemeni-Soviet Projects' compound and in the military camps of al-Fath and al-Sawlaban — involved placing parts of the victim's body in hot tar. Eye-witnesses reported that 12 men died in the Yemeni-Soviet Projects' compound in Aden between Febmary and August after being forced into barrels containing hot tar. Former detainees also reported threats of execution and mock executions.
Five journalists were reported to have been tortured to death between Febmary and August. Among them were Zaki Barakat, President of the Democratic Yemeni Joumalists' Organization and Editor-in-Chief of the weekly al-Thawri, who was believed to have died in March after being tortured in al-Sawlaban Military Camp.
Eight extrajudicial executions, including three in which the victims were said to have been killed with electrical surgical saws, were reported to Amnesty Intemational. The victims included journalists, judges, and a member of the Supreme People's Council. According to eye-witness accounts, mass executions took place during the first weeks after the fighting in January.
In April and July Amnesty Intemational urged the authorities to investigate cases of torture, death under torture and extrajudicial execution in order to bring to justice those found responsible. No reply was received and further appeals were sent in December.
Amnesty International was informed of several people arrested following the fighting in January whose fate and whereabouts were still not known at the end of the year. The organization feared that some may have died in custody and was seeking further information.
