Guyana
Amnesty International was concerned about reports of torture and ill-treatment of people held in police custody and about the use of the death penalty.
In February Amnesty International wrote to President Hoyte about the ill-treatment of three youths taken into police custody in December 1985. According to reports from relatives and other sources, Andrew Mayers, Subryan Mokeen (both 18) and Donald Morrison (aged 14) were arrested and taken to a New Amsterdam police station where they were beaten. Andrew Mayers is alleged to have been particularly badly treated: beaten on the head, stomach and groin and seen by relatives bleeding from the ears and mouth. The three were remanded in custody on murder charges and Andrew Mayers was reported to be detained in the infirmary of New Amsterdam Prison in late January 1986. In its letter. Amnesty International asked whether an investigation had been carried out and for the result of any inquiry. No reply had been received by the end of the year.
In June Amnesty International asked for information about reports that Anthony La Cruz, a 53-year-old Amerindian, had been tortured in police custody in January. According to his statement, during his 48-hour detention he was stripped and repeatedly beaten with wire and a five-foot piece of wood; police tied wire around his testicles and pulled him around the room; he was ordered to eat excrement out of a toilet; the police threatened to shoot him and placed a gun at his head which proved not to be loaded when the trigger was pulled. He spent the night lying on a table with his hands cuffed behind his back and was further beaten while thus restrained.
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about the use of the death penalty in Guyana. On 24 June Malcolm Daniels became the fifth person to be executed since hangings resumed in October 1985, after a 15-year period in which no one had been executed in Guyana (see Amnesty International Report 1986). Amnesty International expressed its regret at the executions. It believed there were 26 prisoners on death row at the end of 1986.
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	173
