Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
Amnesty International observed no improvement in the harsh and arbitrary treatment of prisoners of conscience in 1986. Although it leamed of fewer political arrests, Amnesty Intemational was disturbed that the Soviet authorities continued to imprison many citizens whose conscience had led them to dissent peacefully from official policies, and to apply compulsory j^ychiatric measures to others. There was no reduction in the number of capital offences: at least eight people were executed and Amnesty Intemational leamed of a further 17 sentenced to death.
During 1986 Amnesty Intemational worked on behalf of more than 530 individuals whom it knew or suspected to be prisoners of conscience, but official censorship and restrictions on freedom of movement, which limited the flow of information, made it probable that the real total was much higher.
Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe	321
In statements to audiences abroad Soviet representatives dwelt at length on human rights. In July the Soviet Committee for European Security and Cooperation marked the 11th anniversary of the signing of the Helsinki accords by announcing a plan to set up a commission which would "inform ^viet citizens of their rights". Amnesty Intemational wrote to the committee's chairman asking which rights the new body would seek to promote; who would compose it, and how they would be appointed. It also asked if the commission would try to redress abuses of human rights and to raise petitions on behalf of individual complainants with the appropriate authorities. No reply had been received by the end of 1986.
In an interview with the French newspaper L'Humanité in April, Mikhail Gorbachov, the General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, maintained that there were no political prisoners in the USSR, but acknowledged that over 200 prisoners were serving sentences for "anti-state crimes". Amnesty International wrote to him in November asking for clarification of his remarks. It pointed out that of the 28 laws that prohibit "anti-state crimes", Soviet courts had habitually applied three to punish individuals solely for expressing their conscientiously held beliefs, or for trying to leave the country without permission. The organization enclosed a sample of over 140 cases and asked for a list of the 200 for comparison.
At least 12 prisoners of conscience were unconditionally released in 1986, either before their sentences had expired or from indefinite confinement. They included Academician Andrey Sakharov, who had been exiled to Gorky without charge or trial since 1980, and his wife Yelena Bonner, the Moscow Helsinki monitor. Most of the 12 were apparently pardoned. In its letter to Mikhail Gorbachov, Amnesty Intemational welcomed the releases but repeated its call for an amnesty for all Soviet prisoners of conscience. It also renewed its request to meet representatives of the Soviet Government to discuss its concems.
The Soviet news media gave unusually frank coverage to social and political issues during 1986 in what was described as a campaign for glasnost — "op)enness". Several legal problems were debated and Amnesty International welcomed the proposal of certain innovations by high-ranking officials of the USSR Supreme Court and the Ministry of Justice of the USSR. One such was that crime statistics should be published regulariy for the first time since 1934 — a step Amnesty Intemational had urged so that, for example, informed and public reassessment of the use of the death penalty could take place. Another proposal was that prisoners be permitted to see a lawyer when the investigation of their case began, rather than only when it was completed. If this proposal were to be implemented Amnesty
322	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
Intemational believed it might make for fairer trials and could help protect prisoners from ill-treatment before trial.
Amnesty International had repeatedly expressed concem that current procedure made prisoners in investigation prisons particularly easy targets for abuse (see Amnesty International Report 1986). They could be held incommunicado for as long as nine months while their cases were being investigated and during that time they did not have to be produced before a judge or a procurator as a safeguard against ill-treatment. In March Amnesty Intemational appealed for an urgent inquiry into the treatment of Dr Vladimir Lifshits, a Jewish mathematician who required 10 days' hospital treatment for concussion and a broken nose following a beating by criminals in Leningrad investigation prison. News of his injuries emerged only after he saw a lawyer. Officials had not allowed his wife to see him, nor even notified her of his transfer to hospital. To Amnesty Intemational's knowledge no steps were taken to investigate the beating or punish those responsible. Dr Lifshits was later sentenced to three years' imprisonment in connection with his efforts to emigrate. Other allegations of beatings by officials, or by prisoners acting with apparent official consent, reached Amnesty Intemational from psychiatric hospitals, prisons and corrective labour colonies. Amnesty Intemational knew of no investigations into these allegations.
Conditions in the prisons and colonies of the corrective labour system where most prisoners of conscience were held remained consistently poor. Prisoners were kept on monotonous, meagre rations with only mdimentary medical care, and had to meet excessively high work targets, often involving heavy physical labour. Failure to meet these targets and other infractions of the mles incurred administrative penalties ranging from cancellation of visits and letters to transfer to harsher conditions. In Amnesty Intemational's experience prisoners of conscience incurred the most severe of these penalties very quickly, and although they were legally entitled to appeal against their treatment in uncensored letters to the Procurator — who was responsible for seeing that their legal rights were observed — their appeals were invariably rejected.
The experience of Anatoly Marchenko was a case in point. He was sentenced in 1981 to 10 years' imprisonment and five years' internal exile for "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda" after he had sent abroad memoirs of a previous imprisonment. From 1983 he repeatedly complained to the procuracy that officials had handcuffed him and beaten him unconscious in strict regime corrective labour colony Perm 35 (see Amnesty International Report 1985). His complaints were ignored. Instead labour colony officials punished him by cancelling his visits, placing him for long spells in solitary
Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe	323
confinement with reduced rations, and initiating his transfer to Chistopol prison, the country's harshest corrective labour institution. In December Anatoly Marchenko died after an unsuccessful hunger-strike in which he had appealed for the prosecution of the officials he said had beaten him, and for a visit from his wife, whom he had not seen since 1984. Amnesty International had repeatedly appealed on his behalf. In August Mark Morozov, another longstanding prisoner of conscience, died in Chistopol prison after a long illness.
Against this background Amnesty International remained disturbed by the terms of the law against "malicious disobedience" whose introduction was described in the Amnesty International Report 1984. It carries up to five years' imprisonment and empowers directors of prisons and corrective labour colonies to prosecute prisoners who have incurred repeated administrative penalties. In 1986 Soviet commentators sharply criticized the way courts had convicted criminal prisoners of "malicious disobedience" even though in many instances the administrative penalties had been illegally imposed in the first place. Amnesty International feared that in cases involving prisoners of conscience the risk of wrongful prosecution was even higher. At least another eight prisoners of conscience were convicted of "malicious disobedience" in 1986, some only days before they completed previous sentences. From their trial documents Amnesty International found officials had punished them for activities which it considered were the legitimate exercise of human rights, such as wearing a cross, or requesting a Bible. Amnesty Intemational welcomed the acquittal by judicial review of Vladimir Poresh, Tatyana Osipova and Samuil Epshtein, previously convicted on this charge.
Soviet citizens were still at risk if they exercised their freedom of conscience in ways that did not conform to official policy and in 1986 at least 150 people were prosecuted for doing so. No one was acquitted of a political or religious offence to Amnesty International's knowledge, but the courts passed more probationary and deferred sentences than usual.
Despite official moves towards glasnost, individuals who communicated uncensored information on controversial topics faced imprisonment under laws restricting freedom of expression. Sentences of up to 10 years' imprisonment and five years' internal exile were passed on at least 11 people for "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda". One was a Georgian dentist, Immanuil Tvaladze, who was convicted in June of compiling an unofficial record of a major trial in Tbilisi in 1984 in which four alleged hijackers were sentenced to death. (An account of the public protests that greeted their sentences appeared in
324	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
Amnesty International Report 1985.) Another 30 individuals received sentences of up to three years' imprisonment on the less serious charge of "circulating anti-Soviet slander". They were mostly religious believers convicted of distributing or printing Bibles and prayer books produced on home-made presses.
Religious believers remained the largest single category of prisoners of conscience in 1986. Around 40 Baptists who had refused on principle to submit to the state's restrictions on religious freedom were imprisoned for up to 10 years under the laws against "anti-social religious activity" and "violating the laws separating church and state", and several Jehovah's Witnesses, Pentecostalists and Hare Krishna devotees were also imprisoned on these charges. Some who stood trial in 1986 had served previous sentences spanning 20 years for activities such as teaching religion to children, or writing theological texts. In November Amnesty Intemational published information on Rudolf Klassen, a Baptist preacher from Kazakhstan with a history of 17 years' imprisonment, who was released in August.
Soviet law offers no altemative to military service, and eight young men whose religious beliefs prevented them from bearing arms or swearing the military oath were imprisoned for up to three years for "evading regular call to active military service". Several would-be emigrants were also imprisoned on this charge after refusing call-up because they feared it would give them a security classification and further delay their emigration. In December Amnesty International produced a paper on Imprisoned Conscientious Objectors in the USSR drawing on the cases of 42 Jews, ethnic Germans, Baptists, Jehovah's Witnesses, Pentecostalists and others imprisoned on such charges since 1980.
By the end of 1986 Amnesty International believed that at least 44 prisoners of conscience were still being held against their will for indefinite p>eriods in psychiatric institutions. Some had already been confined for over 15 years, under close supervision in special I^ychiatric hospitals, where isolation from relatives and friends made them especially vulnerable to ill-treatment with dmgs or beatings. In December Amnesty International distributed a letter that had emerged from Alma-Ata special psychiatric hospital which illustrated these risks. It had been written in 1984 by Nizametdin Akhmetov, a worker from Bashkiria. Although Amnesty Intemational believed he was still confined as a prisoner of conscience, it did not know what had happened to him since. During the year the authorities continued to use compulsory psychiatric measures to deter or punish acts of non-violent dissent. Nineteen individuals were confined on these grounds — most of them supporters of an unofficial peace group in Moscow, who were arrested going to or from the group's public
Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe	325
events. Several of the 19 were said to have received forcible treatment with powerful drugs that gave them acute physical discomfort, and a numter were still confined at the end of 1986.
The USSR retained 18 capital offences in peacetime and in May amended the law against bribe-taking by officials to increase the circumstances in which it was punishable by death. In 1986 the maximum sentence for prisoners whose death sentences had been commuted was raised from 15 to 20 years. Although Amnesty Intemational interpreted this as encouragement to officials to reduce death sentences, it learned of no commutations in 1986. Eight executions and 17 death sentences were announced in the official press, but because of official secrecy the real total was probably higher than reported. Amnesty Intemational appealed for clemency in each case.
In view of allegations that Soviet military personnel in Afghanistan were sometimes present during the torture of detainees. Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Soviet President in September urging investigation of the allegations (see Afghanistan entry).
