" ■ 1 Iraq
Amnesty Intemational's concems continued to be the widespread arbitrary arrest and detention of hundreds of political prisoners, including possible prisoners of conscience; the long-term detention of political prisoners without trial, or after summary trials; the routine use of torture by the security forces; "disappearances"; the increase in the number of capital offences and the large number of judicial and extrajudicial executions, including executions for political offences.
An amnesty was declared in April for certain prisoners sentenced by civil and military courts. Enacted by Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) Resolution No. 387, it did not extend to prisoners convicted of murder, adultery, espionage, drug offences and those sentenced to death. Amnesty Intemational was unable to verify how many prisoners were released. In September an amnesty was declared for army deserters who had given themselves up to the authorities between 28 July and 6 August (RCC Resolution No. 675).
Among the hundreds who continued to be detained in 1986 were members of prohibited political parties; other suspected government opponents or critics; army deserters and draft resisters refusing to fight in the war against Iran; student demonstrators; and relatives of such people arrested as hostages in lieu of suspects sought by the government.
As in previous years Amnesty Intemational received reports of widespread arbitrary arrests of suspected govemment opponents and innocent civilians, as well as allegations of torture and deliberate killings by govemment forces. The organization raised these concems in a speech to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights on 11 March. It referred to the "disappearance" of about 300 Kurdish children arrested in Sulaimaniya between late September and mid-October 1985 (see Amnesty International Report 1986). On 20 January the organization had appealed urgently for official clarification of the reasons for their detention, calling for the release of all children held because of the political activities of their parents or relatives. It also called for an investigation into reports that some of the children had been tortured, and that three of them had died in custody as a result. Their bodies were allegedly found in the streets on the outskirts of Sulaimaniya, their clothes bloodstained and their bodies bearing signs of torture. Amnesty Intemational reiterated its concerns in a letter dated 19 Febmary to President Saddam Hussain.
Amnesty International RefX>rt 1987 Middle East/N. Africa	345
On 25 April, the govemment responded by stating that it had "found such allegations totally false". Amnesty Intemational also referred to reports of the killing of some 300 people in Sulaimaniya and Arbil in October 1985, and the arrest of hundreds of others whose fate and whereabouts were unknown (see Amnesty International Report 1986). The organization had sent urgent appeals in December of that year, and reiterated its concems in its letter of 19 February 1986. In August Amnesty Intemational received a response from Iraq's Ambassador to the United Kingdom in which he stated that ". . . the allegations were pure fabrication clothed with a figure and a venue to make them appear credible."
In late March and early April a large number of civilians, including students, were reported to have been arrested in Arbil, in northem Iraq, following an assassination attempt in March on the Govemor of Arbil by Kurdish opposition forces. Fifteen students were subsequently executed (see below), and the others "disappeared". In July Amnesty Intemational urged the authorities to release all those detained during these events unless they were to be charged. No response was received.
Amnesty International continued to be concemed about the routine torture and ill-treatment of detainees in the custody of the security forces. The victims included political prisoners tortured to force them to sign "confessions" or to renounce their political affiliations. Over the years the govemment had denied allegations of torture even when supported by detailed medical evidence. It had also failed to show that such allegations were ever investigated or that any perpetrators were brought to justice.
Some detainees were reported to have died as a result of torture, such as Tayar Salim Muhammad, an 18-year-old student and member of the banned Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP). He was detained in October 1985 and was reported to have died under torture in July. Amnesty Intemational called for an investigation into his death and into reports of the torture of two other KDP members before their execution in November. The bodies of Mahdi Ibrahim Muhammad and 'Abed Taha Ibrahim were returned to their families on 8 November; their fingemails had reportedly been extracted and their eyes gouged out.
Amnesty Intemational appealed to the authorities on numerous occasions following reports of the execution of large numbers of people. The organization received reports that hundreds were executed during 1986 but it had insufficient information to ascertain the precise number. Among those executed were said to be army deserters, members of banned political parties, suspected govemment opponents and students. Many of them were said to have been
346	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
executed without trial or after summary trials by the Revolutionary Court with procedures which fell short of international standards. A number of people convicted of criminal offences were also executed during 1986.
On 3 January Amnesty Intemational appealed to the govemment following reports of the execution of nine members of the banned Kurdistan Socialist Party-Iraq (KSP-I) in August and November 1985, as well as the execution in November 1985 of a KDP member. The govemment stated that in all three cases they were . . executed for their crimes including carrying out sabotage activities using explosives and weapons against the peace and security of innocent citizens. [They] were granted a fair trial where all judicial and legal measures were fully respected according to the Iraqi constitution and the laws in force, including the right to have court-appointed lawyers defending them." The govemment did not respond to the organization's additional appeals for an investigation into reports of the execution of large numbers of political prisoners and army deserters in Abu Ghraib and Mosul prisons in November 1985 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 7986). On 13 February appeals were sent following reports of the execution of four KDP members and two students from the Technical Secondary School in Sulaimaniya in December 1985 and January 1986. No response was received. In December further appeals were sent following reports of the execution of five KSP-I members in August in Abu Ghraib prison and seven KDP members between August and November. Earlier in the year, nine other KDP members were reportedly executed in Mosul, Kirkuk and Baghdad. In its appeals. Amnesty Intemational expressed fears for the lives of 16 other KSP-I members detained in Abu Ghraib prison who were said to be facing the death penalty.
Amnesty Intemational also appealed on behalf of a number of people sentenced to death for criminal offences. On 27 May it appealed on behalf of a number of Egyptian workers sentenced to death for forging travel documents. On 3 June the organization leamed that the death sentences passed on 10 Egyptians had been commuted. On 22 August Amnesty Intemational received a letter from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, stating that the 10 Egyptians were among a larger group arrested on charges of forging passports, residence cards and official stamps. The defendants had also been charged with smuggling currency abroad and economic sabotage. They were tried by a Revolutionary Court.
In October Amnesty Intemational appealed to the authorities following the execution of seven Iraqis on charges of economic corruption. The seven, among them 'AM al-Mun'im Hassan 'Alwan, under-secretary at the Ministry of Oil in Baghdad, were allegedly
Amnesty International RefX>rt 1987 Middle East/N. Africa	347
involved in facilitating contracts for foreign companies in return for bribes. Neither the trial nor the executions were public. The death sentences were passed on 19 August and ratified by presidential decree on 31 August. In a letter to Amnesty Intemational dated 11 November, Iraq's Ambassador to the USA stated that the executions
. . took place in accordance with the penal code of Iraq [and] were carried out with full respect for the due process of law."
Amnesty Intemational remained concemed about the continued enactment of legislation increasing the number of capital offences. On 4 November Article 225 of the penal code was amended by RCC Resolution No. 840. The amendment prescribes the death penalty for publicly insulting the President of the Republic or deputy, the Revolutionary Command Council, the Arab Socialist Ba'th Party, the National Assembly or the govemment with the intent of mobilizing public opinion against the authorities.
In July Amnesty Intemational appealed following reports that 21 people had been killed in northem Iraq, whom the organization believed might have been extrajudicially executed. Fifteen of them were students from secondary schools and the University of Salah al-Din who were reportedly arrested and summarily executed in public in Arbil between 27 March and 3 April. In another incident, six detainees were reportedly summarily executed in public outside Sulaimaniya Central prison on 9 April. TTie victims, sympathizers with the banned Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK), were all said to be under 18. No response was received to the organization's appeals.
In late Febmary Amnesty Intemational appealed to the authorities following reports that two Iraqi students expelled from France on 19 Febmary had been detained upon arrival in Iraq. Fawzi Hamza al-Ruba'i and Muhammad Hassan Khair al-Din had reportedly said they were afraid of retuming to Iraq. Amnesty Intemational requested details of their legal status and whereabouts and sought assurances that their safety would be guaranteed and that they would be permitted access to a lawyer and relatives. The organization also asked whether reports that one of them had been executed were tme. On 4 March Amnesty Intemational welcomed assurances from the Iraqi authorities that neither men had been executed. However, it remained concemed that they were detained and risked facing the death penalty. They allegedly belonged to al-Da'wa al-Islamiyya, Islamic Call, membership of which is a capital offence in Iraq. The organization urged the govemment to make known their whereabouts and the reasons for their arrest and continued detention. On 27 Febmary Amnesty Intemational also called upon the French Govemment to clarify the procedures followed which led to the involuntary expulsions, and urged it to obtain assurances from the
348	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
Iraqi Govemment that the physical safety of the two men would be guaranteed. The French Govemment informed Amnesty Intemational on 11 March that France's Ambassador to Iraq had visited the two men on 9 March and was able to confirm that they were both in good health. Fawzi Hamza al-Ruba'i and Muhammad Hassan Khair al-Din were pardoned by President Saddam Hussain on 13 March and released on 22 March. This was confirmed in a letter to Amnesty Intemational on 1 August. Following their release, the two men announced on Iraqi television that they had "repented" of their past activities. They returned to France on 26 September.
