Burkina Faso
Amnesty International was concerned about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience most of whom, however, were released before the end of 1986. New information was received about torture and ill-treatment of detainees in 1985, when one detainee was alleged to have died as a result of torture.
Some 80 prisoners were either released or had their sentences reduced at the beginning of January by the Head of State, Captain Thomas Sankara. Among them were former President Saye Zerbo and other former senior officials sentenced to prison terms in 1984 for alleged corruption or financial impropriety. At the end of the month and in early February, there were further releases. Those freed included two leading members of the Ligue patriotique pour le développement (LIPAD), Patriotic League for Development, both named Adama Touré and both of whom had been detained without trial since late 1984. Other supporters of LIPAD who had been among 19 people arrested in mid-January 1986 were also released uncharged. Another LIPAD leader held since late 1984, Soumane Touré, a former secretary general of one of the country's three trade union confederations, was not released at this time but remained in detention in a military camp at Pô. He had been accused of financial misdemeanours but not charged. He was reported to have demanded to be brought to trial but to have been released on the orders of the Head of State on 3 October.
Several new arrests were reported to Amnesty International in April. Those held included Drissa Touré and Joseph Diallo, two teachers accused of distributing leaflets critical of the government. In May Amnesty International expressed concern to ^e government
29	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
about these arrests and about reports that those arrested had been held incommunicado and ill-treated. The government did not respond but subsequently Amnesty International learned that both detainees had been released uncharged at the beginning of May. Seven other people working at a gold mine at Poura, who were also reported to have been arrested as suspected critics of the government, were apparently released at the same time.
There were further releases on 4 August to mark the third anniversary of the coup which brought Captain Thomas Sankara to power. In particular, about 170 prisoners were believed to have been freed, including a number who had been detained without trial or held under house arrest for long periods. Among those released were Ali Lankoande and Henri Guissou, two members of an opposition group, the Front progressiste voltaique (FPV), Progressive Front of Upper Volta (as Burkina Faso was formerly called), who had been held under house arrest since November 1983. A number of people who had been imprisoned following bomb explosions in May 1985 at military depots in Bobo Dioulasso and Ouagadougou, the capital, were also believed to have been released.
During 1986 Amnesty International received further information about torture and ill-treatment of detainees held following the bomb explosions in May 1985. They were mostly held in Ouagadougou at the headquarters of the Direction de surveillance du territoire (DST), security police, where some of them were reported to have been tortured with electric shocks, burnt with cigarettes, beaten, and suspended by the wrists for long periods. Prisoners were also reported to have been made to sit in what was described as the "kangaroo position", with their knees drawn up tightly under their chins, for hours at a time. Further information was received also about the death in 1985 of Lieutenant Hamidou Zeba, one of those detained after the bomb explosions. As previously reported (see Amnesty International Report 1986), the government denied that his death was the result of torture and attributed it to cirrhosis of the liver. However, one report received by Amnesty International in 1986 stated that he died after being burnt with a blow torch while being interrogated. No inquest or other official inquiry into his death was believed to have been held by the end of 1986.
In March Amnesty International was invited by the authorities to send a delegate to observe the trial in Ouagadougou of Mohamed Diawara and two others, who were charged with embezzlement of funds belonging to the Economic Community of West African States. However, as it appeared to be solely a criminal matter which did not come within Amnesty International's mandate, the organization informed the authorities that it could not accept their invitation.
40	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
