Zaire
Amnesty International was concemed about the imprisonment and banishment of prisoners of conscience for supporting an illegal opposition poHtical party and also about reports of torture and killings in eastern Kivu region. Amnesty International was also concemed about reports of torture in other parts of the country and about the long-term detention without trial of prisoners of conscience and other political detainees.
The number of political prisoners known to Amnesty International varied considerably from month to month as people were released and new arrests made. After a wave of arrests in June of supporters of the opposition Union pour la démocratie el le. progrès social (UDPS), Union for Democracy and Social Progress, Amnesty International campaigned for the release of 70 people who were detained or banished because of their links with the UDPS. The total number of people imprisoned for |x>litical reasons for all or part of the year was significantly higher, but could not be estimated accurately by the organization.
Major reforms were announced at the end of October when the military security service, Service de renseignements militaires et d'action (SRMA), Military Intelligence and Action Service, was disbanded and a new Department (Ministry) for Citizens' Rights and Freedoms {Département des droits et libertés du citoyen) was established. Explaining these changes President Mobutu Sese Seko confirmed publicly that human rights violations had been committed by the armed forces. Referring to an Amnesty International report published in March 1986, Zaire — Reports of Torture and Killings Committed by the Armed Forces in Shaba Region, the President said that an official inquiry had been carried out after the report was published which had confirmed that some of the abuses described by Amnesty International had occurred. However, the inquiry's findings and the types of abuses it had documented were not made public. President Mobutu Sese Seko also said that the new department would deal with complaints brought by the victims of human rights violations and that the new department would be represented at all levels of the community, right down to village level.
After the dissolution of the SRMA, the Secretary of State for Defence announced that a disciplinary commission would investigate the activities of a number of SRMA officials. By the end of 1986 no details were available about the findings of this commission.
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	119
The arrest of non-violent opponents of the government continued throughout 1986. In March the Jehovah's Witness sect, which had been legalized in 1980, was banned. Amnesty International received reports of the detention without trial of Jehovah's Witnesses in Shaba region, and it appeared that arrests also occurred in other parts of the country. Efforts were also made to enforce legislation which prohibited other religious sects which had not obtained official recognition from practising. Information about the repression of these sects was difficult to obtain across the country as a whole, but in April 20 sects were prohibited in Lingwala, a district of Kinshasa.
Amnesty International was concerned about the imprisonment or banishment of UDPS supporters. About 40 people arrested in Kinshasa during the last three months of 1985 were believed to have remained in detention or under restriction throughout 1986. One group of eight people, which included Bossassi Epole Kodya, a leader of the UDPS and President of the Zairian Human Rights League was detained by the National Gendarmerie in Kinshasa until February. All eight were then banished to villages around the country.
Two UDPS leaders charged with insulting the head of state were tried in January. Kanana Tshiongo and Tshisekedi wa Mulumba, both former members of the National Assembly, were arrested in October 1985. They were both convicted by the State Security Court and sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment. However, at the end of February they were pardoned and released. They were released within a week of the release of another prisoner of conscience, Ronald van den Bogaert, a Belgian national who had been arrested in July 1985 on his arrival in Zaire and later sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment on charges of conspiring to change the country's one-party system.
Further arrests of UDPS supporters began on 11 June when seven UDPS leaders were served with administrative banishment orders. All seven had been repeatedly imprisoned or banished since 1981 or 1982. One of them, Bossassi Epole Kodya, was already restricted to Bolomba, a village in Equateur region, when the new restrictions were announced. The others were sent to villages in Kasai Oriental, Kivu and Shaba regions. They included the two UDPS leaders released in February and two other former members of the National Assembly, Kibassa Maliba, a former government minister, and Birindwa ci Birkashirwa, a businessman. No charges were brought against them but the authorities accused them of inciting people against the government and of encouraging students to paint slogans hostile to the government on Kinshasa University's campus. Despite this accusation it appeared that the real reason for their rearrest was
120	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
their persistence in seeking to have the UDPS officially recognized. One of the seven, Kibassa Maliba, was transferred a few days after his arrival in a village to Shaba's provincial capital, Lubumbashi. where he was kept under house arrest for the rest of 1986. One other, Makanda Mpinga Shambuyi, became seriously ill in July and was transferred to hospital. He requested permission to leave the country for treatment unavailable in Zaire. His request was still under consideration at the end of 1986.
At least 20 other UDPS supporters and possibly many more were arrested in June and July. They included Lusanga Ngiele and Lumbu Maloba Ndiba. also former National Assembly members and leaders of the UDPS who had been imprisoned and banished before. Also detained were Mbwankiem Niaroliem, a member of one of the first governments formed after independence in 1960, and Mpindu Buabua. At the end of 1986 Amnesty International was working for the release of some 70 UDPS supporters who were believed still to be detained or banished and whom the organization considered to be prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty International was also concerned about other |x>litical prisoners arrested in previous years. Kianzila el Busi and five others arrested in 1984 after two bomb explosions in Kinshasa remained in detention without trial. Unofficial sources suggested that the six were questioned by State Security Court investigators in early 1986, but that there was insufficient evidence against them to bring them to trial. Amnesty International continued to investigate their cases as possible prisoners of conscience.
Five prisoners of conscience, including Ngwashi Chola, who had been detained without charge in Lubumbashi since January 1984 were released in May, on condition that they reported every week until the end of the year to the local office of the Agence nationale de documentation (AND), the national security service. Other prisoners of conscience detained by the AND in Lubumbashi were also released during 1986. Nkamba Ilunga, who was arrested in July 1984 after disputing the result of an election in his village, was freed uncharged in April.
In southeast Kivu region the army continued to detain villagers suspected of being in contact with government opponents in neighbouring Burundi and Tanzania. They were held without being charged or referred to the local judiciary, and were only released after the payment of a ransom. The organization was also concerned by the detention for several months, on the island of Idjwi, of a young man called Moudhama, reportedly for possessing a newspaper article referring to extrajudicial executions carried out on the island in 1985 (see Amnesty International Report 1986).
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	121
In 1985, in Kivu's Kabare district, the appointment by the govemment of the younger son of the former mwami (king or paramount chief) in preference to the eldest son led to violent clashes between troops and civilians in which about 4() people were killed. After a senior local official was murdered about 80 people were arrested and accused of complicity, although it appeared that some had been detained solely because of their opposition to the new mwami. Most of them were released uncharged during 1986, but in September 15 were reported to be still detained. Amnesty Intemational sought information from the Procurator General of Kivu region about their cases, but had received no reply by the end of 1986. Weregemere Bingwa Nyalumeke, a former govemment minister and prominent political figure in Kivu region, who had been opposed to the appointment of the new mwami, was adopted by Amnesty Internafional as a prisoner of conscience. He had been expelled from the Central Committee of the ruling party in September 1985 and then banished to a remote farm in Katana, near Kabare. Although he was suffering from glaucoma the authorities refused permission for him to have an eye operation. Other opponents of the new mwami were arrested in Kabare in early 1986 and detained in unofficial prisons on the orders of local chiefs supporting the new mwami. Following moves by the local procurator in Bukavu to prevent such arbitrary arrests, some of the local leaders resorted to acts of terror against their opponents. There were reports of the burning of huts and houses, rape, and beatings and torture of prisoners. Amnesty Internafional was concemed that the detentions carried out by the local leaders were outside the framework of the law and that torture and killings took place. One man, Matabaro Bagula, a villager from Kakongola, was reportedly bumt alive at the mwamis court at Cimngu in May, after being held prisoner there for 10 days. In another case, also in May, a local Red Cross worker was arrested and so severely beaten and tortured that he required three months' hospital treatment. In August a retired ¡x)liceman, Nyongola, was reported to have been castrated and then burnt alive in Cirungu.
Amnesty International also received reports of torture from other parts of Zaire, but not on the same scale as in 1984 and 1985 when there were widespread abuses in areas affected by counter-insurgency operations. However, in September, it was reported that a man named Radi, who was suspected of having contacts with govemment opponents based in Tanzania, was killed by soldiers in Moba who forced him to drink petrol until he died. A number of suspected UDPS supporters arrested in Mbuji-Mayi in March were reported to have been severely beaten. Those arrested had been among a crowd of several hundred people who welcomed Kanana Tshiongo when he
122
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
arrived in Mbuji-Mayi, following his release from prison in February. Amnesty International received details of the injuries sustained by 10 individuals, which included wounds inflicted by blows, mainly to the face, arms and body.
Amnesty International remained concerned about the use of the death penalty but did not know the number of sentences imposed or how many executions took place. In July the authorities announced that four people convicted of murder and armed robbery had been executed. The previous month it was reported that a woman convicted of witchcraft and sentenced to death by the paramount chief of the Bakuba in Kasai Occidental region had been executed. However, it was not clear whether she had been tried by a court empowered by law to impose a death sentence, nor whether her rights to appeal and to petition the head of state for clemency had been resp)ected.
Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Zaire under the UN procedure for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations (the so-called "1503 procedure").
