Korea (Democratic People's Republic of)
As in previous years. Amnesty International's work on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) continued to be seriously hampered by the lack of information emerging from the country. The authorities disclosed no information about arrests, trials or imprisonment for political offences, or the death penalty, except occasionally to announce that people allegedly entering the DPRK for espionage purposes had been arrested. However, a range of sources continued to allege that the rights of freedom of expression and association, guaranteed under the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to which the DPRK acceded in 1981, were strictly curtailed. According to these reports, individuals who criticized the President or his policies were liable to punishment by imprisonment or "corrective labour".
Amnesty International continued to receive reports that there were substantial numbers of political prisoners. Some were believed to be held in penal institutions, but others were reportedly sentenced to terms of "corrective labour" which could be served at a person's normal workplace (working for part or no wages) or at other designated places. These reportedly included mountainous areas in the northeast of the country where prisoners were set to work in agriculture or mining and where conditions were said to be very harsh.
Amnesty International was concemed about two Japanese nationals detained in the DPRK since November 1983. Isamu Beniko and Yoshio Kuriura were the captain and chief engineer of a refrigeration ship which sailed regularly between Nampo in the DPRK and Osaka in Japan. They were detained after Min Hong Kyu, a young North Korean army sergeant, hid on their ship and reached Japan in late October 1983. The DPRK authorities alleged that they were involved in espionage, and said that they would be released in exchange for the defector, who remained in Japan.
Although some prisoners were detained without trial, others were apparently brought to trial, in some cases at the scene of the alleged offence. Amnesty International was unable to ascertain whether defendants were afforded rights of defence and appeal.
The penal code provides the death penalty for a range of political and criminal offences. Amnesty International believed that death
244	Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe
sentences were imposed and executions carried out, although details were not available.
