Ecuador
157
Amnesty International's concerns centred on evidence of torture; the introduction of detention procedures under which political suspects were held incommunicado and had their detention denied; and the failure to institute satisfactory inquiries into a series of killings that may have been extrajudicial executions. Political suspects frequently "disappeared" temporarily: detentions were generally acknowledged by the arresting authorities only after interrogation, or immediately before release or transfer to the custody of the prison service and the courts.
Government representatives made unprecedented public attacks on Ecuadorian church and human rights groups which actively campaigned for a halt to torture and "disappearances", accusing them of supporting subversive groups. In October police spokesmen told the news media that the Roman Catholic Bishops of Riobamba, Cuenca and Babahoyo and members of Ecuador's leading human rights organization, the Comisión Ecuménica de Derechos Humanos (CEDHU), Ecumenical Commission for Human Rights, were "collaboratoi^" with the group Alfaro Vive, Carajo (AVC), Alfaro Lives, which had carried out a series of bank robberies and kidnappings in recent years. Human rights leaders and the Ecuadorian Conference of Bishops rejected the charge, which the authorities did not pursue. The govemment news media campaign coincided with anonymous threats of violence towards individual human rights workers, including members of CEDHU in Quito, the capital, and the Permanent Committee for the Defence of Human Rights based in the port city Guayaquil. In mral areas, particularly in Esmeraldas and Chimborazo provinces, Roman Catholic clergy and lay workers engaged in education and development projects were harassed and publicly denounced by the authorities as "subversives". Church workers were reported to have been detained in rural areas, although none were known to have been formally charged. On 10 September, for example. Father Aurelio Vera and church workers Susana Andrade and Bolivar Franco were reportedly detained without warrant in Guamote, Chimborazo. Ahhough held for just one night, they were reportedly forced to sign statements accusing the Roman Catholic church in Riobamba of "subversive acts". In December Amnesty Intemational called on the govemment to ensure the safety of church and human rights workers.
158	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
In May Amnesty International published a summary of its evidence of torture, including detailed testimonies and medical affidavits. The organization stated that a decrease in reports of ill-treatment and torture since 1979, when elections ended eight years of military government, appeared since 1985 to have been reversed. Detainees in the custody of police and military agencies in major cities were frequently reported to have been hooded or blindfolded, systematically beaten, sexually abused, and subjected to near-drowning and to electric shocks. Threats to relatives were also reported. Several prisoners testified that they had received medical attention for bruises, abrasions and swellings before being transferred from incommunicado detention, apparently to reduce the physical evidence of ill-treatment. However, in a number of cases medical examinations found evidence of injuries consistent with prisoners' allegations of torture.
Torture was reported in the context of detention procedures not previously used in Ecuador. Suspects were seized without warrant and their detention denied while they were being interrogated, usually for between 24 and 72 hours. A number of prisoners testified to having been seized by agents of the Servicio de Investigación Criminal (SIC), Criminal Invesfigation Service, briefly interrogated, and then transferred to secret military interrogation centres. Many of the victims were alleged by the authorities to be collaborators with AVC, or relatives of alleged members of the group.
Amnesty International appealed throughout 1986 on behalf of victims of incommunicado detention and torture. Lidia Caicedo, an 18-year-old student, was reportedly detained without warrant in Quito on 13 October by SIC agents. In later testimony she said she was tortured for two days with beatings, electric shocks, application of toxic gas into the pillow case which hooded her and threats to harm her family. A medical examination on 27 October reportedly confirmed bums on her face. She was in the Quito women's prison at the end of 1986 pending trial on charges of collaboration with the AVC group.
Amnesty International asked for information on the fate of Alberto David Troya, an army conscript, who "disappeared" for about 45 days after being detained in mid-April. It was later established that he was secretly transferred to a garrison at Yahuarcocha, and taken on 4 May to a detention centre in which he was held in a small lightless underground cell. The authorities admitted in mid-June that he was in custody, and stated that he was to be charged with theft of military equipment for the AVC group. According to his subsequent testimony, he was repeatedly tortured by intelligence officers. The arrest of Alberto David Troya followed
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	159
the arrests of two of his brothers. His younger brother, a minor, was detained on 25 March in Quito, and interrogated — apparently under torture — about the activities of his brother Marco Troya, an alleged AVC member then in hiding. Following his release on 7 April, a medical examination reportedly found he had a fractured sternum, apparently from being beaten. On 27 March Marco Troya was detained, reportedly after an exchange of gunfire between members of AVC and the security services. He and Alberto David Troya were in custody pending trial at the end of 1986.
Torture was the subject of frequent public discussion in Ecuador in 1986. On 25 May in a news release headed "There is Torture in Ecuador", the President of Ecuador's Tribunal de Garantías Constitucionales, Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees, reported on a meeting with the Minister of the Interior to discuss the rise in human rights violations. Despite the efforts of this tribunal, to the knowledge of Amnesty International the government initiated no investigations in 1986 into allegations of torture and unacknowledged detention in political cases. In cases on which Amnesty International appealed, the authorities responded by declaring that prisoners were members of AVC, and that abuses had not occurred.
Amnesty International was concerned about 11 prisoners who reportedly remained "disapp>eared" after being detained in 1985, and one who "disappeared" in 1986. Jorge Villegas Bajaña, a municipal council member for Babahoyo in Los Rios province, was reportedly seized on 8 February 1986. Amnesty Intemational appealed for information on his legal status after conflicting reports were received: the local police denied that he had been detained but the news media reported a statement by the Minister of the Interior that "Villegas Bajaña is a prisoner, and is not disappeared".
The organization also continued to press for information on the fate of sociologist and teacher Consuelo Benavides Cevallos. She was reportedly detained on 4 December 1985 in Quinindé, Esmeraldas province, with peasant leader Serapio Ordóñez by a unit of the army's Fourth Military Zone. According to eye-witnesses both were severely beaten, and when last seen Consuelo Benavides appeared to have been seriously injured. Although army spokesmen denied the arrests, the two were reportedly taken to the headquarters of the Fuerzas Especiales del Ejército, Army Special Forces, in Latacunga, Cotopaxi. Although Consuelo Benavides remained unaccounted for, Serapio Ordóñez was released without charge several days later and subsequently said he had been accused of being the leader of a "subversive" group, and interrogated under torture.
Amnesty International called for an inquiry into the killing on 28 June of suspected AVC leader Ricardo Merino at his home in
160	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
Cuenca, Azuay province. Although police said he was shot when he attacked police officers, an autopsy reportedly supported claims by relatives that he had been killed while helpless — the cause of death was said to have been three bullet wounds from very close range.
Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about the prolonged administrative detention in Quito of two Basque refugees — Alfonso Echegaray and Angel Aldana — who in July and December 1985 respectively were forcibly expelled to Ecuador by the Govemment of France. On the night of 8 January, according to detailed testimonies, the two were taken from house arrest by Ecuadorian police to a secret interrogation centre outside the city where they were interrogated for 16 hours by Spanish police officers. They alleged that they were subjected to torture, including electric shocks. On 21 January Amnesty International telexed the Foreign Minister to express its concern. On 30 January a reply was received denying that the two had been "tortured by Ecuadorian police". On 12 March the organization reiterated its request for an investigation, pointing out that the previous response did not address the allegation that Spanish police had ill-treated the prisoners, and stressing that the Ecuadorian authorities were responsible for the treatment of prisoners in its custody. On 11 August Alfonso Echegaray was expelled from Ecuador to Sao Tomé. Angel Aldana remained in custody in Ecuador.
The Govemment of Ecuador signed the Inter-American Convention to Prevent and Punish Torture on 30 May.
