Czechoslovakia
285
Amnesty International's main concerns were the continuing imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, the ill-treatment of some prisoners of conscience and the use of the death penalty. At the end of 1986, there were 33 prisoners who had been adopted as prisoners of conscience or whose cases were being investigated by Amnesty Intemational, although the total number of prisoners of conscience was believed to be higher. Amnesty Intemational also learned of many people who were given suspended sentences, charged without being remanded in custody or harassed for peacefully attempting to exercise human rights.
Amnesty Intemational remained concemed at the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience under laws explicitly restricting the nonviolent exercise of human rights. In June, it called upon the authorities to bring these laws and their application into line with their obligations as a party to the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and to release prisoners of conscience held under such legislation. In September Amnesty Intemational appealed for the release of 17 prisoners of conscience detained for the peaceful exercise of the right to freedom of expression. These included Herman Chromy, a clerk from Melnik and a signatory of the unofficial Czechoslovak human rights document. Charter 77. He was sentenced to two years' imprisonment for "subversion" under Article 98 of the penal code. Herman Chromy was detained on 9 April following a house-search and charged with the lesser crime of "incitement" (Article 100). He was accused of making "anti-socialist" statements at work, distributing unauthorized literature and writing an open letter to the President criticizing Czechoslovak and Soviet officials. At his trial on 25 July before the Regional Court in Prague he was additionally accused of listening to Voice of America broadcasts. Amnesty Intemational was concemed about irregularities in the interrogation and trial procedures. Some witnesses maintained that they were threatened by their interrogators and subjected to questioning for up to eight hours without meal breaks. Other witnesses were unable to substantiate their assertions that he had made "anti-socialist" statements. Herman Chromy denied that he was the author of the incriminating letter and although the charge was not proved by the court of first instance, the Supreme Court of the CSR ruled at his appeal hearing on 9 October that this letter be included in the charges against him.
286	Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe
Also convicted of "subversion" (Article 98) was Jaroslav Svestka, a woodcutter. He was accused of sending a letter to a friend in the Federal Republic of Germany which contained comments on George Orwell's novel 1984 and made comparisons with the contemporary situation in Czechoslovakia. He was initially charged with the lesser crime of "damaging the interests of the Republic abroad" (Article 112). On 28 April the Regional Court in Ceske Budejovice sentenced him to two years' imprisonment to be followed by three years of protective surveillance. In August the sentence was reduced to one year's imprisonment and the sentence of protective surveillance was quashed.
The possession of works by George Orwell was included in evidence against Eduard Vacek, an electrician from Teplice. He was sentenced to one year's imprisonment by the District Court in Teplice on 3 June for "hooliganism" (Article 202). A copy of George Orwell's Animal Farm found during a search of his home was considered to be "faulty" by the court, as it compared human society to that of animals. Eduard Vacek was also accused of writing and distributing texts between October 1983 and January 1986 which were considered to be "ironic parodies of society and contrary to socialist morality".
Amnesty International investigated the cases of Karel Srp, Josef Skalnik, Tomas Krivanek, Vladimir Kouril, Cestmir Hunat, Milos Drda and Vlastimil Drda who were remanded in custody by the Prague City procurator at the beginning of September. They were charged under Article 118 with "unauthorized business enterprise". The trial was due to take place in late December and Amnesty Intemational sent an observer to Prague. However, formal defects in the indictment caused it to be postponed and the trial had not been rescheduled by the end of 1986. Milos Drda and Josef Skalnik were released from detention on grounds of ill-health, although the charge against them remained, but the procurator objected to the recommended release of three others who were also in poor health. All seven men were committee members of the Jazz Section of the Musicians' Union, which the authorities had tried to dissolve because of its unofficial cultural activities.
Active Christians continued to be arrested for unofficial religious activities and many received suspended sentences. Michal Mrtvy, an electrician from Olomouc, was sentenced on 29 October to 13 months' imprisonment, suspended for three years. He was convicted of "incitement" and "obstmcting the State supervision of churches and religious bodies". However, the procurator appealed against the verdict and he was kept in detention pending appeal. At the end of 1986 he was still in prison. The trial court considered the distribution
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Europe	287
of copies of a religious text and the possession of duplicating equipment and of other religious literature to be in breach of Article 178 of the penal code: "obstructing the State supervision of churches and religious bodies". The court defined the text, "Revival of the Interest in Religion" by Erika Kadlecova, as "ideologically faulty but not of anti-state nature", and considered the duplication of 250 copies as "preparation to incitement" (Article 100).
Reports reaching Amnesty International indicated that many prisoners of conscience were held in conditions of inadequate hygiene, medical care and nourishment. There were also complaints that prisonei^ of conscience were singled out for particularly harsh punishments for failing to meet excessively high work norms and for minor infringements of prison rules. Punishments included reduced food rations and confinement in special punishment cells. In particular. Amnesty International was concemed about the mental and physical health of Jiri Wolf, a prisoner of conscience serving a six-year prison sentence in Valdice prison (see Amnesty International Report 1984). He had reportedly been given frequent administrative punishments and subjected to threats by the prison staff and fellow prisoners. He was suffering from severe depression as well as from chest pains and deteriorating vision. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about the health of Walter Kania, another prisoner of conscience in the same prison. Since 1980 he had suffered from angina and a liver complaint as well as from two heart attacks. He was reported to be receiving inadequate medical treatment and to be under physical and psychological stress.
Amnesty International learned of one execution for murder and the imposition of three death sentences in 1986 and appealed to the authorities against the retention and use of the death penalty.
288	Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe
