The Pacific

Amnesty International delegates met govemment officials in several countries and territories in the Pacific region during 1986 to introduce Amnesty International and to discuss safeguards for the protection of human rights.
In Febmary two Amnesty Intemational delegates met govemment officials and representatives of non-govemmental organizations in Papua New Guinea to discuss the organization's concems about refogees from the Indonesian province of Irian Jaya. Amnesty Intemational had been concemed that some refugees might be forcibly repatriated to Indonesia, where they would be at risk of torture. The Papua New Guinea Govemment, however, assured the delegates that no refugees would be retumed against their will and, as far as Amnesty Intemational was aware, none were. Aben Pagawak, one of 12 refugees returned to Irian Jaya in October 1985 and then imprisoned and reportedly tortured there, had escap)ed and retumed
278	Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe
to Papua New Guinea. In June Amnesty Intemational heard that he might be deported again following a conviction for illegal entry. Amnesty Intemational appealed to the government not to deport Aben Pagawak as it believed he might be tortured after being returned. The Justice Minister, in a letter dated 27 June, assured Amnesty Intemational that neither Aben Pagawak nor anyone else with re^gee status would be forcibly retumed to a country where they risked human rights abuse. In July Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Justice Minister welcoming both these assurances and the announcement that Papua New Guinea had ratified the Convention and Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees.
In August and September, an Amnesty Intemational delegate visited Vanuatu, New Caledonia, the Solomon Islands, Tonga, Fiji, Westem Samoa and French Polynesia to introduce Amnesty Intemational and to discuss safeguards for the protection of human rights with govemment officials and representatives of nongovernmental organizations.
Although Amnesty Intemational had no major concems in the Pacific countries, its representative raised the issue of the retention of capital and corporal punishment in Fiji and Tonga. In November and December Amnesty Intemational wrote to the director of the Fiji Law Reform Commission and the Prime Minister of Fiji urging the total abolition of the death penalty, which was retained only for extraordinary crimes such as treason and genocide. No executions had ever taken place under these laws. It also urged the Fiji Commission to review the provisions in the Penal Code relating to flogging which could be imposed for 33 offences, and to recommend an end to all such corporal punishments as Amnesty Intemational believed that they constituted cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. In December Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Prime Minister of Tonga urging the govemment to abolish the death penalty. The last executions in Tonga were carried out in September 1982 when three men were hanged for murder.
Amnesty Intemational also wrote to the governments of Vanuatu, the Solomon Islands, Fiji, Tonga and Westem Samoa in December urging them to ratify intemational instruments for the protection of human rights such as the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Convention against Torture and Other Cmel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the Intemational Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. The Solomon Islands has ratified the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
Amnesty International's concems in New Caledonia are described under the entry on France.
