China
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and the conditions under which they were held, and about the extensive use of the death penalty. It was also concemed about reports of torture and ill-treatment of criminal suspects in police custody.
In December the People's Republic of China signed the UN Convention against Torture and Other Cmel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, a move welcomed by Amnesty Intemational. This followed various official statements during the year that the govemment was committed to eradicating torture. In October Zhang Siqing, Deputy Chief Procurator, was reported to have stated: "The key task of procuratorial work for the next year will be the eradication of torture to extract confessions, illegal detention, dereliction of duty by police officers and accidents caused by negligence".
By the end of 1986 the organization had collected extensive reports published in the Chinese press during the previous two years which revealed many cases of torture and ill-treatment of criminal suspects in police custixly. According to these accounts, torture often occurred when people were illegally detained, usually during the first few hours or days of detention. Some accounts concemed cases where torture had caused the death of the victims.
An example reported in September 1986 was the case of a village party secretary in Shaanxi province who was charged with illegally detaining 72 villagers whom he suspected of stealing part of his bicycle bell and ordering 17 of them to be tortured. In another case, a lawyer from Jinjiang county in southem Fujian province was arrested in May 1985, repeatedly poked with an electric baton and beaten for asking a police officer carrying out a "household registration" to produce his identity papers. The lawyer lodged complaints after being released and one public security officer responsible for his ill-treatment was arrested. On 19 September the China Daily reported that during the first half of 1986, "the number of cases [of illegal detention] nearly doubled over the same period last year, to 949, in which more than 140 people were reported to have been tortured". Allegations of ill-treatment of prisoners included beatings, poking with electric batons, use of tight handcuffe and suspension by the arms.
Amnesty Intemational was also concemed at reports that some
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Asia	225
political prisoners had been held for long periods of time in solitary confinement. Wei Jingsheng, a prisoner of conscience detained since 1979 who was said to have suffered a nervous breakdown after several years in solitary confinement, was still reported to be in a poor physical and mental condition in early 1986. Despite repeated appeals by Amnesty Intemational, the authorities did not make public any specific information about his condition or his place of detention, which remained unknown.
In May Amnesty International received reports that another prisoner of conscience, Xu Wenli (see Amnesty International Report 1986), had been confined since late 1985 in a windowless cell entered by a trap-door in the ceiling. It was further reported that he was being denied all visits, mail and access to newspapers or reading material, and that his food ration had been reduced. This treatment was said to be a punishment for the circulation abroad in October 1985 of a document he had written in prison on his arrest, detention and trial. Amnesty International published excerpts from this testimony in February. On 9 May Amnesty Intemational asked the govemment to investigate Xu Wenli's treatment and to release him. But in September he was still reportedly held under the same harsh conditions and fears were expressed for his health.
Amnesty International was also concerned about the detention and health of several elderly Roman Catholic priests adopted by the organization as prisoners of conscience who were arrested during the 1950s for remaining loyal to the Vatican or expressing op|x>sition to govemment measures to control religious affairs. Some were released in the late 1970s and rearrested in 1981. One of them, Francis Xavier Wang Chuhua, who had been imprisoned for 30 years, was reported in early 1986 to be suffering from tuberculosis, to have a cataract in one eye and to have lost his sight in the other. He had been transferred to a labour camp in Oinghai province in 1980 and had received a new sentence of seven years' imprisonment in 1981. Thomas You Guojie, a priest from Nancheng in Jiangzxi province serving a sentence of 10 years' imprisonment in a labour camp, was also reported to be in a poor state of health, suffering from high blood pressure.
Arrests of people believed to be prisoners of conscience were reported during the year. In April Zhang Xiaohui and Li Caian, two students from Beijing University's history department, were arrested, allegedly for distribufing pamphlets criticizing the Chinese Communist Party and calling for the creation of a new political party called the "China Youth Party". According to unofficial sources, they had written a theoretical article criticizing Marxism and the leadership of the Communist Party, but had made no attempt to form a political
226	Amnesty International Report 1987 Asia
party. A spokesman from the University foreign affairs office confirmed in May that they had been arrested for "counterrevolutionary activities". They were reportedly due to be tried at the end of June, but no confirmation had been received by the end of 1986. Both were reported to have participated in student demonstrations in Beijing in late 1985 and to have l^en kept under surveillance since then. The demonstrations, initially a protest against the flood of Japanese goods on the Chinese market, later extended to complaints ab^ut the students' living conditions, inflation and official corruption.
Student demonstrations on a larger scale took place throughout China in December 1986, when tens of thousands of students marched in a dozen major cities to demand democratic reforms and freedom of the press. Although the demonstrations were initially tolerated by the authorities, unauthorized demonstrations were later banned in several cities. Warnings were issued in the press against "elements hostile to socialism who were infiltrating the students to encourage protests". Wall-posters, banned since 1979, appeared in Beijing University in late December demanding democracy and an end to the one-party system. One wall-poster reportedly called for the release from prison of two Beijing students arrested in April.
Demonstrators were reportedly arrested during protests in Shanghai, Nanjing and Beijing and there were allegations of police brutality towards demonstrators temporarily detained. While it was officially denied that any students had been arrested, official reports indicated that at least six workere were arrested in Shanghai and Nanjing on charges ranging from disrupting public order and damaging property to spreading rumours during demonstrations, and one man, officially described as an "agitator", who had taken part in a demonstration by students at Beijing Teachers' University on 29 December, was arrested for "making statements that incited students".
Amnesty International also received reports from various sources about the arrests of groups of Catholics in Hebei province in May and June 1986. More than 40 Catholics were arrested around midnight on 29 May in Qiaozhai village, Gaocheng county, by truckloads of armed police coming from several counties. Among those arrested were elderly priests and nuns, and a large group of young seminarians and novice nuns who were training in a seminary established without official permission in Qiaozhai. Police were reported to have beaten them on the trucks when they started saying prayers and singing hymns. It was also alleged that several young novices were isolated from the others, each tied with her arms around a tree, stripped naked and insulted "with dirty language" for several hours. Most of those arrested were reported to have been released after interrogation but at least two priests. Father Liu Xilue and Father Gao, were
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Asia	227
reported to be still detained in July. In September Amnesty Intemational called on the govemment to investigate the allegations of ill-treatment by police and to make public the results of its findings as well as the charges against those still detained. In October the Chinese Embassy in Australia stated in a letter that: "a handful of bad elements had grouped themselves into an illegal underground organization under the cover of Catholicism in Beiqiachai village of Gaocheng county, Hebei province. They were detained by the public security organ in Gaocheng county on 30 May this year. All these detainees were released soon after the examination. During the detention no one was ill-treated or insulted." No further information was available to Amnesty International about these arrests by the end of 1986.
Among other Catholics reported to have been arrested in June in Hebei were four seminarians who had gone to visit an elderly Bishop. No further news was received about them.
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the release of other prisoners of conscience, among them editors of unofficial journals who took part in the "democracy movement" and had been detained since 1981, and Tibetans arrested for advocating Tibetan nationalism. Among them was Geshe Lobsang Wangchuk, a monk and Buddhist scholar arrested in 1981 for writing leaflets on the history of independent Tibet. He reportedly refused to retract his statements about Tibet and was sentenced to 18 years' imprisonment in February 1984. Amnesty International was also investigating the cases of Tibetans reported to have been arrested since 1983 for their political activities, and learned of the release of several others detained for possessing or circulating information advocating Tibetan nationalism.
Fu Shenqi, the former editor of an unofficial joumal in Shanghai imprisoned since 1981 for his association with other editors of unofficial journals, was reported to have been released on parole in July 1986, having served five years of his seven-year sentence. Amnesty International also leamed of the release of two other prisoners of conscience who had been active in the "democracy movement".
The use of the death penalty for a wide range of offences remained a major concern. Legislation providing for accelerated procedures for trial, appeal and executions continued to be applied. During 1986 Amnesty International documented 257 death sentences, of which 180 were carried out shortly after sentencing. These figures (which are believed to represent only a fraction of the total number of executions and death sentences throughout the country) were higher than those recorded by Amnesty Intemational in 1985.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the
228	Amnesty International Report 1987 Asia
humiliating treatment of condemned prisoners who were paraded through the streets, hands tied behind their backs, with placards hanging round their necks, or who were taken to sentencing rallies attended by thousands of people before being executed. Execution usually took place immediately after such rallies. In Beijing, 31 people aged t^tween 19 and 35 were executed on 25 June after a public sentencing rally in Beijing's Capital Gymnasium. Seven of them were convicted of murder, three of rape and 21 of theft or robbery. In Henan province, 3,000 people attended a rally held on 14 July by the Huaihua Prefecture Intermediate People's Court to pronounce the death sentence on two people convicted of corruption. In Lasa, the capital of the Autonomous Region of Tibet, one man convicted of murder and stealing firearms was executed on 14 September after a rally in the City Stadium attended by some 10,000 people.
On 20 June the Minister of Public Security stated that the practice of parading condemned prisoners sentenced to death through the streets had stopped "some time ago". However, reports indicated that the practice had not stopped nationwide. In one case, a 24-year-oId man was reported to have been paraded through the streets on 5 September before being executed in the Zhuhai Economic Zone.
