Somalia
Amnesty International was concerned about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, one of whom had been held without trial for over 11 years. Many other political prisoners arrested in 1986 or in previous years were detained without trial or impr^ned after unfair trials. The organization was also concerned about reports of torture and ill-treatment of political prisoners and about the use of the death penalty.
Armed conflict continued in 1986 between government forces and two opposition organizations, the Somali National Movement (SNM) and the Democratic Front for the Salvation of Somalia (DFSS). In the north, civilians suspected of contact with the SNM were arrested, ill-treated and in some cases summarily executed. There were also reports of killings of government officials or sympathizers by opposition forces.
In late January about 50 school students and up to 100 other people were arrested in Hargeisa in northern Somalia on suspicion of links with the SNM shortly after an attack in the vicinity by SNM guerrillas. Amnesty International asked the authorities about their legal status and treatment in custody and appealed for them to be released if they were not to be charged and brought to trial. Several
96	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
of the prisoners were released in the following months but some were brought to trial before the National Security Court on 30 June. Abdi Dahir Ainanshe, a student, was sentenced to death for possessing weapons. Amnesty International appealed for the commutation of his death sentence and expressed concern that those convicted by the National Security Court have no right of appeal. He was still under sentence of death at the end of 1986.
In February there were unofficial reports that the presidential review of the death sentences imposed for treason on seven secondary school students by the National Security Court in Hargeisa in October 1984 (see Amnesty International Report 1986) had been completed. The death sentence imposed on Abdi Dama Abbi was upheld and he was secretly executed in Mandera in March, although the govemment would not confirm this. The other six students had their sentences commuted to life imprisonment. Amnesty Intemational had been investigating whether the seven might be prisoners of conscience and believed that they had not received fair trials and that they had been tortured. The organization had app)ealed for clemency for all seven students.
Large-scale arrests of Islamic religious leaders and members of their organizations took place in Burao on 16 April. Over 300 men, women and children were reportedly detained without charge or trial for their religious activities. They were believed to have been critical of the govemment's policies of "scientific socialism". Many other members of Islamic organizations were arrested in Mogadishu and Merca the following month after the announcement in Mogadishu on 9 May of the formation of the Somali Islamic Movement (SIM). The SIM said that it would seek to educate society to follow "moderate Islamic beliefs and laws". It criticized the repression of religious activities by the authorities, particularly the regulations affecting mosques and religious teaching which were issued in August 1985. Among those arrested in Mogadishu were Sheikh Mohamed Moallim Hassan, a former Director General in the Ministry of Justice and Religious Affairs and a prisoner of conscience from 1976 to 1982, and Sheikh Mohamed Nur Qawi, who was alleged to have been tortured. Amnesty International appealed for their release as prisoners of conscience. Several of the prisoners were released over the following months but by the end of 1986 Sheikh Mohamed Moallim Hassan and several other religious leaders, including Sheikh Ahmed Ali Aden, the Imam of the central mosque in Burao, were still detained without charge or trial.
On 31 May, 23 people, some of them school students, who were arrested in Hargeisa in July 1985, were brought to trial before the National Security Court in Hargeisa, charged with treason. They
Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa	97
were reportedly accused of involvement with the United Somali Students Organization, an unofficial opposition organization. Three of the students — Saeed Dahir Jama, Ahmed Abdi Omar and Hassan Osman Omar — were sentenced to death for distributing subversive literature. Other defendants were sentenced to prison terms ranging from five years to life imprisonment for lesser offences. Amnesty International appealed for the commutation of the death sentences and expressed concern that the prisoners did not receive fair trials — they were reportedly denied legal representation as well as having no right of appeal. Several were alleged to have been tortured and to be held in harsh conditions. Amnesty International was investigating whether they were prisoners of conscience. At the end of 1986 the death sentences had neither been carried out nor commuted.
Amnesty International continued to press for the release of several long-term prisoners of conscience. Abukar Hassan Yare, a law lecturer detained without trial since 1981, was released in March. Others still held at the end of 1986 included Yusuf Osman Samantar C^'Berda'ad"), a politician and lawyer detained without trial since 1975 and Abdi Ismail Yunis, an educationalist, and Suleiman Nuh Ali, an architect, both imprisoned without trial since 1982. Amnesty International also continued to appeal for the release of 17 doctors, teachers and civil servants imprisoned in 1982 on charges of participating in a subversive organization. Three of these prisoners were released in October 1986 by presidential amnesty, but the others, including Aden Yusuf Abokor, director of Hargeisa hospital, were still in prison. Appeals continued to be made for the release of Ismail Ali Abokor, a former Vice-President of Somalia. Omar Arteh Ghalib, a former Foreign Minister, Mohamed Aden Sheikh, a doctor and former President of the Somali Academy of Sciences, and three former members of parliament detained since 1982. They were publicly accused of treason shortly after their arrest but had been continually refused access to their lawyers and families. Despite rumours in early 1986 of an imminent trial, all were still held at the end of 1986 without formal charge or trial.
Other prisoners whose cases were under investigation by Amnesty International included those of four former army officers detained without charge or trial since a coup attempt in 1978; two students detained without trial since 1984 for refusing to be conscripted into the army; and 11 prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment by the National Security Court in Burao in December 1984 for alleged links with the SNM. Amnesty International believed that these were a small proportion of the total number of political prisonei^ in the country, which the organization was unable to estimate. The
108	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
government published no figures on political prisoners and in most cases did not reply to Amnesty International's inquiries.
On 21 October, Revolution Day, 2,506 prisoners were released and 30 sentences of death or life imprisonment were commuted by presidential order. Amnesty International welcomed the commutation of the death sentences and requested details of any political prisoners released in the amnesty. A few political prisoners were believed to have been released, among them some of the prisoners arrested in April and May 1986 for their religious activities.
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about the detention without trial of several hundred Ethiopian civilians, abducted from Ethiopia by Somali forces in 1977. They were held in a rural settlement in Hawai under the control of the National Security Service. Their detention has not been acknowledged by the government. A number of refugees who had fled from Ethiopia to avoid political persecution were also believed to be detained, some of them for alleged security offences and others apparently because they had criticized the treatment of refugees by the Somali authorities.
Political prisoners were subject to harsh prison conditions. Those detained in Lanta Bur and Labatan Jirow prisons were denied contact with their families and several were held in prolonged solitary confinement. There were reports of prisoners held in National Security Service custody, particularly in Mogadishu, being tortured and ill-treated. Conditions in government prisons, such as Mogadishu Central Prison and Hargeisa Prison, were also harsh, with prisoners being given only occasional access to their families.
Amnesty International appealed to President Mohamed Siad Barre to commute 15 death sentences imposed by the National Security Court in 1986 for treason, armed robbery and homicide. It was believed that many more death sentences were imposed during the year. In February, Amnesty International's concern at the considerable number of executions that had taken place in the previous year — probably over 100 — led the organization to appeal to the government for an inquiry into the use of the death penalty. Amnesty International noted, in particular, the wide range of offences for which the death penalty was imposed; the absence of any right of appeal for defendants before the National Security Court, which tried all capital cases; and reports that several executions had taken place in public within 24 hours of confirmation by the President. No reply was received.
Amnesty International Report 1987
