Mauritania
ii	Amnesty Intemational was concerned
about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and the detention without trial of other suspected opponents of the government. Twenty-one people were imprisoned in September after a trial marked by serious inadequacies. There were reports that some detainees had been ill-treated and that prisoners generally were held in poor conditions with inadequate medical facilities.
In early September some 30 people, mostly professionals, were arrested in connection with the distribution, both within Mauritania and abroad, of a manifesto alleging discrimination by the ruling Arab-Berber population against the southern, black population. Twenty-one of them were brought to trial on 25 September charged with holding unauthorized meetings, displaying and distributing
73	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
material harmful to the national interest, and making racialist propaganda. They were convicted on all charges. Four were sentenced to six-month prison terms and 17 received four- and five-year prison sentences, with fines, to be followed by five and 10 years' internal exile and loss of civil rights. The heaviest sentences were imposed on Ibrahima Sarr, a journalist, Abdoulaye Barry, an official in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ibrahima Sail, a lecturer at the University of Nouakchott, and Tene Youssouf Gueye, a writer and poet who was reported to have intended to stand as a candidate in the forthcoming municipal elections. The trial lasted less than a day. The defendants were denied access to defence lawyers before the trial and the defence lawyers were given insufficient time to examine the prosecution dossiers and withdrew from the trial in protest when their request for more time was rejected. The defendants were apparently convicted largely on the basis of statements they had made while detained incommunicado in police custody. Several of the defendants were reported to have alleged in court that they had been tortured or ill-treated in detention and one woman defendant stated that she had been raped by a senior police officer at the time of her arrest, but the court apparently failed to investigate these allegations. On 13 October the Court of Appeal confirmed all the convictions and sentences despite the fact that the state had not contested appeals in four of the cases. Amnesty International expressed its concern that they might be prisoners of conscience. In a related trial. Captain Abdoulaye Kebe, an army officer, was convicted by a military court in September of revealing state secrets. He was said to have provided statistics on the racial composition of the army command for inclusion in the manifesto. He was reportedly sentenced to five years' imprisonment and 12 years' internal exile after a trial in camera.
Following the arrests and trials in September, there were demonstrations in various parts of the country and a second wave of arrests in September and October. The government alleged that vehicles and buildings had been attacked. At least 100 people, and perhaps many more, were detained in various parts of the country. There were reports that troops had arrested people, including some schoolchildren, in southern districts. By the end of 1986 at least 17 people had been brought to trial on charges related to the unrest and sentenced to prison terms, and at least 30 were reported to be awaiting trial.
Two other apparently politically motivated arrests were reported in September. Mahmoudi Ould Boukhreis, a businessman, and Def Ould Babana, a diplomat, were reported to have been suspected of pro-Libyan sympathies. They were believed to have been released
74	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
from detention and placed under house arrest before the end of 1986.
Amnesty International was also concerned about the continued house arrest of the former head of state, Lieutenant-Colonel Mohamed Khouna Ould Haidalla and five former government officials. They were arrested following the coup in December 1984 which brought to power the government of Colonel Maaouya Ould Sid' Ahmed Taya. Their detention was authorized by presidential decrees, renewable every six months, which specifically denied them any family or other visits. Mohamed Khouna Ould Haidalla and Commandant Mohamed Lemine Ould Zein, former chief of staff of the gendarmerie, were reported to be suffering ill-health as a result of their detention. It was alleged in particular that Mohamed Lemine Ould Zein, a diabetic, had been denied a medically prescribed diet and exercise and specialist medical treatment. Amnesty International received no response to its inquiries about them.
During 1986, for the first time since the present government came to power in December 1984, Amnesty International received reports of torture. Some of those arrested in September and October were alleged to have been tortured or ill-treated in police custody, and to have required medical treatment. Kane Abdoul Aziz, an agronomist arrested on 17 October, apparently in connection with the collection of funds for the families of the 20 convicted on 25 September, was reported to have been beaten by police, as was Saidou Kane, a student at the University of Nouakchott. No inquiry was believed to have been made by the authorities into these allegations. There were also several reports that conditions for detainees and for convicted prisoners were harsh, particularly in the Civil Prison in Nouakchott where food, exercise, hygiene and medical facilities were said to be inadequate. Both before and after their trials, political prisoners were reported to have been denied all contact with their families.
75	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
