Ghana
53
Amnesty international was concerned about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and the detention without charge or trial of more than 50 other political prisoners. The organization was also concerned about reports of the ill-treatment of detainees subsequently tried for political offences, sentenced to death and executed. The use of the death penalty was a further concern.
Amnesty International continued throughout the year to press for the release of Jacob Yidana, a former senior police officer, who was sentenced to eight years' imprisonment with hard labour by a Public Tribunal in August 1983 on charges of assisting the escape of a criminal. Amnesty International believed that the real reason for his imprisonment was his conduct of police inquiries into the political murder of three high court judges and a former army officer in June 1982, which reportedly implicated members of the government. Amnesty International was also concerned about the procedures of the Public Tribunal which convicted him, which did not conform to internationally accepted standards of fair trial. In particular, he was not able to appeal against his sentence.
In April four people involved with left-wing groups or in trade unions were arrested. Akoto Ampaw, a former student leader, Kweku Baako, a journalist, Ralph Kugbe, an employee of a Committee for the Defence of the Revolution, and Kwesi Pratt, a public relations officer at the Ministry of Fuel and Power, were held until August 1986 when they were released uncharged. Amnesty International adopted them as prisoners of conscience because it believed the sole reason for their imprisonment was their non-violent opposition to government policy, in particular its economic policy.
At least 50 people, most of whom were believed to be former military personnel, were held without charge or trial throughout 1986 under the Preventive Custody Law, 1982 (PNDC Law 4). This empowers the ruling Provisional National Defence Council (PNDC) to authorize the indefinite detention without trial of anyone "in the interest of national security or in the interest of the safety of the person". The law of habeas corpus in Ghana was amended in August 1984 sp>ecifically to exclude people held under PNDC Law 4 and there was no known legal review process under this legislation.
Among those detained under PNDC Law 4 for whose fair and prompt trial Amnesty International called were six soldiers who had
54	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
been members of the army's Military Intelligence branch under the government of former President Hilla Limann (1979-1981). Some reports suggested that they had been detained because they were alleged to have intimidated or assaulted members of the current government when they were in opposition (see Amnesty International Report 1983). Their release was announced by the Head of State on 31 December.
At least 44 other people were held under PNDC Law 4 without charge or trial throughout 1986, apparently suspected of involvement in one of the many coup attempts and plots since 1982, when the PNDC came to power.
In early November Amnesty International wrote to the Chairman of the PNDC calling for fair and prompt trials for all political prisoners. It added, however, that none should be sentenced to death or executed. In the past, some detainees prosecuted before public tribunals had been sentenced to death and executed. Among the cases raised by Amnesty International was that of George Kojo Adjei, a former detainee who had been rearrested in June 1985. At the end of 1986 he remained detained without charge or trial at Ussher Fort Prison and Amnesty International believed he might be a prisoner of conscience. Corporal Alhassan Adam, who was arrested in 1983, apparently on suspicion of involvement in a coup attempt, also continued to be held without charge or trial throughout 1986, as were Bombadier Mustapha Mohamed, Corporal Stanley Obeng Okyere, Private Rexford Ohemeng and Sergeant Emmanuel Osei. Another former soldier. Private S.K. Amponsah Dadzie, who had been tried and acquitted by a Public Tribunal in 1983 but then rearrested, was also held without charge or trial throughout 1986.
In August a former presidential candidate and leader of the Popular Front Party (PFP), Victor Owusu, was detained without charge. Press reports suggested that his detention was connected with information about an anti-government plot which the authorities obtained from Captain Edward Adjei Ampofo, who was arrested in late May, having been sentenced to death in absentia in 1983 on charges of treason. However, other sources suggested that Victor Owusu was detained on account of his non-violent activities in opposition to the government. His release was announced on 31 December. Following the arrest of Captain Ampofo, Amnesty International appealed to the government to commute the death sentence imposed on him in 1983 if it were confirmed on appeal.
Amnesty International was concerned about reports of ill-treatment of detainees. In particular, it noted allegations by several people tried by a Public Tribunal in May on charges of conspiring to overthrow the government that they had been hooded and beaten
55	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa

before their trial. An official of the Board of Public Tribunals subsequently denied that Bureau of National Investigations (BNI) personnel had ill-treated prisoners, but drew a distinction between them and the soldiers who had detained suspects. He disclosed also that the Public Tribunal had accepted that some of the accused may have been assaulted at the time of their arrest.
Amnesty International learned of 21 death sentences passed in 1986; three of them were passed in absentia and two others were subsequently commuted to terms of imprisonment. Most of the death sentences were passed by Public Tribunals. The charges included conspiring to overthrow the government, armed robbery, murder and embezzlement. Amnesty International appealed for clemency in every case. However, 16 people were executed by firing-squad in late June, of whom nine had been convicted of ordinary criminal offences. The other seven had been convicted of conspiring to overthrow the government. Some of those executed for conspiring to overthrow the government alleged, as noted above, that they were ill-treated before their trial. As in all cases when Amnesty International had confirmed information about death sentences, it apF)ealed for these to be commuted.
