Suriname
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about reports that civilians had been killed by the army in circumstances suggesting that they may have been extrajudicially executed. The killings followed the outbreak of armed opposition to the government in July.
In July forces led by Ronny Brunswijk, a former army sergeant, began an armed campaign against the military government of Lieutenant Colonel Desi Bouterse, attacking a number of military targets and reportedly taking over parts of the country. The rebel forces operated mainly in eastern Suriname, an area populated by the ethnic group known as Bush Negroes, many of whom reportedly sup|x>rted the rebel forces. The govemment imposed a state of emergency in this area on 1 December.
On 8 December Amnesty Internationa! expressed concern to the government about reports that between 13 and 18 unarmed civilians ftxDm the Bush Negro village of Moengotapoe in eastem Suriname had been killed by the Suriname army at the end of November. They were said to be mainly women and children and their bodies were said to have been riddled with bullets when they were found shortly after the army had left the village. In mid-December Amnesty
202	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
Intemational received unconfirmed reports that at least 250 unarmed Bush Negroes had been killed by the army since July. It was alleged that government forces had attacked this group in reprisal for its support for Ronny Brunswijk's activities. In December govemment sources admitted that some civilians had been killed but denied that these were extrajudicial executions, stating that those killed were either involved in the fighting between the army and rebel forces, or were caught in cross-fire after having been wamed to leave the area. Amnesty International was still investigating the killings at the end of 1986. By this time, several thousand Bush Negroes and members of other ethnic groups had fled from their homes in eastern Suriname and had temporarily settled in refugee camps in French Guiana.
More than a hundred people were reported to be detained in military prisons in or near the capital, Paramaribo, at the end of 1986 and Amnesty Intemational was investigating reports that some had been tortured.
Amnesty International drew the attention of the UN Special Rap|X)rteur on summary or arbitrary executions to the Moengotapoe killings.
Trinidad and Tobago
Amnesty International continued to be concerned that approximately 25 prisoners were under sentence of death in Trinidad and that, in two cases, death sentences had been upheld despite evidence which cast doubt on the defendant's guilt. Amnesty Intemational continued to monitor the cases of several prisoners under sentence of death who had exhausted all their legal appeals. No executions have been carried out since 1979.
The case of Kitson Branche, who was convicted in November 1972 of murdering a man in 1970, was the subject of appeals in Amnesty International's 25th anniversary campaign. Kitson Branche had spent 14 years on death row. New evidence in the form of an affidavit from a British pathologist was submitted to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in the United Kingdom in 1980. This cast doubt on the cause and time of the death of the victim, and suggested that he might have died of natural causes rather than strangulation. The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council refused to consider the new evidence
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	203
on the grounds that it should have been presented at the time of the trial. There had been no further developments in Kitson Branche's case by the end of 1986.
Amnesty International also urged the authorities to grant clemency to Lalchan Nanan, who was convicted in 1977 of the murder of his wife and sentenced to death. He had exhausted all available legal appeals against his death sentence. In his appeal it was argued that the verdict of the jury which convicted him had not been unanimous, as required by the laws of Trinidad and Tobago for a conviction for murder. After the trial the foreman of the jury had informed the Registrar of the Supreme Court that he had misunderstood the word "unanimous", believing it to mean "majority". He reported that the jury had in fact been divided eight to four in their verdict. The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council did not accept this as grounds for granting Lalchan Nanan's appeal, which they rejected on 22 May 1986.
Amnesty Intemational learned that Calvin Jeremy had his death sentence commuted to life imprisonment on 25 December 1985. Amnesty International had appealed for clemency on his behalf in June 1985.
The decision on the appeal in the case of Andy Thomas and Kirkland Paul, two other prisoners under sentence of death, was still pending at the end of 1986. Their lawyer's motion challenged the constitutionality of carrying out executions after so long a delay. Both men had been on death row since 1975 (see Amnesty International Report 1986).
204
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
