Benin
Amnesty International was concerned about the detention without trial of more than 130 suspected op|X)nents of the government, including many prisoners of conscience, all of whom appeared to be held in breach of the provisions of the Benin Constitution. Fifty of these prisoners were released in September by presidential order but 88 others were still in detention at the end of 1986. Amnesty International was also concerned about reports of torture and ill-treatment of political detainees and the use of the death penalty. The first executions known to have taken place for several years were carried out in May when six people sentenced to death for armed robbery and murder were shot by firing-squad.
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about a large number of students and others detained in 1985 and 1986 in connection with unrest at the national university or on account of their suspected links with the banned Parti communiste du Dahomey (PCD), Communist Party of Dahomey (as Benin was formerly called). Some of these detainees might have been arrested because of
25	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
their links with student groups and unofficial trades unions. Some were apparently held because they were suspected of supporting student demonstrations in 1985 over conditions and student union representation. Most of the detainees had been arrested between May and December 1985, but some further arrests were reported in the first months of 1986. Several of those held were prisoners of conscience who had been detained without charge or trial on previous occasions. Among them were Jerome Houessou. a teacher previously held from March 1981 to August 1984, and Nestor Agbo, a peasant held from October 1983 to August 1984. Other prisoners of conscience whose unconditional release Amnesty International sought included Christophe Monsia Boni, a veterinary surgeon, arrested in September 1985, Alassance Tigri, a bank official arrested on 31 October 1985, and Daniel Djossouvi, a teacher who was arrested in Lomé, Togo, on 18 November 1985 and forcibly returned to Benin. In the cases of many of these detainees Amnesty International sought further information to determine whether they were prisoners of conscience, and called for their prompt and fair trial, or release. However, the organization received no reply.
The government publicly stated that the unrest in mid-1985 included demonstrations that were violent in character, and put this forward as one reason for the detentions. However, in most individual cases Amnesty International had information indicafing that this was not true. The organization also noted that the government body established to investigate the events of 1985 did not examine the alleged violence of the demonstrations nor did it charge anyone with a recognizably criminal offence; rather it questioned prisoners about their political sympathies and connections. Some of those apparently detained in connection with allegedly violent student demonstrations in the capital, Cotonou, were, for example, either not in Cotonou at the time (some were in other countries) or were arrested as long as six months after the demonstrations.
A persistent pattern of detention of people associated with unofficial organizations has been observed, notably since 1979 (see previous Amnesty International Reports). Among the prisoners of conscience held during 1986 were Didier d'Almeida, Emmanuel Alamou and Afolabi Biaou, who had all been held as prisoners of conscience before, released in a presidential amnesty in August 1984 and rearrested later that year. Among the cases being investigated by Amnesty International were those of Raphaël Lawani, a student arrested in June 1985, and Koffi Christophe Kinkpe, arrested by mid-1986.
All the prisoners of conscience and probable prisoners of conscience known to Amnesty International and still in detention at
26	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
the end of 1986 were held either in Camp Séro Kpéra in Parakou, central Benin, or in the Prison civile in Segbana in the northeast of the country which appeared to have been specifically allocated for political prisoners.
All the political prisoners of concern to Amnesty International were believed to have been interrogated by the Commission nationale permanente d'enquête de sécurité d'Etat, National Commission of Inquiry on State Security. The purpose of this Commission, headed by a senior military officer, was apparently to establish the extent of individuals' links with opposition groupings, in particular the PCD. The Commission was apparently able to recommend to President Kerekou the continued detention or release of suspects. For example, 50 political prisoners were released on 26 September 1986 on the order of the President, apparently following a recommendation by the Commission. According to Loi fondamentale, Benin's Constitution, no one can be arrested and detained without a decision by a popular Tribunal or prosecuting magistrate. However, in none of the cases where people were detained for their alleged connections with the PCD or other groups were charges brought.
During interrogation by the National Commission of Inquiry, which sat first in Cotonou and later in Parakou, many prisoners were tortured or ill-treated to elicit information about opposition groups. Individuals were reported to have been beaten and whipped, sometimes until they lost consciousness. One detainee suffered a broken arm as a result of this treatment. Other detainees were subjected to the "barrel torture" — the victim is rolled around inside a barrel which contains broken glass and stones. Another method of torture was the "rodéo", whereby prisoners are forced to crawl or walk barefoot over sharp stones while being beaten with sticks or rifle butts. On some occasions medical personnel were involved in determining whether a detainee was strong enough to endure torture. Medical advice was made available to some victims of torture but this was believed to have been inadequate. Torture was also reported to have been used to punish prisoners who complained about their treatment.
The death penalty was carried out in 1986 for what was believed to be the first time in several years. Six people convicted of armed robbery and murder were executed by firing-squad on 26 May. Amnesty International wrote to President Kerekou to express concern about the six executions and regret at the apparent change in policy on the use of the death penalty. The organization appealed to the President to grant clemency in any further cases of death sentences that came before him.
In August 1986 Amnesty International submitted information
27	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
about its concerns in Benin under the UN procedure for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations (the so-called "1503 procedure"). This submission was also sent to the government with an invitation to comment, but no reply was received.
