India
Amnesty International was concerned about the detention of hundreds of political detainees held without charge or trial under special "anti-terrorist" legislation or preventive detention laws. The organization was concerned that these laws lacked legal safeguards required by intemational human rights standards and that they allowed people to be detained for non-violently expressing their opinions. TTiere were allegations from most Indian states of ill-treatment and torture of detainees and some detainees allegedly died as a result. Amnesty Intemational was concerned that some alleged supporters of armed opposition groups were deliberately killed in "encounters" staged by the police, and that landless peasants were extrajudicially killed by police. The organization was also concemed about several executions.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Asia	229
Acts of political violence were reported from various states, including the Punjab, West Bengal, Bihar, Jammu and Kashmir and Andhra Pradesh. Armed groups in the Punjab demanding a separate Sikh state killed police, local officials and civilians. Reuters reported on 20 September that 480 political killings had taken place in the state between January and September. In West Bengal, supporters of the Gorkha National Liberation Front staged a violent campaign for a separate state, while in Andhra Pradesh some left-wing political groups advocating social and economic reform adopted violent methods.
Politically motivated arrests were reported from many Indian states. A number of those arrested were held in preventive detention under the National Security Act (NSA) which permits detainees to be held without charge or trial for up to one year (in the Punjab, two years). These periods of detention could be renewed indefinitely. Others were arrested under the 1985 Terrorist and Disruptive Activities Act. Amnesty International believed that the Act's provisions were so broad that people could be detained for non-violently expressing their political opinions (see Amnesty International Report 1986). Among the several hundred people reportedly arrested under the Act during 1986 were several whom Amnesty Intemational considered prisoners of conscience. On 12 August the editor of the fortnightly publication, Dalit Voice, was arrested for publishing an article which the government alleged was seditious. He was released one week later without having been charged. The editor and printer of an Urdu weekly, Nai Duniya, were arrested under the Act on 5 November and detained for 15 days for publishing, a year earlier, an interview with an expatriate Sikh leader advocating a separate Sikh state. Another prisoner of conscience was a Sikkimese Buddhist and former leader of the Nay a Sikkim Party, Captain Sonam Yongda, who was arrested on 6 January under the NSA for making a series of speeches, more than a year before his arrest, in which he allegedly criticized the incorporation of Sikkim into India and called on the Sikkimese to re-establish their lost rights. He was held without charge or trial and was reportedly suffering from recurring paralysis of the left side of the body.
In November Amnesty Intemational wrote to the authorities about the continued detention, apparently under the NSA, of 379 Sikh detainees held in Jodhpur Jail. Rajasthan. They were among some 1,500 people arrested when the Indian army attacked and entered the Golden Temple, Amritsar, in June 1984. Amnesty International expressed concern that the detainees had apparently been held beyond the two-year legal maximum and that there could be some among them who had been arrested simply for having been present in
230	Amnesty International Report 1987 Asia
the Golden Temple. Amnesty Intemational also stated that if these detainees were tried under the Terrorist Affected Areas (Special Courts) Act, they might not be given a fair trial since the Act permitted procedures incompatible with Article 14 of the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to which India is a party. The Act permitted special courts to try people on charges of "waging war": it was mandatory for special courts to sit in camera, courts could sit in jails and the identity of witnesses could be kept secret. The burden of proof was transferred from the prosecution to the defence, if the accused was in an area where firearms or explosives were used, or where the security forces were attacked or resisted. Appeals could be lodged only within 30 days of sentence. A special court was established in Jodhpur Jail which by August had, according to one report, started proceedings against these detainees, although no details had emerged by the end of 1986. All the detainees were reportedly charged with identical offences on the basis of cyclostyled "confessions" that they were members of the All India Sikh Students Federation or the Dal Khalsa (an outlawed Sikh organization). Sixty of the detainees in Jodhpur had been held in 1984 in Ladha Kothi Jail, Sangrur, Punjab, together with 30 others. An official commission established by the Punjab state government submitted a report in May which found evidence that the 90 detainees arrested at the Golden Temple in June 1984 had been tortured. The commission recommended compensation for the 90 detainees and disciplinary action against 22 police officers reportedly involved. Amnesty Intemational was investigating the cases of the 379 Sikh detainees in Jodhpur, urging the govemment either to release them or to give them a fair trial under ordinary procedures of criminal law.
In December Amnesty Intemational urged the release or fair trial without delay of Prakash Singh Badal, leader of the breakaway A kali Dal faction formed in May 1986, Gurcharan Singh Tohra, the newly elected President of the Shiromani Gurdwara Prabandhak Committee (SGPC), Temple Management Committee, and an estimated 200 members of the Akali Dal (Badal) faction and the All India Sikh Students Federation (AISSF). They were arrested and held without charge or trial under the provisions of the NSA in early December after 22 bus passengers, mostly Hindus, were killed in Hoshiarpur on 30 November 1986, an incident for which the Khalistan Liberation Force (the armed wing of the AISSF) had claimed responsibility. Subsequently parts of Punjab were declared "disturbed areas" and the state govemor asked the army to assist the police and paramilitary forces. The new Director General of Police of the Punjab, appointed in March 1986, announced new police and paramilitary operations aimed at the elimination or arrest of leaders and members of armed
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Asia	231
Sikh groups. Amnesty International received an increasing number of reports that some killings of Sikh activists in the state were the result of "fake encounters" staged by the police or paramilitary forces. According to these reports, the victims were delil^rately killed, some after capture. Amnesty Intemational was not able to investigate these reports but an official four-member committee, headed by a former judge, studied 35 "encounters" in the state and reported in February that almost all such cases in the Punjab were "fake encounters". On 25 June a magisterial inquiry found that the Border Security Force had been guilty of deliberate killings and recommended that charges of murder be brought against those responsible, but few inquiries into alleged extrajudicial killings were held. Extrajudicial killings were also reported from other parts of India, including West Bengal.
Of particular concern were re|X)rts from the state of Bihar where landless peasants increasingly opposed illegal land occupation or appropriation by local landowners. Left-wing political groups, some advocating peaceful change, as well as "Naxalites" (Maoist revolutionaries, some of whom resorted to violence), were also active in the state. Local landowners often employed criminals in private armies and operated in league with local police and politicians. One example of this was an incident in Arwal, Gaya district, where a dispute developed over a plot of government land which had been used by villagers but which was appropriated by a local landowner. In league with police and local authorities the landowner had peasant huts on the plot demolished. On 19 April police surrounded the Gandhi Library where a protest meeting organized by the left-wing group Mazdoor Kisan Sanghash Samiti (MKSS) was attended by over 500 people. Police opened fire and killed 23 men, women and children. The police claimed they fired at MKSS workers trying to attack the nearby police station with lethal weapons, but local witnesses, journalists and representatives of civil liberties bodies found no evidence of this. Tlie Gaya District magistrate, visiting the spot one hour later, reportedly described the police firing as "unwarranted, unorganized and uncontrolled". There were widespread demands for a judicial investigation and in August 25,000 people were reportedly arrested to prevent demonstrations before the state assembly. The Bihar Government did not order an independent investigation but asked a member of the Board of Revenue to carry out an official inquiry. On 6 October he was reported to have found that the firing was not "fully justified" and that the police had used "excessive force". The Supreme Court was reported to have ordered the state government to grant compensation to the victims. By the end of 1986 it had not been paid and no action was known to have been taken against those responsible.
232	Amnesty International Report 1987 Asia
Deaths in police custody allegedly as a result of torture or shooting continued to be reported from many Indian states including Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Union Territory of Delhi, Kamataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. In Andhra Pradesh, 11 such deaths were reported in the first nine months of the year, three of them during one week in September alone. In one case, a senior naval officer found seven wounds on the body of one of the victims, T. Muralidharan, who the police said had committed suicide in a police station. Amnesty Intemational expressed concern about these deaths but welcomed the state govemment's decision to hold a judicial inquiry. The outcome of the investigations were not known at the end of 1986. Amnesty Intemational also expressed concem about the deaths of several Sikhs in police custody in New Delhi. Among them was Dal jit Singh who died on 24 January in the custody of the New Delhi police. The police stated that he died of high blood pressure, but Amnesty Intemational received evidence that he died of torture. Suraj Singh died on 13 August in the Gandhi Nagar police station. Eastern Delhi. According to the police he hanged himself in the toilet, but relatives alleged he died of beatings in Shakarpur police station. Amnesty Intemational asked for a judicial inquiry in these cases but was unaware of any being instituted. However, in December a magisterial inquiry found that the death of Dayal Singh in a Delhi police station had been the result of torture and recommended that four police officers be charged with murder. In several other such cases police officers were reported to have been charged with murder.
Reports of torture and ill-treatment by the police were received from nearly all Indian states. A number of the victims were members of the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes. For example, tribal leader Shankar Yadu Lx)khande died in Narajangaon police station in March, according to the police by hanging, but according to members of the tribe, because of beatings in police custody. There were also repeated reports that tribal women had been raped by local police. In some cases the Central Bureau of Investigation investigated the allegations and was reported to have established that there was evidence of rape. In October the Supreme Court heard the report of a commission it had established which recorded statements by 584 people about rape by police of tribal women in Gujarat. The commission indicted local police and hospital doctors for covering up evidence of rape. In Jammu and Kashmir political prisoners complained of beatings in various jails, but most reported that torture took place during interrogation in police custody.
In 1986, as in previous years, dozens of people were sentenced to death, mainly for murder. In November the Minister for Home
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Asia	233
Affairs stated that 35 people had been executed in the three years ending 1985. In April the Indian Supreme Court confirmed a stay of execution for Daya Singh — who had been arrested in 1965 and sentenced to death for murder in 1978. The Supreme Court confirmed a previous ruling made in 1983 that a person sentenced to death may demand commutation as of right if the sentence has not been carried out within two years.
On 22 January three Sikhs — Satwant Singh, Kehar Singh and Balbir Singh — were sentenced to death on charges of murder and conspiracy to murder the late Prime Minister Indira Gandhi. The trial took place in Delhi's maximum security Tihar Jail. On 3 December the New Delhi High Court dismissed the appeals of the three men who said they would be appealing to the Supreme Court.
Throughout 1986 Amnesty International wrote to the Prime Minister and other government officials reiterating its proposal for an Amnesty Intemational delegation to visit India to discuss the intemational protection of human rights as well as its human rights concerns in India. However, by the end of 1986 the govemment had failed to respond.
