Poland
Amnesty International was concemed about the arrest and detention of hundreds of prisoners of conscience and welcomed the release of almost all of them under a wide-ranging amnesty. The organization received allegations that some political prisoners were ill-treated and that others were denied the right to choose their own legal representatives. It was also concemed about legislation which endangered the right to a fair trial and about short-term detentions of people for the non-violent exercise of their right to freedom of expression. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about the death penalty.
According to official figures there were 159 political prisoners in March. By July Amnesty Intemational believed that there were over 250 political prisoners, most of whom had been arrested since the limited act of clemency announced in November 1985 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1986). The majority were detained because of their involvement in underground activities of the banned trade union Solidarity or in the production and distribution of unauthorized literature and were considered by Amnesty Intemational to be prisoners of conscience.
Zbigniew Bujak was the chairperson of Solidarity in Warsaw and a founder member of the Provisional Coordinating Committee (TKK) — the underground Solidarity leaderehip formed after the declaration of martial law in December 1981. He was arrested on 31 May after
Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe	305
being in hiding since martial law was imposed. He was cnarged with preparing to overthrow the state under Article 128 of the penal code. Arrested on the same day were Ewa Kulik, reportedly an organizer of the underground press in Warsaw, who had also been in hiding since martial law was imposed, and Konrad Bielinski, who had escaped from a martial law internment camp in 1982 and joined the TKK in Warsaw. Julita and Tomasz Mirkowicz, at whose apartment Zbigniew Bujak was arrested, were arrested on 18 August, the day after their return from the USA. Also arrested in connection with Zbigniew Bujak's arrest were: Alicja Komorowska and Zbigniew Lewicki who reportedly possessed keys to the apartment; and Julita Mirkowicz's father, a senior Foreign Ministry official. All were released in September under the amnesty.
Amnesty Intemational took up the cases of Zbigniew Bogacz and four others from Katowice. They were sentenced on 9 April by the Mikolow regional court to between one and a half and three and a half years' imprisonment for producing and distribufing leaflets calling for a 15-minute strike. They were also released under the terms of the amnesty.
On 17 July the Sejm (Parliament) approved an amnesty law which came into effect on 23 July. The law enabled courts and procurators to order releases before 15 September. Political prisoners excluded from the amnesty were those convicted of: high treason; participation in a conspiracy against the Polish People's Republic; espionage; sabotage and activity detrimental to the socialized economy; preparations for high treason or conspiracy; membership of an association detrimental to the Polish People's Republic or of an underground or criminal organization; so-called "small economic sabotage"; and recidivists. The Public Prosecutor could ask the Supreme Court to release those prisoners whose offences fell outside the scope of amnesty law. Additionally, those people who had not been charged by 17 July with committing a crime against the state or public order could benefit from the law if by 31 December they voluntarily reported and confessed to the authorities, or to a Polish diplomatic or consular mission abroad.
On 12 September the authorities announced that all political prisoners except those charged with terrorism, espionage, sabotage or giving away state secrets would be released under the terms of the amnesty. On 15 September it was announced that 225 political prisoners had been released.
Not included in the amnesty were some people imprisoned for refusing to do military service on conscientious grounds, for example Wojciech Jankowski and Jaroslaw Nakielski, both members of the "Freedom and Peace" movement (RWP) which demands an
306	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
alternative to military service. Wojciech Jankowski was sentenced on 23 December 1985 to three and a half years' imprisonment for refusing to do military service (see Amnesty International Report 1986). Jaroslaw Nakielski was arrested on 15 April for "persistently refusing to serve in the army". He was reportedly transferred to a psychiatric hospital from which he escaped. He was rearrested on 15 September while on his way to report to the authorities so as to benefit from the amnesty. Amnesty International adopted both as prisoners of conscience. They were both released by early November. Another RWP member, Ryszard Bonowski, was arrested on 26 July for refusing to do military service. He remained in detention until his trial on 1 October when he was sentenced to two years' imprisonment suspended for three years.
Amnesty International also received reports stating that there were up to 300 Jehovah's Witnesses serving prison sentences in 1986 for refusing to do military service. The organization was able to obtain details on only four of these prisoners who were all adopted as prisoners of conscience: Zenon Katulski, Jan Plitt and Bronislaw Kreft, were sentenced to three and a half years, two and a half and two and a half years' imprisonment respectively in December 1985; Tadeusz Gorczynski was sentenced to two and a half years in early 1986. To Amnesty International's knowledge all four were still in detention at the end of 1986.
The organization appealed on behalf of Leszek Moczulski, leader of the Confederation for an Independent Poland (KPN) (see Amnesty International Report 1986), who was sentenced to four years' imprisonment on 22 April. He was reportedly denied adequate medical treatment after suffering heart attacks in detention on the night of 1/2 July and again on 27^August. He was released, along with other KPN members, in September under the amnesty. Among the other prisoners of conscience released under the amnesty were senior Solidarity activists Wladyslaw Frasyniuk and Bogdan Lis; Jan Kostecki of the Szczecin Committee in the Defence of the Rule of Law, imprisoned on 23 May after his appeal was turned down (see Amnesty International Report 1986)\ and Marek Adamkiewicz whose imprisonment in 1984 had led to the formation of the RWP (see Amnesty International Report 1986).
Amnesty International received numerous reports that detainees and convicted prisoners of conscience were ill-treated. It appealed on behalf of Wladyslaw Frasyniuk (see Amnesty International Report 1986) who was allegedly severely beaten by warders in Lubsko prison on 26 March after refusing to cooperate with the prison authorities when they tried to move him by force into solitary confinement. Before the beating, the prisoner with whom Wladyslaw Frasyniuk
Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe	307
shared his cell was taken out and the cells nearby were emptied. According to reports, a group of 30 warders then entered and systematically beat Wladyslaw Frasyniuk with their fists and kicked him in the stomach and back. He was then put into solitary confinement for a month.
Amnesty International received reports that some political detainees due to be tried in military courts were denied the right to choose their own legal representatives. Solidarity activists Tadeusz Jedynak and Bogdan Borusewicz, arrested in June 1985 and 11 January 1986 respectively, were reportedly refused lawyers of their choice. Both were charged with "preparation to overthrow the state by force" under Article 128 in connecfion with Article 123 of the penal code, but were released in September under the terms of the amnesty.
On 24 October the Sejm passed legislation introducing new offences into the Code of Petty Offences. These included participation in "actions designed to foster public disquiet", unauthorized publishing activities and banned organizations "if the range of the deed or its effect are not extensive". Previously, such offences had usually been prosecuted under Article 282a of the penal code which carried prison sentences of up to three years' imprisonment. The new legislation transferred such cases to misdemeanour courts which could impose a maximum sentence of three months' imprisonment or a fine of 50,000 ziotys (US$250) and where an "accelerated procedure" was applied. Under this "accelerated procedure" an investigation is conducted by the police alone (without involving the Public Prosecutor's Office) and has to be completed within 48 hours. A trial is held at the end of the 48 hours at which the police stand in for the Public Prosecutor and the case is heard by a single judge. An appeal against sentence can be lodged. Because of the speed of the procedure, Amnesty International was concemed that there would be insufficient time for defendants to prepare a defence. For example, on 11 November Daniel Korona, a student, was detained after leaflets calling for the commemoration of Poland's independence in 1918 had been thrown out of a window in Warsaw. On 12 November he was sentenced to a fine of 50,000 zl under Article 52a of the misdemeanour code for distributing an illegal publication, a charge he denied. Reportedly, the only prosecution witness at the hearing told the tribunal that he had intuitively sensed that Daniel Korona had thrown the leaflets because he acted suspiciously when leaving the building. The defence lawyer was reportedly refused access to the case file and was also initially refused entry into the tribunal.
Another example of the use of the "accelerated procedure" followed the arrest in Warsaw on 15 June of Joanna Wierzbicka-
308
Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
Rusiecka and five others in connection with the production of an unauthorized publication. At their first hearing the following day they reportedly had no defence counsel other than a lawyer who happened to be in court on another matter, who refused to act for them owing to unfamiliarity with the case and the number of defendants involved. On 23 June, by which time they did have defence counsel, they were sentenced to between 12 and 18 months' imprisonment. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about allegations that some of the defendants were ill-treated by the police following arrest. They were all released under the amnesty.
After the amnesty Amnesty International continued to receive reports of people being arrested and detained for short periods for attempting to exercise their right to non-violent freedom of expression. At least 22 people in Warsaw and Krakow alone were detained and fined by misdemeanour courts for participating in peaceful demonstrations on 11 November marking the anniversary of Poland's independence after the First World War. In December Francisek Kocik and Stanislaw Szyba were among those detained and fined. Some people also had their cars confiscated by misdemeanour courts for transporting unofficial publications.
Amnesty International leamed of the imposition of seven death sentences and of two executions, in each case for murder.
