Thailand
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concerned about the imprisonment of people convicted of "lese majesty" because they had expressed poUtical opinions on matters involving the Royal Family. It was also concerned about the prolonged detention without charge or trial of political prisoners, and about trial procedures for political prisoners which did not always meet intemational standards. There were allegations of arbitrary killing, torture or ill-treatment of Kampuchean refugees by the military and allegations that a number of criminal prisoners were deliberately killed while trying to escape. Five death sentences were reportedly carried out during 1986 and at least 26 people were sentenced to death.
In January three prisoners of conscience convicted of "lese majesty" — Samaan Khongsuphon, Thawan Saengkaanjanaanon and Phongtheep Manuuphiphatphong — were pardoned by King Bhumibol Adulyadej (see Amnesty International Report 1984). Rattana Uttaphan, another prisoner of conscience convicted of "lese majesty", was released in May, but a fifth, Anan Seenaakhan, remained in prison. Phromneet Baanthip, whose conviction of "lese majesty" the organization continued to investigate, also remained in prison (see Amnesty International Report 1986). In a letter to the King in December, Amnesty Intemational urged him to release Sanan Wongsuthii who had been sentenced to five years' imprisonment on charges of "lese majesty" in November, and to drop the charges of "lese majesty" against Wiira Musikaphong, Secretary General of the Democrat Party and a member of parliament. These charges arose from speeches he made during the parliamentary election campaign in July.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concerned that people arrested for alleged "communistic activities" could be held without charge or trial for up to 480 days (see Amnesty International Report 1986). Some of the 25 people reportedly arrested for "communistic activities" during 1986 were still t^ing held without charge at the end of the year.
The organization wrote to Prime Minister General Prem Tinsula-nonda reiterating its concern that people tried for political offences under martial law were denied the right to appeal, and expressed concern at the delays in concluding the trials of some political suspects.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Europe	273
Amnesty Intemational also wrote to the Prime Minister in May about reports that three Kampuchean refugees had been tortured by members of the armed forces' Task Force 80. The three had been tortured while held incommunicado in a prison inside Khao I Dang refugee camp on suspicion of involvement in armed attacks on the camp by Kampuchean "bandits". The organization urged the govemment to investigate and prosecute those found responsible. Amnesty Intemational also urged that the three either be released or charged and tried, and that they be granted full access to lawyers and representatives of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees. In response. Squadron Leader Prasong Soonsiri, then Secretary General of the Thai National Security Council, denied the allegations and called on Amnesty Intemational to re-examine its information, while indicating that formal charges would be brought against the three men. In June an Amnesty Intemational delegation visited Thailand and met the three men at a civilian prison to which they had been transferred under court remand. On the basis of their evidence Amnesty International concluded that they had been tortured by being bumed with a hot flat iron, as well as by other methods. Amnesty Intemational urged that they be allowed proper medical treatment and the opportunity to seek asylum abroad. During the delegation's visit, the three met legal counsel for the first time. They were subsequently tried for armed robbery but in December the court decided to drop the case for lack of evidence. The authorities then allowed them to resettle abroad.
When Amnesty Intemational published its findings in July confirming the torture. Squadron Leader Prasong publicly stated that Amnesty Intemational had received information about the case from two unnamed Amnesty Intemational members in Thailand. He reportedly accused them of having been associated with the Communist Party and suggested that they might be arrested. Amnesty International denied that it had received any information from its members in Thailand, and stated that the organization would be deeply concemed if any retaliatory measures were taken against anyone for allegedly providing information. No arrests took place.
During 1986 Amnesty Intemational also received allegations that other Kampucheans had been beaten and forced into cesspools at the Thai military camp of Kamput. In November a man held in custody by Task Force 80 at Khao I Dang camp was allegedly deliberately shot after attempting to escape from detention in the camp prison.
Amnesty Intemational expressed concem at reports that two criminal inmates at Sakon Nakhom provincial prison were killed by security authorities to whom they had surrendered following an attempted escape. Six other prisoners, held in Chonburii and
274	Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe
Nakhom Siithammaraat provincial prisons and in Baang Khwaang central prison in Bangkok, were allegedly killed by prison officials during 1986 to punish them for trying to escape.
Amnesty International urged the government not to execute 13 prisoners whom the organization was able to identify by name, who were sentenced to death during 1986 for murder and heroin trafficking. In December the sentence on Surachai sae Daan was commuted to life imprisonment by the King. In a letter welcoming this, the organization urged him to commute all other death sentences also. Five prisoners sentenced in previous years were executed in 1986.
