Libya
Amnesty International was concemed about renewed official calls for the "physical liquidation" of political opponents of the govemment, some of whom were in detention. It was also concerned about the continued detention of 75 prisoners of conscience. Some political prisoners were reportedly detained without trial, after being acquitted by the courts or after the expiry of their sentences. Reports of torture were received and the organization leamed of one execution.
The General People's Ojngress, which held its annual ordinary session between 25 February and 3 March 1986, did not call for the "physical liquidation" of govemment opponents in its final resolutions, as it had in previous years. There were also statements in January and March by Major 'Abd al-Salam Jallud suggesting that the policy was no longer in use. However, other official calls for the "physical liquidation" of political opponents were renewed during 1986. In a speech broadcast by Tripoli television on 14 January, Colonel Mu'ammar Gaddafi reportedly referred to "Libyan Muslim Brothers . . . Libyan Ba'thists, Libyan monarchists, mnaway entrepreneurs and middlemen, and drop-out students". He reportedly stated: "They collaborate with American intelligence against their own country! . . . hence we call them stray dogs. If we find them abroad we kill them, if they come here we throw them in the streets.
362	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
we treat them as dogs." In an apparent reference to attempts on the life of Libyan opponents in Egypt (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1985 and 1986) Colonel Gaddafi reportedly stated in June that: "Those Libyans who went to Egypt — went to liquidate Libyans . .. We continue with this and this is the resolution of the Libyan people." (Radio Tri|X)li, 11 June 1986). Further calls for the pursuit and elimination of "enemies of the Libyan people" and of "traitors" were issued in March and May by the Basic People's Congresses of New Benghazi and Bayda Central. An official radio station announced on 18 May that "Egyptian revolutionary forces and Arab masses in the Great Jamahiriya" had called for the "physical liquidation" of detained members of an Egyptian "spy ring". At the end of October several Basic People's Congresses from all over the country sent messages to Colonel Gaddafi urging the "physical liquidation" of a group of prisoners referred to in the Libyan news media as the "group of the enemies of God". One of these prisoners, Ahmad Muhammad al-Fallah, reportedly made a confession on Libyan television on 15 October. He apparently said that the group had received orders from United States intelligence agencies to assassinate Libyan "revolutionary elements" and "friends of the Libyan people who help them to be strong militarily". Amnesty Intemational appealed to the Libyan authorities not to execute the prisoners. Information received by Amnesty Intemational from the Libyan authorities in December indicated that eight of these prisoners had not been executed and were going to be brought to trial.
Muhammad 'Ashur, a former Libyan diplomat resident abroad, was assassinated in 1986, possibly in implementation of the policy of "physical liquidation". He was reportedly found shot dead in East Berlin on 3 March.
Amnesty Intemational continued to work for the release of 75 prisoners of conscience and received reports that two of them had been executed in 1983. 'Abdullah Bilqasim al-Misalati and Salih *Ali al-Zamq Nawwal, who were arrested in 1973, were serving life sentences until April 1983 when they were retried and sentenced to death for membership of the Islamic Liberation Party (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984). Amnesty Intemational was seeking clarification of the fate of the two prisoners. Among the other prisoners of conscience known to Amnesty Intemational were people arrested in 1973 for membership of a Marxist political organization, students arrested in 1976 for opposing govemment interference in student affairs, and 16 writers and joumalists arrested in 1978 and convicted of forming a political organization. During 1986 no reply was received from the Libyan authorities to any of Amnesty
Amnesty International RefX>rt 1987 Middle East/N. Africa	363
International's communications about these 75 prisoners of conscience, some of whom were under sentence of death or serving life sentences.
Amnesty Intemational received reports that political prisoners in Libya were often held without trial or after having been acquitted or having served their sentences. Among those reportedly held without trial were eight people arrested following an attack by members of the National Front for the Salvation of Libya on Colonel Gaddafi's headquarters in Bab al-'Aziziyah in May 19^. The organization also learned of dozens of political prisoners arrested since 1983 whose legal status and whereabouts had not been disclosed and was seeking further information on them.
In October Libya paid US$500,000 compensation to the Norwegian Govemment for the torture and ill-treatment of Norwegian sailors and the death under torture of one of them in May 1984 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1985 and 1986). However, the investigation into the death of the sailor, Bjorn Pedersen, promised by Libya in July 1985 was reported not to have taken place. During 1986, as in previous years. Amnesty Intemational received little information on the treatment of prisoners. However, reports did confirm that torture methods such as falaqa (beating on the soles of the feet) and farruj (the prisoner is hung upside down from a perch inserted between the knees with wrists and ankles bound and is beaten intermittently) have been used in recent years.
Amnesty Intemational received reports that Isma'il Hasan al-Sanussi Isma'il was executed on 1 August in the town of Waddan. He was believed to have been sentenced to seven years' imprisonment after his arrest in 1984. The organization did not know the charges on which he had been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment, nor was it aware of any further judicial proceedings before his execution. Amnesty International reiterated its unconditional opposition to the death penalty and recalled UN Resolution 35/172 of 15 December 1980 which set minimum standards for safeguarding defendants in capital cases, including guaranteeing the most careful legal procedures and the right of appeal.
364	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
