Singapore
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the release of one prisoner of conscience who had been detained without trial for 20 years. It was also concerned about the use of the death penalty, which was mandatory for drugs offences.
Chia Thye Poh, a former member of parliament representing the opposition Barisan Socialis, Socialist Front, had been detained since October 1966 under the Intemal Security Act (ISA) which provided for indefinite detention without judicial review at the discretion of the Minister for Home Affairs. Chia Thye Poh had never been charged, although in May 1985 the govemment alleged that he was a member of the outlawed Communist Party of Malaya (CPM) who had been instmcted to penetrate the Barisan Socialis in order to destabilize the government. The authorities persistently demanded what amounted to a confession of guilt in exchange for his release. On 28 October the Foreign Minister stated that Chia Thye Poh would be released if he gave "a simple undertaking to renounce the use of force to overthrow the Govemment" and that "altematively [he can] go to any country willing to accept him". Amnesty Intemational believed that Chia Thye Poh was imprisoned because of his non-violent political activities and appealed again for his unconditional release in its "Prisoner of the Month" campaign in September.
Amnesty International learned of one execution, in January, of a labourer for dmg trafficking, and of the imposition of the death sentence on a Malaysian, Tan Sek Cheong, who was convicted of
Amnesty Intemational Report 1981 Asia	264
drug trafficking in May. The organization appealed for the sentence to be commuted. Under the Misuse of Drugs Act (1973) as amended in 1975, possession of, and unauthorized traffic in over 15 grams of heroin or fixed amounts of other drugs incurred a mandatory death penalty. At least 20 prisoners convicted of drug offences had been executed since 1975. Three other prisoners, including two women convicted in 1981 for the ritual murder of two children, were still awaiting the outcome of their appeals against the death sentence.
Amnesty Intemational also remained concemed about the routine imposition of mandatory canings of three to 12 strokes for a wide variety of offences ranging from rape to a second conviction for putting up posters without permission, on the grounds that it constitutes cmel, inhuman or degrading punishment.
On 1 August parliament adopted amendments to the Newspaper and Printing Presses Act (1974), empowering the Minister for Communications and Information to curtail the distribution of foreign periodicals without actually banning them. Anyone illegally selling or distributing copies of a restricted publication became liable to a prison term of up to two years and a fine of up to S$10,000 (US$4,680). A leading intemational weekly was declared a restricted publication and had its circulation immediately curtailed. In September parliament passed amendments to the Parliament (Privilege, Immunities and Powers) Act (1%2), giving parliament the power to suspend any member of parliament's immunity from civil proceedings for statements made in the house and to imprison a member for the remainder of the current session in addition to imposing a fine of up to S$50,000 if found guilty of dishonourable conduct, abuse of privilege or contempt. Amnesty Intemational was monitoring the application of both amendments to the law.
