Switzerland
Amnesty International was concerned about the imprisonment of conscientious objectors to military service and the return to Sri Lanka of members of the Tamil minority, reportedly against their will.
Regular periods of military service are compulsory for men aged between 20 and 50 and there is no alternative civilian service. There is limited access to unarmed military service for conscripts who can prove that the use of arms would result in "a severe conflict of conscience" on religious or ethical grounds. Article 81 of the Military Penal Code allows military tribunals to sentence people refusing military service to up to three years' imprisonment although, in practice, sentences rarely exceed one year. If a tribunal recognizes an individual's "severe conflict of conscience" on religious or ethical grounds, a sentence of up to six months' imprisonment may be passed. This is normally served in the form of arrêts répressifs, a system of imprisonment allowing prescribed work during the daytime outside the place of detention or, more exceptionally, in the form of "semi-detention", allowing the objector to continue normal or approved employment during the day. In 1985 the Federal Military Department conducted a public consultation on the possibility of "decriminalizing" certain categories of conscientious objection to military service (see Amnesty International Report 1986). On 2 July 1986 the Federal Council instructed the Federal Military Department to draw up a draft law for parliament's consideration, taking into account the findings of the consultation.
Amnesty International worked on the cases of 45 people sentenced to imprisonment of three to 12 months for refusing armed military service. A number of these cases were still under investigation by Amnesty International at the end of 1986 to determine whether they were prisoner of conscience. Among those adopted as prisoners of
Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe	315
conscience were conscientious objectors who had applied unsuccessfully for unarmed military service and objectors who had refused all forms of military service but had expressed their willingness to perform an altemative civilian service.
On 10 October Amnesty Intemational telexed the head of the Federal Department of Justice and Police urging that members of the Sri Lankan Tamil minority should not be retumed against their will to Sri Lanka, in view of continued widespread arbitrary arrests, torture, extrajudicial killings and "disappearances" there. During 1986 Amnesty International received reports that 18 Tamils had been retumed by Switzerland. However, on 16 October the Delegate for Refugees of the Federal Department of Justice and Police announced that the authorities were not at that time considering repatriating all Tamils whose requests for asylum had been rejected since the situation in the north and east of Sri Lanka was "precarious". Tamil cases would be examined individually before a decision to return anyone was made. In the view of the Delegate, some 40 asylum seekers could be returned in view of the experience of previous retumed Tamils and because "they had relations in the quieter regions of the island". The repatriation of Tamils convicted of offences relating to drugs would continue.
During 1986 Switzerland ratified the UN Convention against Torture.
