Egypt
Amnesty International's concems included the short-term detention of hundreds of political prisoners, some of whom were prisoners of conscience, under state of emergency legislation; the detention of other individuals because of their religious or political beliefs; torture; and the use of the death penalty.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed that state of emergency legislation appeared to be used to silence criticism of the govemment or to limit freedom of religious expression, and that prisoners of conscience were held without charge or trial under its provisions. The organization's concem was increased by evidence that certain individuals were arrested repeatedly. Amnesty Intemational has frequently expressed its concern that this legislation contains insufficient safeguards to ensure that violations of the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to which Egypt is a party, do not occur; particularly with regard to freedom of expression and the right to be charged and tried within a reasonable period of time. In May, the Egyptian parliament voted to extend the state of emergency for a further two years.
Hundreds of members and supporters of various Islamic groups were detained without charge or trial under state of emergency legislation, some of whom might have been prisoners of conscience. In March Amnesty Intemational wrote to the authorities expressing its concem about the detention of 15 students from Minya University, for allegedly producing and distributing unauthorized leaflets and magazines. In May Amnesty Intemational sought further information about the arrest and detention of 55 men, including the prominent religious leader Dr Omar Abdul Rahman, following clashes with security forces at a religious meeting in Aswan on 30 April. Amnesty Intemational received further reports of the arrests of large numbers of Islamic activists throughout 1986 from all parts of the country, as well as allegations that some of these detainees had been tortured or ill-treated. Some defendants in cases referred for trial involving Islamic groups were tried in (Emergency) Supreme State Security Courts before a military tribunal, instead of the usual tribunal of civilian judges. Other detainees held under state of emergency legislation included members of various non-orthodox religious groups. Amnesty Intemational believed that these detainees might have been prisoners of conscience.
During 1986 Amnesty Intemational leamed of many arrests in
338	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
connection with trade union activity. On 7,8 and 9 February over 300 arrests were reported in the industrial town of Mahalla A1 Kubra in connection with a strike by textile workers. Amnesty Intemational asked the authorities for the reason for these arrests, and called for those detained solely for taking part in non-violent trade union activity to be released. After two weeks, 33 were still in detention, but they were all released without charge in April.
A raii strike on 9 July led to the arrest of hundreds of railworkers in Cairo. Forty-five of them were still in detention in October and 37 of the 45 were charged and referred for trial before an (Emergency) Supreme State Security Court under Article 374 of the penal code which forbids strikes by workers in the public sector. The court released all the railworkers in late October, but their trial was still continuing at the end of 1986.
In December Amnesty Intemational sought further information about the detention of 44 alleged members of a secret communist organization, At-Tiyar Ath-Thawri, The Revolutionary Tendency, detained in Cairo for reportedly producing and distributing publications critical of govemment p>olicy.
A number of individuals were detained apparently because of their conversion from Islam to Christianity. Six members of the Coptic Evangelical Church were arrested between January and May, apparently because of their decision to convert to the Christian faith. Tlie six were released from detention in July, but charges under Article 98 of the penal code, concerning attempting to divide national unity, were not dropped. Two Moroccan and two Tunisian Christians were detained in Alexandria in similar circumstances on 24 April. The four were deported to France in October after six months' imprisonment without formal charge.
On 24 May the verdict in two cases relating to the banned Egyptian Communist Party was announced. In the first, 12 people were convicted of producing and possessing publications undermining the basic principles of the constitution, the political system, and society. They were sentenced to between one and three years' imprisonment. In the second, related, case 22 people were convicted, but their sentences of one to three years had to be ratified by President Mubarak before coming into force. Of the 12 convicted in the first case, nine were imprisoned, the remaining three having escaped arrest. Amnesty Intemational believed them to be prisoners of conscience, held for their non-violent opposition to govemment policies. Two people received prison sentences in both cases, which were to mn consecutively.
In June Egypt acceded to the UN Convention against Torture and Other Cmel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
Amnesty International RefX>rt 1987 Middle East/N. Africa	339
Amnesty International wrote to the authorities welcoming this step, and seeking information about procedures and results of investigations into allegations of torture since October 1981. No reply was received.
In September Amnesty Intemational wrote to the govemment expressing its concern about reports that defendants in cases involving certain Islamic groups had been tortured. The letter named 43 members and supporters of Islamic groups detained for allegedly taking part in attacks on cinemas, video tape shops, and shops selling alcohol, and for alleged anti-govemment activities, who had reportedly been tortured in Tora Prison. The torture methods described to Amnesty Intemational included: electric shocks, cigarettes being extinguished on the skin, beating with sticks and whips, and forcible insertion of objects into the anus. Official forensic medical reports stated that in some cases the physical scarring was consistent with the alleged method and timing of torture. Amnesty Intemational called for all allegations of torture to be impartially investigated, and asked what measures had been taken to ensure that torture did not occur in Egypt's prisons. No reply was received.
Amnesty Intemational noted reports that approximately 40 members of the security police had been charged in connection with allegations of torture made by defendants in the mass trials of alleged members of the Al Jihad organization, who were arrested in 1981. The first hearing in this trial before South Cairo Criminal Court took place on 23 December 1986, and further hearings were scheduled for Febmary 1987. Other members of the security forces were reportedly under investigation in connection with allegations of torture.
The organization was concemed by the death in a prison hospital of Suleiman Khater on 7 January. He had been sentenced to life imprisonment in December 1985 for the murder of seven Israeli civilians at the Egypt/Israel border in the Sinai Desert. Official reports that he had committed suicide were widely questioned, and Amnesty Intemational called for a public inquiry into the circumstances surrounding his death.
Amnesty International recorded 14 death sentences in 1986; 12 for drug-related offences and two for murder. In each case Amnesty International sought commutation of the death sentences. Three executions were recorded by the organization in the course of the year; all the victims had been convicted of murder.
340	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
