Saudi Arabia
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the long-term detention without trial, often incommunicado, of political prisoners, some of whom might have been prisoners of conscience; allegations of torture and ill-treatment, including the amputation of limbs as a judicial punishment; and the death penalty.
In 1986 Amnesty Intemational documented the names of over 140 alleged political opponents or critics of the govemment reportedly
368	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
detained in the eastern provinces of Saudi Arabia (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1986). Those arrested were said to be Shi'a Muslims and included students, teachers, religious scholars and employees at oil installations. Among them was Makkiya 'Abdallah Hamdan who was reportedly arrested after midnight at her home on 24 July after trying to discover the whereabouts of her husband who had been arrested in May. Amnesty Intemational was seeking further information on the arreste and the detainees' whereabouts.
At the end of 1986 Amnesty International was also seeking further information on the continued detention of 11 Egyptian nationals reportedly held without trial since 1979. Among them were Usama Awadh Sa'd, a medical student at Cairo University, and Abdul Moneim Abdul Hamid Bayoumi Sultan, a student at the Institute of Health in Cairo, Egypt. According to reports received from the detainees' families, the 11 were among a large group of pilgrims arrested following the seizure of the Grand Mosque in Mecca in November 1979 by an armed group. Following the arrests, 63 were tried and executed and 107 received prison sentences of varying lengths. Many were released after investigation but the 11, the majority of whom were students, remained in detention without trial.
In September Amnesty Intemational appealed to the authorities to investigate the reported death in custody of Ahmad Mahdi Khamis, a Saudi national working at the British Bank of al-Dammam. Ahmad Mahdi Khamis was reportedly arrested on 11 August with several others from his village, Hillah Mahish, in the Eastem Province. The reasons for his arrest were not known but appeared to be connected with the appearance of opposition slogans on walls and the distribution of opposition leaflets in the village. The detainees were held incommunicado in al-Dammam Central Prison. On the night of 23 August his body was returned to his family with instructions that it should be buried without the customary funeral. Reports received by Amnesty International stated that his b<xiy bore the marks of torture.
In 1986 Amnesty Intemational received several reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees. As in previous years, torture or ill-treatment apparently occurred during the period immediately after arrest when detainees were held incommunicado. Among the practices described were beatings on the soles of the feet or all over the body; submersion in water; and sleep deprivation. Prisoners in cells were sometimes shackled by their ankles and some had been held in solitary confinement for over two years. Amnesty Intemational was unable to investigate these reports fully but was concemed by their consistency, from a variety of sources, which appeared to indicate a pattem of torture and ill-treatment.
Amnesty Intemational also expre^d its concem about cruel,
Amnesty International RefX>rt 1987 Middle East/N. Africa	369
inhuman and degrading punishment being judicially imposed in the form of amputation of limbs. On 24 October four men had their right hands and left feet amputated ("cross-limb" amputation) in the town of Abha, 'Asir province. The four amputations, following convictions for burglary and armed robbery, brought to 11 the number of amputations documented by Amnesty Intemational in 1986. These were also the first instances of "cross-limb" amputation to be brought to the organization's attention for several years.
In September 1986 Amnesty International informed the Minister of the Interior of its concem about reports that Mohamed Lazrak, a Tunisian national sentenced to death in absentia on 10 July by the Military Court of Tunis, had been retumed against his will from Saudi Arabia to Tunisia. According to reports, Mohamed Lazrak was arrested by the Saudi authorities and handed over to the Tunisian authorities on 20 August. He appeared before the Military Court in Tunis on 23 August when the death sentence was upheld, and was executed on 2 September. Amnesty Intemational reiterated its opposition to the involuntary retum of individuals to any country where there are reasonable grounds to fear that they may be imprisoned for their non-violent conscientiously held beliefs or be subjected to torture or execution. Amnesty Intemational sought clarification of the circumstances surrounding the return of Mohamed Lazrak to Tunisia and sought assurances that the necessary measures would be taken to ensure that such incidents did not recur. In response the Minister of the Interior stated that, contrary to Amnesty International's information, Mohamed Lazrak had not been forcibly retumed but had returned to Tunisia of his own accord.
In 1986 Amnesty Intemational leamed of 24 executions. In all but one case they followed convictions for murder and were carried out after the relatives of the murder victims had demanded Qisas (retribution). Under the law relatives may demand Qisas in the form of the death of the murderer or by financial settlement, or they may waive such a claim. As well as Saudi citizens those executed included six Pakistanis, one Yemeni and one Egyptian. In August Ahmet Giine§, a Turkish worker in Jeddah, who had been convicted of the murder of his wife E§e Gune§, was reported in the Turkish Daily News to have been reprieved after a Turkish Deputy intervened on his behalf with the victim's parents and obtained from them a document saying that Ahmet Gune§ should not be executed. In several communications during the year to the Saudi authorities Amnesty Intemational repeated its unconditional opposition to the death penalty and urged commutation of such sentences.
370	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
