Botswana
Amnesty International was concerned about the forcible repatriation of several refugees to Zimbabwe, where they faced possible torture, and about the use of the death penalty.
In February Makhatini Guduza, a recognized refugee with political asylum in Botswana, was arrested and taken to Plumtree in Zimbabwe, where he was handed over to the authorities. He was immediately detained and was still being held without trial in Zimbabwe at the end of 1986. Amnesty International considered that he might be a prisoner of conscience and was investigating reports that he had been tortured after his forcible return to Zimbabwe. Makhatini Guduza was a leading member of the Zimbabwean minority party, the Zimbabwe African People's Union (ZAPU) who had fled to Botswana in 1983. The Botswana Government justified his expulsion on the grounds that he was directly involved in armed opposition to the Zimbabwean Government. Similar allegations had also been made by the Zimbabwean Government, which had for some time sought to obtain his return. In March Amnesty International expressed its concern to the Botswana Government about the forcible return of Makhatini Guduza to Zimbabwe.
Amnesty International also received information that a number of other refugees and political exiles had been forcibly returned from Botswana to Zimbabwe since 1983, some of whom were still in detention without charge in Zimbabwe at the end of 1986. Those returned forcibly in 1986 included Jane Mathuthu and Albert Nkomo, both of whom were reportedly served with detention orders of indefinite duration on arrival in Zimbabwe, and were later charged with assisting "dissidents". Amnesty International was investigating whether they might be prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty International remained concerned about the use of the
28	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
death penalty. In June the organization appealed to President Ouett Masire seeking clemency for Maxwell Mhlanga and Joseph Moyo, two Zimbabwean refugees convicted of murder. At that stage, however, their appeal against conviction and sentence had not been heard and the organization had not learned its outcome by the end of 1986. It was not known whether any executions took place.
