Sudan
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the detention without trial of political prisoners, some of whom appeared to be prisoners of conscience; about allegations of torture and ill-treat-ment of prisoners; about sentences ot amputation and the retention of laws providing for judicial amputation; and about the use of the death penalty.
Armed conflict continued in several parts of the country between govemment forces and the Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA). Human rights abuses were re|X)rted on both sides of the conflict. These included the shooting down of a civilian aircraft in Malakal by the SPLA on 18 August, killing all 60 passengers, and the killing by government soldiers in Kosti in mid-December of 22 captured SPLA
Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa	105
guerrillas who had been wounded in battle.
The first multi-party elections in the country since 1968 took place in April, one year after the overthrow of the government of President Gaafar Mohamed Nimeiri and the assumption of power by the Transitional Military Council (TMC). On 6 May the TMC handed power to the elected government of the new Prime Minister, Sadiq el-Mahdi.
In February Amnesty International submitted a memorandum to the government prepared following its mission to Sudan in December
1985.	It welcomed the progress made since April 1985 in the protection of human rights but called for the repeal of legislation which continued to permit the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience. The organization also expressed concern about recent cases of detention without trial of political prisoners, calling for them to be charged and tried or released. Amnesty International also urged the abolition of the penalties of amputation, flogging, retribution iqisas), crucifixion and the death penalty and for the commutation of all such sentences. Safeguards to prevent torture or ill-treatment of prisoners were proposed and ratification of international and tegional human rights instruments recommended.
During 1986 several measures were taken by the authorities which coincided with the organization's recommendations, notably the accession on 18 March to the International Covenants on Civil and Political Rights and on Economic, Social and Cuhural Rights and the signature on 4 June of the UN Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
About 90 officials or supporters of the former government of President Nimeiri detained since April 1985 were released by April
1986.	A few were tried by State Security courts. They included former Vice-President Major General Omar Mohamed El-Tayeeb, who was convicted in April on charges of treason, espionage and corruption, and sentenced to life imprisonment. In December Major General Khalil Abbas Hassan and three other former army officers were convicted of rebellion for their part in the May 1%9 coup which brought President Nimeiri to power. They were sentenced to life imprisonment.
Twenty-one civilians, six police officers and 220 military personnel were held without charge or trial at the beginning of 1986 in connection with an alleged conspiracy against the government in September 1985. All the civilians were released uncharged, including the Reverend Philip Gabboush, leader of the Sudan National Party. The six police officers were charged with treason, tried and acquitted in July. The detained military personnel — mostly members of the Nuba ethnic group — were charged with mutiny and other related
106	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
offences and were to be court-martialled, but the trials had not started by the end of the year.
Amnesty International was concerned that 24 members of the Nationalist Socialist Alliance for the Salvation of the Country, arrested in December 1985 after launching their party, appeared to be held for their non-violent political opinions. They had criticized the government and expressed sup|X)rt for several aspects of President Nimeiri's rule. All were released on 23 March.
On 23 March the presidential power to form special State Security courts was abolished, thus ensuring that trials of political prisoners would in future be held before normal criminal courts, with the exception of the State Security court trials then in progress. On 1 April the State Security Act, which provided for detention without charge or trial for indefinitely renewable three-month periods, was also abolished. However, administrative detention without charge or trial for an indefinite period was still permitted under the Code of Criminal Procedure and also under the state of emergency, which remained in force throughout 1986. Several people were detained during 1986 under emergency regulations, including people holding banned demonstrations. In most instances they were released within hours or days, but Amnesty International learned of the detention of civilians by the military authorities in southern Sudan for longer periods. Mike Kilongson, a British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) reporter, was detained in Juba on the order of the military governor of Equatoria Region from 14 March to 13 May. He subsequently alleged that he had been tortured, and that of the 34 civilians who were detained with him, one was summarily executed and two died of starvation and medical neglect. Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to investigate the allegations of torture and harsh treatment of political prisoners and to ensure that all prisoners were either formally charged and brought to court or released. The organization called for them to be given immediate access to their families, lawyers and doctors.
In Malakai in mid-August 200 or more people were reportedly arrested and accused of links with the SPLA after the SPLA shot down a Sudan Airways aircraft. Most were soon released but 27 or more senior civil servants were still detained at the end of 1986 without charge or trial. They included Daniel Dhanho, Director of Roads in the regional administration, Amos Awan Gak, Director General of Agriculture, and James Tuch, a pharmacist. Amnesty International urged that they should be either charged or released, and was investigating whether they might have been arrested for their political opinions rather than any proven links with the SPLA.
No judicial amputations took place during 1986 but Amnesty
Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa	107
Intemational was concemed that about 40 prisoners remained under sentence of judicial amputation. On 4 February the Supreme Court confirmed 42 sentences of amputation and retribution but in August a resolution to the Constituent Assembly (parliament) by the Islamic National Front calling for the sentences to be carried out without further delay was defeated. By the end of 1986 the sentences were still under review by the Council of State.
The 1983 laws providing for penalties of amputation, retribution, flogging and crucifixion were technically still in force but only floggings continued to be imposed and carried out during 1986, mostly for alcohol offences. Proposals to abolish or amend these laws were under discussion during 1986. Amnesty International initiated a special relief project to provide artificial hands and feet for amputees, of whom there were 120 or more.
Amnesty International was investigating reports that prisoners sentenced to death and amputation were being held in leg irons. The organizafion was also concerned about reports that civilians detained in military custody on |x>litical grounds were subjected to ill-treatment and harsh conditions.
No executions were known to have taken place in 1986, although about 50 people were under sentence of death from previous years. In January Amnesty Intemational appealed to the govemment to establish an inquiry into the execution in January 1985 of Mahmoud Mohamed Taha, leader of the Republican Movement, who was executed for his opinions and religious beliefs. No such official inquiry took place but on 25 April the Sources of Judicial Decision Act (1983), under which he had been charged, was amended to ensure that advocating a new interpretation of Islam could not be a criminal offence. On 18 November the Constitutional Court ruled that his execufion had been unconstitutional.
108
Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
