Mozambique
Amnesty International was concerned about the detention without trial of suspected government opponents including alleged supporters of an armed opposition group, the Resistencia Nacional Mogambicana (RNM or RE-NAMO), Mozambique National Resistance. Some detainees arrested in the mid-1970s were considered to have "disappeared". The organization
76	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
continued to investigate the cases of prisoners serving sentences after unfair trials between 1979 and 1983. There was continued concern about reports of torture and about the use of flogging as a judicial punishment. Ten people were sentenced to death by a military court from which there was no appeal.
In October President Samora Moisés Machel and 33 other people were killed in a plane crash, the causes of which were still being investigated at the end of 1986. Major-General Joaquim Chissano, the Foreign Minister, was sworn in as Head of State in November.
The RNM became increasingly active, particularly in the central provinces, and reportedly continued to receive South African assistance in contravention of an agreement between South Africa and Mozambique. There were reports of human rights abuses by both government forces and by the RNM during the conflict including torture, mutilation and killing of civilians. However, Amnesty International was unable to verify independently such reports or identify those responsible.
Amnesty International continued throughout 1986 to investigate the cases of people imprisoned since between 1974 and 1977 on account of their suspected op|X)sition to the ruling Frente da Libertaçào de Moçambique (Frelimo), Mozambique Liberation Front. One of them, Antonio Francisco, a former member of Frelimo, returned to Mozambique in 1974 after studying abroad. He was arrested later that year, apparently on suspicion of supporting one of the political groups which opposed the transfer of power from the Portuguese colonial government. Another, Domingos Alvares Anibal, was detained in the capital, Maputo, between March 1976 and January 1977. In 1978 he was reported to have been transferred from Ruarua prison camp in Cabo Delgado Province to another prison camp in the province of Niassa. The subsequent fate or whereabouts of both men was not known. Amnesty International also inquired about several leading members of opposition groups which opposed Frelimo before Mozambique's independence. After being arrested in late 1974 or early 1975 they were paraded at Nachingwea, Frelimo's base camp in southern Tanzania, in March and April 1975 and accused of espionage or treason against Frelimo. One of them, the Reverend Uria Simango, had been the chairman of the Partido de Coligacào Nacional (PCN), National Coalition Party, which was formed in August 1974 to unite the groups opposed to Frelimo. He was reported to have admitted planning to invade Mozambique in order to overthrow Frelimo. Despite repeated inquiries the authorities failed to clarify the fate of these "disappeared" detainees, giving rise to fears that they may have been secretly killed in detention.
Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa	77
During 1986 the arrests of over UK) alleged members or supporters of the RNM were reported in the national press. However, the actual number might have been considerably higher. Most were accused of participating in armed attacks on civilians or on industrial or commercial installations. Some four to five thousand other suspected RNM supporters were officially reported to have been arrested in previous years. Amnesty International did not know where most of them were being held. Some were known to be in the custody of the Servigo Nacional de Seguranga Popular (SNASP), People's National Security Service. For example, several were reported to have been held since their arrest in 1980 in the SNASP headquarters in Ouelimane in crowded conditions and with insufficient water and exercise. According to Decree Law No. 21/75 of October 1975, the SNASP, which is res|X)nsible for the custody of these prisoners, could detain suspects indefmitely without bringing them before a judge. In addition, security detainees did not have the right to contest the legality of their detention.
Amnesty International also investigated the cases of untried political prisoners who were not accused of participafing in armed attacks but who had been detained apparently on suspicion of assisting the RNM in other ways. Although the authorities did not reply to the organization's inquiries about these detainees it was reported that one of them, Abdulla Abacar, who had been arrested in May 1985, was released in August.
Other alleged RNM supporters who had given themselves up to the authorities or who were not considered to have committed serious crimes were reportedly sent to "re-education" centres. The legal basis for their detention was not clear: they were not known to have been sentenced by a court, nor was it known whether or not they were able to appeal against their continuing detention.
Amnesty International continued to investigate the cases of 15 political prisoners who had been sentenced to periods of imprisonment after unfair trials between 1979 and 1983. One, Leonardo Mabunda, a secondary school teacher, had been accused of writing an examination essay criticizing government policies and submitting it as the work of one of his students. He was sentenced in April 1983 by the Revolutionary Military Tribunal, a court established in 1976 with jurisdiction over political cases, to eight years' imprisonment and 45 lashes. Among other things the organization was concerned that those tried by the Revolutionary Military Tribunal were not given an adequate opportunity to defend themselves in court since It was reported that they were not informed of the precise charges against them before the trial took place and were unable to call witnesses in their defence.
78	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
No alleged RNM supporters were tried in 1984 and 1985. However, in February and May 1986 two trials took place involving a total of 24 such defendants. The Revolutionary Military Tribunal sentenced to death eight defendants accused of armed activities resulting in civilian deaths. Another 15 were sentenced to between four and 30 years' imprisonment for spying, armed rebellion and other crimes against state security, and one was acquitted. One of the people sentenced to death in May, Alberto Macamo, had been arrested in December 1982 by the SNASP. In October 1984 he was reported to have admitted to the press that he had killed dozens or even hundreds of people in the course of his activities on behalf of the RNM.
Amnesty International received further reports of torture, mutilation and killing of villagers by govemment forces in areas of conflict. For example, it was alleged in June 1986 that a p>easant woman had died in a remote northern village after soldiers seeking information about the RNM had tortured her with knives or bayonets. It was also reported that a number of prisoners in Machava prison on the outskirts of the capital, Maputo, were flogged by prison warders after some of them had allegedly committed disciplinary offences. However, the organization was unable to obtain confirmation of these and other reports of torture or ill-treatment. Although the authorities did not respond to Amnesty International's expressions of concern about the use of torture, they did respond to certain reports by local people of torture. In Nampula province a commission of inquiry was established in May to investigate allegations published in Non'cias, the Maputo daily newspaper, that two former criminal prisoners had been beaten and tortured. One of them, Jonas Rodjas Nhabalane, was reported to have had his elbows tied behind his back for 24 hours, resulting in partial paralysis of the forearms. In another case reported in Noticias, local people claimed that a military commander had ordered villagers suspected of assisting the RNM in Inhambane province to be tortured. The officer was reported to have been dismissed, but it was not stated whether he or any of his subordinates were to be prosecuted. Amnesty Intemational inquired whether or not the alleged torturers had been prosecuted but by the end of the year had received no reply. Its letter also welcomed the establishment of a commission of inquiry by the Governor of Nampula province as a potentially significant step towards the prevention of further cases of torture.
The courts, particularly those at village level, continued to impose sentences of flogging for crimes such as theft and speculation. In one case 52 Beira dock workers were each sentenced to three lashes, in addition to two-month prison sentences and a fine, for allegedly
Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa	79
stealing over a thousand kilos of maize. Under Law No. 5/83 of 1983, which introduced this judicial punishment, flogging was made a mandatory penalty, additional to terms of imprisonment, for certain offences, including crimes against state security. However, the 15 people sentenced to prison terms for state security offences in February and May 1986 were not reported to have received additional sentences of flogging. Amnesty International continued to appeal to the authorities to abolish judicial flogging which it considers to be a cruel, inhuman or degrading form of punishment.
Ten people were sentenced to death during 1986. Two had been found guilty of murder and the others were convicted of violent crimes against the security of the state in support of the RNM. Under Article 3 of Law 3/79 which established the Revolutionary Military Tribunal there was no appeal against the decisions of this court, in contravention of the internationally recognized right of all those who face the death penalty to appeal to a higher court against their verdict and sentence. According to Article 6 of the same law executions had to be carried out within five days of sentencing. However, it was not reported whether or not these 10 people had been executed.
Human rights abuses including the torture, mutilation and killing of civilians by the RNM were reported by official sources and by people assisting refugees. There were reports that people had been hacked or clubbed to death or had had their ears or other parts of their body cut off but Amnesty International was unable to obtain independent corroboration of individual cases. The RNM was reported to have captured government soldiers but it was not known where they were being held or under what conditions. The opposition movement was also holding some 100 foreign workere captured at various times over the previous two years. At the end of 1986, 65 were released but at least two were reported to have died in captivity because of lack of medical assistance.
80
Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
