Cameroon
Amnesty International was concerned about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, some detained for relatively short periods but others held since 1984. Several prisoners of conscience were released during 1986. Amnesty International continued to investigate whether at least eight people who were tried and acquitted by a military court in 1984, but subsequently redetained, were prisoners of conscience. The cases of several other political detainees were also under investigation to determine whether they were prisoners of conscience. The organization continued to urge the government to disclose the identities of those executed after an armed mutiny in April 1984 and to release full details of the subsequent trials in which at least 51 people were sentenced to death.
Amnesty International adopted as prisoners of conscience 10 people arrested between late 1985 and early 1986 and held without charge or trial until August when they were released. They were among a larger group arrested after leaflets sympathetic to a banned opposition movement, the Union des populations du Cameroun (UPC), Union of Cameroonian Peoples, were circulated, but Amnesty International was able to confirm information only on these 10. Some of them had returned to Cameroon shortly before their arrests following assurances from President Paul Biya that former political opponents could return home, in August President Paul
34	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
Biya ordered the release of 14 people officially described as political detainees, 10 of whom were those who had been adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience. According to the Ministry of Territorial Administration, the 14 had been detained "for attempting to reconstitute banned organizations, holding clandestine meetings and distributing leaflets aimed at destabilizing institutions of the Republic".
Amnesty International also considered as prisoners of conscience several journalists who were arrested in 1986 for criticizing government policy. They included three Radio Cameroon journalists — Ebsiy Ngum, Sam Nvalla Fonkem and Johnny MacViban — who were arrested in June after a radio program critical of members of the government and following industrial action at the radio station. In mid-October the three were released from detention uncharged.
Amnesty International continued throughout 1986 to appeal for the release of André Beyegué Yakana, a Jehovah's Witness who was adopted as a prisoner of conscience in 1985. The Jehovah's Witness sect is banned in Cameroon. André Beyegué Yakana was arrested in December 1984 for attending an unofficial religious service at his home in Limbe, Southwest Province. A number of other Jehovah's Witnesses were arrested at the same time, some of whom might subsequently have been released, but Amnesty International did not obtain details of their cases. However, the organization did receive information in 1986 about two other Jehovah's Witnesses detained without trial — Olivier Nwana and Njiofack Paris — who were arrested in February 1982 and June 1984 respectively. Amnesty International took up their cases for investigation and called for their release unless they were to be charged and tried for a recognizably criminal offence. They were still held uncharged at the end of 1986.
Alhadji Hassan Tanko, whom Amnesty International had adopted as a prisoner of conscience in 1985, was reportedly released in mid-1986. He had been sentenced to two years' imprisonment in 1984 by a military tribunal sitting in camera, apparently accused of involvement in the April 1984 coup attempt. However, Amnesty International was informed that he was in fact imprisoned because he had criticized the arrests of large numbers of businessmen and women and officials in April 1984.
The cases of eight other people, among them Alain Touffic Othman and Nana Mamadou, detained shortly after the April 1984 armed mutiny, were investigated by Amnesty International to determine whether they were prisoners of conscience. They were all tried and acquitted of offences related to the mutiny but were then redetained without charge or trial. Amnesty International considered that they might be prisoners of conscience and called for their fair
35	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
trial or release. The cases of at least four other people imprisoned in the wake of the April 1984 events were also investigated by Amnesty International. Some of them were believed to have been held without trial, others to have been sentenced to prison terms after trials which did not conform to international standards of fairness. The proceedings were held in camera and some of the accused were denied access to legal counsel of their choice. Since details of the trial were not made public, it was difficult to ascertain the legal status of those concerned and the reasons for their imprisonment. However, Amnesty International considered that the following four, at least, might be prisoners of conscience: Ahmadou Bello, the former Managing Director of Cameroon Airlines; Bobo Hamatoucour, the former Director of the Office national de commercialisation des produits de base (ONCPB), National Raw Materials Marketing Board; and Suzanne Lecaille and Rose Zia, both businesswomen.
Etienne Max Abessolo and Luc Minkoulou, two former soldiers detained since 1979, remained in detention throughout 1986. They were reportedly detained with others on suspicion of involvement in a plot to overthrow the former government led by President Ahidjo in 1979. However, no charges were believed to have been brought against them and they remained throughout the year in the Prison de production, labour camp, at Yoko. Amnesty International considered that they might be prisoners of conscience and called for their fair trial or release.
There were reports of several death sentences in 1986, but Amnesty International was not able to confirm whether any executions took place. The organization appealed for the commutation of death sentences passed on seven people about whom it obtained information. Among them were two people sentenced to death in September after being convicted of armed robbery. Amnesty International learned about four other condemned prisoners when they escaped from prison and their cases were reported in the local press. The organization continued to urge the government to release full details of all those sentenced to death in the wake of the April 1984 armed mutiny; it appeared that the families of some people allegedly involved in the mutiny still did not know the fate of their relatives.
36	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
