Zambia
Amnesty International was concerned about the detention without trial of alleged opponents of the government, some of whom were reportedly tortured or ill-treated, and about the death penalty. At least 18 people were sentenced to death but in November five prisoners awaiting execution for treason had their sentences commuted to life imprisonment.
Three political prisoners held without trial since their arrest in 1981 remained in detention throughout 1986. Major Ronald Chansa, an army major. Flight Sergeant Manfred Mwangana Mukumbuta, and Faustino Lombe, a teacher, were suspected of plotting the escape of several people awaiting trial on charges of treason. However, no charges had been brought against them and Amnesty International continued to investigate whether they were prisoners of conscience.
In May Peter Chiko Bwalya, a former clerk, Henry Kalenga, Joseph Chitalu and Stanslous Kachenjela were detained under the Preservation of Public Security Regulations, accused of belonging to
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	123
a clandestine anti-govemment organization, the People's Redemption Organization (PRO), and recruiting students at the University of Zambia into it. No political parties, other than the governing United National Independence Party (UNIP), are permitted. Amnesty Intemational expressed its concern at their detention without trial and asked the government to charge or release them. The organization was investigating whether they were prisoners of conscience.
The Preservation of Public Security Regulations, under which about a dozen political detainees known to Amnesty Intemational were held, empower the President to authorize detention without trial for an unlimited p>eriod. The grounds for detention under these regulations may not be challenged in court. Detainees are told the formal grounds for their detention and their cases are reviewed by a special tribunal which can recommend release or continued detention, but it sits in camera and the President is not obliged to implement its confidential recommendations.
A civilian pilot. Captain Pasco McLeo Chansa, who had been arrested and detained in February 1985, was released uncharged in June 1986. He had been detained for allegedly holding meetings outside the country with a person wanted by the Zambian authorities in connection with a 1980 coup plot and for failing to report these meetings to the authorities. Amnesty Intemational had called on the authorities to charge or release him.
In May South African security personnel attacked a Lusaka suburb, ostensibly against members of the African National Congress (ANC) of South Africa which has headquarters in the Zambian capital. A number of people, most of them foreign nationals, were arrested and questioned by police after the attack. A group of seven foreign nationals on a visit to Zambia were arrested in early May. Three were released uncharged after a few weeks but the other four, all white South Africans, were still in detention under the Preservation of Public Security Regulations at the end of 1986. It was reported to Amnesty Intemational that all seven foreigners had been tortured or ill-treated during interrogation at Lilayi police training centre near Lusaka. The reported ill-treatment included being t^aten, hung upside down, forced to hold weights in outstretched hands, and made to perform physical contortions for long periods. In August the organization urged President Kenneth Kaunda to order an investigation into these allegations and to either charge the four South Africans and bring them to trial or release them. The President replied that no torture or ill-treatment had been inflicted on the South Africans and that their cases would be reviewed in accordance with the law. Amnesty International was investigating whether they were possible prisoners of conscience, imprisoned on account of their
124
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
national or racial origins.
There were renewed reports of torture following the arrest of five other foreign nationals in July. No charges were brought against them and they were released in August. They alleged that they had been tortured by police in an attempt to make them confess to spying for the South African Government and had been beaten on the head, stomach and kidneys and sexually abused. President Kaunda was reported to have said that if any ill-treatment had taken place, those responsible would be punished. No investigation or prosecution had been reported by the end of 1986.
Amnesty International remained concerned about the death penalty. At least 18 people were sentenced to death in 1986, mostly for murder or armed robbery, although no executions were reported. In November, five prisoners sentenced to death for their role in the 1980 coup plot had their sentences commuted to life imprisonment by President Kaunda. The five, on whose behalf Amnesty International had appealed, were former High Court Commissioner Edward Shamwana, a Zairean politician Deogratias Symba, Thomas Mulewa Mpunga, Yoram Godwin Mumba and Albert Chimbalile. Amnesty International welcomed the commutations and urged the President to extend clemency to all others under sentence of death.
