Ethiopia
Amnesty International was concerned about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, some of whom had been held without trial for over 12 years, and the detention without trial of many other political opponents of the government. Some political prisoners were reported to have been sentenced in secret to prison terms by a special government committee without being formally charged or tried. Amnesty International was also concerned about reports of widespread torture and ill-treatment of political prisoners. It continued to press the authorities to account for a number of "disappeared" prisoners who were feared to have been summarily executed. There were reports of summary executions of political prisoners and of people resisting resettlement into new villages.
Armed conflict between government and opposition forces continued during 1986 in many parts of the country, particularly Eritrea, Tigray, Wollega and Hararghe. Civilians in these areas suspected of having links with armed opposition groups were reportedly detained and ill-treated.
Obtaining detailed information about political arrests remained difficult as the government did not disclose any information and relatives were often afraid to report arrests for fear of official reprisal. Nevertheless about 1,000 political prisoners were believed to be being held in the Central Prison in Addis Ababa, and many more in other prisons run by the prison service, notably Sembel men's prison and Haz-Haz women's prison, both in Asmara. In addition, hundreds of prisoners were believed to be being held for interrogation in security prisons under the authority of the Ministry of State and Public Security. In the security prisons, particularly the Central Investigation Centre {Maekalawi Mirmera Diridjit — known informally as the "third police station" — in Addis Ababa), and the "Mariam Gimbi" Central Investigation Centre in Asmara, torture was reportedly routine. There were also reports that political prisoners were tortured in the Special Investigation {Liyu Mirmera) Centre of the Provisional Military Administrative Council (PMAC) in the PMAC headquarters in Addis Ababa. Many of the prisoners were believed to have been arrested on suspicion of links with opposition organizations such as the Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF), Tigray People's Liberation Front (TPLF) and Oromo Liberation Front (OLF). Amnesty International also received reports of people being arrested
48	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
for trying to evade military conscription or to flee the country. Relatives of those who fled were also said to have been arrested.
Political prisoners were held illegally. The Code of Criminal Procedure specifies that arrested people must be produced in court within 48 hours and either charged or released, although the court may authorize further detention without charge for up to 14 days. However, political prisoners were held for prolonged periods without charge or trial, in incommunicado detention and often without official acknowledgement. There was no effective legal remedy for such unlawful detention. Amnesty International believed that some political prisoners in 1986 were being sentenced to prison, or in some cases execution, by a secret government committee of representatives of the Ministry of State and Public Security, which is also responsible for interrogating political prisoners. Those sentenced in this way — who may have been convicted on the basis of "confessions" made under torture — were not formally charged or tried and were not p>ermitted to appear before the committee to present a defence or to appeal against the committee's decision. TÎiey were told of the decision before being secretly executed or transferred to a civil prison. Thirteen alleged members of the Ethiopian People's Democratic Alliance (EPDA), who were arrested in December 1983 and accused of anti-revolutionary activities, were believed to be serving such secret prison sentences, ranging from five to 20 years. Amnesty International's concern that such procedures flagrantly violated fundamental principles of the rule of law received no response from justice officials in Ethiopia.
In June Amnesty International published a report. Political Imprisonment and Torture in Ethiopia. It contained detailed information on prisoners of conscience and other political prisoners, the legal background, torture, "disappearances" and extrajudicial execution. In submitting the report to the government Amnesty International urged the release of all prisoners of conscience and an impartial review of the cases of all other political prisoners to ensure their release or trial in accordance with international standards for a fair trial. The organization called for the immediate abolition of secret sentencing and urgent government action to stop torture and safeguard prisoners from ill-treatment. Amnesty International also urged the government to ratify the relevant international human rights instruments such as the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and to incorporate safeguards for the protection of human rights into a draft new constitution that had been published in June to replace the previous constitution suspended in 1974.
Amnesty International received no response to its inquiries about the arrest in mid-May of Berhanu Dinka, Ethiopia's Permanent
49	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
Representative to the UN in New York. At the end of 1986 he was still detained without charge or trial, reportedly in the Central Investigation Centre in Addis Ababa. Amnesty International was investigating whether he might be a prisoner of conscience.
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the release of prisoners of conscience arrested in previous years, including 10 members of the family of the late Emperor Haile Selassie detained since 1974. His daughter, Tenagnework Haile-Selassie, aged 74, her four daughters, a daughter-in-law and another relative, Zuriashwork Gebre-Igziabeher, were held in the women's section of the Central Prison in Addis Ababa; a grandson, Wossen-Seged Mekonnen, and his two younger brothers were held in the Alem Bekagne ("End of the World") maximum security section of the same prison.
The authorities gave no reason for their continued detention without charge or trial, but in 1986, for the first time since their detention began, they were permitted to receive regular medical and dental treatment in hospitals in Addis Ababa. The health of Hirut Desta continued to be of concern due to her extremely low body weight, and she was not allowed to obtain appropriate specialist treatment.
Other women prisoners of conscience still held in 1986 included Tsehai Tolessa, whose husband the Reverend Gudina Tumsa was abducted in 1979, apparently by security officers, and Martha Kumsa, a journalist. They were among many members of the Oromo ethnic group arrested in 1980 and still detained without trial, including Zegeye Asfaw, former Minister of Law and Justice, and Ababiya Abajobir, a former high court judge.
Cases of political prisoners detained without charge or trial which were being investigated by Amnesty International included that of Tesfa-Mariam Zeggay, an official of the UN Economic Commission for Africa, who was arrested in 1983 and was reported to be suffering from injuries as a result of being tortured. Amnesty International was also investigating the detention without trial of several officials of the Democratic Front for the Salvation of Somalia (DFSS), a Somali armed opposition organization based in Ethiopia.
The trial of Shimelis Teklu, an official of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Addis Ababa detained since 1984, began before the Special Court during 1986. He was charged with espionage. He was legally represented and had the right of appeal to the Special Court of Appeal if convicted.
Several prisoners of conscience were released during 1986. Negash Kebede, general secretary of the Meseret Christos (Mennonite) Church, and other members of the church detained since 1981, were freed in April. On 1 May the Reverend Olana Lemu and 12 other
50	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
leading members of the Ethiopian Evangelical Mekane Yesus Church who had been detained without trial for several years were released. Another 50 political prisoners who had been held with them in Nekemte prison in Wollega region were also released. Tesfay Gabiso and several members of the Full Gospel {Mullu Wongel) Church who had been detained without trial in Yirga Alem prison in Sidamo region since 1979 were also released around the same time.
An amnesty for 775 prisoners was announced on 31 May. The identities of these prisoners were not disclosed, but they reportedly included many held since 1977 and 1978 for alleged membership of the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Party (EPRP). A review of political prisoners' cases was said to have been undertaken after a visit to the Addis Ababa Central Prison by the Head of State Mengistu Haile-Mariam on 10 May. On 30 July, 114 detainees officially described as "former guerrillas" were released from prison in Asmara. No details were given as to whether they had been arrested on political grounds or captured in armed conflict, although several hundred people captured in combat in recent years were reported to be detained without trial in the Central Prison in Addis Ababa and in Sembel prison in Asmara.
Amnesty International continued to receive reports of torture from many parts of the country. Political prisoners were among the 1,800 inmates of Mekelle Central Prison who were freed in February by the TPLF. According to those released, many prisoners had been tortured in Mekelle Central Investigation Centre and held in harsh conditions. Amnesty International wrote to the Head of State urging a full investigation into their allegations.
Two cases were reported in which officials were prosecuted for torture. In Shoa region in July, six kebelle (urban dwellers association) officials were each sentenced to three years' imprisonment on charges of torturing a farmer accused of theft. In Hararghe in the same month, a court sentenced a kebelle chairman to death for causing the death of a prisoner by torture in 1979, and seven other officials were sentenced to life imprisonment or 25 years' imprisonment for complicity. However, despite these two prosecutions. Amnesty International was not convinced that sufficient steps were being taken to eradicate torture, investigate torture allegations and establish safeguards to protect prisoners from torture.
In January Amnesty International appealed to the government to clarify the repKJrted "disappearance" in November 1985 of about 60 political prisoners held in Addis Ababa. Among them were Asegahegne Araya, Wube Gebre-Yohannes and Maheteme-Work Kassahun, alleged members of the EPDA who had been detained since 1983, and other prisoners held for several years for their alleged
51	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa

membership of the EPRP, TPLF or EPLF. Amnesty International urged the government to confirm that they were alive and well and not under threat of execution, but there was no response. Their fate was still unclear at the end of 1986 and it was feared that they might have been summarily executed. The government also failed to account for Mengesha Gebre-Hiwot, who "disappeared" from the Central Investigation Centre in Addis Ababa in mid-1985. He had been held since December 1983 for alleged membership of the EPDA and was reported to have had a foot amputated because of torture injuries. The fate of 16 other people who "disappeared" in 1979 also remained unexplained. They included prominent political detainees held since 1974 and 1977, and the leader of the Ethiopian Evangelical Mekane Yesus Church, the Reverend Gudina Tumsa, who was abducted in Addis Ababa in 1979. All were believed to have been summarily executed soon after their "disappearance".
Few details could be obtained to confirm other reports of executions of political opponents which appeared to have been carried out following secret death sentences. Four political prisoners were reported to have been secretly executed in Asmara on 3 January and two others imprisoned in Asmara were reportedly publicly executed in Segeneita, 50 kms southeast of Asmara, on 6 May. In March eight sheikhs and other Muslim leaders were reported to have been summarily executed near Hararghe, after villagers refused to participate in the official resettlement program. Many other summary or extrajudicial executions were alleged to have taken place in areas of armed conflict or of resistance to the government's mass resettlement program.
