Comoros
Amnesty International was concerned about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience, most of whom were sentenced after trials which fell short of internationally recognized standards. A number of prisoners were released during 1986, however, either on completion of their sentences or as a result of acts of clemency by the government. An Amnesty International mission visited Comoros in August and discussed with the government the organization's concerns and the need for further measures to protect human rights.
Amnesty International was concerned about the imprisonment throughout 1986 of four civilian opponents of the government who were among 77 people tried in November 1985 on charges arising from events in March 1985, when members of the Presidential Guard mutinied against their European officers. The authorities alleged that this was part of a conspiracy involving civilian opponents who wished to overthrow the government. Moustoifa Said Cheikh, Secretary General of the Front démocratique des Comores (FDC), the Comorian Democratic Front, was sentenced to life imprisonment; FDC members Abdou Mhoumadi and Idriss Mohamed received eight-year terms; and Mohamed Abdou Soimadou received a five-year term. Sixteen members of the Presidential Guard also received sentences of life imprisonment and were held throughout 1986. All but one of those brought to trial in November 1985 were convicted but some had been released by the end of 1985. Others were freed in amnesties granted by President Ahmed Abdallah on 1 January and 13 May.
41	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
Following the November 1985 trial, as many as 70 other people were reported to have been arrested either because they had criticized the proceedings or because they were considered sympathetic to the imprisoned FDC leaders. Some were released, but in late July 42 people, most of whom had been arrested in the last two months of 1985, were brought to trial before the Correctional Court in Moroni, the capital. They were convicted of membership of an unlawful organization. The heaviest sentences were 18-month prison terms and seven of the defendants were released immediately after the trial in view of the time that they had already spent in custody. A further 17 were believed to have completed their sentences and been released by the end of 1986, at which time 18 prisoners were still believed to be held.
Amnesty International was concerned that both the November 1985 and July 1986 trials failed to satisfy internationally recognized standards of fair trial. In particular, it appeared that defendants and lawyers assigned to them were given insufficient access to the prosecution dossiers on their cases to enable them adequately to prepare their defence. It also appeared that defendants, notably those tried in November 1985, were convicted on the basis of statements made under duress while they were held incommunicado in pre-trial detention.
In February Amnesty International wrote to President Abdallah to express its concern about the conduct of the 1985 trial and the subsequent arrests. The organization welcomed the releases on 1 January and proposed that an Amnesty International delegation should visit the Comoros to discuss with the government the cases of those still held and the shortcomings of the trial. There was no response to this approach but in March it was reported that the Minister of the Interior, Information and Press, Omar Tamou, had stated in a local radio broadcast that Amnesty International had been invited to send a mission to the Comoros. No such invitation was received. However, the 30 April edition of the Paris-based magazine Jeune Afrique published an open letter to Amnesty International from Minister Omar Tamou. This criticized some aspects of Amnesty International's work on the Comoros but also contained a clear invitation to the organization to send a mission there. Subsequently, this invitation was confirmed by Minister Omar Tamou and an Amnesty International delegation visited the Comoros between 9 and 16 August.
In addition to Minister Tamou, Amnesty International's delegates met the Army Chief of Staff, the Minister of Justice and judicial officials. They received considerable assistance from the authorities but their requests for access to the records of the November 1985 and
42	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
July 1986 trials were denied, and they were also refused permission to visit Moustoifa Said Cheikh and the three other civilian prisoners. These four had earlier been adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International. Minister Omar Tamou gave the government's view that the four had been directly involved in an attempt to overthrow the state, but the authorities' refusal to permit Amnesty International access to the full documentation made it impossible to verify whether this was so. Having regard to the deficiencies of the trial. Amnesty International considered that the four prisoners should at the very least be given a new trial fully in accordance with internationally recognized standards. During the mission. Amnesty International also raised with the government the authorities' failure adequately to investigate reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees in early 1985 and the alleged ill-treatment of some of those held following the November 1985 trial. Amnesty International's delegates stressed the need for improved safeguards against torture and ill-treatment, proposing that detainees should not be held incommunicado and that |X)lice and other security personnel should be trained to respect fundamental human rights. There was concern also about the apparent absence of statutory rules governing prison conditions. Moustoifa Said Cheikh, the imprisoned FDC leader, was reported to have been held in solitary confinement and to have been denied visits throughout 1986, as were the 16 members of the Presidential Guard serving life imprisonment. Noting that the Comoros had deposited its ratification to the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights, Amnesty International urged the government to ratify other international human rights standards, notably the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the UN Convention Against Torture.
	; 1" ^ • J
	- / J Na ^
	• Aix,
	■'IJ ¿Q X ^
	
	r n
	
	• .■A I" ir .■,■■ ..■.
	
43	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
