Viet Nam
Amnesty International's predominant concern remained the detention
without trial for "re-education" of thousands of individuals held on account of their positions in the armed forces or the civilian administration of the former Republic of Viet Nam. Several dozen political prisoners were arrested in more recent years; they too were mostly held in detention without charge or trial. The organization believed many of them to be prisoners of conscience. Amnesty International continued to be concerned about the use of the death penalty and about reports of ill-treatment and deaths in custody of political prisoners.
The organization's research into compulsory "re-education" was hampered considerably, as in previous years, by the strict censorship and control over information exercised by the government. Amnesty Intemational was unable to ascertain precisely how many of the individuals taken into custody in 1^5 or 1976 remained in "re-education" camps in 1986. However, it received reports suggesting that a large number of prisoners had been released in recent years, while others had merely been transferred to other camps. A figure given by the govemment in May, stating that the number of such detainees had been reduced to some 6,000, could not be confirmed and Amnesty Intemational continued to receive various estimates claiming the number was considerably higher. Most of these detainees were held in "re-education" camps in the southern delta, and a significant number of camps in northem Viet Nam had been closed in recent years. Conditions in the southem camps were
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Europe	275
said to have improved somewhat, with family visits allowed by the authorities on a more regular basis. Detainees were also allowed to receive some food from their relatives to supplement the generally meagre camp rations, as well as specialized medicines which the camps were unable to provide. Other reports continued to emphasize that detainees were frequently denied any contact with their families. "Re-education" continued to consist largely of compulsory manual labour, with sporadic self-criticism sessions at the end of the working day or on special occasions designated by the camp superintendent. Amnesty Internationa! continued to make repeated representations to the govemment to release these prisoners unconditionally, or to charge and try them without further delay, in accordance with the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to which Viet Nam acceded in 1982. A letter to the government in October reiterated this concem and welcomed the government's announcement in August that it would release a number of prisoners from "re-education", including the sick and elderly, war invalids and those whose families were facing economic difficulties. No details of any such releases were, however, made public before the end of 1986.
Amnesty International continued to work for the release of a number of individual adopted prisoners of conscience who had not been part of the previous administration but who were believed to have been arrested for expressing opinions deemed contrary to those of the post-1975 administration. Among them were a number of writers, journalists, artists, intellectuals of various professions and members of various non-communist political parties. For example. Professor Phan Ngo, a teacher and author, Tmong Van Quynh, a doctor, and Nguyen Dinh Luong, a teacher, had all been members of the Viet Nam Quoc Dan Dang., Viet Nam Nationalist Party, which was banned by the new authorities after April 1975. Also arrested in 1975 and 1976 were the journalists Nguyen Viet Khanh, Le Van Tien, Le Khai Trach and Tmong Vi Tri. Lawyers Nguyen Thanh Long, Do Trong Nguyen, Pham Kim Qui and Vu Ngoc Tmy were arrested soon after the cessation of hostilities in 1975, along with doctors Ly Tmng Dung and Nguyen Dan Que. As far as Amnesty Intemational was aware, they were all still held in "re-education" camps at the end of 1986.
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the release of several Buddhist, Catholic and Protestant religious figures arrested in recent years for dissenting from govemment efforts to control activities in the religious, literary and cultural spheres. Among these prisoners of conscience held without trial were the monks Thich Nguyen Giac, Thich Nhu Minh, Thich Due Nhuan, and Thich Tri Sieu, ail of whom were reportedly held in Chi Hoa Prison in Ho Chi
276	Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe
Minh City throughout 1986. Among the Cathohc clergy still in detention were Fathers Thadeus Nguyen Van Ly and Paul Trinh Cong Trong, as well as the Jesuit Superior Joseph Nguyen Cong Doan, and Joseph Le Thanh Que. The Protestant pastor, Ho Hieu Ha, of the Tran Cao Van Church in Ho Chi Minh City also remained in detention. He was arrested in December 1983 when the authorities confiscated the church compound and informed him that it had been requisitioned for the exclusive use of the government.
Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about reports that two prominent Buddhist monks, Thich Quang Do and Thich Huyen Quang, were still living under surveillance, in virtual isolation and confined to their home villages. Monseigneur Nguyen Kim Dien, Roman Catholic Archbishop of Hue, was similarly restricted. He was placed under house arrest, and contact with his diocese made virtually impossible, after the arrest in late 1985 of two nuns, Tmong Thi Ly and Tmong Thi Nong, who had been delivering his correspondence from Huê to Ho Chi Minh City. The nuns were subsequently accused by the authorities of espionage under Article 74 of the new penal code, but were not tried. Amnesty Intemational considered them to be prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty International received reports in October that some of Viet Nam's foremost writers and novelists, among whom were Doan Quoc Sy, Hoang Hai Thuy and Duong Hung Cuong, were about to be tried in Ho Chi Minh City for writing, reciting and circulating uncensored literature allegedly used "to spread counter-revolutionary propaganda inciting rebellion and antagonism against the govemment". The writer Nguyen Hoat reportedly died in custody in July. They were all arrested in May 1984.
During 1986 Amnesty International continued to receive reports from former detainees of deliberate ill-treatment and torture in several "re-education" camps in previous years. For example, detainees who infringed camp regulations, often in minor ways, were, according to these reports, held in prolonged solitary confinement, shackled and deprived of food for long periods.
Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about reports that Vietnamese personnel had been involved in the torture of Kam-puchean political prisoners in the People's Republic of Kampuchea. Amnesty International communicated its concem to Pham Van Dong, Chairperson of the Council of Ministers, in September but no reply was received in 1986.
Amnesty International repeatedly appealed to the govemment to commute the death sentences passed on Chu Van Tan, Ngo Van Tmong and Phan Anh Tuan between June and August by the People's Tribunal in Ho Chi Minh City. Phan Anh Tuan was
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Europe	277
convicted of armed robbery; Chu Van Tan and Ngo Van Truong were convicted of attempting to overthrow the govemment. These and about 20 other offences, ranging from especially serious economic crimes to murder, were made punishable by death under the new Oxie of Criminal Law which came into force in January. No executions, however, came to the attention of Amnesty Intemational during 1986.
