^^ I Malta
303
Amnesty International continued to receive allegations that people held in police custody had been ill-treated. On 3 January and 17 February the organization wrote to the Minister of Justice and Parliamentary Affairs providing details on two cases in which ill-treatment was alleged and asking if any investigation had taken place. The organization had written in July 1985 about five other cases (see Amnesty International Report 1986). All seven prisoners alleged being ill-treated at various times between 1980 and 1985. In May Amnesty Intemational received a detailed reply from the Minister, which addressed the seven specific cases. In the case of Wilfred Cardona the police denied using violence, but claimed that during interrogation Cardona banged his head against a table in a fit of desperation which was attributed to family problems. In four cases the Minister said that investigation would not be appropriate as legal proceedings were still continuing. In one case — that of Leonard Debono, found dead in 1980 — the Minister said that no progress had been made in the inquiries. Referring to the acquittal in 1985 of Anthony Mifsud by a jury, the Minister said that "they felt they could not rely on the statement he had made to the jx)lice" but that "I do not regard the evidence ... as justifying any further investigation".
Norway
Amnesty International continued to be concemed about the imprisonment of conscientious objectors to military service. In Norway an objector's application for alternative service is assessed by the Minister of Justice on the basis of whether the p>erson's conviction is profound and based on purely pacifist principles. On 31 January Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Minister of Justice about Ulf Alstad, who began a 45-day prison sentence on 8 January for refusal of military
304	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
service, his second period of imprisonment. On 22 July the organization urged the release of prisoner of conscience Stein Roar Kringeland, who began his 90-day sentence on 10 June. The court of Trondheim acknowledged that his refusal to carry out military service was based on firm and sincere conviction. However, it upheld the view of the Ministry of Justice that his application did not express principles that were purely pacifist. Amnesty Intemational also urged the authorities to review their current practice. The organization wrote again on 14 October to the Minister of Justice asking for the release of Vidar Aas, who was imprisoned in September for 90 days for refusing to do military service.
