Namibia
Amnesty International was concerned about the detention without trial of suspected opponents of the government, some of whom might have been prisoners of conscience. There were also new reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees, and extrajudicial killings of __civilians, particularly in northern Namibia, by South African security forces. In one case, the trial of four soldiers accused of killing a civilian was prematurely terminated by order of the South African State President. Amnesty International was also concerned about the death penalty: the total number of people sentenced to death was not known but there were at least four executions.
During 1986 Amnesty International was concerned about reports that the external wing of the South West AfHca People's Organisation (SWAPO) was holding prisoners in its camps in Angola. Those held were alleged by SWAPO to have spied for South Africa but other sources suggested that they had been detained as a result of political disputes within the organization.
Throughout the year, there was continued conflict between South African security forces and SWAPO guerrillas operating mostly from Angola. Both sides accused each other of responsibility for civilian killings which occurred in the war zone. South African security forces made incursions into Angola in the course of their operations against SWAPO forces. They were believed to hold a number of captured SWAPO combatants whose identities and places of detention were kept secret.
There were reports throughout the year of detentions by South African military units and security police, including particularly the former Koevoet (Crowbar) police unit which was renamed the Police Counter Insurgency Unit (COIN). Those held were mostly detained in the northern-most districts of Ovambo, Kavanga and Caprivi, where SWAPO guerrillas were most active. Most were believed to have been detained as suspected supporters of SWAPO, which remained a legal political party in Namibia although the organization's main leadership was based in Angola, from where a military wing continued to mount guerrilla activity inside Namibia.
The main basis for detention without trial was Proclamation AG.9 of 1977. This administrative decree empowered all members of the security forces to detain suspects incommunicado and without charge for 30 days, after which the cabinet of the so-called Transitional
Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa	81
Government of National Unity (TGNU) could authorize further unlimited detention. The proclamation applied in areas designated as "security districts" which extended from the capital, Windhoek, to the northern border.
In January there was a legal challenge to the use of Proclamation AG.9. In an action brought on behalf of Martin Akweenda and three other AG.9 detainees held for more than four months, it was argued that the provisions of AG.9 abrogated rights set down in a Bill of Fundamental Rights which had been attached to the proclamation establishing the TGNU in 1985. On 15 February the Windhoek Supreme Court ordered the release of the detainees on the grounds that they should have been permitted access to legal counsel after the initial period of 30 days' detention. However, Martin Akweenda was not freed: he remained in custody and was subsequently brought to trial with seven others on charges relating to SWAPO activities.
The February judgment effectively established the right of AG.9 detainees to access to legal counsel after 30 days, althou^ in practice few detainees appeared to have benefited from this. Possibly as a result of the judgment, however, there were reports during 1986 of some detentions being carried out under Section 6 of the Terrorism Act. This was introduced by the South Aftican Government in 1%7 and made applicable in Namibia and South Africa. In 1982 the Terrorism Act was repealed in South Africa but it remained effective in Namibia. Section 6 empowered security police to detain suspects incommunicado and in solitary confinement for unlimited periods and to withhold all information about their places or conditions of detention.
The Terrorism Act and the related Suppression of Communism Act, also originally a South African law which remained applicable only in Namibia, were also challenged in the Windhoek Supreme Court as contrary to the Bill of Fundamental Rights. In February the court ruled that seven alleged SWAPO supporters should stand trial under the acts as the proclamation establishing the TGNU had not repealed the two laws. The seven were subsequently convicted and given long prison sentences for political offences involving violence.
The validity of the two laws was again challenged in August when Martin Akweenda and seven others were brought to trial. They were alleged to be SWAPO members who had participated in acts of sabotage and had been responsible for a number of deaths. The basis of the challenge was again the conflict between the terms of the Terrorism Act and the provisions of the Bill of Fundamental Rights relating to safeguards against arbitrary arrest and torture and the right to fair trial. Before the court could rule, the State President of South Africa issued a new decree. Proclamation 157 of 1986, which stated
82	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
that no court would be competent "to inquire into or pronounce upon the validity of" any act passed by the South African Parliament before or after the formation of the TGNU. However, the Windhoek Supreme Court decided it should still hear the challenge to the Terrorism Act and in October decided that the act had effectively become invalid when the Bill of Fundamental Rights was introduced as part of the Proclamation establishing the TGNU. As a result, the state withdrew charges against the accused relating to incidents after the TGNU took office on 17 June 1985 but they continued to stand trial under the Terrorism Act for offences allegedly committed before that date. Their trial had not been completed by the end of 1986. In December the South African Appeal Court overturned the October judgment and ruled that the Bill of Fundamental Rights did not affect laws such as the Terrorism Act which were already in force at the time of its introduction.
In October the authorities published the findings of a judicial commission of inquiry into security legislation, which had been established in 1983 under a South African judge, H.P. van Dyk. This recommended the consolidation of existing security legislation and proposed a new draft law, which had not been made public by the end of 1986. Despite evidence of torture and abuse of detainees, the commission sought to justify the retention of detention without trial and recommended that civilians should be made liable under threat of imprisonment to provide information about SWAPO guerrillas. The commission disclosed that the military and security police did not keep records of detainees held under AG.9 although they were able to give some figures for the numbers held between 1977 and 1983. This failure to keep records, in Amnesty International's view, provided a context in which "disappearances" could occur and may have been the reason why in previous years the authorities were unable to account for people whose relatives believed they had been detained. The disclosure that records of detainees were not kept came several months after State President Botha told the South African Parliament in February that there were then nine people detained under AG.9.
There were new reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees and new developments relating to deaths in detention in previous years. In January an inquest magistrate ruled that no one was responsible for the death of Thomas Shindobo Nikanor, who was reportedly found hanged in a cell at the secret Osire detention camp in January 1985 (see Amnesty International Report Í956). The inquest accepted, however, that he had been found hanged with his feet fully on the ground, which led his relatives to believe that suicide was improbable. In November the authorities announced the completion
Amnesty International Report 1967 Africa	83
of a criminal investigation into the death in detention of Johannes Kakuva in 1980. In 1983 the Windhoek Supreme Court decided that he had been killed in detention and named security police officers allegedly responsible for his death and an ensuing cover-up, but no action was taken against them. By the end of 1986, no one had been charged in connection with the death.
Amnesty International received information that several of those brought to trial with Martin Akweenda in August had been severely ill-treated while held incommunicado. Two other notable cases were also reported, both involving children. In June it was alleged that Portas Blasius, aged 15, was badly burned by South African soldiers who held his face against the exhaust pipe of an army lorry. His mother subsequently sued the army for damages. The two soldiers responsible were convicted of the assault in October and each fined 500 rand (£150). In July a 13-year-old, Titus Paulus, alleged that he had been "roasted" over a fire by COIN personnel who interrogated him about SWAPO activities. In this case, no prosecutions had been reported by the end of 1986.
South African military personnel and security police were protected throughout 1986 by an immunity from prosecution for acts committed "in good faith" in the course of their operations. Nevertheless, some soldiers and COIN personnel were prosecuted and imprisoned for assault and rape of civilians in northern Namibia, although these appeared to represent only a small minority of cases of abuse. In July State President Botha intervened to prevent the trial of four South African soldiers charged with the murder of Frans Uapota. He was among a number of people who had been seized and violently assaulted in November 1985: he died after he was beaten, kicked and trampled on by his interrogators. State President Botha used powers under Section 103/er of the South African Defence Act to terminate the trial on the grounds that the soldiers who had killed Frans Uapota had acted "in good faith".
Amnesty International remained concerned about the use of the death penaUy but did not obtain precise figures about the number sentenced to death. At least four people were re|X)rted to have been executed.
Amnesty International was concerned also by reports that the external wing of SWAPO was holding prisoners at a camp or camps in southern Angola. Those detained were alleged by SWAPO to have infiltrated the organization and spied for South Africa, but other sources suggested that they had been detained because of internal disputes within SWAPO. In February SWAPO officials admitted that more than 100 people had been detained but they did not disclose all their identities. The detainees were reported to include at least two
84	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
men who had previously been of concern to Amnesty International when they were detained by the South African authorities in Namibia in the late 1970s.
