Equatorial Guinea
Amnesty International's concerns were the imprisonment of possible prisoners of conscience, an unfair political trial and the death penalty. There was one execution.
Following the reported discovery in July of a plot to overthrow the government of President Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, 19 p>eople were brought to trial in August before a military court {consejo de guerra) in the capital, Malabo. They included Deputy Prime Minister Fructuoso Mba Oriana Nchama; a member of parliament, Eugenio Abeso Mondu; other senior officials and several military officers. A member of the government, Melanio Ebendeng Nsomo, the Vice-Minister of Defence, was appointed to preside over the military court which had jurisdiction to try civilians as well as military personnel charged with crimes against state security
46	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
or public order. The defendants faced a variety of charges ranging from planning a coup to insulting the head of state.
The trial concluded on 18 August. Eugenio Abeso Mondu was sentenced to death and his brother, Melchior Ndong Mondu, received a 20-year prison sentence. Five other defendants, all military officers, received 18-year sentences for failing to reveal knowledge of the alleged plot and six senior government officials, including Deputy Prime Minister Fructuoso Mba Oñana Nchama, were each sentenced to 28 months' imprisonment for insulting the head of state. Five others were acquitted and the remaining defendant was stripped of his military rank. At the end of 1986 Amnesty International was investigating reports that some of those imprisoned might be prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty International was concerned that the trial was not conducted in accordance with international standards. The trial judges could not be considered independent: one was a serving government minister and the others lacked security of tenure as, according to military law, judges could be appointed for each separate trial. In addition, it was not clear that the defendants were represented by defence counsel of their choice: their lawyers were required to be serving military officers as the trial was held before a military court. The defendants were also denied any right of appeal to a higher court, in violation of international standards.
Eugenio Abeso Mondu was executed by firing-squad on 19 August, the day after his sentence was imposed. It was not clear whether he was permitted any opportunity to petition the President for clemency. Amnesty International expressed its concern to the government about Eugenio Abeso Mondu's execution and the deficiencies of the trial. It had received no response by the end of 1986.
47	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa

