Uruguay
Amnesty Intemational's concerns continued to focus on the cases of Uruguayans who "disappeared" between 1973 and 1982, under the military govemment. In December a law was passed granting immunity from punishment to police and military personnel allegedly responsible for human rights violations committed during the p)eriod of military mie.
An Amnesty International delegation visited the capital, Montevideo, in March. The delegates met President Julio Maria Sanguinetti and govemment ministers to inquire about measures for the future protection of human rights, and to discuss the government's position on investigations into past human rights abuses. The delegates also met the President of the Supreme Court, members of parliament from the main political parties, representatives of human rights and lawyers' organizations, and relatives of the "disappeared". Amnesty Intemational wrote to President Sanguinetti in July emphasizing the responsibilities incurred by new governments for measures to protect human rights in the future, to investigate human rights abuses, including "disappearances", committed under previous governments, and to bring those responsible to justice. The letter stated that Amnesty International did not oppose measures of magnanimity or
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	209
clemency, provided that these did not pre-empt or obstruct judicial, administrative or other investigations to establish publicly the truth about what had occurred. The letter concluded by emphasizing the importance of a public condemnation of torture and the need to ensure that any future complaints of torture or ill-treatment of prisoners were thoroughly investigated and anyone found responsible swiftly brought to justice. Copies of the July letter were sent subsequently to parliamentary leaders of the opposition parties, and to the President of the Supreme Court. Extracts of it were published in the Uruguayan press in September.
A reply from President Sanguinetti was received in October which drew attention to the measures taken by his government to promote national reconciliation, including an amnesty for political prisoners. He pointed out that parliament had appointed commissions to investigate abuses committed under the previous government, and that these commissions had carried out their work without obstruction. He stated that delays in investigations by the courts were not the result of obstruction, but of jurisdictional disputes whose resolution by the Supreme Court was still awaited. President Sanguinetti outlined the arguments for an "unrestricted amnesty" for all military and police personnel accused of "crimes against the human person" during the military government. He affirmed his government's "absolute and unequivocal rejection of torture", and stated that complaints alleging violations of human rights since his government took office had been extremely few, and that all had been scrupulously investigated, without any firm evidence being found to support them.
In late August the government introduced to the Senate a draft law providing an amnesty for crimes committed by military or police officials between 1962 and March 1985 linked to the "war against subversion" and closing all investigations into them. The proposal was rejected on 29 September. An alternative opposition bill was also rejected. It would have provided for officials to be tried for violations of human rights committed between 1 March 1%7 and 1 March 1985, but only in cases involving murder, serious wounding, rape and "disappearance", and provided that the cases had been filed with civilian courts before 22 September 1986. Finally, an opposition party proposal was approved which became law on 22 December. It granted exemption from punishment to all police and military personnel responsible for human rights violations committed before 1 March 1985 if such acts were carried out for political motives or in fulfilment of orders. The law required judges acting in such cases to seek a decision from the government as to whether the law was applicable or not, to be given within 30 days, and gave the
210	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
government powers to order cases to be closed by the courts. In cases of "disappearances" already under investigation by the civilian courts, the law stated that the government would be responsible for instituting investigations and providing complainants with the results within 120 days.
Since the government of President Sanguinetti took office in March 1985, 38 cases involving "disappearances" under the military government had been filed with civilian courts, but judicial investigations had been deadlocked since August 1985 when the military courts contested the competence of the civilian courts (see Amnesty International Report 1986). In November 1986 the Supreme Court resolved the conflict of jurisdiction in a number of cases of human rights violations, confirming the jurisdiction of the civilian courts. They included the "disappearance" in September 1981 of Félix Sebastián Ortiz Piazoli (see Amnesty International Report 1983), and of trade union leaders Gerardo Gatti Antuña, León Duarte Luján and Hugo Méndez Donadio, who "disappeared" in 1976 after being held with 28 other Uruguayans in Automotores Orletti, a clandestine detention centre in Buenos Aires. Witnesses had identified Uruguayan military intelligence personnel as participants in their capture and interrogation.
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about several aspects of the new law which was enacted only hours before military personnel were reportedly due to be summoned to testify before civilian courts. In particular, it was not clear what mechanism of appeal was available to plaintiffs in the event of their questioning the government's judgment as to the applicability of the law; what safeguards would be introduced to ensure that investigations to be conducted by the government into "disappearances" were conducted thoroughly and impartially; whether there was any provision for investigations to be continued if the 120 days envisaged by the law proved insufficient to enable the necessary information to be gathered; in the event that the investigations established that crimes had been committed, what legal remedies would be available to the relatives or their representatives, what provision had been made to compensate them and what steps would be taken to make the results of investigations public.
In October Uruguay ratified the UN Convention Against Torture and Other Cmel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 The Americas
