Jamaica
Amnesty International was concerned about the increased use of the death penalty in Jamaica. Fourteen prisoners were executed in 1986, all of them between June and December: this compares with nine executions in 1985 and eight in 1984 and brings to 52 the total number executed since 1980 when executions resumed after a four-year moratorium.
Amnesty International appealed for clemency on behalf of prisoners whose executions were imminent. Among these were Stanford Flowers and Winston Dixon, who were hanged after their third execution warrants were issued in November. They had been convicted in October 1981 of murdering a man in October 1980. The organization expressed concern about reports that new medical evidence put in question whether it had been shown beyond reasonable doubt at their trial that they had caused the death of the victim. In July Amnesty International brought to the attention of the Governor-General the UN Economic and Social Council Resolution 1984/50: Safeguards Guaranteeing Protection of the Rights of Those Facing the Death Penalty, which states that capital punishment may be imposed only when the guilt of the person charged is based upon clear and convincing evidence leaving no room for an alternative explanation of the facts.
In November Amnesty International wrote to the government about Albert Berry, who was reportedly aged only 16 when the murder was committed for which he was sentenced to death in January 1985. If this information is correct, the imposition of the death penalty contravened both Jamaican law and international treaties prohibiting death sentences on people aged under 18 at the time of the crime. Albert Berry had by then spent nearly two years on death row. Amnesty International expressed concern that the question of his age had apparently not been raised at his trial and requested an early review of his case. In his reply in December, the Minister of Justice informed Amnesty International that a review of the case had been set in motion.
There were believed to be over 170 prisoners under sentence of death at the end of 1986.
183	Amnesty International Report 1987 Asia
