Venezuela
211
Amnesty Internationa! remained concerned about the long-term detention of civilian political prisoners being tried by military courts. During 1986 Amnesty International investigated allegations of arbitrary killings by police, mostly of ordinary criminal suspects, and cases of reported "disappearance". It was also concerned at evidence of inadequacies in the judicial and prison systems, which involved delays of several years in the trials of most prisoners, including some political prisoners, and prison conditions which sometimes amounted to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.
Fourteen civilian prisoners arrested between 1978 and 1982 who were being tried by military tribunals for politically motivated offences remained in detention without having been convicted. Their trials made little or no progress during 1986. Others whose cases were transferred to civilian courts after several years before military tribunals also remained in prison without verdicts being reached.
The Venezuelan press reported growing public concern about conditions in Venezuela's prisons. Amnesty Intemational was concerned about reports of beatings and the arbitrary use of disciplinary measures such as punishment cells, deprivation of food and medical treatment, and physical punishment. In some prisons the overcrowding, lack of hygiene, deficient diet, frequent punishment and poor medical attention constituted a serious risk to the inmates' mental and physical health.
Amnesty International received a number of reports about individuals killed in incidents involving police officers, where witnesses or relatives maintained that the deaths had resulted from beatings or the unwarranted use of firearms. In at least one case the killings appeared to be politically motivated. Nine political activists were shot dead on 8 May, in a mountainous area of the state of Yaracuy. Official sources stated that the killings were the result of an armed confrontation with guerrillas. Other sources claimed that the victims had been unarmed and that some of them had been arrested before being shot. In response to public denunciations a parliamentary committee was asked to investigate the incident, but so far as was known, no information about its findings had been made public by the end of 1986.
In March human remains were discovered in wells in the stale of
212	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
Zulia. This drew attention to the unresolved cases of dozens of individuals missing in this and other regions, some for several years, who had reportedly been arrested by police in connection with ordinary criminal offences before "disappearing". Four corpses were identified as those of men reportedly arrested by police in recent years. In another case three members of the state police were charged with the killing of Jorge Rogelio López Silva, a youth who "disappeared" following his arrest in Maracaibo on 13 November 1985. His family received information that his body was in one of the "death wells".
Among those who died during 1986 after being detained by police were César Montilla and Jorge Terán Carmona. César Montilla was arrested on 2 May during a p>olice raid in Antimano. When he was released 13 days later he had broken ribs and other injuries, as a result of which he died in hospital shortly afterwards. According to reports Jorge Terán Carmona was severely beaten in front of his family when arrested at his home in Caracas by police on 23 March. He died on 11 April of internal injuries.
There were an estimated 200 to 300 complaints pending in the courts concerning deaths or "disappearances" believed by relatives to have resulted from unlawful police action. Many of the victims were reportedly detained by police and later shot, or died as a result of ill-treatment. Although in some cases officers had been convicted of the killings, little or no progress appeared to have been made in most judicial investigations.
