United States of America
The death penalty continued to be Amnesty International's main concern. Eighteen prisoners were executed during the year, bringing to 68 the number executed since the death penalty was reinstated in the 1970s. A record 1,838 prisoners were on death row as of 20 December. Amnesty International also investigated a number of criminal trials in which it was alleged that the prosecutions were politically motivated, and there were complaints of ill-treatment of prisoners.
Ten of-the 18 executions during 1986 were in Texas. The others took place in Florida, Alabama, Georgia, North Carolina, South Carolina and Virginia. Amnesty International had appealed for clemency in every case where it learned that an execution was imminent.
James Terry Roach was executed by electrocution in South Carolina on 10 January for two murders committed when he was 17 and thus still a minor. He was sentenced to death despite a finding by the trial judge that he had acted under the domination of an older man (who was also executed), and was mentally retarded. A few weeks before the execution a doctor found that James Roach exhibited signs of a hereditary neurological illness, which his lawyer claimed cast doubt on his mental competence to be executed and might also have affected him at the time of the crime. However, an appeal on this and on grounds of his youth was turned down by the US Supreme Court. The state governor refused to grant clemency or a stay of execution pending the outcome of a complaint to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (see Amnesty International Report 1986). A decision by the Commission was still pending at the end of 1986.
A second juvenile offender. Jay Pinkerton, was executed in May 1986 in Texas. At least 32 other juvenile offenders were under sentence of death in 15 states at the end of the year.
On 4 June Amnesty International wrote to the Governor of Connecticut — one of only nine US states to prohibit death sentences on people under 18 at the time of the crime — expressing concern about a bill which would remove this restriction. The Governor replied that he had vetoed the bill.
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	205
David Funchess, a Vietnam War veteran convicted of icilling two people during a robbery, was executed by electrocution in Florida on 22 April — despite evidence, which came to light only years after his 1975 conviction, that he was suffering from a severe mental disorder at the time of the offence. His trial lawyer had not been aware of his condition (Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder), the full extent of which was not revealed until his app>eal lawyers interviewed his family and friends for the first time about his post-Vietnam War mental state. They testified that he had returned from Vietnam addicted to heroin, suffering from frequent "flashbacks" and nightmares and, among other things, had taken to sleeping in cars or in foxholes he had dug under the house. Appeals by his lawyers were denied.
Jerome Bowden, a mentally retarded black man, was executed by electrocution in Georgia on 24 June 1986 for the murder of a white woman 10 years earlier during a robbery. His execution came a day after a state-hired psychologist had conducted a three-hour intelligence test on him in prison and had found that his mental age of 12 was not low enough for him to be spared electrocution. Defence lawyers had no opportunity to challenge the findings. Jerome Bowden was convicted partly on the evidence of his own alleged confession and partly on the testimony of a co-defendant. It was not established which of the two had been the actual killer. The co-defendant was sentenced to life imprisonment at a separate trial.
On 19 September Amnesty International wrote to 12 US Senators about an amendment to a federal bill providing the death penalty for certain drug related offences, which had been passed by the House of Representatives. Amnesty Intemational urged the Senate not to support the amendment, on the grounds that this would conflict with intemational human rights standards. The Senate subsequently voted against the death penalty provision in the bill.
In December Amnesty International wrote to Governor Anaya of New Mexico welcoming his commutation of the death sentences on the five prisoners on death row in the state on 28 November.
The US Supreme Court made a number of important rulings on the death penalty during 1986. In May the Court upheld the practice in most US death penalty states of excluding committed opponents of the death penalty from serving as jurors in capital trials. The ruling reversed a decision by a federal appeals court which had held that this practice was unconstitutional and that, in future, such people could be excluded only from the penahy phase of a capital trial.
In June, in the case of Florida prisoner Alvin Ford, the Supreme Court mled for the first time that the constitution prohibited the execution of prisoners found to be insane. The mling also held that Florida's statutory procedure for determining the mental competency
206	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
of a condemned prisoner (which gave the final decision to the state governor) was inadequate. Alvin Ford remained on death row pending a re-evaluation of the Florida procedures.
In July the Supreme Court agreed to hear an appeal in a Georgia case in which it was alleged that the application of the death penalty there was discriminatory on grounds of race. The appeal, brought on behalf of black prisoner Warren McCleskey, cited a study which showed that killers of whites, especially black killers, were significantly more likely to receive death sentences than killers of blacks. Condemned prisoners in several states subsequently received stays of execution pending the ruling, which had not been given by the end of 1986.
The trial of 11 church workers belonging to the "sanctuary movement", who were charged with violating Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) laws by helping undocumented Guatemalans and Salvadorians to enter and remain in the USA, ended in May. The defendants had offered assistance on religious and humanitarian grounds to those they believed to be genuine refugees whose lives would be in danger if they were returned to their countries of origin. They contended that they had been forced to take action because of the US Government's failure to grant political asylum to most Salvadorians and Guatemalans who had applied for it (see Amnesty International Report 1986). Eight of the defendants were convicted on 1 May on 12 counts of harbouring, transporting and conspiring to transport illegal aliens and were sentenced on 2 July to five years' probation. Three were acquitted. The charges carried maximum sentences of five years' imprisonment, and the convicted defendants risked resentencing if they violated their parole conditions by continuing to help undocumented aliens. Before the sentences were passed Amnesty International had written to their lawyer saying that it would adopt them as prisoners of conscience if they were sentenced to prison terms. Although Amnesty International did not dispute the right of the USA to enforce its immigration laws, it concluded that the defendants had been convicted of breaking laws which, in their current practice, directly facilitated human rights violations to which the organization was opposed.
In August, an Amnesty International delegate investigated the cases of several anti-nuclear protesters imprisoned for eight to 18 years for damaging nuclear silos. The delegate concluded that their cases did not fall within Amnesty International's mandate.
In September a Court of Appeals denied a motion for a new trial in the case of Leonard Peltier, a leading member of the American Indian Movement (AIM) convicted of murder in 1977. Concerned by apparent discrepancies in the ballistics testimony, which it believed
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	207
might have prejudiced the outcome of the trial. Amnesty International publicly stated in 1985 that the interests of justice would best be served by granting him a new trial (see Amnesty Intemational Reports 1985 and 1986). A motion by the defence for a rehearing of the case by the full Court of Appeals was pending a ruling at the end of 1986.
In August nine members of the Yakima Indian tribe, convicted in 1983 of federal charges of illegally catching and selling fish, were ordered into custody to serve prison terms of between two and five years. At the end of 1986 Amnesty International was still seeking information on prosecutions of non-Indians under the same legislation, in an attempt to establish whether or not the defendants had been selectively prosecuted on account of their ethnic origin.
On 11 November Amnesty Intemational wrote to the US Attorney General, expressing concern about reports that a prisoner, Vinson Harris, had died as a result of ill-treatment by prison guards. A North Carolina coroner established that Vinson Harris had died of asphyxiation after guards had tightly wrapped his head, neck and face in bandages while he was being transported by bus to a federal prison in March 1986. Before this, he had reportedly been beaten and chained to a seat for asking to use the lavatory several times during the journey. Amnesty International asked for a full inquiry to be conducted into the incident, including investigation of the role played by all officials who had witnessed it. On 23 December, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Prisons replied saying that a federal Grand Jury had indicted a prison guard on two charges of assault creating serious bodily injury and violating the civil rights of an inmate.
On 30 December Amnesty International wrote to the Director of the Federal Bureau of Prisons enclosing its observer's report on federal district court hearings into a complaint brought by inmates of the Penitentiary at Marion, Illinois. The lawsuit had examined, among other things, allegations that inmates were beaten by guards during the imposition of a "lockdown" in the prison in November 1983, following violent incidents in which two prison guards had been killed by inmates. In August 1985 the magistrate found that there had been no constitutional violation of the inmates' rights and dismissed the allegations (see Amnesty International Report 1986). Amnesty International's observer was unable to draw conclusions on the substance of the allegations of brutality. However, he found serious shortcomings in the measures taken to investigate the allegations. The lawsuit initiated by the inmates themselves provided the only independent means of reviewing the complaints. The federal court, however, was limited to finding proof of specific violations of law or constitutional rights and it was beyond its jurisdiction to examine whether existing procedures or practices might have facilitated acts of
208	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
brutality, or to make recommendations to protect inmates. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that there were a number of relevant circumstances which the court was unable to address, including the absence of the use of name tags by masked guards involved in the lockdown operation; the denial of access to lawyers in the immediate aftermath of the lockdown; the non-reporting by prison officials of the use of force, and the inadequacy of complaints procedures within the prison. Amnesty Intemational recommended that the govemment set up an independent and impartial inquiry into the allegations of brutality, which would look into all the circumstances.
In Febmary and October Amnesty Intemational wrote to the authorities expressing concern that US military assistance to the irregular armed forces opposing the Govemment of Nicaragua (the contras) may have contributed directly to killings, abductions and torture by those forces (see Nicaragua entry).
