Sri Lanka
Arbitrary killings of hundreds of Tamil civilians, often in reprisal for attacks by armed Tamil groups, continued to be reported as armed conflict between such groups and govemment forces intensified. A major concern was the "disappearance" of well over 300 young Tamil men during the last three years; a number of them were feared to have died as a result of secret footings in army or police custody or as a result of torture, which
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Europe	265
was widespread. Thousands of political suspects were arrested under the Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA) and Emergency Regulations. Many were held for several years without trial, often after long periods of incommunicado detention. The majority were Tamils, but increasing numbers were Sinhalese suspected of links with armed Tamil groups or involvement in alleged attempts to overthrow the govemment. Amnesty Intemational was also concerned about courts trying political suspects under special PTA procedures with changed mles of evidence.
Armed Tamil groups seeking a separate Tamil state in the north and east of the country increased their activities, particularly in eastern Sri Lanka, killing hundreds of security forces personnel in combat. They abducted and killed dozens of alleged "informers" and several Tamil civilians, including some political leaders. Armed Tamil groups also acknowledged responsibility for killing unarmed Sinhalese civilians in the capital Colombo and in villages in eastem Sri Lanka; some of these killings were said to be in reprisal for widespread extrajudicial killings of Tamil civilians by the army. Special Task Force (STF) of the police and the paramilitary "home guards" in the north and east. In its communications to the govemment during 1986 Amnesty Intemational stressed that, as a matter of principle, it condemned the torture or execution of prisoners by anyone, including armed opposition groups. It emphasized, however, that such acts of violence could never justify the security forces themselves resorting to torture, extrajudicial killings and "disappearances", practices then widely reported throughout Sri Lanka.
Amnesty Intemational received hundreds of reports that people taken away by members of the security forces "disappeared"; officials subsequently denied knowledge of their arrest or whereabouts or stated that they had been released. On 10 September Amnesty Intemational launched a campaign and published a report, "Disappearances" in Sri Lanka, the text of which had previously been presented to the President and the Minister of National Security with a request for comments. Amnesty Intemational urged the govemment to explain what had happened to 272 people reported to have "disappeared" between June 1983 and April 1986. All but one of the "disappeared" were Tamil. Many were fanners, labourers and fishermen, often from poor families. Others were students and civil servants and one was a Roman Catholic priest, Father Mary Bastian, who was killed, according to witnesses, by soldiers on 5 January 1985. His death was initially reported in an Information Department press release two days later, but was subsequently officially denied. Amnesty International said that it had evidence in all these cases that
266	Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe
the "disappeared" had been taken away by members of the army, air force or, in the Eastern Province, by the STF. In a few instances, members of the paramilitary "home guards" were allegedly responsible. The "disappeared" were reportedly taken to camps and police stations in Amparai, Batticaloa, Jaffna, Mannar, Trincomalee and Vavuniya districts. In one case, eye-witnesses reported that at least 28 young men were taken away from Naipattimunai and other villages in the Kalmunai area in the Amparai district on 17 May 1985 by STF personnel. There was evidence that the STF shot and killed them and disposed of their bodies in secret, but the government repeatedly denied that they had been arrested or shot, although it failed to explain what had happened to them. Paul Nallanayagam, President of the Kalmunai Citizens Committee, who had made on-the-spot investigations, was arrested the day after he had spoken to journalists about the incident and was charged with spreading rumours or false statements (see Amnesty International Report 1986). During his trial, which took place between March and July and ended in his acquittal, the High Court judge found that the evidence which was produced "cast a serious doubt on the prosecution case that no arrests took place at Naipattimunai by the STF officials on 17 May 1985".
In its report. Amnesty Intemational called on the govemment to establish speedy and independent investigations into the whereabouts of the "disappeared" and to inform their relatives immediately. It also recommended that the govemment set up a regularly updated central register of arrests to which lawyers, relatives and the courts could have immediate access and that security personnel found responsible for "disappearances" should be prosecuted. By the end of 1986, 72 more "disappearances" had been reported to Amnesty Intemational.
On 25 September the govemment stated that the report was "one-sided and ignored counter-affidavits the govemment had filed with the United Nations". However, despite four urgent requests by Amnesty International to the Minister of National Security in September and October, the government failed to make available the information it had given the UN and Amnesty International was therefore unable to comment publicly on it. TTie Chairman of the official Media Centre suggested that Amnesty Intemational should bring cases of "disappearances" before the Sri Lankan courts so that the govemment could cross-examine witnesses. In response. Amnesty International emph^ized that it was the government's responsibility to investigate and clarify "disappearances", a duty the UN had also underlined. Amnesty International said witnesses risked repercussions if their testimonies implicated security forces personnel in "disappearances". It urged the govemment to invite the UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances to visit Sri Lanka
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Europe	267
but by the end of 1986 it had not visited the country nor had the Intemational Q)mmittee of the Red Cross been given permission to carry out protection activities there. In December the govemment reportedly asked an official body to maintain a register of missing persons but Amnesty Intemational received no reply to its request for information on this. Amnesty Intemational's various requests to the President and Minister of National Security to visit Sri Lanka to discuss its concems also received no response.
By the end of 1986, Amnesty Intemational had been able to clarify only three "disappearances": two people had been found to be imprisoned in Welikada prison, Colombo, awaiting trial, and a third had been released from Boosa Army Camp after seven months' unacknowledged detention. The UN Working Group on Disappearances had considered 326 cases by the end of 1986; despite a govemment response on 212 cases, the Working Group said only five had been resolved and the fate and whereabouts of 321 people remained unclear.
There were continuing reports, particularly from eastem Sri Lanka, that unarmed Tamils had been shot dead deliberately in reprisal for attacks by Tamil separatist groups on security forces personnel and civilians. In a report released in April on extrajudicial killing in Sri Lanka from September 1985 to March 1986, Amnesty Intemational described in detail 10 such incidents. The organization had dozens of eye-witness accounts describing how Tamil men were taken out of their houses to be shot, often within sight of their relatives. Although some inquests were held. Amnesty International recommended that the government order an independent body to investigate alleged extrajudicial killings to determine criminal responsibility. Officials often stated that Tamil civilians were killed "during a shoot-out" or by armed Tamil groups, but in many cases Amnesty Intemational had evidence that they were in fact victims of extrajudicial killings by the security forces. One example was the killing of Brother M. Wenceslaus on 20 June at the Tholakatty Monastery, Jaffna. The next day, the govemment announced that he had been killed by "Tamil terrorists". However, three witnesses testified during an inquest that they saw between 10 and 50 soldiers going towards the shed where Brother Wenceslaus was working and then heard a gun shot. One witness testified that he saw soldiers speak to Brother Wenceslaus and hit him before hearing the fatal shot. The inquest returned a verdict of homicide. Amnesty Intemational was not aware of any action by the police to identify those responsible in this and many similar cases of alleged extrajudicial executions by security forces personnel, hundreds of which were reported during 1986.
268	Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe
Thousands of suspects, mainly Tamils but also Sinhalese, were arrested and held without trial under the PTA. Some were released within weeks of arrest but others were kept in prolonged detention. Many of these were initially held incommunicado, often for periods exceeding the legal maximum of 18 months. Many were then held under Emergency Regulations permitting indefinite detention without trial. Thousands were transferred to prisons or camps in the south. At the end of 1986 over 2,500 people were officially reported to be detained in Boosa Army Camp, the largest camp in the south. Among the detainees were seven women and a 14-year-old girl.
An increasing number of arrests in the south of both Tamils and Sinhalese were reported. By the end of 1986 over 400 Sinhalese were estimated to be detained under the PTA and Emergency Regulations, among them Pulsara Liyanage, a lecturer at Kelaniya University arrested on 1 November. She was one of 60 people described by officials as "Sinhala extremists, believed to have links with northern terrorist group»". They included members of left-wing group», among them the Janatha Vimukti Peramuna Nava Prava-nathayaya (JVP NP), New Tendency, and the Sama Jawadi Janatha Viyaparaya (SJV), Socialist People's Movement. They had not been charged or tried by the end of 1986. Among the others arrested were students detained for putting up p>osters opposing govemment policies.
Of the estimated 100 Tamils of Indian origin arrested between 1983 and September 1986, 60 were still detained at the end of 1986 in Welikada Prison, Colombo and Bogambara Prison, Kandy. Of these, 22 had been held for nearly two years without charge or trial and were among over 200 Tamil detainees held under the PTA whose cases had been taken up by Amnesty Intemational for investigation. Most claimed they had h^en tortured.
Over 100 Tamil detainees were rep)ortedly tried under the PTA on charges of failing to give information to the police about the activities of armed Tamil group» or of creating hatred amongst communities. They were given prison sentences ranging from several weeks to five years. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that many of them were reportedly convicted on the basis of "confessions" allegedly obtained under torture by the p)olice or army. Statements made to the police are normally not admissable as evidence in the courts, but the PTA permits such statements and places the burden on the accused to prove that statements were made under duress.
Amnesty International continued to receive allegations of torture at various police stations and army camps. Released prisoners stated that they had been beaten, often on the soles of the feet, hung up»ide down, forced to inhale buming chilli fumes and bumt with cigarettes.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Europe	269
Female detainees said they had been beaten, had had police batons forced into their vaginas and had been raped. Torture was also reported from Boosa Army Camp where prisoners were reportedly held in unhygienic conditions without medical treatment. Detainees were reportedly beaten with pipes, sometimes resulting in broken limbs, had chilli powder applied to sensitive parts of the body, and both male and female detainees complained of sexual abuse.
Amnesty International continued to oppose the deportation of Tamils to Sri Lanka by other governments. Several Tamils were detained, apparently for short periods, on arrival in Colombo after being returned against their will from France, Switzerland and Australia where they had sought political asylum.
On 16 October a Dutch national, Cornelius Stephanus Van-derhulst, was sentenced to death for attempting to smuggle heroin. No executions have been carried out since the present government assumed office in 1977.
