Burundi
Amnesty International was œncemed about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience. Some had challenged the government's restrictions on religious activities, others were imprisoned for criticizing government policies or on suspicion of organizing opposition to the government among members of the ^utu community. The majority were held without trial. The number of political prisoners was difficuh to establish, but appeared often to exceed a hundred. Amnesty International was also concerned about the ill-treatment of prisoners and about the use of the death penalty.
The government maintained its policy, introduced in 1984, of restricting public religious activities to Saturday afternoons and Sundays. This resulted in arrests of members of the Roman Catholic church, the largest religious denomination,- and of other Christian groups, particularly Seventh Day Adventists and Jehovah's Witnesses, both of which were banned. The government also banned several Roman Catholic organizations during the year, including the Mouvement mariai. Movement of Mary, in March and the Mouvement d'action catholique. Catholic Action Movement, a youth movement, in October.
Relations between the government and the Roman Catholic church became particularly strained in September and October, when the government nationalized minor seminaries (secondary schools for boys who might become priests) and, after Bishops protested against the nationalization in a pastoral letter, prohibited pre-school classes organized by the church. At least one priest. Father André Kameya, was arrested after he read the pastoral letter in his church: he also described the background to the confrontation between church and state and called on his congregation to remain faithful to the church. Other church workers and an army officer were also reportedly arrested for criticizing these government measures and in December another priest was arrested after referring publicly to the conflict between church and state. All were, like Father Kameya, still detained at the end of the year and were adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience.
The government declared 1986 to be "Justice Year" and focused attention on the imix)rtance of respect for legal procedures. Nevertheless, in many cases reported to Amnesty International, legal procedures were not observed for political detainees, who were not referred to the procuracy or remanded in custody by a judge as laid
31	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
down by law. The security forces were apparently permitted to arrest and detain suspected government opponents or critics for several months or more outside the framework of the law. Only one prisoner of conscience. Father Gabriel Secco, an Italian priest, was known to have been brought to trial. There were also many short-term detentions of people who appeared to be prisoners of conscience.
In February three Roman Catholic catechists were arrested in Nyangwa, in Gitega province, apparently because they had been organizing religious classes during the working week. They were still held at the end of 1986. In April Samuel Butoyi and more than 20 other Seventh Day Adventists were reportedly detained at the house of their pastor in Muyira, near Bujumbura, during a Saturday morning religious service. Although the women and children were released two days later, almost 20 men were held uncharged until July and then released. Some Jehovah's Witnesses were also arrested during the first half of the year and a few were reportedly still held at the end of the year.
A number of people apparently suspected of being in contact with government opponents outside the country were arrested, particularly between April and July. For example, Béatrice Mirerekano, who had Belgian nationality and was the daughter of a prominent Hutu political leader who was executed in 1965, was arrested upon arrival in Bujumbura in mid-July and detained until the end of September, while she was questioned about her contacts and activities in Belgium. Others were, like her, released uncharged after a few months. However, some were kept in custody. Ntuyengendo, a young man who had visited neighbouring Tanzania, was arrested when he returned to his village at Mugara in March: no reason was given for his detention, but he was apparently suspected of being in contact with Hutu opponents of the government who were based in Tanzania. He was not known to have been freed by the end of 1986.
In addition to these detention cases, all of which were investigated by Amnesty International, the organization remained concerned about a number of people arrested in previous years who were still held without trial. For example, Jean-Paul Banderembako, an army officer who was arrested in mid-1984 after criticizing government officials in public, was reported to have been kept in custody without being tried throughout 1986. Amnesty International also continued to investigate the case of a Protestant pastor, Siméon Nzishura, who was arrested in neighbouring Zaire, where he was a refugee, in October 1985. He was forcibly repatriated to Burundi on the grounds that he had committed non-political offences there. However, he was not tried during 1986 and Amnesty International suspected that his detention was due to his opposition to the government's restrictions
32	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
on religious activities. In the cases of a number of detainees arrested before the beginning of 1986, Amnesty International was unable to find out whether they had been released or not.
Amnesty International was also concerned about the imprisonment of a former Minister of Justice, Philippe Minani, who was arrested in August 1985. He had previously been imprisoned in the 1970s after being convicted of embezzling public funds while in office, but had been released before completing his sentence. His rearrest in 1985 appeared to have been due to his support for Roman Catholic critics of the government's restrictions on religious activities; however, instead of being charged with a new offence, he was apparently imprisoned on the basis of the sentence imposed on him in 1978.
Amnesty International was aware of only one political trial during the year. This concerned an Italian Roman Catholic priest. Father Gabriel Secco, who was arrested at the beginning of June and tried in July. He had given the last sacraments to a former government official who was reputed to have taken part in the May 1972 massacres, when many thousands of people were killed in strife between the Tutsi and Hutu communities, and had later allowed his burial in a parish cemetery at Ntega. In response to criticism by members of his congregation, he explained during a religious service that the former official had asked for forgiveness. It was on account of his remarks in church that Father Secco was arrested and charged with libelling the former official, disclosing a professional secret and inciting racial hatred. He was convicted by Ngozi High Court and sentenced to six months' imprisonment. Amnesty International believed him to be a prisoner of conscience. He was released at the beginning of September after serving half his sentence.
Amnesty International remained concerned about five people convicted in December 1985 of involvement in sending an anonymous letter to the Roman Catholic Bishop of Bujumbura urging him to defy the government's ban on weekday religious services. Two of the five were convicted of insulting the head of state, on the grounds that the letter compared the government to Satan. The convictions of the five were confirmed by the Bujumbura Appeal Court in March. The Cassation Court, the final court of appeal, later turned down a complaint by one of the five. Father Gabriel Barakana, that he had not been able to present his defence adequately. All five were adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience.
As in previous years, Amnesty International was also concerned about reports of police brutality and of severe beatings inflicted on detainees. In December, for example, a Roman Catholic nun was reported to have been badly beaten while in police custody in Rumonge: she apparently fainted twice during interrogation, but was
33	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
revived to be beaten again. More than 10 school teachers and other professionals belonging to the Hutu community were also reported to have been arrested in Bururi province during December and to have been severely beaten in Rumonge. The previous month, prisoners at Rumonge's Murembwe prison, who had sought refuge in neighbouring Tanzania after the 1972 massacres but had later returned home voluntarily, were allegedly subjected to a series of severe beatings. Unofficial sources claimed that some prisoners had died as a result, but Amnesty International was not able to obtain independent confirmation of this.
Death sentences were imposed during 1986 but no information was available to Amnesty International about the total number, nor about the number of executions.
