Albania
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the existence and application of legislation severely restricting certain human rights. It could not assess accurately the number of prisoners of conscience, because of official censorship and restrictions on freedom of movement. The organization was also concemed about inadequate legal safeguards for political detainees, harsh prison conditions and allegations of ill-treatment of detainees. It did not leam of any death sentences or executions (such information was not made public), but remained concerned about the number of offences for which the death penalty could be imposed.
On 13 January a "general pardon" effected the release of the following categories of political prisoners: those serving sentences of up to six years' imprisonment for "anti-state agitation and propaganda" or "flight from the state" (recidivists excluded); female political prisoners serving sentences of up to 20 years' imprisonment; all political prisoners under 18 years old; and political prisoners with a year or less of their sentences left to serve. Other political prisoners had the remainder of their sentences reduced by a quarter. No official figures were published about the number of prisoners benefiting from the pardon. From unofficial sources Amnesty Intemational leamed of two political prisoners who had been released. Amnesty Intema-tional's information indicated that a large proportion of political prisoners were serving prison sentences of 10 years or more and that most were adult men; it therefore seemed likely that the chief effect of the pardon on political prisoners was to shorten their sentences rather than to bring about their release.
280	Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe
Amnesty International noted that the pardon decree confirmed that since the previous pardon in November 1982 people had continued to be imprisoned on charges of engaging in "anti-state agitation and propaganda" under Article 55 of the criminal code. The great majority of prisoners about whom Amnesty International received information in recent years were convicted under this article for criticizing economic or |X)litical conditions in the country or under Article 47, paragraph 11 ("flight from the state"). Amnesty Intemational learned of further such cases in 1986. They included a group of men from Vlore who were said to have been sentenced in 1985 to prison terms of between 16 and 25 years for "anti-state agitation and propaganda" and a worker from Kavaje serving a 25-year prison sentence for attempting to leave the country illegally.
Since 1%7, when Albania was officially declared "the first atheist state in the world", all organized or public forms of religious worship have been illegal. In that year religious buildings were closed and all religious communities, Muslim and Christian, were deprived of legal status and their functionaries prohibited from exercising their offices. In the following years Amnesty International received various re|X)rts of clergy being imprisoned or interned (usually on collective farms). In 1986 refugees stated that Father Pjeter Meshkalla, an 80-year-old Jesuit, had been arrested in Guri i Zi, near Shkoder, after he had celebrated mass in a private house. Former political prisoners who had known Father Meshkalla in prison had in previous years informed Amnesty Internafional that the priest was first imprisoned for 10 years in the 1950s. In the 1960s he was imprisoned for a further 15 years and was said to have been released in the early 1980s. Amnesty Intemational was not able to find out what happened to Father Meshkalla after his most recent arrest.
Official hostility to religious belief and to former clergy was reflected in an article published in March in the monthly Rruga e Partise (The Party's Road). Referring to "former clergy" and "declassed elements dissatisfied with the people's government", it said that "Experience has shown that religious propaganda or religious rites practised by these elements are simply a mask for their hostile political aims and intentions." The writer said that such people were punished according to their degree of guilt, "from unmasking them in social courts, down to, and including, penal prosecution". At the same time he denied that people were persecuted for their religious convictions.
Amnesty International also learned of people who had been intemed. This punishment can be imposed under the criminal code for up to five years as a supplementary penalty, or administratively for unspecified periods, on i>eople officially thought to represent a
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Europe	281
danger to the country's social system and on "members of the family of fugitives living inside or outside the state". This punishment was reportedly imposed on six members of the Popa family from Durres in 1968, apparently in retaliation for political offences allegedly committed by their relatives. In December 1985 they left the collective farm without official permission and took refuge in the Italian Embassy in Tirane. The authorities refused to let them leave the country and they were still in the embassy at the end of 1986.
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about inadequate legal safeguards for political prisoners during investigation and trial proceedings, in particular the absence of provisions entitling them to visits from relatives and legal aid during investigation. Political prisoners were almost always denied legal aid at their trials.
Former political prisoners have told Amnesty International that during investigation they were held in small, dark, basement cells, and often obliged to sleep on the cement floor or on boards with blankets but no mattress. They complained that they were given little to eat and were interrogated at night and deprived of sleep. Most alleged that they were beaten during investigation.
Prison conditions for political prisoners were regularly described as very hareh, with poor food, hygiene and medical care. Political prisoners reportedly continued to be held in Burrel prison, but others formerly held in Spac labour camp were said to have been moved to another site near Tue in Puke district where, as at Spac, they mined pyrites. Yet other political prisoners formerly held in Ballsh were said to have been transferred for a period to Zejmen in Lezhe district.
