Kampuchea (Cambodia)
Amnesty International was con-œmed about human rights violations by the People's Republic of Kampuchea (PRK) authorities who administered most of the country's territory and population with the support of Viet Nam. Several thousand prisoners were held without trial, among them some prisoners of conscience. Amnesty International was also concemed about reports of torture, about unfair trials of political prisoners and about the death penalty. Amnesty Intemational was concemed, too, about human rights violations by the UN-recognized Democratic Kampuchea (DK) authorities, whose three Coalition Government partners continued to wage war within the country and to administer camps along the Thailand-Kampuchea border.
Amnesty International believed that almost all of the several thousand political prisoners held by the PRK authorities were imprisoned without charge or trial, and that among them were some prisoners of conscience. Reports of arbitrary arrest and detention continued. As in previous years, political suspects were reportedly tortured during interrogation and held incommunicado in shackles in dark and dirty cells. Amnesty Intemational received reports that former political opponents of the government, officially termed "misled people", who surrendered to the authorities during 1986, were restricted to camps and held without charge or trial for unspecified periods of "re-education". Only one political trial was officially reported during the year. One of the 10 defendants, all of whom were convicted, was sentenced to death and Amnesty Intemational was concerned that the convicted men may not have been allowed adequate opportunities to defend themselves.
Information obtained by Amnesty Intemational during 1986 corroborated reports that people arrested in previous years for suspected involvement with DK or other opposition activities had been the victims of human rights abuses. The organization received dozens of first-hand testimonies from former political prisoners and over a hundred reports about other individual political prisoners, 88 of whom were believed to be still imprisoned in 1986. These reports contained consistent allegations of torture being inflicted between 1979 and 1985. The organization also interviewed several former PRK police officers and govemment officials, who told it that in past years p)olitical prisoners had been tortured by their colleagues or Vietnamese advisory "experts" working with them. Torture of
240	Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe
Kampuchean political prisoners by Vietnamese "experts" assigned to PRK detention centres was alleged in several reports, as was the presence of Vietnamese personnel when PRK officials committed torture. Twelve political prisoners were allegedly killed during interrogation or died as a result of torture between 1979 and 1985, and over 30 others reportedly died in prison in that period due to inadequate medical treatment for injuries caused by torture, untreated diseases, or lack of food.
Severe beatings, whippings and other assaults were the forms of torture most commonly reported to Amnesty Intemational. Also frequently reported were near-suffocation, usually by putting a plastic bag over the victim's head, near-drowning, sometimes using irritant liquids such as soapy water or fish-sauce, and electric shocks. Other reported tortures included being held in covered petrol dmms and subjected to continuous loud noises, being burned with powdered limestone or heated instruments and being buried alive.
Amnesty International had the names of more than 400 of the several thousand political prisoners whom it thought were held without charge or trial in the PRK in 1986, including the names of several prisoners of conscience, but relatives had expressed fears that disclosing prisoners' names could put them at risk. The list included people l^lieved to be imprisoned in detention centres in 14 of the PRK's 20 provinces and municipalities. Most of them were in national, provincial or municipal centres administered by the PRK authorities, but several were in centres mn exclusively by Vietnamese personnel.
Although the PRK news media provided fewer statistics about political arrests in 1986 than in previous years, they did reveal that 19 people were arrested on political grounds throughout the country during one week in January, and seven in Kampung Thom province during the first quarter of the year. Statements emphasizing the importance of carrying out political arrests were broadcast by the official radio to the security forces. For example, it broadcast a March "circular", signed by Secretary General Heng Samrin of the mling Revolutionary People's Party of Kampuchea, which called on the PRK authorities "firmly to implement . . . security plans for [the] year by fulfill[ingl additional plans to take turns sweeping up all kinds of enemy forces" and in particular "carry[ing] out well the task of unmasking hidden enemy elements". An editorial in July in the party joumal Pracheachun similarly stressed that it was "imperative" to "vigorously stimulate . . . security measures to mop up . . . enemy elements hidden among the people".
Amnesty Intemational received detailed reports of several people arrested during 1986 accused of opposition political activities. Three
Amnesty International Refxjrt 1987 Asia	241
people were reportedly arrested in Siem Reap-Utdar Meanchey province, and one in the capital, Phnum Penh, all during the second quarter of the year. One was a low-ranking PRK police official, one a member of the Islamic Cham minority, one a health professional and one a small trader. They were reportedly detained without charge or trial and tortured during interrogation. Among the tortures allegedly inflicted on them were electric shocks and near-drowning. They were also alleged to have been held in dark cells, and two to have been shackled for long periods. The organization also received reports of two other political arrests, one of a low-ranking ministerial employee in Phnum Penh and another of a health professional in Kandal province.
In May Amnesty International wrote to the Chairperson of the PRK Council of Ministers, Hun Sen. It expressed its concern about reports of torture and ill-treatment of political prisoners imprisoned without charge or trial in the PRK. While regretting the lack of any response to the correspondence it had addressed to PRK authorities during 1985 (see Amnesty International Report /9S6), Amnesty International requested permission to visit the PRK to discuss its concerns. In its September Newsletter, the organization publicized reports of torture in the PRK. At the same time, the organization again wrote to Chairman Hun Sen, requesting his comments on the reports, and in particular any information on safeguards against torture.
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about allegations that some of the 4,414 former political opponents who the PRK news media said had voluntarily surrendered to the authorities during the first 11 months of 1986 were held without charge or trial in "re-education" camps. In its May letter to Chairperson Hun Sen, the organization expressed concern at the lack of legal safeguards against the indefinite arbitrary restriction of such people, who were officially described as "misled" people who had "repented".
In October 1986 the PRK news media announced that 10 people accused of being DK-affiliated "counter-revolutionaries" who had committed acts of armed sabotage against the PRK had been tried in the province of Kampung Speu. This was the first known publicly announced political trial in the PRK since December 1983, and the first in the PRK's history to result in a publicized death sentence on a political prisoner in custody. Amnesty International called for commutation of the death sentence passed on Chea Saran and reiterated its concern that political suspects in the PRK might not receive fair trials.
Amnesty International was concerned about reports of human rights abuses by the three parties which formed the DK, which
242	Amnesty International Report 1987 Europe
administered several hundred thousand Kampucheans. The organization received rep>orts that some partners to the coalition had committed extrajudicial executions of political and criminal suspects; that they had held political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, without charge or trial; that they had severely ill-treated |X)litical prisoners; and that they had systematically raped Vietnamese and other refugee women in military custody.
The organization received rep>orts of three prison camps run by one coalition partner, the Partie of Democratic Kampuchea (PDK), the President of which was Khieu Samphan. Their prisoners were said to include political suspects held without charge or trial because of alleged "liberalism", some of whom were believed to be prisoners of conscience. Political prisoners suspected of serious offences are reportedly often shackled. In addition, the PDK news media claimed with some frequency during 1986 that its armed forces operating in the interior had killed non-combatants during offensive operations, and it appeared from these official accounts that the reported victims might in some instances have been executed in custody.
The organization also received reports of two prisons run by another coalition party, the Khmer People's National Liberation Front (KPNLF). They were said to be administered by KPNLF personnel who disputed the political authority of its original President, Son Sann. The prisoners reportedly included people suspected of espionage and of supporting Son Sann against his rivals. Political prisoners held in one of these prisons were allegedly put in dark cells, shackled and severely beaten. Amnesty International also received reports that KPNLF personnel — both those opposed to Son Sann and his supporters — had shot and beaten to death political and criminal susp)ects. In addition, it received reports that anti-Son Sann KPNLF troops had repeatedly raped Vietnamese and other refugee women taken into custody at their Chamkar Kor base camp, and that some of the victims had died as a result. The organization outlined these concerns in a meeting with Son Sann, the Prime Minister of the DK coalition government, in November.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Europe	243
