Yugoslavia
Amnesty International was concerned about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience; during 1986 it worked on the cases of 249 individuals whom it knew or suspected to be prisoners of conscience, but it believed that the actual total was considerably greater. It was concerned that many political prisoners were denied a fair trial and that, in Kosovo in particular, courts had apparently relied heavily on evidence obtained under pressure. The organization received a number of allegations that political prisoners had been ill-treated during investigation proceedings and it continued to be concerned about conditions in some prisons where political prisoners were serving their sentences. During 1986 Amnesty Intemational continued to call for the release of two prisoners of conscience, Radomir Veljkovic and Milisav Zivanovic, forcibly detained in the psychiatric section of Belgrade Prison Hospital since 1973 and 1976 respectively; in June Milisav Zivanovic was released. Amnesty Intemational learned of four death sentences. To its knowledge, no executions were reported.
According to official statistics, in 1986, 466 people were charged with political crimes, of whom 258 were ethnic Albanians. Seventy-three people were indicted for so-called "verbal crimes" under Article 133 of the criminal code dealing with "hostile propaganda". During 1986 Amnesty International learned of some 50 trials involving over 180 people in which the accused were convicted of political crimes, most frequently under Article 133 and Article 136 ("association for hostile activity") of the criminal code.
The situation in Kosovo province continued to be grave, with tension between the majority, ethnic Albanians, and the Serbian and Montenegrin minorities, who publicly protested that the failure of the authorities to safeguard them from attacks and pressures from Albanians was responsible for their continued emigration from the province. According to official statistics 1,400 people, almost all ethnic Albanians, were charged with political crimes in Kosovo between 1981 and mid-1986 and a further 6,500 were summarily sentenced for minor political offences. Between April and July 1986 more than 120 ethnic Albanians were sentenced in a series of group trials in Kosovo. They were generally convicted of membership of illegal nationalist groups, such as the Marxist-Leninists of Kosovo (MLK) or the Movement for a Socialist Albanian Republic in
330	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
Yugoslavia (LRSSHJ). They were mostly accused of having demanded that Kosovo should cease to be part of the Republic of Serbia and be itself given republic status, or of having called for the creation of an Albanian republic within Yugoslavia, composed of Kosovo and other regions with large ethnic Albanian communities, with a view to the eventual unification of this republic with Albania. They were generally found guilty of reading and distributing illegal nationalist literature, writing "hostile slogans", or, in some cases, of having contacts with political emigres. There were also cases in which the accused were charged with having amassed arms and planned acts of violence, although press reports generally gave few details of the supporting evidence and it was noticeable that defence counsel frequently asked for the charge to be changed to one of "hostile propaganda". Among prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International were Sahit Berisha and five co-defendants sentenced in Pec in June to prison terms of between seven months and five years. Sahit Berisha and two other unemployed men in their twenties were convicted of being members of LRSSHJ. At their trial they denied this; in its written decision the only evidence cited by the court in support of its finding was statements made by the defendants during investigation proceedings, which they had subsequently retracted, saying they had been induced to make them under threats and pressure from state security officers. Four other defendants were found guilty of "hostile propaganda" for having possessed, read or given to another person to read, illegal nationalist literature. Amnesty International sought further information in connection with one of these.
Despite public pressure to reformulate Article 133 ("hostile propaganda") in such a way as to prevent its use to penalize the non-violent exercise of the right to freedom of expression, it was not amended. The abuses to which its formulation led were, in Amnesty International's view, illustrated by the conviction in Tuzla of Jovan Nikolic, a retired art teacher, Obren Jovic, a denfist, and Bogdan Antic, a doctor. The charges against them arose out of conversations they were alleged to have had with friends and colleagues, in which they criticized Yugoslavia's political and economic system, claimed that Serbs were discriminated against in Bosnia-Hercegovina, and denigrated other Yugoslav peoples, in particular Muslims. The defendants denied the charges and witnesses retracted their previous testimony or altered it, several alleging that they had given their original statements after being threatened by police. There was also no proof of counter-revolutionary intent on the part of the defendants, a necessary element of the offence. However, they were found guilty under Article 133, as well as under Article 157
Amnesty Intemational Report 1967 Europe	331
("damaging the reputation of the state" — for having allegedly ridiculed the late President Tito). Obren Jovic and Jovan Nikolic were sentenced to five and a half and five years' imprisonment respectively in March. Bogdan Antic, who because of ill-health was tried separately in November, was sentenced to four years' imprisonment. Unlike the other two, he remained at liberty pending appeal.
Amnesty Intemational also adopted Halil Mehtic, a Muslim imam sentenced to three years' imprisonment in Zenica in April under Article 134 for "inciting national, racial and religious hatred". The charges were based on statements he allegedly made in sermons and during religious classes in which he supposedly preached the moral superiority of Muslims over Serbs and Croats and urged Muslims not to associate with or marry people of other faiths. Halil Mehtic produced witnesses who said that he had not made the statements of which he was accused, as well as other evidence testifying to his lack of religious or national prejudice. The same day, a court in Banja Luka (also in Bosnia-Hercegovina) sentenced a Roman Catholic priest, Father Filip Lukenda, also under Article 134, to four years' imprisonment, on similar charges. In November his sentence was reduced to two and a half years on appeal. Amnesty Intemational sought further information about his trial.
The issue of conscientious objection to military service became the subject of public discussion after the Socialist Youth Alliance of Slovenia in October proposed alternative civilian service for conscientious objectors. Outside Slovenia this proposal generally met with official censure. Amnesty International adopted Ivan Cecko, a Jehovah's Witness from Slovenia who was sentenced in October to five years' imprisonment by Belgrade Military Court for refusing military service on religious grounds. It was his third sentence for this offence and he had already spent seven years in prison. He was released in December when the Supreme Military Court, following an appeal, ordered his retrial.
Detailed information that Amnesty International obtained on a number of political trials reinforced its eariier concems about the fairness of trials for political detainees. Amnesty Intemational was, for instance, concemed at the tendency of courts to rely heavily on testimony obtained during investigation proceedings, even when this was retracted in court on the grounds that it had been obtained under pressure and threat. Amnesty Intemational also noted the frequent reluctance of courts to examine witnesses or other proposed evidence for the defence, thus heavily weighting the case in favour of the prosecution. There were also complaints that defence counsel were impeded in their work in various ways, such as by being denied
332	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
private consultations with their clients and adequate access to records of investigation proceedings.
Amnesty Intemational learned of allegations made by a number of ethnic Albanian political prisoners that they had been ill-treated during pre-trial proceedings. In September the organization urged the authorities to investigate allegations that Peter Ivezaj, an ethnic Albanian living in the USA with dual US and Yugoslav citizenship, had been ill-treated after his arrest on 19 August while visiting relatives in Montenegro. On 8 October he was sentenced to seven years' imprisonment in Titograd on charges of belonging to an emigre organization, the American-Albanian Student Association, in Detroit and of having taken part in anti-Yugoslav demonstrations in several US cities. His arrest and trial aroused protest in the USA and two days after his conviction he was released and allowed to retum home. He subsequently stated that after arrest he was for three days denied food and was on three occasions beaten, kicked and punched by prison guards. At another trial (in Pristina in June), involving 23 ethnic Albanians said to be members of MLK, one of the accused, Kadri Raka, a minor, said that he had been forced to confess falsely to planning to place explosives in buildings by state security officers. Amnesty International's concems about the treatment of political detainees in Kosovo were further aggravated by allegations that Male Morina, an ethnic Albanian student, had committed suicide in Pec on 11 December, a month after his arrest. It was alleged that he killed himself in a state of severe depression induced by the ill-treatment he suffered.
Amnesty International did not receive any information which would suggest that the harsh conditions in certain prisons where political prisoners were held had improved (see Amnesty International Report 1986). In March Dobroslav Paraga, a former prisoner of conscience (see Amnesty International Report 1981), sued the Croatian Secretariat for Justice for permanent damage to his health resulting from prison conditions and ill-treatment in detention from 1980 to 1984.
Amnesty International learned of three death sentences imposed for murder. It appealed to the State Presidency to commute the death sentence on Andrija Artukovic for war crimes after it had been confirmed by the Federal Court; the organization explained its unconditional opposition to the death penalty. Amnesty International did not leam of any executions.
