Lesotho
Amnesty International was concerned about the detention without trial and administrative restriction of alleged government opponents. Three political detainees were reported to have died in custody in suspicious circumstances and two former government ministers and their wives were victims of politically motivated killings, alleged to have been carried out by agents of the government. Several South African political refugees or exiles were also victims of killings or abductions, which unofficial sources alleged were carried out by South African security agents acting with local support.
The government of Prime Minister Chief Leabua Jonathan, which had itself seized power in 1970, was overthrown by the armed forces on 20 January. For three weeks before the coup, Lesotho had been subject to an economic blockade by South Africa, which accused the government of permitting African National Congress (ANC) guerrilla fighters to operate from Lesotho. Five opposition political leaders who visited Pretoria briefly to discuss the blockade with the South African authorities were arrested on their return to Lesotho. They were freed several days later when the armed forces, led by Major-General Justin Lekhanya, seized power. The South African blockade was lifted when the new government agreed to deport certain South African refugees to other countries of asylum.
Following the change of government, King Moshoeshoe II was given additional powers, and a new government comprising a six-member Military Council and a subordinate Council of Ministers, both chaired by Major-General Lekhanya, took power. Subsequently, an amnesty was granted for political prisoners and exiles, which resulted in the release of Mathabiso Mosala and others awaiting trial on political charges (see Amnesty International Report 1986). In late March the King announced a ban on all political party activity and new legislation providing for up to two years' imprisonment for violating the ban. After the coup, the Youth Wing of Chief Jonathan's Basutoland National Party was disbanded and the Lesotho Liberation Army, a guerrilla force which had been opposed to Chief Jonathan's government, became inactive.
Following the coup, a number of people were arrested. Among them were Colonel Sehlabo Sehlabo, who had led a mutiny apparently in an attempt to prevent the coup, and Brigadier B.M. Ramotsekhoane, Major-General Lekhanya's deputy as army
65	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
commander. In March the government announced that both men had died in detention: Colonel Sehlabo's death was said to have been caused by a heart attack, but no reasons were given for the deaths of Brigadier Ramotsekhoane and another soldier. Sergeant M. Tjane, whose death was also reported. Subsequently, Amnesty International received information which suggested that the deaths of Colonel Sehlabo and Brigadier Ramotsekhoane had been caused by ill-treatment. It was reported at the end of 1986 that inquests on both men were expected early in 1987.
Former Information Minister Desmond Sixishe and former Foreign Minister Vincent Makhele were also detained after the coup but they were released within a few weeks. However, in August they were among six former officials who, together with Chief Jonathan, were placed under restriction orders by the authorities. Chief Jonathan had previously been under house arrest.
On 15 November Desmond Sixishe and Vincent Makhele and their wives were abducted by a group of armed men and killed. Two friends who were abducted with them were injured but escaped. They were believed to have told the authorities that those responsible for the killings were military personnel but no arrests were known to have been made by the end of 1986.
Two months before the killings of Desmond Sixishe and Vincent Makhele, a leading church official was expelled from the country after he alleged that a death squad acting on behalf of the South African Government was opjerating in Lesotho. Father Michael Worsnip, General Secretary of the Christian Council of Lesotho, was deported in mid-September after he confirmed to the press the existence of widespread suspicion among South African refugees in Lesotho that this death squad was responsible for recent abductions and killings of alleged ANC activists. The victims included Joseph Mothopeng, who was reported to have been shot dead on 19 July when armed men attempted to abduct him, and Simon Makhetha, who was abducted on 22 July and widely believed to have been taken to South Africa.
66
Amnesty International Refyort 1987 Africa
