Jordan
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the detention of prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience and about trials of political prisoners by the Martial Law Court which fell below intemational standards for fair trial. The organization was also concemed about reports of torture or ill-treatment of fxisoners and about the death penalty.
During 1986 Amnesty Intemational worked for the release of four prisoners of conscience and investigated the cases of 25 possible prisoners of conscience. One of the prisoners of conscience adopted by the organization was Jamil al-Nimri, a pharmacist arrested in May 1985 and sentenced in April 1986 to three years' imprisonment for membership of an illegal organization. Another was Yusuf Hamid, a student arrested in November 1980 and sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment for membership of an illegal communist organization. The two other prisoners of conscience, Samih Khalil and Suleiman Suwais (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1986), were released on 25 May and 17 Febmary respectively. Suleiman Suwais had been detained without charge for almost four months in the General Intelligence Building in Amman.
Amnesty Intemational learned during 1986 of the release of 10 of the 25 prisoners whose cases it had been investigating. Among those still held at the end of 1986 was Mahmud 'Uwaydah, alleged to be a prominent member of the Islamic Liberation Party, who had been detained without trial in al-Mahatta Central Prison since September 1982. Also held were alleged members of the Jordanian Communist Party and other banned organizations. A large number of political prisoners were transferred on 3 September to al-Jafr Prison, in the southern desert, following protests at restrictive regulations introduced in August in al-Mahatta Central Prison.
Amnesty Intemational learned of nine trials before the Martial Law Court of people charged with membership of illegal political
354	Amnesty International Report 1987 Middle East/N. Africa
organizations. In each case the defendants were convicted and sentenced to prison terms. The organization continued to be concerned about the fairness of the proceeding before the court and about the lack of any right of appeal against its sentences. It investigated the cases of prisoners convicted by the Martial Law Court, and adopted some as prisoners of conscience.
Martial law has been in force since 1967. In 1986 a pattern of arrest and short-term detention without charge of political prisoners under emergency legislation continued. The arrests were mostly carried out by the Dairat al-Mukhabarat al-'Amma, General Intelligence Department, and detained political suspects were usually held in the General Intelligence Department headquarters in Amman for a few weeks to a few months and interrogated. Some were held incommunicado. Those who were to be detained for longer periods or brought to trial were usually transferred to ordinary prisons. During 1986 Amnesty International learned of 53 people arrested on political grounds by the General Intelligence Department, 42 of whom were released before the end of the year without having been charged. They included 22 alleged members of the Jordanian Communist Party, outlawed since 1953, who were held between 17 May and 4 September in Jweidah Prison near Amman. Amnesty International expressed concern that they may have been prisoners of conscience, and also inquired about the physical condition of a number of them. It received assurances from the authorities that they had access to medical attention.
Further reports of torture or ill-treatment reached Amnesty Intemational during 1986. Durgham Jiryis Halasa, a trade unionist from Karak, was reportedly tortured while held incommunicado for a number of weeks in the General Intelligence Department headquarters in Amman following his arrest on 16 May. Amnesty Intemational appealed on his behalf, and he was released on 4 September. When security forces dispersed students demonstrating within the campus of Yarmuk University at Irbid on 15 May a number of students were killed and others were reportedly beaten while being taken to detention centres. Amnesty Intemational expressed concem about the deaths and Prime Minister Zaid al-Rifai replied stating that three students had died because "of the pressure of the crowd. The students fell and they were trampled upon by their fellow students. They did not die at the hands of the police." In another action by security forces on 6 August within al-Mahatta Central Prison, apparently aimed at confiscating prisoners' belongings, a number of prisoners were reportedly beaten.
During 1986 Amnesty International recorded four executions, all for murder, and the passing of death sentences in absentia on three
Amnesty International RefX>rt 1987 Middle East/N. Africa	355
people convicted of selling land in the Israeli occupied West Bank to Israelis. The organization conveyed its concem about the apparent increase in the rate of executions in 1985; in their reply the Jordanian authorities expressed their belief in the use of the death penalty as a deterrent and as a fit punishment for certain crimes. Amnesty Intemational continued to reiterate its position on the death penalty and expressed regret at the executions.
