Guinea-Bissau
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about 12 people who were sentenced to death after an unfair trial, six of whom were executed, and about reports that prisoners had been tortured and ill-treated. There was concem about the continuing detention without charge or trial of Rafael Barbosa but the organization welcomed the release of three other long-term political detainees.
Amnesty International sent a mission to Guinea Bissau from 17 to 23 June at the invitation of the govemment. Its delegates held discussions with President Joao Bernardo Vieira and a range of government, judicial and other officials. They also attended one session of the trial of the former Vice-President of the Council of State, Colonel Paulo Correia, and 55 others, both military personnel and civilians, accused of involvement in a plot to overthrow the govemment. The trial began before a military court on 5 June. Many of the defendants had been arrested in October and November 1985
58	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
on suspicion of planning to place a bomb in the town of Bafata where the President was due to make a speech on 14 November, the fifth anniversary of his accession to power. Following these arrests, other people were detained and charged with planning an assault on the prison to liberate the alleged coup plotters. The total number of people arrested was not known to Amnesty Intemational. Six of the detainees died in custody and some others were known to have been released before the trial. The trial was held before the Superior Military Tribunal comprising a president, two other judges and an assessor. The hearing was observed by an invited audience which included military personnel and government officials. The defendants were assisted by legal counsel. Both those charged with plotting to overthrow the government and those accused of planning to free the alleged plotters from prison were tried together. Among the principal defendants were Viriato Rodrigues Pa, a former supreme court judge, Comandante Joao Biambi, who was allegedly responsible for keeping the explosive device, and Benhancaren Na Tchanda, the head of the presidential guard. Others were senior administrative, judicial and military officials, soldiers and civilians. Most of the defendants belonged to the Balanta ethnic group. On 12 July, 12 defendants were sentenced to death, 24 people were sentenced to prison terms of between one and eight years and 16 others received sentences of between 12 and 15 years' imprisonment. Four people were acquitted. There was no judicial appeal against the decision of the Superior Military Tribunal, which is the highest military court. The 12 people sentenced to death did, however, have the opp)ortunity to appeal to the Council of Slate for clemency. As a result, six death sentences were commuted to 15-year prison terms. The other six people, Paulo Correia, Viriato Rodrigues Pa, Benhancaren Na Tchanda, Colonel Pedro Ramos, a high court judge, Braima Bangura, former Secretary of State for Veterans, and N'Bunhe Sanbu, a soldier, were executed by firing-squad on 18 July 1986, six days after being sentenced. On 14 July Amnesty International appealed for the commutation of the death sentences. It also informed the government of its concern that the trial had not conformed to international standards of fairness: those sentenced to death did not have the right to appeal to a higher court against the verdict and sentences; in addition, there was concern that evidence obtained by coercion had been admitted in court.
During 1986 Amnesty International received reports that some of the detainees arrested in connection with the coup plot had been beaten and otherwise ill-treated. Amnesty International's delegates were present in court when one of the defendants, a security official, claimed that he had been threatened with torture during his pre-trial
59	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
interrogation. Subsequently, the organization received reports that other defendants had also told the court that they had been forced to make self-incriminating statements. No investigation of these complaints was known to have taken place. Amnesty International also received allegations that other prisoners had been beaten and ill-treated.
Six people detained in connection with the plot died in custody. Joào da Silva, a former Minister of Culture and Sport, was shot while attempting to escape from prison in November 1985. The other five were reported by official sources to have died of illnesses. Unofficial sources claimed that the illnesses were exacerbated by ill-treatment in custody. Amnesty International urged the government to establish an independent inquiry into the deaths and to make the findings public. It was informed by the authorities that the five who had died between February and July 1986 had been ill before their arrest and had received all possible medical treatment while in custody. While it was unable to confirm any of the allegations of ill-treatment. Amnesty International remained concerned that measures to protect prisoners from torture or ill-treatment were inadequate. The military authorities were responsible for both the custody and the interrogation of detainees implicated in the coup plot and the defendants were apparently held incommunicado for extended periods and did not have access to legal counsel until a week before the trial.
Amnesty International's concern about the death penalty was not confined to the death sentences passed on 12 July. At least one other person, Jorge Sanca, a soldier charged with homicide, was sentenced to death by a military court and executed in February. The death penalty was introduced into Guinea Bissau by the Law of Military Justice which was promulgated in 1966 by the Partido Africano para a Independência da Guinea Bissau e Cabo Verde (PAIGC), African Party for the Independence of Guinea Bissau and Cape Verde, in the areas which they had liberated from colonial control. However, as far as the organization knew, no other death sentences had been carried out in Guinea Bissau since the present government came to power in November 1980.
Amnesty International continued to investigate the case of Rafael Barbosa who was rearrested in June 1985 and held under an administrative restriction order on one of the islands in the Bijagos archipelago (see Amnesty International Report 1986).
Three long-term detainees were released in 1986. Francisco Barbosa, a relative of Rafael Barbosa, who was arrested in April 1985 and accused of distributing an anonymous leaflet criticizing the government, was released on 18 January. Fernando Delfim da Silva, arrested in Bissau in June 1985 on his return from the Soviet Union,
60	Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
was released in May. Amnesty International was informed by the government that the allegations leading to his arrest had proved to be false. The authorities said they had been told that he had tried to establish an opposition party among compatriot students in Leningrad. All restrictions on Victor Saude Maria, a former Prime Minister accused of plotting against the government, were removed in November. He had been detained under administrative detention or restriction orders since March 1984.
