Greece
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the imprisonment of large numbers of Jehovah's Witnesses for refusing to perform military service (see Amnesty International Report 1986) and about allegations of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners. Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Prime Minister, Andreas Papandreou, on 22 August expressing concern about the imprisonment of conscientious objectors. The letter pointed out that the option of four years' unarmed military service was not a satisfactory altemative. It was twice as long as armed military service and Amnesty Intemational believed that altemative service should be separate from the military system and of comparable length. The only reply received was a standard letter which did not address the substance of Amnesty Intemational's concerns. At the end of 1986 Amnesty Intemational knew of 234 Jehovah's Witnesses imprisoned for conscientious objection to military service. All were adopted as prisoners of conscience.
On 27 May 1986 an appeal court in Athens mied that three Protestant Christian evangelical missionaries, Costas Macris, Don Stephens and Alan Williams, were not guilty of "proselytism" (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1986). This charge had been brought against them after they gave a 16-year-old Greek youth a Bible and talked to him about religion. The court was reported as saying that there was nothing illegal in their evangelizing methods and that their message did not differ from that of the Greek Orthodox Church.
Throughout 1986 Amnesty Intemational received allegations of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners and detainees by prison guards
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Europe	297
and police officers. The organization wrote to the Minister of Justice on 23 December about the alleged torture and ill-treatment of prisoners in Alicarnassos Prison on Crete, Kerkyra High Security Prison on Corfu and Eptapyrgion Prison. It also referred to cases of people ill-treated in police custody, including four young Englishmen interviewed by Amnesty Intemational following their release from prison. They alleged that they had been ill-treated on 30 July and 1 August at liieologos Police Station and Kavalla Police Station on the island of Thassos. They said they were beaten, punched, kicked and slapped repeatedly by police officers and kept without food or water for 21 hours.
