Bahrain
Reports of two deaths in custody, allegedly as a result of torture, reached Amnesty International during 1986. The organization was also concemed by reports of torture and ill-treatment of convicted political prisoners and of detainees held without charge for interrogation. Information allegedly obtained through torture was admitted and used as evidence in a political trial. The organization was concerned about the continuing imprisonment of political prisoners who were possibly prisoners of conscience, and about reports of detention without charge or trial of political opponents of the govemment.
Throughout 1986 Amnesty International called on the govemment to set up impartial inquiries into all allegations of torture and to ensure that torture did not occur. Specifically, Amnesty Intemational urged that a limit be placed on incommunicado detention, and that detainees be permitted access to lawyers and to relatives shortly after
336	Amnesty Intemational Report 1967 Middle East/N. Africa
arrest and at regular intervals afterwards. The organization also urged the authorities to ratify human rights instruments outlawing torture.
On 9 September Amnesty Intemational expressed concem about the reported death in custody of Radhi Mahdi Ibrahim, one of a group of 73 people involved in an alleged coup attempt in 1981, who had been sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment. He reportedly died in A1 Jaw prison as a result of torture or ill-treatment and insufficient medical care. On 22 September concem was again expressed following the death in A1 Qala' prison, Manama, of Dr Hashim Ismail A1 Alawi, reportedly as a result of torture. Dr A1 Alawi was detained in late August, reportedly for being in possession of leaflets criticizing the govemment.
Amnesty Intemational repeatedly raised the case of five men reportedly tortured in Al Qala* prison while held in incommunicado detention between June and October 1985. The five — Fahd Jabbar Al Mudahaki, Abderrahim Abderrahim As-Saiy, Qasim Ahmad Al Hillal, Abdullah Hussein Al'Iysa and Radi Mahdi As-Samak — were apparently charged under Article 159 of the criminal code with membership of an illegal organization. Amnesty Intemational received reports that the case against them was based solely on confessions obtained through torture. Amnesty Intemational sought information about the procedures followed in this case, and details of the court, but no reply was received. On 1 September the organization made public its concem.
At the end of 1986 Amnesty Intemational was continuing to investigate the cases of 13 possible prisoners of conscience. They were detained for between five and 10 years, some without charge or trial (see Amnesty International Report 1985). The organization learned of the release of Radi Makki Al Jabal, and was still trying to confirm reports that Nader Abu Drees and Mirza Muhammad Ali Fardan had also been released.
On 20 August Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Minister of the Interior seeking information about some 15 people who had been detained since July because of their political views. On 24 November it wrote again about reports that some 30 political prisoners were held in Al Qala' prison without charge or trial. The organization called for detainees held solely for their non-violent political views to be released, and any others to be given a fair and prompt trial. It also sought assurances that the detainees were not being ill-treated.
Amnesty International RefX>rt 1987 Middle East/N. Africa	337
