Honduras
All the long-term political prisoners known to Amnesty Intemational were released in March under an amnesty granted by the incoming government of President José Azcona Hoyo. During 1986, however, there were reports of arbitrary detentions in rural areas of peasant organizers and trade unionists, most of whom were released on bail or without charge. The lack of effective judicial control over arrests and pre-trial detention and the frequently reported use of torture were continuing areas of concern. Amnesty International remained concerned about the failure of the government to take farther steps to clarify the whereabouts or fate of prisoners who had "disappeared" under the previous governments of Policarpo Paz Garcia and Roberto Suázo Córdoba, allegedly at the hands of a specialized military intelligence unit. Reports were received in May that irregular forces opposed to the Nicaraguan Government (known as contras), which operated from bases in Honduras with the knowledge of the Honduran authorities, had abducted Nicaraguan refugees, including children, from camps in Honduras, often apparently for the purpose of recruitment. Abuses were also reported in refugee camps housing Salvadorian refugees, including harassment and arbitrary detention of refugees by the Honduran army.
On 6 March 30 political prisoners went on indefinite hunger-strike demanding their release. Many had been held for several years without being formally tried and some had not had access to a defence lawyer. Among them were several prisoners on whose behalf Amnesty International had appealed in previous years. Ricardo de Jesús Ramírez and Gregorio Pinto Alvarado had been among a group of 19 people detained in 1984 and accused of belonging to a rural guerrilla group, the Frente Popular Revolucionario Lorenzo Zelaya (FPR). Ricardo de Jesús Ramírez and Gregorio Pinto Alvarado maintained that they had been forced to "confess" under torture. Reports of torture were also received in other cases, including that of Gustavo Garcia España who was detained in July 1985 (see Amnesty International Report 1986). On 12 March Amnesty Intemational sought assurances that the prisoners on hunger-strike would be given medical care and called for them to be promptly brought to trial or released. All the hunger-strikers were released at the end of March under an amnesty declared by the new President to mark his coming to office on 27 January.
Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas	179
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about reports of detentions without warrant, particularly of members of peasant organizations. In October the organization asked about the legal position of peasant leader Marco Danilo Guardado Nájera, detained on 29 July and held incommunicado for several days in the Fourth Infantry Battalion base in La Ceiba. He had recently been elected treasurer of the Cooperativa Agroindustrial de la Palma Africana (COAPALMA), the Agroindustrial African Palm Cooperative, an organization representing some 50 cooperatives of African palm producers in the Bajo Aguán region in northern Honduras. He was accused of sedition and disturbing the peace, and was transferred to prison in Trujillo to await trial. No reply was received to Amnesty International's inquiries on his behalf and the organization was investigating his case.
Another peasant leader detained was Benicio Flores, public relations secretary of the Central Nacional de Trabajadores del Campo (CNTC), the National Agricultural Workers' Union. He was arrested on 18 December in Tegucigalpa, by armed agents of the Dirección Nacional de Investigaciones (DNI), a plain clothes police unit. He had reportedly been involved in supporting a group of peasant farmers in Morazán, Yoro, in a land dispute. According to reports, the peasants had recovered over 260 acres of land which was also claimed by a local landowner and the army had tried to evict the peasants from the land. On 19 December Amnesty International sought assurances that Benicio Flores would not be ill-treated in custody and urged his immediate release unless he was to be brought before a comp)etent court and charged. It was subsequently reported that he was released on bail on 22 December pending his trial on charges of robbery, usurpation of land, damage and death threats. Amnesty International continued to investigate the case.
A number of reports were received during 1986 of torture of detainees held incommunicado by police and military units. One was peasant leader Ovidio Betancourt Mairena, who was taken violently from his home in Tocoa, Colón, on 3 April by armed men in plain clothes, believed to be members of the DNI or a paramilitary group associated with the security forces. He was held for some hours, during which time he was reportedly blindfolded, beaten and threatened, his body pricked with a sharp instrument and a cord tied around his penis and pulled. He was finally abandoned in the countryside far from his home.
Other detentions took place in October in the context of counter-insurgency operations carried out in the north of Honduras where small guerrilla group« were said to be operating. Large numbers of people were reportedly detained, including human rights
180	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
workers and trade union officials. On 24 October Amnesty International sought clarification of the situation of a number of these detainees. They included Pedro Alberto Luperón, a teacher and trade union official who also worked for the Comité para la Defensa de los Derechos Humanos de Honduras (CODEH), Honduran Ojmmittee for the Defence of Human Rights, in Tela; and Germán Aguirre, President of the local committee of CODEH in Tela. Both were released a few days after their detention. However, another man, Hermes Aguilar, who had been detained in Agua Blanca Sur, Yoro, on 16 October, died while in police custody in circumstances which have not been fully clarified by the authorifies.
CODEH's national President, Dr Ramón Custodio López, was the victim of a series of attacks in September and October when attempts were made to fire-bomb his office in Tegucigalpa. In recent years CODEH has been an outspoken critic of the human rights performance of successive governments in Honduras. A week before the fire-bomb attacks, CODEH had publicized the existence of what it claimed was a death list containing the names of Dr Custodio and other public figures. According to CODEH, the list was compiled by a secret unit of the armed forces called Battalion 316, which it said acted on the orders of the highest levels of military command.
Reports which appeared in the Honduran press in August suggested operational links had existed in earlier years between units of the Honduran army and Nicaraguan irregular armed forces opposing the Nicaraguan Government based on Honduran territory, known as the contras. In an interview with an American journalist a former contra confessed to having participated in several killings, including that of student Eduardo Becerra Lanza, who "disappeared" in 1982. He claimed that he had formed part of a paramilitary group attached to a secret unit of the Honduran army known as the Dirección de Investigaciones Especiales (DIES). He said that following interrogation by the Honduran army, Eduardo Becerra Lanza and another student, Felix Martinez, were handed over to this group to be killed. The c^e of Eduardo Becerra Lanza was one of several under investigation by Amnesty International. At the time of his arrest on 1 August 1982 in Tegucigalpa, he was Secretary General of the Federación de Estudiantes Universitarios de Honduras, Federation of University Students of Honduras.
Another case of concern to Amnesty Intemafional, that of Angel Manfredo Velázquez Rodriguez, was under consideration by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (lACHR) of the Organizafion of American States. Angel Manfredo Velázquez, a student, was detained in Tegucigalpa on 12 September 1981. The lACHR considered that he had "disappeared" after detention and
Amnesty Intemational Report 1981 The Americas	181
that the govemment had failed to clarify his fate, and referred the case to the Inter-American Q)urt of Human Rights in April. Similar resolutions were made in the cases of Saúl Godínez Cruz, who "disappeared" in July 1982 and two Costa Rican citizens, Francisco Fairen Garbi and Yolanda Solís, who "disappeared" in Honduras in December 1981. Amnesty Intemational continued to seek an official response to requests for clarification of the fate of Eduardo Lanza, Angel Manfredo Velazquez and a number of other "disappeared" prisoners.
Nicaraguan irregular opposition forces were allegedly responsible for the abduction from a refugee camp in Honduras of 18 Nicaraguan Sumo Indian refugees, many of them in their early teens, on 24 May. According to reports, the refugees were seized from their homes in the Sumo refugee settlement at Tapalwas in southem Hondura by members of the contra group the Fuerza Democrática Nicaragüense (FDN), Nicaraguan Democratic Force. Amnesty Intemational called on the Honduran authorities to take immediate steps to locate them and to ensure their safety. Twelve of the refugees were later released after the Honduran armed forces established a commission to investigate the incident. One other was reported to have escaped earlier and five could not be traced.
Abuses against refugees in camps close to the border with El Salvador continued to be of concern to Amnesty Intemational. In June two Salvadorian refugees from the Colomoncagua camps were detained by the Honduran army. One, David Palacios, aged 17, was epileptic and suffered from emotional problems. He was reportedly detained on 6 June when he left the camp without permission following an incident with other refugees. Claudia Garcia, who had been suffering from gynaecological problems since the birth of her fourth child a year before, was detained while returning to the camp in an ambulance, after she had had an operation in a Tegucigalpa hospital. On 20 June Amnesty International asked where they were being held and why they had been arrested, and sought assurances that they would be humanely treated while in detention. They were released on 25 June on condition that they left the country.
182	Amnesty International Report 1987 The Americas
