Tanzania
Amnesty International was concerned about the detention without trial of two possible prisoners of conscience and about the death penalty.
In October James Mapalala and Mwinyijuma Othuman Upindo were detained without trial, apparently because they had petitioned leading officials of the government and the country's sole legal political party, Chama Cha Mapinduzi (CCM), Party of the Revolution, calling for a repeal of the 1%5 law that made Tanzania a one-party state. Since September 1984, when this petition was made public, James Mapalala was reported to have been detained for brief periods at least six times and Mwinyijuma Othuman Upindo at least three times. The Preventive Detention Act, under which they were held, authorized the President to order the indefinite detention without trial of anyone deemed "dangerous to peace and good order". The
110
Amnesty International Report 1987 Africa
Act was revised in 1985 to allow detainees to challenge the legality of the detention order before the High Court and to require the detaining authorities to release detainees if they failed to provide written grounds for detention within 15 days. Relatives of the two men filed a habeas corpus application before the High Court in November but the judge ruled that they had been legally detained and did not need to be produced in court. However, their detention orders were signed by the President only on 31 October, the day that the habeas corpus application had been filed, suggesting that they had been held since 21 October in breach of the law. The organization was further concerned to learn that relatives of the two men had been refused access to them and had not been notified of their whereabouts by the end of 1986. In November Amnesty International informed the Prime Minister of its concerns and called for James Mapalala and Mwinyijuma Othuman Upindo to be released if they were not to be charged.
Amnesty Internafional was also concerned about the death penalty. At least 10 people were sentenced to death after being convicted of murder or other criminal offences. In December Amnesty International appealed to President Ali Hassan Mwinyi to exercise clemency on behalf of Asha Mkwizu Hauli, a woman whose sentence of death imposed for murder in 1983 had been confirmed by the Court of Appeal. There were no executions reported during 1986.
