German Democratic Republic
As in previous years Amnesty International's main concern was the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience. The majority were would-be emigrants imprisoned either for trying to leave the country without permission or for their attempts to seek permission. The organization was also concemed that, along with other political prisoners, they were denied the right to a public trial. Many of them were convicted under laws directly restricting the exercise of basic human rights.
The right to leave one's country is severely restricted for GDR citizens below the age of retirement. To leave the country for any purpose, except for visits to other Warsaw Pact countries, requires special j>ermission which is very difficult to obtain. Those caught leaving without permission faced up to eight years' imprisonment for "illegal crossing of the border" (Article 213 of the penal code), while those who persisted in their efforts to obtain permission risked arrest and imprisonment under a number of articles of the penal code which explicitly circumscribe the right to freedom of expression.
Some of those who persisted in their efforts to persuade govemment authorities to grant them exit visas were prosecuted for "impeding the activity of public bodies" under Article 214 of the penal code. Among them was Klaus-Dieter Emst, a scaffolding-constmctor, who was arrested on 28 July 1986 after applying repeatedly but without success for permission to emigrate. This was his third imprisonment for political reasons. In 1%5 he was sentenced to one year's imprisonment for attempting to leave the country without permission and in 1971 he was sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment for "slandering the state".
A number of would-be emigrants, whose applications to emigrate had been repeatedly rejected, tumed to foreign organizations and individuals in the hope that support or publicity abroad would improve their chances of emigration. Some of these were prosecuted and imprisoned for "treasonable passing on of information" (Article 99 of the penal code), "treasonable activity as an agent" (Article 100), or "taking up illegal contacts" (Article 219). These laws proscribe sending information out of the country and making contacts with foreign organizations and individuals if the activity is considered to be contrary to the interests of the GDR. None of them concem passing
Amnesty Intemational Report 1987 Europe	293
on secret information, which is covered by Article 97 of the penal code (espionage). Among those arrested were Mike Wolf and Dirk Braumann from Berlin (GDR). After repeated attempts to obtain permission to emigrate the two informed a friend in West Berlin of their wish to emigrate. They were arrested on 25 February 1986 and tried on 13 June. Each was sentenced to two and a half years' imprisonment for "treasonable passing on of information". Mike Wolf was released on 15 October.
Amnesty International sent a delegate to observe the trial but he was refused admission to the court on the grounds that the procurator had applied for the trial to be held behind closed doors. Amnesty International's delegate then asked if he might attend the trial until the court had taken a decision on this, and if he could be admitted to the pronouncement of the judgment following the trial. He was informed that this was only permitted for GDR citizens. According to GDR law, the pronouncement of the judgment must be public, even when the trial is held in camera. Intemational law also stipulates that trials and especially judgments should be public. In neither case is the "public" specified to mean only citizens of the country concerned. Amnesty Intemational's delegate noted that no notice of trials taking place that day was displayed at the entrance of the court building, calling into question whether ordinary GDR citizens are able to attend those parts of the trial which must by law be public.
During 1986 all political cases which Amnesty Intemational was able to research were tried behind closed doors. Released prisoners reported to the organization that their families were not present even for the pronouncement of the judgment. They also reported that they were not allowed to mention their cases to relatives during visits. Prisoners' families therefore received only minimal information about the reasons for the imprisonment. If the families attempted to pass on the little information they had to organizations or individuals abroad they themselves risked prosecution under the laws restricting sending information out of the country.
Amnesty International considers that the lack of possibilities for any public scrutiny of political trials seriously jeopardized the prisoner's right to a fair trial. Lack of information about political trials made it impossible in many instances to assess whether the people concemed were prisoners of conscience. The organization also believes that because of the secrecy surrounding them, many cases of political imprisonment did not come to its attention. During 1986 Amnesty International worked on behalf of about 160 prisoners of conscience in the GDR but believed the total number to be much higher.
Among other prisoners of conscience adopted by the organization
294	Amnesty International Report 1967 Europe
were two men from Jena who were charged with "public vilification" (Article 220 of the penal code), apparently for criticizing elections to the People's Chamber held in June. Andreas Richter was accused of writing the following slogan on the wall of a house: "Those who have the vote suffer, those who do not vote still suffer". Lars Matzke displayed on the door of his flat a collage he had made about the elections. Andreas Richter was sentenced to two years' imprisonment on 4 September. Lars Matzke was sentenced later in the year to eight months' imprisonment.
As in previous years many political prisoners were released before completing their sentences and permitted to emigrate to the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG) in exchange for payment by the FRG Govemment. According to FRG Govemment sources the number released in this way in 1986 was expected to be somewhat less than the 2,500 who were released in 1985.
