Bulgaria
The concerns of Amnesty International were legislation creating political offences, political imprisonment, the treatment of ethnic and religious minorities, ill-treatment and torture, poor prison conditions and the death penalty.
Article 54 of the Bulgarian Constitution guarantees freedom of speech, of the press, of assembly and of association and demonstration. The penal code, however, contains a number of articles which are used to punish individuals by imprisonment for the nonviolent exercise of these freedoms in a manner not approved of by the authorities. For example. Article 108 makes "anti-state agitation or propaganda" an offence punishable by up to five years' imprisonment; Article 273 prescribes up to two years' imprisonment or corrective labour for disseminating "untruthful remarks which might incite mistrust of the state power or cause confusion in society". Article 109 prescribes three to 12 years' imprisonment for "forming or being a member of an organization whose activities are aimed at committing offences against the state" (which include the already mentioned offences), while Article 113 makes people who commit these offences against another workers' state liable to the same penalty. It is Amnesty International's view that the very general formulation of these articles renders them liable to abuse, leaving the exercise of the rights of freedom of expression and association largely to the discretion of the authorities. In practice, they have been used to punish people who have openly criticized the philosophy or policies of the government.
257
Amnesty International has continued to work for the release of Ljuben Sobadschiev, a former employee of the Bulgarian Danube shipping line, who, in 1978, was sentenced to four and a half years' imprisonment under Articles 108,109 and 113 for having distributed leaflets in 1977 in a local supermarket, criticizing official economic policy and complaining of food shortages. His two co-defendants, who received shorter sentences, have since been released.
Emigration is severely limited by the government and in past years Amnesty International has adopted a number of people who have been imprisoned for having attempted to leave their country without official permission to emigrate or travel abroad. This is an offence punishable under Article 279 of the penal code by up to five years' imprisonment and a fine of up to 3,000 levas. In 1979 Amnesty International took up the case of Dimiter Kolev, imprisoned for having allegedly sought to leave illegally. Dimiter Kolev is 69 years old; he has served several terms of imprisonment as a political prisoner in the past, as a result of which he has a long history of severe illness. In January 1980. having received news of a further deterioration in his health. Amnesty International appealed to the authorities. In March it was learnt that he had been moved from the prison camp in Buhovo to a prison hospital for treatment for kidney and prostate complaints.
Amnesty International continues to work on a number of cases of people serving long sentences for espionage. Characteristic of these cases is that they all involve people who either have relatives abroad with whom they maintained contact, or who were acquainted with foreigners living in Bulgaria. One of them, Dr Peter Kondofersky, who had been very ill. was released early in 1979: three others, Solomon Ben Joseph, Nicholas Chamurlisky and Yusuf Husnu, are still serving their sentences. In April 1979 Amnesty International took up the case of the lawyer Dr Hans Klein, a 5 9-year-old Bulgarian of Austrian and German extraction, who had worked as a legal adviser to a number of foreign embassies in Sofia. In 1976 he was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment on charges of espionage. Reports state that at his trial it was proved that one of the key pieces of evidence against him, a document purportedly written by him. offering his services to a foreign government, was a forgery. Dr Klein was allowed by the authorities to appoint a lawyer of his own choice only shortly before the trial, as a result of which the lawyer had little time to prepare his client's defence. Dr Klein is at present serving his sentence in Stara Zagora prison.
During the year Amnesty International received further reports alleging the persecution and imprisonment over the past decade of Bulgarian Moslems, both members of the Turkish minority and
258
Pomaks (ethnic Bulgarians of the Moslem faith). According to these reports, a number of Turkish teachers have been imprisoned for protesting against the closure of Turkish language schools. Both Turks and Pomaks have been subjected to considerable official pressure to induce them to exchange their Moslem names for traditional Bulgarian names and, in effect, to renounce their religious and ethnic identity. Amnesty Intemational has taken up the cases of three Pomaks: Bajram Gaitov, Jumer Ilanski and a Mr Bunzev (the latter two cases are being investigated by Amnesty Intemational). All three have been sentenced to long terms of imprisonment for having taken part in protests in 1973 against an official and systematic campaign of assimilation. In March 1973 the authorities sent security forces into a number of Pomak villages after the inhabitants had refused to change their names. Violent clashes ensued and many villagers were arrested and sentenced. Jumer Ilanski and Mr Bunzev were subsequently tried in Blagoevgrad in 1973 on charges of "instigating a riot"; they received death sentences which were afterwards commuted to 15 and 20 years' imprisonment respectively. At least six other Pomaks were reported to have been tried and sentenced together with these two men. Amnesty International has received further reports of the persecution and imprisonment of Pomaks from the districts of Blagoevgrad, Pazardzhik, Smolyan, Plovdiv, Razgrad and Turgovishte during the mid-1970s. Many were sent to serve their sentences at the island prison of Belene on the Danube. Pomak prisoners allegedly suffer particularly harsh treatment in prison. If they fail to use or to respond to the Bulgarian names assigned to them by the authorities, they risk being deprived of the right to visits from their families.
Article 53. paragraph 1 ofthe constitution states that "Citizens are guaranteed freedom of conscience and of creed They may perform religious rites and conduct anti-religious propaganda". The right to propagate religious belief is not guaranteed. In 1979 Amnesty Intemational appealed to the authorities on behalf of five Pentecostal ists. Georgi Todorov. Bancho Banchev. Natanail Tsachev, Dimiter Zhekov and Petar Janev. convicted of systematic infringement of foreign currency regulations and the illegal import of goods — Bibles, duplicating equipment and tape-recorders. Printing facilities are not available to religious denominations other than the Orthodox Church. While it appears that the accused may have infringed currency regulations, the severity of the sentences imposed suggests that the underlying reason for their arrest was their contacts with foreign evangelical missions, their unofficial evangelistic activities and their distribution and duplication of Christian literature. Information reaching Amnesty International indicates that the money and goods
259
they received from abroad were used for pastoral, not commercial, activities. They received sentences ranging from three to six years' imprisonment, reduced on appeal to between one and four and a half years' imprisonment. All five were fined substantial amounts.
Amnesty International is concerned about allegations recently received of the ill-treatment and torture of political and criminal prisoners held in Razvigor Street State Security Centre in Sofia. According to these reports, prisoners have been subjected to long and repeated interrogations, during which they have been threatened, deprived of sleep and adequate food and severely beaten with fists and with rubber truncheons reinforced with metal. Two former prisoners have also alleged that during preventive detention they were taken to a psychiatric clinic and forcibly given drugs. Political prisoners have frequently been denied a lawyer of their choice or been obliged to accept a state-appointed lawyer. It has also been reported that witnesses have been intimidated by the police into testifying against the accused and that the defendant's family and friends have been excluded from the court-room during the trial.
The majority of prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International are at present serving their sentences in Stara Zagora, the chief maximum security prison. Recent accounts of conditions in Stara Zagora confirm reports previously received, including persistent allegations of severe ill-treatment by guards. Cells are overcrowded (usually four people in an area less than four metres square), with inadequate heat, lighting and ventilation. Prisoners have complained particularly of being subjected to a constant barrage of noise from loudspeakers installed in cells. Food is reportedly poor and prisoners are permitted only one hour's exercise a week. Medical care is primitive and there is no prison dentist. Prisoners work long hours in workshops producing furniture and computer parts; they have not always been allowed to receive visits from their families; they have been punished by solitary confinement for up to 28 days in basement cells without light or washing facilities and by severely reduced food rations.
Amnesty International has continued to investigate five cases of people banished during the 1970s to remote towns or villages. The authorities have failed to respond to repeated requests by Amnesty International for information about the present circumstances of these people.
Amnesty International has received a detailed account, dated from 1977, of the forcible confinement in a psychiatric clinic (the "Fourth Kilometre" psychiatric hospital in Sofia) of one prisoner of conscience; it has not, however, received reports of this form of repression during the year. However, in view of the general difficulty
260
in obtaining reliable and detailed information on prisoners of conscience in Bulgaria this may not mean that it has stopped.
The penal code retains the death penalty for 29 crimes. Amnesty International has learned of two cases in which the death penalty was imposed in the year covered by this report.
