Togo
The major concerns of Amnesty International were detention without trial, unsatisfactory trial procedures, poor prison conditions and the death penalty.
Throughout the year, the so-called "mercenaries affair" of October 1977 — a reportedly thwarted conspiracy to overthrow the government of President Gnassingbe Eyadema — continued to weigh heavily on Togolese political life. Arrests in connection with the so-called plot had begun in November 1978, when Satumin Ayite, Kouassivi de Souza and Komlan de Souza were detained. In 1979 more than 30 people (including seven children under the age of 12) were arrested and held without charge or trial for periods ranging from a few days to several months. All were members of Togo's " Southern" families, officially suspected of having backed the "plof; they were usually friends or relatives of individuals whom the government was seeking to arrest in connection with the "plot".
On 3 June 1979, two Togolese exiles, Kodjovi de Souza and Teyi Lawson, were kidnapped in Ghana and forcibly returned to Togo. Shortly afterwards, the government-controlled newspaper published statements alleged to have been made by Kodjovi de Souza, in which he confessed to an involvement in the preparation of the "plot" of October 1977. On the basis of these*"confessions", which available information suggests were extracted under torture, other individuals were arrested, including Major Kouao Sanvee and businessman Lanyo Savi de Tove. In early July, when 10 people remained in detention, the government announced its decision to convene the State Security Court to try those charged with complicity in the "mercenaries affair".
On 19 July 1979 Amnesty International made public its fear that the forthcoming State Security Court trial would not provide the accused with a fair and impartial hearing. High-ranking government officials, including two of the State Security Court's judges, had publicly proclaimed the guilt of the accused in June 1979. The independence of the judiciary had been formally abolished in 1976, when magistrates came under the direct control of the state. In its communique. Amnesty International reiterated its appeal to the government to allow an observer to attend the trial proceedings and expressed its concern at the continuing recourse to detention without charge or trial, the practice of torture, the poor conditions prevalent in Togolese prisons and what appeared to be a deliberate government
85
policy of harassment of "Southern" families. In a public statement a few days later, the Togolese Government rebutted these charges and declared its willingness to accept international observers at the trial.
The Slate Security Court sat on 23 and 24 August 1979 and was attended by the public and international observers. Two of the seven accused were acquitted and five were found guilty of "conspiring... to overthrow or change the Togolese Government... of committing or beginning acts in preparation of its execution . . . and of possessing arms . . .". Kodjovi de Souza and Kouao Sanvee were sentenced to death, three others were given prison sentences of from five to 10 years. Eight other accused were sentenced to death in absentia. On 30 August 1979 President Eyadema commuted the death sentences passed on Kodjovi de Souza and Kouao Sanvee to life imprisonment. Three of those arrested in connection with this affair were not brought to trial. According to official reports, Saturnin Ayite and Arthur Yehouessi were among 34 detainees freed in a presidential amnesty on 13 January 1980. The third, Barnabas Aku, died in hospital in late 1979 only two weeks after his release from prison. Amnesty International remains concerned about the fate of Saturnin Ayite, whose state of health and whereabouts have been the subject of several inquiries to the Togolese Government.
In its report on the trial, Amnesty International stated that, despite strict regard for procedure during the hearing, the degree of guilt of the accused was not adequately established in court and that the sentences passed accordingly appeared unwarranted and severe. Further, the report noted thai the right to defence counsel at all stages of the judicial process had not been respected and that material given wide coverage in the Togolese press during June 1979 had constituted an essential part of the prosecution's case. Amnesty International called on the Togolese authorities to release or to retry the prisoners. The government has replied that it will not accede to this appeal. In late April 1980 an Amnesty International mission was received in Lome by President Eyadema.
Amnesty International has received numerous reports that arrest and detention without charge or trial in Togo are both known to and encouraged by President Eyadema. The available information suggests that he has played an active part in interrogating individuals suspected of holding views critical of the government and uses his personal authority to "sentence" them often to unspecified terms of imprisonment. In such cases there is no access whatsoever to judicial redress. Amnesty International has appealed to the President on several occasions during the year for the release of individuals imprisoned often on the sUghtest of pretexts and without charge or public trial. It has also interceded with the government with regard to the two cases
86
of kidnapping of suspected opponents: in June 1979 Kodjovi de Souza and Teyi Lawson were seized in Giiana, and in October 1979 Benis Lawson, aFrencli citizen of Togolese origin, was taken back to Togo from Niger by Togolese military personnel. He was released in November 1979.
Conditions of imprisonment at the Gendarmerie and the Tokoin military camp in Lome, in Lama Kara prison and at flie Temedja paracommando camp are reported to be harsh. Amnesty International has received reports of severe overcrowding, poor nutrition and hygiene, insufficient medical facilities and the restriction of visits by families and friends at the two Lome detention centres. These poor conditions have led to a high incidence of illness among detainees. Amnesty International remains concerned about the number of deaths of political detainees and that these have not resulted in an official inquest. The deaths have occurred either in detention or shortly after release and have included during the year the cases of four customs officials, one gendarme and Barnabas Aku.
Two prisoners held without charge or trial since December 1979, Quist Crosby and Antoine Lawson, were released in April 1980, after appeals from several organizations including Amnesty International.
