Yugoslavia
The concerns of Amnesty International have continued to be the existence and application of laws prescribing imprisonment for the non-violent exercise of certain human rights, the lack in certain cases of legal safeguards for people charged with political offences, and conditions of detention. In the year under review Amnesty International also learned of a well-documented case in which a person was forcibly confined in a psychiatric hospital for the non-violent exercise of his right to freedom of expression.
In February 1980 the Federal Public Prosecutor, in his annual review of crime statistics, stated that political crimes had accounted for no more than 0.25 per cent of offences committed and that there had been a substantial decline in the number of political offences since 1972 (when there were widespread arrests and convictions, in particular in Croatia). Amnesty International notes, however, that on the evidence of official Yugoslav press reports alone the number of people sentenced for political offences was higher than in the year 1978-1979. There was a sharp decrease in the number of prisoners affected by the annual amnesty of 29 November (Yugoslavia's National Day). Of the 51 prisoners affected by the 1979 amnesty, only three were people on whose behalf Amnesty International was working and of these only one was released. By comparison, in the amnesty of 1977, 574 prisoners were affected, including 33 people whose cases had been taken up by Amnesty International and the 1978 amnesty benefited 94 prisoners, 18 of them Amnesty International cases.
The majority of prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International during the year have been sentenced under Article 133 of the Yugoslav Penal Code which makes "hostile propaganda" an offence punishable by from one to 10 years' imprisonment. Heavy sentences have been imposed on people who have expressed views disapproved of by the authorities, even when this occurred in the course of private conversations.
Prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International included Zarko Aleksic and Milorad Joksimovic, sentenced on 8 April 1980 by the District Court of Doboj, Bosnia-Hercegovina, to seven and two and a half years' imprisonment respectively for "hostile propaganda". According to official Yugoslav press reports, Zarko Aleksic, a lawyer, was accused of having, since 197^ criticized Yugoslavia's
314
political leaders, its political system and the policies of the Yugoslav Communist Party. He was charged also with having eulogized the Chetniks {Serbian royalists, who opposed the communist-led partisans in World War II). Milorad Joksimovic was found guilty of having expressed similar views while living as a migrant worker in the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG) in 1977 and 1978. Amnesty International adopted also as a prisoner of conscience Nikodije Minic, sentenced in December 1979 by the district court of Nis, Serbia, to five years' imprisonment on charges of "hostile propaganda" and of having acted as a commercial agent in foreign trade transactions in Yugoslavia without proper authorization. At the time of his arrest in June 1979. Nikodije Minic, a 60-year-old Yugoslav citizen living in Belgium, was on a visit to Yugoslavia for a German medical firm. The charges of "hostile propaganda" arose from remarks allegedly made by him to acquaintances on two occasions. He was accused of having, in 1974, expressed concern about Serbia's future after the death of President Tito and of having mentioned in May 1979 that he had heard complaints in Zagreb that Croatia's revenues were being diverted to other Yugoslav republics. He had also referred to past events in Balkan history concerning Serbia and Bulgaria. The charge of having illegally acted as a commercial representative was brought against Nikodije Minic only five months after his arrest for "hostile propaganda"; itis reported that at his trial the court did notpermitthe presentation of relevant documents which he claimed would prove that he had not acted as a commercial representative but as a translator. Another Amnesty International adopted prisoner of conscience is Momcilo Selic, a graduate in architecture, sentenced on 25 April 1980 by the district court of Belgrade to seven years' imprisonment because, in December 1979, he had written and distributed to foreign journalists and to some acquaintances a pamphlet strongly critical of Yugoslavia's leaders.
As in past years, Amnesty International took up for investigation or adoption as prisoners of conscience cases of people imprisoned on charges of having formed organizations hostile to Yugoslavia or for their alleged contacts with Yugoslav emigres or emigre organizations, including the importing into Yugoslavia of emigre journals critical of the Yugoslav Government. Amnesty International is investigating the cases of 13 people sentenced by the district court of Sabac, Serbia on 8 August 1979 to prison sentences ranging from 18 months to six years for their membership of an illegal organization called "the Realistic Unification of Europe — the European Yugoslav movement". This group of peasants, crafts workers and students was accused also of contacts with emigres and of unspecified "hostile activity". In February 1979 they had reportedly written to the Yugoslav Govern-
315
ment, calling for the establishment of a multi-party system and for respect for human rights. According to a Reuters report, an unnamed legal source had claimed that the group had possessed arms, pamphlets and plans for terrorist activities in Yugoslavia. Amnesty International has so far not been able to verify this claim.
Amnesty International adopted as a prisoner of conscience Ivan Zelember, a migrant worker sentenced in March 1980 by the district court of Osijek, Croatia, to five years' imprisonment for having brought into Yugoslavia copies of emigre journals, allegedly with the intention of distributing them. Similarly, Jovo Ilic, a migrant worker, was sentenced in December 1979 by the district court of Tuzla, Bosnia-Hercegovina to nine and a half years' imprisonment for his alleged contacts with members of a Serbian emigre organization, for having brought emigre journals into Yugoslavia and for having criticized Yugoslavia's leaders and political system. On 16 April 1980 Dusan Sedlar, the Chairman of the same Serbian emigre organization, was shot dead in Dusseldorf in the FRG. On 13 February 1980 a Croatian exile, Nikola Milicevic, whose extradition had been requested by the Yugoslav Govemment but refused by that of the FRG, was found shot dead in Frankfurt in the FRG. In both cases, supporters have claimed that the men were victims of political murder by the Yugosjav Secret Service.
In February 1980 Amnesty International issued an appeal on behalf of the prisoner of conscience, Vladimir Markovic, a 27-year-old graduate in journalism from Belgrade, confined to the psychiatric section of Belgrade prison hospital in May 1979 for the non-violent exercise of his right to freedom of expression. In mid-1978 he had sent a circular letter to a number of individuals and institutions in Yugoslavia and abroad which included an interview he had had with a prominent Yugoslav historian who had reportedly condemned war crimes committed in Croatia during the Second World War but who had also claimed that official Yugoslav statistics exaggerated their numbers. In November 1978, following the publication of this letter in a Croatian emigre journal, Vladimir Markovic was charged with "disseminating false information". On the instructions of the investigating magistrate, he was sent to Belgrade prison hospital for psychiatric examination, where he was diagnosed as suffering from paranoid psychosis and it was recommended that he undergo psychiatric treatment as an outpatient. This recommendation to the court was subsequently changed to compulsory psychiatric confinement, on the grounds that Vladimir Markovic might repeat his offence. Under Yugoslav law, such a measure may be applied only to people who are a "danger to their environment". Although he had received psychiatric treatment as an outpatient in the past, to the
316
knowledge of Amnesty International he has no record of violent behaviour and it is clear that the offence in question was not of a violent nature. Amnesty International is investigating the case of Vjekoslav Naglic, also detained in the psychiatric section of Belgrade prison hospital, who, on 1 October 1975, was tried by the military court of Sarajevo on charges of "hostile propaganda" for statements he had allegedly made duringmilitary service from 1974 to 1975. The charges against Vjekoslav Naglic were dropped but two days later he was released from military service, diagnosed as psychotic and sent to compulsory psychiatric confinement.
In previous years Amnesty International has adopted as prisoners of conscience a number of members of the Yugoslav Albanian minority from the province of Kosovo, sentenced to terms of imprisonment of up to 15 years on charges of irredentist and anti-state activities. In November and December 1979 mass arrests were reported to have taken place amongst Albanians in Kosovo suspected of having distributed leaflets in schools and elsewhere, alleging economic and political discrimination against ethnic Albanians. At the end of March 1980, the Belgrade daily Politika announced the forthcoming trial, in mid-April, of some 50 alleged Albanian nationalists from Kosovo. Kosovo's Communist Party leader, Mahmut Bakalli, subsequently criticized these reports as irresponsible and exaggerated. Amnesty International asked the authorities for more information and urged that the accused be granted full legal safeguards, including a fair and public trial, and that they be unconditionally released should it be proved that they had neither used nor advocated violence. By the end of April 1980 it was not known whether the trial had taken place.
Information available to Amnesty International indicates that in recent years a number of Yugoslav citizens accused of political offences have been severely beaten or otherwise ill-treated during pretrial detention with the aim of extracting self-incriminating statements from them. It has also been reported that, in some cases,.political prisoners were not permitted a lawyer of their choice and were obliged to accept the services of a state-appointed lawyer. Former political prisoners have also spoken of the reluctance of many lawyers to take political cases for fear of reprisal.
Prison conditions also are a cause for concern. Former inmates of a number of prisons have spoken of a poor diet, insufficiently supplemented by food pa'cels received from their families, damp, unheated cells (in Stara Gradiska Prison), accidents occurring in prison workshops due to lack of industrial safeguards, and beating and other ill-treatment by prison guards. It has been reported that in Zenica Prison (Bosnia-Hercegovina), prisoners punished by solitary confinement have been kept in cells with concrete floors, chained to a
317
ring and without a bed; that they have been subjected to frequent beatings by guards and that the official maximum period of 30 days' solitary confinement has in some cases been exceeded by renewing the period of solitary confinement immediately upon its expiry.
A number of prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International are reported to have been severely ill in the year under review. These include Dr Nikola Novakovic and Dr Veselin Masic (Foca Prison), Vjenceslav Cizek and Adem Demaci{ZenicaPrison) and Manda Paric (Slavonska Pozega Prison). In March 1979, Professor Davor Aras was granted a three-month suspension of sentence because he had a serious heart condition. On learning that medical experts in Yugoslavia had recommended that he should seek treatment in Switzerland. Amnesty International informed the Yugoslav authorities that the treatment would be made available free to Professor Aras. Despite a continued serious deterioration in his health. Professor Aras was excluded from the annual amnesty and received permission to travel abroad only a year later when, at the end of March 1980. he went to Switzerland for an operation at the Yugoslav Government's expense. In April 1980 he returned to Yugoslavia, where he is still under suspended sentence.
The Yugoslav penal code prescribes a discretionary death sentence for particularly grave murder cases, certain "crimes against the state" and acts of political terrorism. During the year Amnesty International learnt of five death sentences, three of which are known to have been carried out.
The Middle East and North Africa
The year May 1979 to April 1980 in the Middle East and North Africa — an area stretching from Morocco in the west to Iran and the Gulf States in the east — was marked by political unrest in almost every country. Two of the major events of 1978 — the replacement of the Shah's administration in Iran by an Islamic Republic, and the movement towards new relations between Egypt and Israel, which was accompanied by discussions between the two states concerning Palestinian autonomy — continued to have important repercussions.
The changing political situation in Iran contributed to unrest in a number of countries. In Morocco and Egypt there were strong protests at the arrival of the Shah on his journey away from Iran, and Shi'i communities, greatly encouraged by the Iranian revolution, became more active in Iraq, Lebanon, Syria, Saudi Arabia and several of the Gulf States. On occasion, this led to violence in the streets, to direct clashes with government forces and to a hostility close to war between Iran and Iraq. A resurgence of Moslem activism affected many countries in the region (including Morocco, Algeria, Syria, Egypt and Saudi Arabia), influenced in part by the events in Iran. Relations between Egypt and Israel were marked by an exchange of ambassadors in February 1980 but, at the time of writing, the discussions on Palestinian autonomy had not yet borne fruit.
March and April 1980 were eventful months in almost every country: in Morocco there was a series of political trials; Algeria experienced violent confrontations between government forces and Berber groups in the Kabyle region demanding greater cultural autonomy: in Tunisia 13 people were executed after an armed attack in the southern part of the country; in Libya two major trials of prisoners of conscience were in process and an official call for the "physical liquidation of enemies of the revolution" had apparently
320
resulted in the murder of several Libyans abroad: new trials of prisoners of conscience were announced in Egypt. Tension in the West Bank region increased when there were killings of both Arabs and Jews and a general increase in violence; Syria experienced great unrest in its northern region: in Lebanon in April the Shi'i Imam Hassan al-Shirazi was killed in a street in Beirut; there were a number of border incidents between Iran and Iraq; and the predicament of approximately 50 American hostages, held since November 1979 in the United States of America (USA) Embassy in Tehran, was no closer to resolution after the failure of a military rescue mission launched by the USA.
There continued to be serious violations of human rights. During the year Amnesty International worked on behalf of more than 800 individual prisoners in the region: in Morocco, Tunisia, Libya, Egypt, Israel and the Occupied Territories, Syria, Iraq, Jordan, Algeria, Oman, the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen (PDRY) and Bahrain. It was concerned about deficient trial procedures or detentions without trial in Morocco, Tunisia, Libya, Egypt, Iran, Israel and the Occupied Territories, Jordan, Syria, Iraq, Saudi Arabia and PDRY; and about allegations of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners in Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Libya, Egypt, Israel and the Occupied Territories, Syria, Iraq and Saudi Arabia.
All states in the region retain the death penalty and executions continued to be a cause for grave concern. Executions were reported in Iran, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Tunisia, Syria and Egypt.
However, during the year under review, there were also positive developments in the field of human rights. In particular, a growing concern in the region for human rights was expressed by regional and national groups of lawyers and jurists. In May 1979, at a conference in Baghdad, the Union of Arab Jurists agreed to a Draft Covenant on Human Rights. This Covenant has no legal status but is designed to provoke wider discussion of human rights throughout the Arab world, and it addresses itself specifically to a number of the Amnesty International concerns. The Draft Covenant includes the following provisions: "No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his life ... no death penalty shall be imposed for political crimes" (Article 5); "No one shall be subjected to arbitrary arrest or detention" (Article 6); "No one shall be subjected to physical or moral torture, nor shall he be subjected to cruel or degrading treatment. Extraordinary circumstances such as state of war... or any other state of general emergency shall not furnish grounds for justifying torture or other similar cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment" (Article 7). In the final communique of the Conference, the Union of Arab Jurists urged all Arab states to abolish the state of emergency which still continued in some Arab
321
states, to abolish exceptional courts under whatever names they existed, to release all political detainees and political prisoners, to abolish the death penalty and to consider torture a crime.
During the year national groups of lawyers took a strong stand against martial law, states of emergency and emergency legislation, which provide the legal context within which many human rights violations of concern to Amnesty International occur and which are applied in varying degrees in Egypt. Israel and the Occupied Territories, Jordan, Syria and Iraq.
Lawyers' groups in Egypt and Syria called specifically for the end of states of emergency and for reforms in emergency legislation in their respective countries. In addition, the Arab Lawyers Union, in a conference held in Amman. Jordan, from 27 to 31 January 1980, welcomed amendments to the Arab League Charter, particularly those which set up an Arab Court of Justice, relating to the defence of human rights of Arabs, and preparing for the implementation of the Arab Declaration of Human Rights.
Another sign of the growing concern for human rights within the region was the increased coverage in the Arabic press of information concerning human rights, including Amnesty International publications and statements. Space was given to the publication Amnesty International Briefing: Syria, and to news releases of regional interest, and there was coverage of the Amnesty International Report and of the Amnesty International report. The Death Penalty, both published in 1979.
An Amnesty International mission returned from Iran in May 1979i during the year other missions were sent to Libya (to observe trials and to meet government officials). Egypt (to observe trials), Tunisia(to observe atrial) and Israel and the Occupied Territories (to meet government officials).
