Ethiopia
Extensive violations of human rights continued throughout the year. The concerns enumerated by Amnesty International in its third major submission on Ethiopia to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in May 1979 remained valid a year later large-scale political imprisonment, torture and killings; long-term detention without trial of former government officials and their families and a wide range of political opponents; and harsh prison conditions. Although the scale of such violations had been greater, the pattern of abuses and government hostility to those who protested against it remained unchanged.
Fighting continued between government forces and opposition movements in Eritrea, Tigre, the Ogaden and the south. Large numbers of refugees fled from armed conflict and political persecution to Somalia and other neighbouring countries. The United Nations and the governments of those countries involved appealed for international aid for almost two million refugees from Ethiopia and for the one million or more displaced persons and drought victims within Ethiopia. The Vice-President of Sudan visited Ethiopia in March 1980, but there was no evidence that this would lead to the return of refugees, since the grounds for their fears of persecution were unaltered. The offer by the Ethiopian Government of an amnesty contained no legal guarantees and was not unconditional. Some who sought asylum were forcibly returned to Ethiopia from Eastern Europe, where they had been studying; they were reportedly detained on arrival.
On the fifth anniversary of the revolution, in September 1979, the Derg, the Provisional Military Government, appointed a committee, chaired by the head of state, to establish a single Marxist-Leninist party intended to proceed eventually to assume governmental powers. Penalties of up to 10 years' imprisonment were decreed for opposition to the committee's work. The military government also took stronger central control over political imprisonment and interrogation. It restricted the powers of imprisonment formerly permitted to local-level administrative units, such as kebelles, the urban-dwellers' associations. These powers had been virtually unlimited during the 1977 and 1978 "Red Terror" campaign. The government, however, has not acted on the Amnesty International requests to bring all political prisoners within the framework of the rule of law. The majority of the several thousand political prisoners were detained or
46
sentenced administratively without trial, although nine prominent prisoners, three Derg members and six senior civil servants, mostly of Oromo ethnic origin did receive the benefit of trials beginning in early 1980 before the supreme military tribunal on charges including espionage.
Amnesty International remained concerned that in Eritrea the previous pattern of widespread arbitrary arrests and summary executions continued, especially after military set-backs suffered by the government forces. Many of those accused by secret informers of "secessionist sympathies" were arrested, tortured and executed without trial. Relatives of people suspected of fleeing to join the independence movements were routinely detained.
Similarly Oromos were arrested as a reprisal for increased activity by the Oromo Liberation Front (OLF), fighting the government in the south. Amnesty International was informed that many people of Oromo ethnic origin living in Addis Ababa and other towns were arrested and interrogated for alleged "narrow nationalist" sympathies. In early May 1979 massacres of political prisoners took place in Dire Dawa and also in Harar in October and November, after increased OLF activity. In February 1980 several hundred Oromo, women and men, were arrested in Addis Ababa, including senior government officials such as the Minister of Justice Zegeye Asfaw, a High Court judge, the All-Ethiopia Trade Union Vice-President, journalists, students and workers. Some were reportedly tortured. Those still held in April 1980 included Tsehai Tolessa, wife of the Reverend Gudina Tumsa.
The non-orthodox Protestant churches were the subject of a government-inspired campaign of persecution for " an ti-revolutionary activities under the cover of religion". Many members of the Ethiopian Evangelical Mekane Yesus Church were arrested on these grounds in May and June 1979 and April 1980, in Addis Ababa, Wollega and other regions. Youth members, particularly of smaller evangelical and pentecostal churches such as the Full Gospel Church, Meseret Kristos Church and Kale Hiwot Church, were imprisoned and tortured. Their churches were closed in Kaffa, Illubabor, Wollega and Gemu Goffa provinces. In Yirga Alem, on three successive days from 15 October 1979, about 30 Christian youths were publicly flogged while suspended from their ankles and subjected to near-drowning and other beatings. They were reportedly arrested for refusing revolutionary commands which they considered incompatible with their beliefs. Others were tortured in prison. They were beaten on their feet and bodies while tied in contorted positions and were forced to crawl on stones and thorns. In Arba Minch in late 1979, Christian youths were frequently arrested on the slightest
47
pretext, such as carrying a Bible or singing in a church choir. The government did not respond to Amnesty International's protests against the arrest and torture of church members.
A feature new to human rights violations in Ethiopia was the disappearance in July 1979 of some long-term political detainees and the abduction of a prominent church leader. On 26 July Amnesty International publicly expressed fears for the safety of a number of prominent political prisoners whose food, which was brought in daily, had been turned away by the prison authorities. This usually means that the prisoner has been summarily executed. Amnesty International cabled the head of state Lieutenant Colonel Mengistu Haile Mariam, urgently requesting assurance of the prisoners' safety and information concerning their whereabouts. No reply was received. No reliable information concerning their fate or whereabouts was subsequently received, and there was no corroboration of statements by government representatives that they had been transferred to other undisclosed prisons. At the end of July 1979, about 20 other long-term political detainees were released.
On 22 April 1980 Amnesty International published the names of those who had disappeared in the hope that the international publicity might protect them if they were still alive. It had previously avoided naming Ethiopian prisoners for fear of reprisals against them or their relatives. The "disappeared" former officials of Emperor Haile Selassie's government included Kassa Wolde Mariam, Minister of Agriculture and former university president; Tefera Worq Kidane Wold, the emperor's private secretary; government ministers Yohannes Kidane Mariam and Seifu Meheteme Selassie; Abebe Kebede, director of the Haile Selassie Foundation; Haregot Abaye, Mayor of Asmara. The deposed Patriarch of the Ethiopian Orthodox Church, Abuna Tewoflos, disappeared from prison also.
Five leaders of Meisone, the All Ethiopia Socialist Movement, disappeared at the same time: Haile Fida, Chairman of the Central Committee; Dr Negist Adane, head of the Women's Organization; Desta Tadesse, Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Culture and Sports; Kongit Kebede and Hailu Gerbaba.
On 28 July 1979 in Addis Ababa the Reverend Gudina Tumsa, General Secretary of the Mekane Yesus Church (an affiliate of the Lutheran World Federation) was abducted by plain-clothes gunmen believed to be government security agents. His wife, kidnapped at the same time, was freed shortly afterwards. Pastor Tumsa had been detained twice in the preceding months, possibly because of his protests against excesses committed in the name of the revolution and persecution of the church (which had never opposed the revolution as such), or on suspicion of Oromo resistance sympathies. Amnesty
48
International issued a special appeal urging the government to provide information about his disappearance.
The United Nations Staff Council also appealed to the government on Human Rights Day, 10 December 1979, on behalf of two Ethiopian staff members, employees of the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa, who had been detained and not seen since 1978. They are Belay Melaku, a research assistant, and Azeb Abaye, a secretary.
The cases of the "disappeared" are the first individual Ethiopian prisoners on whose behalf Amnesty International groups have worked since 1974; Amnesty International continued to campaign for the release of all prisoners of conscience, for the fair trial of all political prisoners and for an end to torture and political killings.
