Nicaragua
The defeat of the government of Anastasio Somoza Debayle by revo-""	lutionary forces on 17 July 1979
sd.,^	■	■ - .-H ended nearly 50 years rule by the
Somoza family and a civil war that cost as many as 50,000 lives. Before 17 July the major concerns of Amnesty International were the thousands of seemingly arbitrary arrests, and summary executions carried out by the National Guard. Since that time Amnesty International concerns included large-scale detentions and delays in trial proceedings.
154
Most detentions under the Somoza government were not acknowledged by the authorities. They often led to murder. Appeals were issued by Amnesty International on behalf of hundreds of people reported "disapp>eared" after arrest, including members of Nicaragua's private Commission of Human Rights, trade union and political leaders, journalists, local Red Cross officials and members of the Frente Sandinista de Liberación Nacional (FSLN), the Sandinist National Liberation Front.
The systematic arrest and murder of young men in some areas during National Guard counter-insurgency operations, was reported and later confirmed in a report by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. Most Nicaraguan cities were partially destroyed by bombing when popular uprisings, organized around the FSLN, took control of urban areas.
After the success of the revolution a junta was established of five members representing those sectors of society that had contributed to the downfall of President Somoza, including two representatives of the FSLN.
A Government of National Reconstruction was established on 20 July, headed by the/M«/¿zííe GoZ)í>mo, junta of government. It issued its Estatuto Fundamental, Fundamental Law, the same day, which replaced the constitution of 1974; declared the organizational structure of the new government; dissolved and replaced the legislature and the judicial system; dissolved the National Guard, the Office of National Security (the secret police arm of the National Guard), and the Military Intelligence Service.
Article 6 of the Fundamental Law gives full recognition to the human rights established in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the United Nations Covenants on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and on Civil and Political Rights, and the American Declaration on the Rights and Duties of Man. The Estatuto sobre Derechos y Garantías de los Nicaragüenses, the Statute on Rights and Guarantees of Nicaraguans, which elaborates Article 6, was promulgated on 21 August 1979 and can be considered an essential part of the Fundamental Law.
The Statute on Rights and Guarantees includes title II on traditional civil and political rights, such as the right to life, physical integrity, legal guarantees, freedom of expression, freedom from servitude, and freedom of conscience and religion. It specifically abolishes the death penalty and the use of torture and cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment Another part concerns economic, social and cultural rights, such as the right to work, the right to union membership and the right to strike.
Article 49 of the Statute on Rights and Guarantees sets out the
155
conditions which need to be satisfied before certain rights and guarantees can be suspended, including the threat of international or civil war, or "reasons of public order or state security". Certain guarantees can in no circumstances be suspended, including freedom of conscience and religion. A decree of 24 November 1979 pointed out that the right to life had, in error, been omitted from the list of guarantees that cannot be suspended, and amended the Statute to include it
The final part of the Statute on Rights and Guarantees (title V) includes transitory provisions, notably the suspension of rights — those that can be suspended — "for those individuals who are under investigation for crimes included in the Penal Code and the International Covenants, committed during the Somoza regime". This suspension of guarantees remained in effect until the state of emergency, decreed on 22 July 1979, was ended on 28 April 1980. The restriction on the right to habeas corpus was widespread during the first months of the new government Administrative problems in locating, accounting for, and beginning legal proceedings against political prisoners were aggravated by the development of new prison and court systems and may have contributed to making habeas corpus ineffective.
Other items in the new legislation relevant to Amnesty international included the Ley sobre el Mantenimiento del Orden y Seguridad Pública, Law for the Maintenance of Order and Public Security, which punished crimes related to public order and state security ranging from drug trafficking, to possession of firearms and destruction of property. This law also lapsed on 28 April 1980 when the state of emergency was lifted.
In the weeks after the collapse of the Somoza government, an estimated 7,000 to 9,000 people were detained by revolutionary forces, and held in former National Guard barracks and prisons, camps under Nicaraguan Red Cross supervision and improvised detention camps. Most of the detained were former members of the National Guard, local police officials, members of the political police and former members of the Somoza government and participants in Somoza family enterprises.
There were some reports of executions of National Guardsmen after they had surrendered in the final days of the conflict On 28 July 1979 Interior Minister Tomás Borge, a principal Sandinista leader and revolutionary government spokesman, now a member of the junta, said that immediate steps would be taken to prevent misconduct by Sandinista forces, declaring that no prisoner would be ill-treated and that neither the death penalty nor torture would exist after the revolution. In November 1979, however, Tomás Borge told the press that investigations had revealed that more than 100 National
156
Guardsmen had been executed in the first days after the overthrow of the previous government and that strict measures to stop the abuse had led to the arrest of several hundred supporters of the revolution.
The first of a planned series of Amnesty International visits to Nicaragua and attendances at trials as observers took place from 15 to 22 January 1980. The Amnesty International delegate, Dr Roberto Alvarez, a lawyer and former official of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, met members of the government, including the Deputy Minister of the Interior, Hugo Torres. As the Amnesty International mission was concerned primarily with the trials of individuals detained for alleged crimes under the former government and with the new court system, Dr Alvarez met officials charged with administration of the Special Tribunals hearing the cases, Dr Nora Astorga Gadea and Dr Mario Mejia Alvarez, Attorney General Dr Ernesto Castillo, President of the Supreme Court of Justice, Dr Roberto Argüello Hurtado and trial lawyers, and examined documentation of the trial proceedings.
Dr Alvarez met also José Esteban González, Coordinator of the Permanent Commission for Human Rights of Nicaragua, a private organization that was instrumental in the monitoring and international reporting of abuses of human rights under the Somoza government It maintains a critical stance towards the present government
As trial proceedings under the Special Tribunals opened only shortly before the Amnesty International mission to Nicaragua took place, few cases in which trials were completed could be examined fully. During the mission emphasis was placed on assessing the procedural aspects of the trials and on raising points of law relevant to the new court structure and the due process of law with responsible authorities. A report on the legal system under the new government and the new procedures applied in the first few cases is being prepared. A second mission for the purpose of observing the trials is planned for mid-1980.
Amnesty International now estimates that from 5,000 to 5,300 people are imprisoned for crimes said to have been committed under the orders of the former government A complete list of prisoners has not yet been published or made available to Amnesty International by the government At the invitation of the government the January mission visited the principal prisons in or near Managua, including the former Model Prison ofTipitapa. renamed Centro de Readaptación Jorge Navarro, where about 2,100 prisoners of whom 13 are women, are held, and the Centro de Readaptación Héroes y Mártires de Nueva Guinea in Managua, known as the Zona Franca, with about 1,300 prisoners, of whom 35 are women. Overcrowding is a major problem in both prisons. Prisoners who have been sentenced are to be
157
transferred to a prison at Coyotepe, in Masaya, which was reportedly not yet ready for use at the time of the mission. Small groups of prisoners are also held under the authority of the Special Tribunals in former National Guard barracks in most provincial capitals, to which the tribunals will travel for hearings.
Amnesty International has written to the authorities on several occasions to inquire into individual cases of imprisonment under the new government At the end of March information was requested concerning four individuals connected with the now closed left-wing newspaper Pwe¿>/o that had been highly critical of the political course taken by the revolutionary government. It is reported that Melvin Wallace Simpson, Carlos Domingo Cuadra, Juan Alberto Rodríguez Oporta and Isidro Téllez Toruno were to be tried under the Law for Maintenance of Order and Public Security. The relevant section of the law establishes a sentence of up to two years of obras públicas, public works, for individuals who publish " proclamations or manifestos that seek to injure the popular interests and abolish the victories achieved by the people". Amnesty International expressed concern that individuals detained under this provision could in certain circumstances be considered prisoners of conscience. Amnesty International has sought to determine whether any prisoners, including the Pueblo group, were still in detention after conviction under the Law for the Maintenance of Order and Public Security, which had lapsed on 28 April 1980.
No prisoners of conscience were adopted by Amnesty International during the year.
On 25 September 1979 the government ratified the American Convention on Human Rights and, on 12 March 1980, ratified the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, as well as the Optional Protocol to the latter covenant granting the right of individual petition to the Human Rights Committee established by the covenant
158
