Seychelles
Amnesty International was concerned about the use of detention without trial and the prison conditions of the detainees.
In November 1979 President Albert René detained 78 men and women under the Preservation of Public Security Regulations. He publicly accused them of involvement in a plot to create internal disturbances with the intention of facilitating a mercenary invasion allegedly organized by former President James Mancham, who had been overthrown in 1977. In March 1980 Amnesty International, at the invitation of the government, sent a mission to Seychelles to inquire into these detentions. Those detained included senior French police adviser, Jacques Chevallereau, former Finance Minister Chamery Chetty, principal immigration officer Gerard Hoarau, journalist Bernard Verlaque (whose independent newspaper Weekend Life had earlier been banned), a former member of parliament, civil servants, business people, teachers, taxi drivers and others. By the time of the Amnesty International mission, 60 detainees, of whom five were women, had been freed unconditionally, including Jacques Chevallereau and Chamery Chetty.
Internal disturbances in Seychelles included student demonstrations on 10 October 1979 protesting against proposals to make national service compulsory (these were later withdrawn) and the circulation of and-government pamphlets by a clandestine group called Mouvement pour la résistance (MPR), Resistance Movement.
The Amnesty International mission delegate, S. Amos Wako of Kenya, Secretary General of the African Bar Association, interviewed detainees in Union Vale prison, Victoria, and in hospital. He had meetings with President Albert René and other members of the government. Amnesty International later sent a repwDrt based on the mission's findings to the government, in which it stated it believed that the majority of detainees were prisoners of conscience, imprisoned because of their political opinions or associations. The report called for the trial or release of the few detainees against whom the government claimed it had substantial evidence of involvement in the alleged plot. It criticized the use of indefinite detention without charge
71
or trial and the absence of legal safeguards against abuse. It also called for improvements in prison conditions, including the return of the detainees from military jurisdiction to the prison administration; the lifting of the ban on family visits, on correspondence and on access to lawyers and priests; improvements in diet, hygiene and medical attention.
