Iran
The main concerns of Amnesty International during the year were the holding of prisoners of conscience, lack of fair trials for political prisoners and executions.
Reports were received of the detention witiiout charge or trial of people wjio have opposed the present authorities. In some cases those detained have been held for short periods of time, but in others for many months. On 5 July 1979 Amnesty International wrote to the religious leader. Ayatollah Khomeini, about the imprisonment of Mohammad Reza Sa'adati, a member of Mujahidin, an Islamic revolutionary group which was active in opposition to the government of the former Shah. At the end of April 1980 he was still being detained and to the best of Amnesty International's knowledge had not been brought to trial. Many people associated ofTicialiy or unofficially with the previous government have been convicted by Islamic Revolutionary Tribunals; others are still awaiting trial and in some cases have been held for over a year.
Amnesty International made numerous appeals to the Iranian authorities for the release of the hostages held since November 1979 in the United States Embassy in Tehran. In February 1980 Amnesty International provided members of a United Nations Commission appointed to inquire into violations of human rights under the government of the former Shah with Amnesty International documentation of such violations.
Amnesty International made frequent appeals to the authorities calling for a halt to executions; it is estimated that from 800 to 1.000 have taken place since the revolution of February 1979. Those executed include people associated with the previous government; members of the National Intelligence and Security Organization (SAVAK); members of the armed forces; members of ethnic groups seeking a degree of autonomy, members of groups found guilty of political assassinations: sexual offenders; people eiigaged in drug traffic; bank robbers and other criminal offenders. In most cases Amnesty Intemational did not leam of the executions until after they had taken place, but in three cases where it knew of the death sentences, it made appeals for commutation. These were for 12 members of the Hezb-e Kargaran-e Sosialist (HKS). Iranian Socialist Workers' Party, on 22 August 1979; for Albert Daniel Pour, a Jew, on 21 April 1980 and for four members ofthe Jewish Boruchim family on 25 April 1980. The Iranian authorities subsequently denied that
330
the HKS members had been sentenced to death and they were, in fact, eventually released.
On 27 March 1980 Amnesty International wrote to President Bani-Sadr about the alleged killing of four members of the Organization of Iranian Fedaii Guerrillas while they were held in custody by Islamic Revolutionary Guards in February 1980; Amnesty International referred to reports that the President had initiated an inquiry into the cause of these deaths and requested to be informed of the findings.
On 9 January Amnesty International submitted a report on Law and Human Rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran to Ayatollah Khomeini, with copies to the Foreign Minister, Sadegh Ghotzbadeh and the Iranian Chargés d'affaires in London and Washington. A little later, in February, a copy was also sent to the new President. Abolhassan Bani-Sadr. The report, which covered the period up to 14 September 1979. focused on the role of the Islamic Revolutionary Tribunals, special courts set up after the revolution. It was based on a fact-finding mission to Iran in April 1979 and on a study of trials before Islamic Revolutionary Tribunals.
In the report Amnesty International concluded that "the guarantees necessary for a fair trial are effectively lacking in cases heard by the Islamic Revolutionary Tribunals'". In particular, defendants were often not told the exact charges against them: were not always allowed to call defence witnesses; were often not permitted to question witnesses against them and were not allowed counsel of their own choice. Other criticisms made in the report were that many trials were closed to the public and that, in practice, there was no right of appeal and no effective presumption that defendants were innocent until proved guilty.
The report noted that sentences of death and fiogging had been imposed even when they were not required by Islamic law and reaffirmed Amnesty International opposition to the death penalty and to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment in all circumstances. Particular emphasis was placed on the large number of people sentenced to death and executed without fair trial.
The Amnesty International recommendations to the authorities included the following: no one should be deprived of his or her liberty except on such grounds and in accordance with such procedures as are established by law: anyone who is arrested should be informed, at the time of arrest, of the reasons for his or her arrest and should be informed promptly of any charges against him or her: anyone arrested or detained should be brought promptly before a judge or other officer authorized by law to exercise judicial power and should be entitled to trial within a reasonable time or to release.
331
The Amnesty International report Lau- and Human Rights in the Islamic Republic of!ran was scheduled for publication in May 1980.
