Romania
During the year the concerns of Amnesty International have been the continuing punishment of Romanian citizens who attempted to exercise internationally accepted human rights in a non-violent manner, by means of imprisonment or forced labour (the latter officially termed "corrective labour without deprivation of liberty") or by confinement in psychiatric institutions. The inadequacy of legal safeguards for those arrested and conditions of detention have also been major areas of concern.
A new penal code has been pending since 1977; in view of some of the modifications introduced into the current penal code since its enactment in 1969, it is expected to confirm the trend away from prison sentences towards sentences of corrective labour, at present an alternative penalty for olYences which would otherwise be punishable by not more than three years' imprisonment. Amnesty International noted that on 11 February 1980, Decree 153/1970 on the "determination and punishment of violations of the rules of social cohabitation, public peace and order" was amended to allow the court to sentence offenders to terms of corrective labour rather than imprisonment. A high proportion of prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International in recent years were sentenced to up to six months' imprisonment under this decree for alleged "anti-social behaviour" or "parasitical conduct".
The penal code contains provisions explicitly restricting certain human rights. Article 166 limits the exercise of freedom of expression, making"anti-state propaganda" punishable by from five to 15 years' imprisonment.
In practice, Romanian citizens who have in recent years attempted to exercise their human rights in ways disapproved of by the
291
authorities have frequently been sentenced not on overtly political charges but on what Amnesty International believes to have been false criminal charges, such as "disturbing public order", "parasitism", " homosexual acts" and "embezzlement". Although they have tended to receive lighter sentences than tiiey would have received under political articles of the penal code, in the view of Amnesty International, the courts have been influenced by political considerations in their cases, and dissenters brought to trial even on such charges have little chance of acquittal.
The government strictly limits emigration: many citizens who have applied to emigrate have regularly had their applications ■refused. People who apply to emigrate, moreover, incur the risk of a variety of reprisals, ranging from harassment and loss of employment to imprisonment and even confinement in psychiatric institutions. During the year, the majority of prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International have been people who have been penalized as a result of having applied to emigrate or who, having had their application refused by the authorities, often repeatedly, have demonstrated in support of their right to emigrate or have attempted to cross the border into Yugoslavia without authorization. Such cases include those of two drivers from Bucharest, Paul Chiracu and Nicolae Jelev. In September 1978, after their application to emigrate had been turned down, the two men, together with their families, barricaded themselves into the Chiracu family's apartment and proclaimed a hunger-strike in support of their demand to emigrate by means of bills posted in the windows. Two days later, police broke into the flat and arrested the two men. They were subsequentiy sentenced to three and a half and two years' imprisonment respectively, on charges of having "seriously disturbed the public peace". These sentences were later confirmed by the Municipal Court of Bucharest The two men are at present detained in Poarta Alba prison.
Amnesty International has continued to work on behalf of the economist Gheorghe Rusu from Tirgoviste, sentenced to three years' imprisonment on charges of "homosexual acts" after he had applied to emigrate to France to join his wife and child. A somewhat similar case, taken up by Amnesty International in the yeair under review, was that of the 22-year-old Bucharest student, Mihail Botez, who, after applying to marry a French citizen and emigrate to France, was arrested in March 1979 on charges of "homosexual acts" with his fiancée's brother, Pierre Drean, then teaching in Bucharest. Detailed information concerning that incident made available to Amnesty International by Pierre Drean indicates unequivocally that the two young men were victims of a carefully staged "frame-up" by the state security police. Mihail Botez was sentenced to one year's imprisonment
292
in August 1979. During this time his mother was summoned to the police and threatened that if she did not cease all contact with France she would never see her son again. Mihail Botez was conditionally released early in 1980. In February 1980 Amnesty International learnt that his fiancee's application to marry him had been refused by the Romanian State Council.
Amnesty International has adopted also Florin Preda from Bucharest who, in May 1979, attempted to leave the country without authorization after the rejection of his applications to emigrate. After swimming across the Danube to Yugoslavia, he was driven by two American friends to the Belgrade offices of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Despite assurances by UNHCR officials that, after completing certain formalities, he would be allowed to proceed to Athens, he was returned by the Yugoslav police to Romania on the grounds that he had committed "conspiratorial violation" of the Yugoslav border. Florin Preda was subsequently sentenced to two years' imprisonment under Article 245 of the penal code which makes "fraudulent crossing of the border" an offence punishable by from six months' to three years' imprisonment. Other similar cases of concern to Amnesty International include a group of ethnic Germans from Jimbolia, members of the Maser, Schira, Kampf and Noll families. In autumn 1979 they crossed the border into Yugoslavia, were arrested by Yugoslav guards and returned to Romania. In November 1979, some of them were sentenced to terms of imprisonment of up to three years, others to 15 months' forced labour.
Prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International have included religious dissenters, usually members of Protestant evangelical sects. There have been indications that official attitudes to such groups have hardened. At the 12th Romanian Communist Party Congress in November 1979, President Ceausescu spoke of the need to combat "mysticism [and] retrogressive conceptions". The Romanian press has carried a number of articles denouncing the evils of "mysticism" and calling for a more militant propagation of atheism. For example, an article in the official Revista de Pedagogic, Review of Pedagogy, of November 1979 criticized the "proliferation of sects in Romania, especially neo-Protestant ones", stating that "all the sectarian movements and especially those outside the law are characterized by mysticism carried to the point of the annihilation of reason"; members of such movements were described as being "intent on undermining confidence in socialism" and "mysticism" was referred to as a "neo-fascist" phenomenon.
In the past two years, some of the leaders of Apararea Libertatii Religioase si de Constiinta {ALRC), the Romanian Christian Com-
293
mittee for the Defence of Freedom of Religion and Conscience, founded in May 1978 by a group of Baptists and other neo-Protestants critical of the cooperation given to state authorities by the official leadership of their churches and of official restrictions on religious freedom, have emigrated — either of their own free will or allegedly under threat from the authorities. Members of this group and other religious activists who have remained in Romania haye continued to be persecuted. They included Dimitrie lanculovici from Timisoara, an ALRC member sentenced to six months' imprisonment in May 1979, having been charged with "parasitism", and the Hungarian Baptist and ALRC member Ludovic Osvath from Zalau sentenced to one year's forced labour in June 1979 after he had protested about his expulsion from the official Baptists' Union and his subsequent dismissal from employment During February 1980, an ALRC member, loan Tirziu, was sentenced to five months' imprisonment on charges of" instigation of anti-social behaviour"; while other ALRC members, including Radu Capusan, loan Moldovan and Emerich luhasz, were repeatedly summoned to police headquarters for interrogation. During the same month, February 1980, the gypsy Pentecostalist and former Amnesty International prisoner of conscience, loan Samu from Médias, was stopped in the street by police officers who beat both him and his pregnant wife.
Amnesty International adopted the Seventh Day Adventist Gheorghe AlexandrufromPloiesti, sentenced in October 1979 to one and a half years' imprisonment for his part in the unofficial printing of religious literature; he was charged with having committed an economic offence by illegally using state equipment and paper. Groups are working also on behalf of five members of the unofficial Reformed Seventh Day Adventist Church who have been sentenced, on charges of insubordination, to terms of imprisonment varying from three to four years for refusing, on grounds of conscience, to perform military service on Saturday. Amnesty International is investigating the case of the Jesuit priest. Father Michael Godo, from Baile Herculane, arrested in September 1979, reportedly charged with currency offences.
During the year Amnesty International continued to work on behalf of23 Jiu valley miners who were forcibly resettled after striking for better working conditions in 1977. The Romanian authorities denied officially that a strike took place but admitted unofficially that an unspecified number of strikers were " banished", although there are no formal provisions for banishment in Romanian law. In February 1979, a group of intellectuals and workers from Bucharest and Tumu Severin issued a manifesto announcing the foundation of Sindicatul Liberal OamenilorMuncii din Romania ( SLOMR), the Free Trade
294
Union of Romanian Workers, for the protection of human rights, in particular those of workers. In March 1979 the leaders. Gheorghe Brasoveanu. an economist, and Dr Cana. a physician, were arrested and were subsequently reported to have been confined in a psychiatric hospital after their families had been forced to sign declarations that they were mentally ill. In June 1979 Dr Cana was sentenced to seven years' imprisonment, reduced to five and a half on appeal; at the time of writing, Gheorghe Brasoveanu's fate is still not known. Another SLOMR member, Nicolae Dascalu, who had reported the arrest of a number of SLOMR members and the wish of a group of Bucharest citizens to join Amnesty International, was sentenced in May 1979 to 18 months' imprisonment (reduced to 10 months' on appeal) for having disseminated information abroad without legal authorization. Other SLOMR members were sentenced to terms of up to six months' imprisonment or to fines, on charges of "parasitism". One of these, Eugen Onescu(whohad been fined), was also visited at home in May by doctors from the Dr Marinescu Psychiatric Hospital in Bucharest, who. according to reports, forcibly subjected him to painful injections with an unidentified drug, claiming that he sufi'ered from Parkinson's Disease. Some weeks later he was confined to the Kula Annexe of the Dr Marinescu Hospital for 30 days; he was diagnosed as suffering from a psychosis and given painful injections which resulted in apathy and a temporary loss of the sense of balance. Another SLOMR member, a 19-year-old Bucharest student, Gheorghe Vasiliu, who had applied to emigrate, was reportedly confined on several occasions to the Dr Marinescu Hospital during April and May 1979; he was given injections which caused him temporarily to lose consciousness and to suffer severe headaches. Arrested at the same time as Dr Cana and Gheorghe Brasoveanu was the Orthodox priest and former political prisoner. Father Catcia Although he was acquainted with Gheorghe Brasoveanu, Father Calciu was not a signatory of the SLOMR manifesto. During preventive detention. Father Calciu was reportedly deprived of sleep for four days and nights in order to make him sign a declaration concerning a meeting he had had with an American journalist in early March. In June 1979 he was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment, which he is reportedly serving in a Bucharest prison, Sos. Giurgiului. After his conviction his wife was apparently refused a copy of the judgment. The authorities have claimed that Father Calciu was a member of the Romanian fascist movement, the Iron Guard, (he was 13 years old in 1940) but did not produce any evidence that his arrest and conviction in 1979 were for the propagation of fascist ideology.
Conditions of detention and trials for political prisoners continue to give cause for concern. There have been persistent reports of police
295
brutality. People detained for interrogation have reported being beaten and threatened with a " fatal accident" or with confinement in psychiatric institutions. There have also been complaints that people held in investigative detention have been severely beaten and subjected to various forms of psychological pressure with the aim of extracting confessions from them and that they have been denied access to a lawyer. In some cases where the accused have been able to obtain lawyers of their choice, it has been reported that the President of the court repeately interrupted the lawyers' defence of their clients. Those sentenced under Decree 153/1970 concerning "anti-social or parasitical conduct" have complained of receiving a summary trial, sometimes lasting no more than 15 minutes and of being denied the right to legal defence.
Former prisoners of conscience have reported overcrowded and insanitary conditions of imprisonment, poor and inadequate diet, long working hours and minimal medical care, which have all contributed to severe strain on prisoners' health. Conditions appear to be particularly bad in Timisoara and Aiud prisons. It is reported also that guards have beaten prisoners who protested about prison conditions or who failed to meet work norms and that guards have incited criminal prisoners to mock and attack prisoners of conscience, in particular religious dissenters. Amnesty International is disturbed to learn that, since his arrest, Gheorghe Rusu has twice had to be taken to prison hospital with fractured ribs and severe internal haemorrhage after being attacked by other prisoners, allegedly at the instigation of prison officials.
Under the 1969 penal code, 28 crimes carry a discretionary death sentence. It is reported that the number of offences punishable by death in the pending penal code will be considerably reduced and that the death penalty will no longer be applicable for offences of an economic nature.
296
