Afghanistan
In September 1979 Amnesty International published evidence that "a consistent pattern of gross violations of human rights" existed in the country. In February 1980 an Amnesty International delegation visited Afghanistan, two months after the new govemment of President Babrak Karmal had come to power. The visit enabled Amnesty International to confirm on the spot the human rights violations it had previously reported. The new govemment assured the mission that in future it would no longer tolerate such violations of human rights as had been noted. Amnesty International subsequently presented a memorandum to the govemment of President Karmal containing recommendations to ensure the protection of these rights, and it was concerned that steps should be taken for the assurances to be fully and effectively implemented. Since then, however, it has expressed concem that its recommendations should be implemented to include those alleged supporters of the previous govemment already in detention at the time of the mission, and the many hundreds of political prisoners subsequently arrested by the govemment in February and April 1980 after anti-government demonstrations.
On 19 September 1979 the Amnesty Intemational report Violations of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms in Afghanistan released details of consistent violations during the government of President Taraki. The repwDrt covered the period from April 1978 to May 1979.
It was estimated that thousands of political prisoners were being held without trial — some 12,000 in Kabul's Pul-e-Charchi prison alone; these included instances where whole families, women and children included, had been arrested together with those suspected of political offences. It described a government policy of imprisoning any individual or member of a political group the govemment considered was in actual or potential opposition to its policies. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that all political prisoners arrested since April 1978 were being held without trial. It was not known under which laws, if any, political prisoners were being held. In most cases political prisoners were denied all contact with their families and with the outside world.
Prisoners were summarily executed without trial and many others simply "disappeared" after arrest. An Amnesty Intemational list of "disappeared" individuals believed to have been executed or killed
177
while in detention under the government of the People's Democratic Party (PDP) included two ministers of the government of former President Daud and the well-known scholar and statesman Mohammed Moosa Shafiq, who had been Prime Minister of Afghanistan in 1973.
It was found that torture was frequently used, including electric shock, whipping, beating and pulling of finger-nails. The Amnesty International report identifies by name three members of the Afghan armed forces who are believed to have died in prison as a result of torture.
On 16 September 1979 Hafizullah Amin ousted President Noor Mohammed Taraki, who, it was announced a month later by President Amin, had "died after a severe illness". However, the new government of President Karmal later charged three men with killing President Taraki on the orders of Hafizullah Amin.
On the date of publication of the report Amnesty International urged President Amin to release all untried political prisoners immediately, to halt all executions and to protect the physical integrity of all those imprisoned. It was subsequently learned that former Minister of Defence General Abdul Qader, former Minister of Planning Sultan Ali Keshtmand and former Minister of Public Works Major Mohammed Rafee had been tried and sentenced, apparently in camera; the government had not honoured its previous assurances to Amnesty International that its delegates would be permitted to attend their trial. On 10 October 1979 Amnesty International requested President Amin to supply full details of the trial and to include a transcript of the trial proceedings.
The gross pattern of violations at that time was confirmed by the administration itself; on 16 November 1979 the Ministry of the Interior had reportedly begun publication of a list of as many as 12,000 names, mainly of political prisoners, who according to the government had died in Kabul jails in the period after April 1978. It was also evidently intended to publish at a later date the names of other prisoners who had died in the provinces. According to press reports, the names of the dead included "professors, teachers, students, civil servants, mullahs, merchants, shopkeepers and'counter-revolutionaries' ". In a letter of 23 November to President Amin Amnesty International said it was shocked to read reports of publication of such lists, and also drew attention to reports that 800 children were named among those "disappeared", and requested that these lists, with full details pertaining to the 12,000 names, be furnished immediately. No response was received to this or to any other inquiry addressed either to President Taraki or later to President Amin after the Amnesty International mission of October 1978.
The previous government of President Hafizullah Amin had been
178
overthrown on 27 December 1979 in a military coup in which the President, two members of his family and the wife of the Foreign Minister were killed. A report on Kabul radio the same day announced that the President, his younger brother Abdullah and his nephew Assadullah had been executed, having been found guilty of "crimes against the Afghan people".
On 28 December 1979 Amnesty International cabled the new President, Babrak Karmal, welcoming his government's stated intention of releasing all political prisoners and of extending "democratic freedoms". Recalling the recent grave violations of human rights in Afghanistan, it requested public assurance that the new government would observe human rights established in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
In his first policy statement of 1 January 1980, published in the Kabul Times, President Karmal was reported as having said that the new government deemed it its urgent duty to "proclaim the release of all political prisoners . . . and abolish executions under favourable conditions". On 7 January 1980 Amnesty International welcomed the announced release by the President of 2,000 political prisoners, suggesting that the names of those released should be published in the press. In the days after the amnesty announcement several thousand political prisoners were released from Pul-e-Charchi prison, Kabul.
On 5 January 1980 Foreign Minister Shah Mohammed Dost in a statement to the Security Council of the United Nations invited Amnesty International to visit Afghanistan. The same delegation which had visited Kabul in October 1978 was sent to Afghanistan to discuss with the new government the statutory concerns of Amnesty International and the establishment of effective safeguards to protect the right to life and security of person, the right to a fair and open trial, and freedom from torture and from arbitrary arrest and detention, as guaranteed in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The United Nations was in receipt of the Amnesty International communication of May 1979 noting that these rights were being grossly and consistently violated
The two delegates. Professor Miimtaz Soysal, a Turkish constitutional lawyer, and a member of the International Secretariat of Amnesty International visited Kabul from 11 to 17 February 1980. The delegates did not travel beyond the capital. They met President Babrak Karmal, the Ministers of the Interior, of Justice and of Foreign Affairs and various other officials on request They also met several former political prisoners released under the general amnesty of December 1979. In Pul-e-Charchi prison, the delegates were permitted to interview six prisoners; officials were not present during
179
these interviews.
The government assured the delegates that a number of the human rights encompassed by the Amnesty International Statute would be protected; that no political prisoners would be arrested for holding beliefs or expressing opinions, provided that they had not been involved in violence; that all political prisoners arrested would be treated "in accordance with the principles of law and legality"; and that no political prisoners would be tortured or killed. The President also said his government was considering steps to establish the independence of the judiciary and that it was considering the abolition of the death penalty "under favourable conditions in the country". Government ministers informed Amnesty International that the hearings of trials of political prisoners would be open to the public and to Amnesty International observers. In a letter of 26 February to President Karma) Amnesty International acknowledged the cooperation of the President during its recent mission and set out the assurances given to its delegates concerning prisoners arrested for their political beliefs. It further expressed the hope that the implementation of these assurances would form the basis of dialogue between Amnesty International and the Government of Afghanistan.
On 26 March 1980 Amnesty International sent the President the text of its memorandum based on the findings of its mission. It recommended that the government should as a matter of priority consider ratifying the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, as well as the Optional Protocol to the first Covenant. Amnesty International noted that thousands of Afghan citizens had "disappeared" after arrest during the period prior to 27 December 1979. It had been informed by those released that prisoners had been taken from Pul-e-Charchi prison at night and not seen again. Others had simply "disappeared" after arrest, and were believed to have been killed while in the custody of the security forces. The Ministry of the Interior revealed that it possessed a list of 4,854 people killed whose names it had not published; the list was far from complete. Many inquiries had been received about the fate of 9,000 individuals who had "disappeared" after arrest in the Kabul area. The government stated that those political prisoners who had not been released under the general amnesty of 28 December 1979 were presumed to have been killed before 28 December 1979. In the absence of details about their fate, Amnesty International stated that relatives of "disappeared" people continued to hope that these were still alive and remained imprisoned in Afghanistan or elsewhere. The Amnesty International delegation presented the Minister of the Interior with some 450 names, listed by profession, of individuals arrested before 27 December 1979; it
180
requested information about their release or fate. The memorandum, noting the United Nations Resolution 33/173 adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 1978, recommended that the government should undertake a full investigation of the cases of all individuals who had "disappeared" after arrest prior to 27 December 1979, and that it should publish the outcome of its investigations. The memorandum recommended that the government should avail itself of help from independent international organizations when tracing these people. It also recommended that the government should make financial assistance available to the families who had lost their principal means of financial support as a result of the execution, "disappearance" or disablement through torture of the breadwinner.
The mission was informed that 15,084 prisoners had been released in the general amnesty of 28 December 1979. However, independent sources in Kabul estimated that between 3,000 and 4,000 prisoners had been released from Kabul's Pul-e-Charchi prison. Official statistics published in the January 1980 issue of the Kabul Times put the total number of prisoners released under the general amnesty from Pul-e-Charchi prison at6,146. When questioned on the discrepancy in these figures, the Ministry of the Interior attributed the difference to the release of prisoners outside Kabul; a list of their names was in preparation. Amnesty International requested that it be sent a copy of the list; by the end of April this had not been received. The Amnesty International memorandum recommended that the government should publish the names of all political prisoners released in Kabul and the provinces, and where possible should give full details.
Discussions were held with the Ministers of the Interior and Justice, the Head of the Intelligence Service and the Commander of Pul-e-Charchi prison, in which provisions were outlined for the protection from torture as laid down in the United Nations Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and the United Nations Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials. The Minister of Justice stated that the government considered the prohibition of torture to be absolute, even in times of a "foreign threat to the country". After its February 1980 visit, however. Amnesty International noted for investigation reports from foreign nationals, arrested in connection with the civil disturbances in Kabul of 22 and 23 February 1980, who alleged that Afghan prisoners were being tortured. Amnesty International has requested the government to investigate a specific allegation.
The Amnesty International memorandum stated that it remained concerned that a number of steps had yet to be taken if torture was to
181
be effectively prevented in Afghanistan, particularly since it had been authoritatively informed that many people associated with past atrocities had continued to hold official positions. Specific recommendations included the institution of a full, impartial investigation into past torture practices and"disappearances" and, if such allegations were substantiated, the institution of criminal or disciplinary proceedings against the individuals involved Families of arrested individuals should be immediately informed of the arrest and the place of detention of those arrested; detainees should immediately be allowed regular visits by relatives. It was further recommended that detainees should not be kept in places of detention or interrogation such as existed under the previous governments of President Taraki and President Amin, in which torture was regularly practised, but that detainees should be kept in regular prisons. It was further recommended that the government should establish rules regarding conditions of detention in accordance with the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. It was also recommended that these international legal instruments, as well as the United Nations Declaration on the Prevention of Torture should be translated into Dari and Pushtu, published in the national press and included in the instructions for all law enforcement personnel.
At the time of the February 1980 mission. Amnesty International was informed by the Ministry of the Interior that there were 42 political prisoners in Pul-e-Charchi prison; its delegation was given their names: nearly all had held official positions under the previous administration after April 1978. However, other officials stated that there were a total of 91 political prisoners. The mission learned that a number of political prisoners, including Siddiq Alam Yar, a former Minister of Planning, Iqbal Waseri, an official in the Defence Ministry, and Mr Jalili, a former Minister of Agriculture, were not on the list of political prisoners said to be in Pul-e-Charchi prison. The mission was informed that their cases were "under investigation" but not where they were being kept. The Minister of the Interior stated that five or six of these political prisoners would be tried before the end of June; the trial would be open to the public and to Amnesty International observers. The Amnesty International memorandum recommended that all these political prisoners should immediately be informed of the charges against them and of the laws under which they were being held; it urged that they should be tried by the ordinary courts with full legal safeguards rather than by Revolutionary Courts. It also recommended that the government should enact legislation to establish the independence of the judiciary.
The memorandum also expressed concern that the political prisoners to whom its delegation had spoken in Pul-e-Charchi prison
182
had been denied all contact with the outside world. Correspondence with their relatives was extremely limited. Some had not been allowed any exercise. It recommended that provisions should be made for prisoners to receive regular visits from their relatives and legal advisers, to obtain writing and reading materials, to listen to the radio and to undertake daily exercise, in accordance with specific provisions of the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners.
The Amnesty International memorandum confined itself to the organization's statutory concerns. It did not deal with human rights concerns of a more general nature, such as those relating to armed conflict, which fall within the mandate of other international organizations such as the International Committee of the Red Cross and bodies of the United Nations. It emphasized, however, that even if special circumstances prevailed — such as situations of armed conflict or the presence of foreign troops in a country — the government still had an obligation under international law to protect the fundamental rights of its citizens.
The Amnesty Intemational memorandum was conveyed to President Karmal on 26 March 1980 and to all the other officials met by its delegation in Kabul. At the end of April Amnesty International was still awaiting the government's response to its recommendations. In an accompanying letter to President Karmal it pointed out that the observations and recommendations made in the memorandum — although based on the discussions of its delegation during its visit to Kabul — applied equally to prisoners subsequently arrested, including individuals arrested in connection with the civil disturbances in Kabul subsequent to the mission on 22 and 23 February 1980, during which several hundred people were killed. It asked the government for details about the arrests and urged that those arrested should be immediately released if no evidence could be supplied to prove that they had been directly involved in acts of violence. Foreign observers estimated that at least 2,000 arrests were made in the days following those events.
On 28 February 1980 Amnesty International cabled the President about reports from Islamabad which Amnesty Intemational subsequently could not substantiate, that Islamic leaders were being executed in Kabul prisons in the wake of the disturbances. The government informed Amnesty Intemational on 10 March 1980 that "the majority of people taken into custody have already been released" and that " none of the persons taken into custody have been executed". On 31 March 1980 Amnesty International was informed by the government that "those remaining in custody will stand a fair trial after an investigation which will be concluded as expeditiously as
183
possible". However, by the end of April 1980 Amnesty International had not been informed of the total number of prisoners arrested in connection with the February disturbances. On 27 March 1980 it wrote to the Minister of Justice, Abdul Rashid Aryan, requesting details of the charges and the date of the trial of these and other political prisoners, which he had invited Amnesty International to observe.
