Uganda
The government of Idi Amin was overthrown m April 1979 by the Tanzanian army and militia and Ugandan guerrilla groups. After eight years of systematic violations of basic human rights, Uganda faced enormous problems of security and reconstruction.
Amnesty International followed its campaigns against human rights violations in Uganda by an international fund-raising campaign in aid of the estimated one million widows and orphans of those tortured to death or otherwise murdered by Amin's security forces. The Amnesty International campaigns were commended by the new Ugandan President Godfrey Binaisa in an address to the General Assembly of the United Nations on 28 September 1979. The government frequently referred to its special commitment to the protection of human rights.
Uganda experienced a major political crisis in June 1979. Yusuf Lule, who had been elected Chairman of the Uganda National Liberation Front (UNLF) at a conference of Ugandan exiles in Moshi, Tanzania, shortly before the overthrow of Idi Amin, was
87
deposed from the presidency by the National Consultadve Council (Uganda's interim parliament) on 20 June 1979, after 10 weeks in office, and forcibly flown to Tanzania. He was detained in President Nyerere's residence, State House, for two weeks, under pressure to recognize the newly chosen President, Godfrey Binaisa. Amnesty International appealed to President Nyerere for Yusuf Lule's release into exile. He was freed unconditionally on 9 July and allowed to leave Tanzania.
In early 1980 President Binaisa's government announced that elections to the presidency and parliament would be held later in the year. Political parties other than the UNLF " umbrella organization" would remain banned but there was to be no bar on any individual standing for elections, such as former Presidents Milton Obote and Yusuf Lule.
Despite this ban on polidcal parties, Uganda, during the first year after the overthrow of Idi Amin, experienced considerable political activity, with a revived range of freedom of expression in the press. This freedom was, however, restricted at times by government threats to close opposition newspapers and by the use of presidential powers of detention. The first detainee in the post-Amin era was the President of the Uganda Law Society, Samuel Njuba, who was detained in September 1979. Other government cridcs, including politicians and journalists, were detained shortly afterwards. On 2 October Minister of the Interior Paulo Muwanga, responding to an inquiry by Amnesty International, replied that Samuel Njuba had been detained pending investigations of violent conspiracies against the government. He and others were released without charge in mid-October. A further 200 to 300 detainees arrested by the newly created secret National Security Service were freed after widespread protests in parliament, the press and the legal profession against arbitrary and politically motivated detentions. President Binaisa, who in 1967 had resigned as Attorney General under President Obote's government in protest against the use of detention powers, then stated his intention to replace the 1967 Public Order and Security Act with a "less restrictive law".
However, by April 1980, no steps had been taken to implement this undertaking. Journalist, Ben-Bella Ilakut, Editor of the government-owned Uganda Times, was detained in January 1980 for reporting on the "Kajansi incident", in which Tanzanian troops assaulted many people of Kajansi, a village near Kampala, killing five villagers as a reprisal for the killing of three Tanzanian soldiers. The government later established a commission of inquiry into the incident, which highlighted the growing hostility to the Tanzanian forces still in control of the country's security. Ben-Bella Ilakut was released two weeks later as a result of protest within Uganda. Amnesty Inter-
national believed that he and a number of other detainees were prisoners of conscience.
The largest group of detainees were members of Idi Amin's security forces, numbering more than 5,500. The new government initially stated that they would stand trial in the normal courts for offences under the penal code such as murder and armed robbery, which carry the death penalty. A year later no such legal proceedings had begun. In February 1980 Attorney General Stephen Ariko presented a bill to parliament to establish special "human rights courts" to try former members of Amin's security units which had been involved in violations of human rights — these units included the State Research Bureau, Public Safety Unit and Military Police, as well as the Anti-Corruption Unit, Idi Amin's close advisers and Idi Amin himself, who had fled the country. Because of opposition to the limitations of normal legal rights in the proposed special courts, the bill was withdrawn. Conditions in Luzira prison, where these detainees were held, were said to be very poor. A further 700 soldiers and 400 civilians, captured during the fighting and taken as prisoners to Tanzania, were returned to custody in Uganda in March 1980.
There were waves of murders, especially in the capital, Kampala, with at times as many as 100 people killed a week, some for criminal and some for political reasons. Blame for politically motivated kilUngs has been placed in various quarters. The victims represented a wide range of pro- and anti-government opinion.
In May 1979 Amnesty International communicated a proposal to the United Nadons Commission on Heman Rights that it conclude its work on human rights in Uganda by making a detailed study of the violations committed by the former government of Idi Amin. A year later, no such study has been initiated, either by the United Nations or by the succeeding Uganda Government.
