Namibia
The main concerns of Amnesty International were the detention without trial of prisoners of conscience, prison conditions and torture.
Protracted negotiations for an internationally acceptable constitutional settlement in Namibia continued throughout the year, but by April 1980 little real progress appeared to have been made.
At a series of meetings initiated by the United Nations and the "Contact Group" of five Western countries involving, on the one side, South Africa and internal political groups in Namibia and, on the other, the African "front-line" states and the South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO), discussions centred largely on the demilitarized zone and other aspects of a proposed UN plan for majority rule elections and independence in Namibia. The process of negotiation was slow and in May 1979 the creation of a National Assembly, to which certain limited powers were delegated by the South African Administrator-General, raised doubts concerning Pretoria's commitment to an international settlement. However, in an attempt to quicken the pace of negotiations, United Nations Secretary-General Kurt Waldheim proposed at the end of March that the UN plan for a constitutional settlement should be implemented with effect from .15 June 1980.
As negotiations continued at the international level, so developments w.ithin Namibia followed an all too familiar pattern. At the end of April 1979, a new wave of arrests occurred, similar to those which took place in late March 1978 and in previous years. More than 70 members of SWAPO — almost its entire internal leadership — were detained uno'er the provisions of Proclamation AG.26 of 1978. The detainees were? almost completely isolated, first in Gobabis Prison and later also in Windhoek Prison. Not only were they denied visits, but they were p^ermitted to receive neither news nor any reading material other ¿an the Bible.
In May 1979 niartial law powers, in force in Ovamboland and other areas of northern Namibia since November 1977, were extended to six more districts situated between Ovamboland and the capital, Windhoek. Ass- a result, an estimated 80 per cent of the population reside in the i>o-called "Security Districts" where martial law is in force. At the same time. Proclamation AG.9 of 1977, which provides the legal basis for the introduction of martial law, was amended. All members of Xhe security forces were empowered to
66
arrest and detain any person on suspicion for a period of 30 days. Such detainees are held incommunicado. The initial period of detention can be extended indefinitely at the discretion of the Administrator-General. Since its introduction, many SWAPO sympathizers are believed to have been detained without trial under the provisions of AG.9, particularly in northern Namibia and the Windhoek area. It is impossible to estimate precisely the number of people detained under this provision at any one time; and no official figures have been made available by the South African authorities.
At the beginning of August 1979, the South African Government replaced Justice Steyn, the Administrator-General, in response to pressure from the conservative Aksie Turnhalle (AKTUR) party, the dominant force in white politics. Soon after Dr Gerrit Viljoen, the new Administrator-General, took office, a number of the detainees held under AG.26 were released. However, at the end of September, another SWAPO official, Tommy Drotsky, was detained under AG.26. At that time he was about to reopen the party office in Windhoek, which had been closed after the previous series of arrests. Earlier, in August, the wife of another detainee, Hewat Beukes, attempted to obtain her husband's release by bringing a court action to challenge the validity of detentions under AG.26. This action was not resolved until December, when it was rejected by the Windhoe.'k Supreme Court. Hewat Beukes was eventually released from detenti.on in January 1980.
Another legal action was brought in the Windhoek Supreme Court in late October, when relatives of three men believed to have; been detained sought court orders for their immediate release. Thi?i action was brought after the South African authorities had denied that the three men concerned, all SWAPO supporters, had been detained. By April 1980 the action had not been resolved.
More AG.26 detainees were released in late 1979, and in the first two months of 1980, when more than 20 were release;d. However, almost without exception, those released in early 1980 were not freed unconditionally. Although most had been held without charge or trial for more than eight months, at the time of their release they were issued with so-called "release warrants". These in'iposed a number of restrictions, similar in some ways to those impose.d on banned people in South Africa, which affect freedom of movement and association. They are prohibited from receiving visitors at their place of residence and are placed under house arrest during th e hours of darkness. In addition, they are not permitted to attend an.y gathering of more than five people and may not leave the locality to which they are restricted without written permission from the polico. Those who were teachers prior to their arrest were prohibited from returning to their profession.
67
Some former detainees, sucii as Dr Thomas Ihuhua — who at the time of his detention was one of the few black physicians practising in Ovamboland — were restricted to localities far from their homes or former places of residence. Unlike banning orders in South Africa, however, which are normally imposed for two- or five-year periods at a time, the restrictions imposed on former detainees in Namibia are of unlimited duration.
In April 1980, at the time of a visit by an Amnesty International representative to Windhoek, where discussions were held with the Administrator-General, seven people remained in detention under AG.26. They included Axel Johannes, Administrative Secretary of SWAPO, who was most recendy detained in April 1979. Axel Johannes has spent a total of more than four years in prison since 1974, although he has yet to be convicted of any serious offence. He is an Amnesty International adopted prisoner of conscience.
In December 1979 Amnesty International urged the Administrator-General to supply information about some 200 Namibian refugees reportedly detained in secret at a special camp near Mariental, south of Windhoek. The refugees were said to have been captured in May 1978, when South African military forces attacked Kassingacamp in southern Angola. Subsequently, in April 1980, the Administrator-General informed Amnesty International that a total of 118 detainees were being held at Mariental and admitted that they had indeed been taken prisoner at Kassinga. Throughout the two years of their imprisonment the detainees have been held incommunicado and their identities have not been disclosed by the South African authorities.
Amnesty International continued throughout the year to make strong representations to the South African authorities for the release of Namibian prisoners of conscience. In addition. Amnesty International groups provided substantial relief and material assistance to victims of human rights violations.
