Portugal
During the year Amnesty International has been concerned about the behaviour of the Portuguese courts, civil and military, towards defendants in trials with a political background. The length of time that defendants spend in custody on remand is frequendy unreasonable and the trial procedure does not conform in some instances to internationally recognized norms. Under Article 1(b) of its Statute, Amnesty Intemadonal seeks to secure the trial of prisoners of conscience and political prisoners within a reasonable period and opposes any trial procedures relating to such prisoners that do not conform to internationally recognized norms.
Afonso de Sousa, a former member of the Proletarian Revolutionary Party (PRP), arrested in October 1976, was sentenced in November 1977 by the Tribunal Militar Territorial, the Territorial Military Tribunal, of Oporto to 13 years' imprisonment for a bank robbery committed in Oporto in October 1976. There were substantial contradictions in the evidence presented against him and irregularities in the trial. In March 1978 the Supreme Military Court, on reviewing the case, quashed his conviction and ordered that he be retried before the Oporto military court-
Under the new Code of Military Justice, Decreto-Lei No. 141/77 introduced in April 1977, a trial in a lower military court must be held within six months but in exceptional circumstances this may be extended by a further six months. However, after this period, notice must be given to the Supreme Military Court which is charged with taking measures to accelerate the procedure and arrange the trial. In the event, the date for Afonso de Sousa's retrial was not fixed until August 1979, 16 months after the quashing of the original verdict Amnesty International wrote to General Pedro Cardoso, the Chief of the Army General Staff, expressing its concern that Afonso de Sousa may have been detained in prison since November 1976
289
purely because of his political associations, and requesting that he either be retried promptly or released immediately pending retrial. In their reply the army merely pointed out that Portuguese courts were sovereign and that they were doing everything possible in the matter.
At his retrial in August 1979 Afonso de Sousa was acquitted, after having spent two years and nine months in custody.
In June 1978 Carlos Antunes and Isabel do Carmo, acknowledged leaders of the PRP, were among the first of many members of that party to t>e arrested. They were held in prison awaiting trial in connection with numerous bank robberies and bomb explosions allegedly carried out by other members of the PRP. It was never alleged that they had been personally involved in committing the acts of violence. Amnesty International, concerned both about the delay in trying these cases and the vague nature of charges such as "moral complicity", requested Dr Hans Rau, of the Max Planck Institute in Hamburg, to attend the trial, which began on 14 January 1980. Because of unnecessary delays, the trial did not finish until 9 April. Dr Rau made two visits to Lisbon during the trial.
Carlos Antunes and Isabel do Carmo were both found guilty of responsibility for, moral complicity in and receiving money in connection with, raids on banks and a bomb explosion. They were sentenced to 15 years' and 11 years' imprisonment respectively.
A third defendant, Fernanda Fraguas. was found guilty of participation in a hold-up of a bank and sentenced to 10'/^ years' imprisonment. She had spent a year and a half in jail while the trial was in preparation — in the view of Amnesty International an unreasonable length of time, but even after this delay a witness, who stated categorically that Fernanda Fraguas was not involved, was not questioned officially by the police until the trial had begun. Fernanda Fraguas was identified as a participant only after eye-witnesses had been shown her photograph before the identity parade.
In the opinion of the Amnesty International observer the procedure used by the court did not conform to internationally recognized norms in three important respects. First, the court admitted hearsay evidence. Second, in Portuguese trials there is no written transcript of the evidence given by witnesses. This makes it extremely difficult at the appeal stage for the facts to be established, since the appeal court can base its judgment only on the facts as recorded in the judgment of the court of first instance. This presents a considerable handicap to the defence and is a serious limitation of their rights.
Third, although the court gave the prosecution every opportunity to present its evidence, much of it questionable and not to the point, it did not always treat the defence similarly. Consequently, a key witness who could have challenged the reliability of the principal
290
prosecution witness. Dinis Lucas, was not allowed to give evidence on the grounds of lack of time. Having noted these points. Amnesty International is not yet in a position to say whether the court could fairly have found as it did until the written judgment is available. The case is being appealed.
Although an amnesty law exists for political cases, in this last case the prosecution has argued and the court has stated that the law of amnesty should not be applied on the grounds that this law extends only to offences committed during an insurrection or civil war.
