Argentina
The concern of Amnesty Intemational centred on the question of illegal deprivation of life and liberty and detention without trial. The rights to life, liberty and the security of person, and to a fair trial and due process of law continued to be systematically violated. Many of the abuses of human rights have resulted from the state of siege, now in its sixth year, which suspends all constitutional guarantees and gives the President extraordinary powers of arrest and detention. Intemational pressure on the military government has, however, increased. In September 1979 the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States visited Argentina; the report of its findings was published on 11 April 1980.
There are an estimated 1,900 political prisoners. Amnesty International has taken up 300 prisoners for adoption or investigation. More than 1,000 prisoners are held in preventive detention by presidential decree a la disposición del Poder Ejecutivo Nacional (PEN), at the disposal of the national executive authority; no charges have been brought against them. Most of those adopted by Amnesty Intemational as prisoners of conscience fall into this category. The remaining prisoners are awaiting trial on charges of subversion or have been sentenced by civilian or military tribunals. When challenged about prolonged and indeterminate detention the authorities claim that those detained under PEN are "terrorist deUnquents" and a danger to national security. Argentinian lawyers have contested the right of the executive to keep prisoners indefinitely in preventive detention, arguing that it is unconstitutional. According to Article 23 of the constitution PEN prisoners are not to be punished, yet the conditions in which they are held are punitive. The President is not allowed to pass sentence (^s this would mean he had taken upon himself the functions of the judiciary), yet many PEN prisoners have been detained for more than five years.
Other categories of prisoners detained under PEN include prisoners who have been tried but acquitted and prisoners who have been convicted but whose sentences have expired. There is substantial evidence that many prisoners have been subjected to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. In March 1980 Amnesty International campaigned on behalf of a particular prisoner of conscience, Gustavo
104
Weslerkamp, who has been detained at the disposal of the executive power since 1975. Gustavo Westerkamp was tortured for two days while handcuffed and blindfolded. He was given electric shocks and beaten on the genitals with chains. His blindfold was sprayed with teargas, which caused bums about his eyes. He was left lying on the floor, and those who passed kicked him and spat and urinated on him. During a transfer in September 1976 from Villa Devoto Prison to Sierra Chica near Olavarria, Gustavo Westerkamp and other prisoners were brutally beaten. He was forced to sign a statement saying that the marks left on him were the result of an accident. At Sierra Chica, where in winter the temperature falls to minus 10°C, he was kept in an unheated cell with no glass in the window.
The Su|>reme Court has ruled that although the declaration of the state of siege is apolitical act beyond the judgment of the judiciary, it is the latter's responsibility to ensure that the state of siege is reasonably implemented by the executive power. In cases reaching the Supreme Court in which PEN prisoners have complained of the effective denial of the right to a fair trial, the Court has nonetheless found prolonged detention under PEN reasonable.
The state of siege has in effect been used to justify extensive arbitrary detention of many non-violent opponents of the military government such as trade unionists, officials of the ousted Peronist government, students, journalists and lawyers who had defended political prisoners.
Amnesty International continues to be concerned about the conditions in which prisoners are hpld. The AsambleaPermanentepor los Derechos Humanos,^ Argentine Permanent Assembly for Human Rights — an unofficial body, created after the 1976 coup, composed of leading religious and political figures — in a letter to the Minister of Justice on 21 March 1980, reported that the prison system seemed designed to produce the "psychological destruction of the political prisoners". The Permanent Assembly stated that prisoners live in a state of permanent tension. The guards constantly and without warning change the regulations: an unfastened shirt button, sitting down, crossing one's l6gs or any other insignificant or trivial act may constitute sufficient motive to be set upon, insulted or sent to the punishment cell. The cells are insanitary, the quality and quantity of the food are inadequate (prisoners in Rawson maximum security prison, for example, show symptoms of avitaminosis — vitamin deficiency) and medical attention is deficient.
In 1979 and the early part of 1980 Amnesty International has interceded on behalf of several prisoners whose health has given cause for concern. On 26 February 1979 Amnesty International appealed for the release of Flavio Koutzii, a Brazilian national, who had been in
105
prison since 1975 and who was suffering from a serious heart condition and arterial hypertension. He was expelled from Argentina in June 1979; it is believed that the Brazilian Government had intervened in his case.
Amnesty International appeals were issued in July 1979 for Osvaldo Cambiasso, another prisoner who is gravely ill, asking for his release on humanitarian grounds. Despite the admission by the prison doctor that he cannot be adequately treated in the prison hospital in Rawson, Osvaldo Cambiasso has still not been released.
Amnesty International received many complaints regarding the "model prison" of Caseros in Buenos Aires. Although it is a modem building it has a number of features which may have an adverse effect on the physical and psychological health of the prisoners. At the time it was built psychiatric advisers, who had understood that the prison would be used only for common prisoners and as a transit jail, recommended that prisoners should in no circumstances be held there for more than three months, as serious mental problems might be caused. There are prisoners now in Caseros serving 20-year sentences or being held indefinitely in preventive detention. Prisoners spend 22 and a half hours of the day alone in small cells in to which sunlight and fresh air can enter only through bars near the ceiling with an opening of six centimetres. Prisoners are not allowed to exercise in the open air, nor are they allowed to do manual work or play sports. Recreation is taken in a room which has no windows. Many of those who have been adopted by Amnesty International are reported to show signs of stress. Amnesty International concurs with the conclusion of the Permanent Assembly in its letter to the Minister of Justice that "it is clear that the above conditions not only violate the elementary principles of humanity but also do not conform to the spirit and letter of Article 18 of the constitution nor with the international standards now in force".
Amnesty International continued to work on behalf of several refugees from neighbouring countries detained in Argentina. Most are under the protection of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
Foreign nationals detained without charge or whose sentence has expired may be deported to their country of origin — which for many would entail further political persecution — or they may be issued with an expulsion decree and allowed to go to another country of asylum. In March 1980 Amnesty International learned that expulsion decrees had been issued for the Uruguayan prisoners of conscience Adolfo Ricardo Campbell Martínez and his wife Marta Edith Lockhart Santellán, who have visas for Belgium; the order has now been put into effect. A Paraguayan prisoner of conscience, Juan de
106
Dios Acosta Mena, who was arrested in August 1976, was issued with an expulsion decree in November 1976 which was never implemented. He was sentenced by a military court to three years' imprisonment, a term which he has now served. He has had a visa for Switzerland for several years.
An increasing number of prisoners of conscience are being released into libertad vigilada, restricted liberty, which may entail some or all of the following restrictions: weekly reporting to police; no association with former political or professional colleagues; no attendance at public meetings (this may be taken to include a visit to a cinema); confinement to a specified part of the country. Libertad vigilada is imposed for an initial period of six months at the end of which time a prisoner may be granted complete freedom. In January 1980 the prisoner of conscience Victor Carlos Marchesini was the focus of an Amnesty International campaign. Dr Marchesini, a 49-year-old lawyer and secondary school teacher had been in prison for more than three years without being charged. The authorities had given as one reason for his continued detention the fact that he had defended "subversive elements". In April 1980 Amnesty International learned that Dr Marchesini had been released from La Plata prison into libertad vigilada.
Most of the 60 prisoners adopted as prisoners of conscience or under investigation by Amnesty International were released during the year and have gone into exile. Among them was former President Héctor Cámpora, who was finally given safe conduct by the Argentinian authorities on the grounds of serious ill-health, and who was allowed to leave the Mexican Embassy in Buenos Aires where he had taken refuge on the day of the coup, 24 March 1976. He is now living in Mexico. Jacobo Timerman, editor of La Opinion, was released from house arrest on the order of the Supreme Court in September 1979; he is now in Israel. Jacobo Timerman was stripped of his Argentine citizenship.
In its work for prisoners of conscience detained without charge at the disposal of the executive power Amnesty International has frequently protested to the authorities against both their failure to release the prisoners unconditionally and their refusal to implement the right of option, which is enshrined in Article 23 of the constitution and entitles any citizen detained under PEN to go into exile as an alternative to imprisonment. After the military take-over in March 1976 this right was first suspended and then re-introduced in a highly restricted form. Thus, what was formerly an unconditional right has been converted unconstitutionally into a discretionary power of the President.
In April 1980 Amnesty International launched a campaign
107
highlighting the problems resulting from the many obstacles and arbitrary delays in the granting of the right of option to prisoners on whose behalf the national sections of Amnesty International had obtained certificates of entry. The case of María de las Esperanzas Beltramino de Loto is an example: she and her husband Daniel Roberto Loto were arrested in September 1975. She was placed at the disposal of the executive power, but her husband "disappeared". She was issued with a "certificate of acceptability" by the United States of America (USA), under the Hemispheric Parole Program, after having been interviewed by a consular official. In early January 1980 the Argentine authorities announced that María Beltramino de Loto had been granted the right of option. A few weeks later the USA Embassy was informed that the Argentinian Government had "reconsidered" her case and her option approval had been "rescinded". No explanation was offered. This decision and the limitation of the right of option for other prisoners were contrary to tHe assurance given by President Videla to members of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States (OAS) during their mission to Argentina in September 1979 that "in future it would be more generous and offered more expeditiously".
Many political prisoners charged with crimes of subversion have been brought before military tribunals, which have generally handed down heavy prison sentences. In November 1979 Amnesty International made urgent appeals on behalf of Victor Ruben Porter. Holzman, a 22-year-old seized on 2 November in Buenos Aires. During his incommunicado detention he was allegedly tortured. His arrest, however, was officially acknowledged a week later. In January 1980 he was sentenced by a military tribunal to 11 years' imprisonment on a charge of having links with the Montoneros, a Peronist-based revolutionary organization. There can be little confidence that the military courts, which afford political defendants inadequate safeguards and deny them the right of defence by civilian lawyers, give any guarantee of a fair and impartial trial.
Amnesty International continued to give priority to work on behalf of prisoners who "disappeared" after arrest by the authorities. On 20 June 1979 it released a computer list of 2,665 documented cases of "disappearance". Four representatives of the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo, a movement of relatives of "disappeared" people who were in Europe to appeal for international support for their campaign for information about their missing sons and daughters, participated in the Amnesty International news conference in London. A revised computer list consisting of more than 3,600 cases was released in March 1980. Copies of both lists were sent to the authorities calling them to account for those people registered as missing.
108
For the International Year of the Child, Amnesty International groups campaigned particularly on behalf of the Missing Children of Argentina. Most had "disappeared" after the arrest of their parents. Evidence suggested that many had been sent to orphanages or illegally adopted. Two Uruguayan children, Anatole and Victoria Eva Julien Grisonas, who "disappeared'' in Buenos Aires in September 1976, were locatedin July 1979, living with adoptive parents in Chile. In March 1980, Amnesty International received confirmation that two other children had been traced. Tatiana Ruarte Britos and her sister Laura Malena Jotar Britos, abducted in 1977 with their parents at the ages of four years and two months respectively, were identified by a Juvenile Magistrate in San Martin, Province of Buenos Aires, just as formalities for their legal adoption were being finalized.
The campaign on behalf of the Missing Children of Argentina included appeals for information abou^ adolescents who had "disappeared" after arrest. Some had belonged to the Union of Secondary Students or had participated in occupations of schools in 1973. Pablo Enrique Fernández Meijide, aged 17, was arrested at his parents' home in Buenos Aires in October 1976. He was a pupil at the Colegio Nacional de Vicente López. That same evening three of his school friends aged between 17 and 18 were abducted also.
On 12 September 1979 the government brought into effect a new law which allows all those who have been reported missing during the past five years to be declared dead: Law 22068 on the Presumption of Death because of Disappearance. The OAS report commented that Law 22068, while implicitly recognizing the problem of missing people, fails to deal with the "fundamental question: whether these persons are still alive or have died. If they are alive, it is necessary to know where they are; if they have died, it is necessary to know where, when and under what circumstances they lost their lives and where their remains are buried." One aspect of Law 22068 which has caused great concern is that the state can seek a declaration of presumed death despite opposition from the family. Once a judicial ruling has been made the relatives of a missing person may not bring a criminal action or initiate habeas corpus proceedings to investigate the "disappearance". In December 1979 Amnesty International wrote to members of the Supreme Court to express concern at the possible effects of the new legislation.
More testimonies from individuals illegally deprived of their liberty were given to Amnesty International, which in August 1979 submitted to the United Nations Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities the testimony of Estrella Iglesias and Cecilia Vázquez de Lutzky who had been held incommunicado as "disappeared" prisoners in the Infantry Regiment of La
109
Tablada in Buenos Aires for three months, after their abduction in July and August 1978. They testified that they had been detained with 22 other people, who had been abducted during the same period but about whom the authorities persistently denied that they had any information. Among the prisoners in La Tablada were the lawyer Abraham Hochman and the psychologist Beatriz Perosio. Estrella Iglesias had been moved to an official prison in November 1978 after a personal intervention on her behalf by the King of Spain. She was released into exile in May 1979. Amnesty International adopted all 22 prisoners in La Tablada as prisoners of conscience. Despite appeals to the government, no information on their present whereabouts has been forthcoming.
On 27 February 1980 Amnesty International published Testimony on Secret Detention Camps in Argentina, the testimony of two men, Oscar Alfredo González and Horacio Cid de la Paz, who had been detained for approximately 15 months in five camps. They testified how politically motivated abductions were supervised in meticulous detail by members of various branches of Argentina's military and police forces. Torture and interrogation were used systematically. Some of the prisoners died under torture or from untreated wounds, infection or suicide. The relatives were never informed nor were the, bodies returned to them for burial. The majority were "transferred", a term understood by the survivors to mean summary execution. In February 1980 the government denied that it had set up secret camps for political prisoners and for suspected "subversives".
Other important testimonies have been received corroborating many of the details supplied by these witnesses. In October 1979 three women. Ana Maria Marti, Maria Alicia de Pirles and Sara Solarz de Osatinsky published their account of their two years' imprisonment as "desaparecidas" in the Escuela de Mecánica de la Armada (ESMA); the principal naval training college in Buenos Aires. One of the most horrifying aspects of their testimony is the revelation that ESMA was used as the "maternity unit" of secret detention camps in the capital. Pregnant women who survived the torture were taken to have their babies in a special wing. They were attended by a doctor from the Naval Hospital. Once the baby was bom the mothers were usually "transferred". It has been reported that some of the babies were given to childless couples in the armed forces. In March 1980 Amnesty International urgently requested information from the authorities about the fate of 64 children apparently bom to prisoners in such circumstances.
On 11 April 1980 the Swedish Govemment, after three years of diplomatic efforts to resolve the case of Dagmar Hagelin, publicly rejected the assertion by the Argentinian Govemment that she was
110
not in their custody. Ola Ullsten, the Foreign Minister, stated that the Swedish Government had definite evidence that Dagmar Hagelin had been taken to the detention centre of the ESMA after her abduction on 27 January 1977. A former prisoner and friend of Dagmar Hagelin, Norma Susana Burgos, testified that she had seen the young Swedish girl in ESMA and that she had been wounded. The practice of abduction, although less frequent, has not been stopped. Between April 1979 and March 1980 Amnesty International intervened on behalf of more than 50 individuals who had "disappeared"; 14 new cases were reported in the first quarter "of 1980.
These testimonies, together with the testimony of Graciela Geuna who was held in La Perla Camp in Córdoba for 21 months in similar conditions, will be submitted to the newly-created working group on disappearances which was set up by the United Nations Commission on Human Rights after its session in February 1980.
The OAS mission of inquiry in the conclusion to its report confirmed the accuracy of allegations that "disappeared" prisoners were summarily executed by members of the armed forces: "due to the actions or the failure to act on the part of the governmental authorities and their agents, numerous serious violations of fundamental human rights were committed in the Republic of Argentina between the period covered by this report 1975-1979 . . . persons belonging to or connected with government security agencies have killed numerous men and women subsequent to their being placed in detention" (Report of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights). On 24 January 1980. General Santiago Omar Riveros, a former senior officer in the Argentine Army, confirmed these conclusions by acknowledging, in a speech in Washington, the collective responsibility of the armed forces for the abuses: "we made war with the doctrine [of national security] in our hands, on the written orders of our superiors, we never needed paramilitary organizations... we had a surplus of our own forces ... in an unconventional war".
In March 1976 the military reintroduced the death penalty, which had been abolished in 1972; however, few death sentences have been handed down. Amnesty International interceded on 21 November 1979 on behalf of Daniel Pose, a non-commissioned officer convicted of murder and sentenced to death. An appeal is pending in the Supreme Court. Amnesty International knows of only one political prisoner sentenced to death — Eduardo Porta, who was arrested in Córdoba in 1977 and sentenced to death by a military tribunal in 1978. He has lodged an appeal.
On 3 April 1980 the authorities announced that they were contemplating an amendment to the penal code to establish the death penalty as an alternative to life imprisonment
Ill
Amnesty International frequently protested against the harassment and arrest of people actively engaged in human rights work in Argentina during 1979 and 1980. On 13 August 1979 it called upon the government to stop the harassment of human rights organizations. The appeal followed the security agents' raid, on 10 August 1979, on the Buenos Aires offices of three leading human rights organizations, during which documents on missing people were confiscated. Amnesty International stated that the raids were intended to prevent or discourage people from presenting testimonies on arrests and abductions to the OAS mission of inquiry. On 21 March 1980 it sent a cable to President Videla after a group of 30 relatives of missing people were arrested by police in the Plaza de Mayo in Buenos Aires. These relatives had gone to the square on 20 March to request an audience with the President to obtain information on the fate of tiie "disappeared" prisoners. Four representatives were allowed to hand over a petition to an official in Government House: when they had left the building they and those waiting in the square were arrested. They were detained in a nearby police station for almost 30 hours. Amnesty International received reUable reports that one mother had been admitted to hospital after being beaten by a poUce officer.
On 30 January 1980 the police raided the Mendoza office of the human rights organization, Liga Argentina por los Derechos del Hombre, the Argentine League for the Rights of Man, and claimed that it had found explosives and subversive literature on the premises. This was denied by the organization, which stated that the material had been planted. Amnesty International adopted as prisoners of conscience two members of the Mendoza branch of the Liga who were arrested and subsequently charged with subversion: Marta Rosa Agüero and Albino Pérez. The latter had started to work with the Liga after the abduction of three members of his family in 1976.
In December 1979, Robert Cox, the British editor of the English language newspaper, The Buenos Aires Herald, which had consistentiy reported human rights violations, was forced to leave Argentina with his family after receiving a series of death threats.
During the year Amnesty International submitted details of human rights violations in Argentina to the Inter-Parliamentary Union, the United Nations and the OAS.
112
