Liberia
The main concerns of Amnesty International were the arrest and ill-treatment of political opponents of the Tolbert government and, since its overthrow, unfair trials and executions.
After the 14 April 1979 "rice riots" in the capital, Monrovia, in which over 40 people died and some 500 were wounded when police opened fire, the Liberian Government issued warrants for the arrest of 32 people. They included leading members of students' organizations, and of the Progressive Alliance of Liberia (PAL) opposition group which had planned the demonstrations against government proposals to increase the price of rice. By early May 1979 approximately 30 people for whom the government issued arrest warrants had surrendered to the authorities. All were charged with treason, an offence which carries the death penalty in Liberia. Possibly as many as 200 people were arrested in rural areas in the same period, although none is believed to have been charged.
All the prisoners were released on 26 June 1979, when the late President William Tolbert declared an amnesty for those arrested in connection with the events of 14 April. He also ordered the re-opening of Liberia's universities and a lowering in the price of rice. These measures are believed to have been recommended to him by the National Reconstruction Commission, a body established after 14 April to consider the causes of unrest in the country and to recommend possible remedies. During May and June 1979 Amnesty International appealed several times to the government for the release of the detainees.
In October 1979, 14 employees of the Lamco steel corporation, including two trade union officials, were arrested for allegedly committing violent acts at the time of steelworkers strikes in August 1979. All of the prisoners were released by presidential order in late October.
On 5 February 1980 three student leaders were arrested in Monrovia and charged with treason, after having sent a letter to the Embassy of Sierra Leone, protesting against the occupation of Njala College, Sierra Leone, by the Sierra Leone army. The letter also contained references to the 14 April 1979 "rice riots" and suggested
55
that official figures seriously underestimated the number of people killed. The students were held in Post Stockade prison, Monrovia, where one of them, Conmany Wesseh, was reported to have been whipped and beaten on several occasions. Shortly after their arrest, Amnesty International called for the release of the students. They were set free on 15 February.
The attempts by PAL to secure its recognition as a legal opposition party succeeded in early January 1980 when it was officially registered as the People's Progressive Party (PPP). In mid-February 1980 eight PPP members were arrested and charged with treason. They were alleged to have encouraged the non-payment of taxes. On 3 March 1980 a demonstration organized by the PPP marched through Monrovia, calling on the government to release the detained PPP members. In a public meeting held several days later, the leader of the PPP, Gabriel Baccus Matthews, called for a general strike to begin and appealed to President Tolbert and his Vice-President to resign. The government promptly ordered the arrest of leading PPP members, alleging that the party was conspiring to overthrow the state by violent means. Official sources claimed that attempts to seize Monrovia's telecommunications centre and to blow up the capital's main bridge had been made by PPP members at the time of the 3 March demonstration. By the end of March 1980, when the PPP was banned, some 90 PPP members had been arrested and variously charged with treason or sedition. The government announced that initial trial proceedings against the accused would take place in Monrovia on 14 April 1980.
In early April, Amnesty International urged President Tolbert to put an end to the beatings and ill-treatment to which several detained PPP members in the Post Stockade prison were said to have been subjected. Amnesty International expressed concern about reports that many of those in detention had been arrested solely on the basis of their sympathy with the PPP, and called for an open trial of the accused. The President did not reply. On 9 April Amnesty International publicly called on the government to withdraw "Wanted, Dead or Alive" notices, which offered rewards ranging from 1,500 to 2,500 US dollars for the capture or assassination of 20 suspected PPP members. In statements to the press the late Minister of Justice, Joseph Chesson, denied that these notices had been issued and claimed that Liberia was "in the vanguard of democracy and human rights".
On 12 April 1980 the government was overthrown in a military coup led by Master Sergeant Samuel Doe. In the assault on the Executive Mansion, President Tolbert and 27 others were killed. In his first public statements, the new head of state declared that the coup
56
had been necessary because of"rampant corruption and the continuous failure by the government to effectively handle the affairs of the Liberian people". He also announced the release of the PPP detainees. The new military rulers formed the People's Redemption Council (PRC), a body vested with supreme executive and legislative powers and composed entirely of members of junior ranks of the army. A civilian administration, which included several former ministers of the Tolbert administration and leading members of.former opposition groupings, was nominated by the PRC. Only hours after the coup it was announced that former officials of the previous administration would be tried before a military tribunal on charges of "rampant corruption, high treason and gross violations of human rights". Some 100 former officials and administrators were arrested and held in the Post Stockade prison.
On 17 April 1980 proceedings against a first group of 14 prisoners began in Monrovia. No prior judicial investigations appear to have been undertaken. The defendants were allowed neither defence counsel nor the right to present evidence in their own defence. All the defendants denied charges of treason. After hurried proceedings the military tribunal submitted its verdict on 13 of the accused to the PRC, which ordered that they be executed On 22 April the 13 prisoners were publicly executed by firing-squad on a beach near the capital; they included the former Ministers of Justice, Foreign Affairs, Planning and Economic Affairs, Finance, and Agriculture, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, the President of the Senate, and the Chief Justice. Only five days previously three soldiers and a civilian had been executed at the same place — it had been alleged that they had committed murder and had looted in the wake of the coup.
On 14 April 1980 Amnesty International appealed to the head of state to ensure that the trial of former officials conformed to internationally recognized standards, including the provision of defence counsel and the application of non-retroactive law. In a second appeal to the new head of state. Amnesty International called for an end to all executions. On 29 April Sergeant Doe announced that he would accede to international pressure and call a halt to the executions of former government officials. At the end of April 1980 proceedings continued against the remaining 101 officials still in detention.
57
