Tanzania
The concerns of Amnesty International in Tanzania were the continued refusal of the Zanzibar authorities to allow a "forced bride" to leave the country to achieve her freedom, and the continued use of the death penalty.
On 12 January 1980 the new Zanzibar constitution ended 16 years of rule by decree of the Revolutionary Council. The first parliamentary elections since the 1964 revolution were held on 7 January. All candidates were nominated by the sole ruling party, Chama Cha Mapinduzi, Revolutionary Party. The constitution made reforms in the judicial structure but the only permitted legal
83
representation is still by the office of the Attorney General, which conducts all prosecutions.
The case of the Zanzibar "forced bride", Nasreen Mohamed Hussein, appeared to be nearing resolution in April 1980. The Tanzanian Attorney General gave an undertaking that she could leave to join her family in Iran. The Amnesty International mission to Zanzibar in 1978 had obtained a similar agreement from the Zanzibar authorities, after having ascertained that she was adamant in her refusal of the forced "marriage" in 1971 to a Zanzibar security officer, Ali Foum Kimara (now Lieutenant Commander), but the agreement was not fulfilled. The Anti-Slavery Society has also been active in this case, which it believes involves a "slavery-type practice"
More than half the 100 or more people held in mainland Tanzania under preventive detention legislation were released in June 1979. James Magoti, a bank manager held under the Preventive Detention Act since 1976 in connection with a theft, was released without having been charged or tried. He still suffers from the after-effects of severe torture in 1976 by electric shocks and other means for which three security officers were sentenced to imprisonment His brother, Adam Magoti, a Nairobi University student, who was detained and tortured at the same time, died in detention on 1 June. On 15 June Amnesty International requested the Attorney General to supply information on the cause of death. The circumstances of Adam Magoti's death have yet to be explained.
On 10 July 1979 Amnesty International wrote to the Tanzanian Attorney General about the security restrictions placed on released detainees and p>olitical prisoners which prevented many from obtaining passports or state employment The Attorney General did not reply.
No allegations of torture were received during the year. However further torture trials of senior police and security officials accused of causing deaths under torture in 1975 and 1976, when several hundred people in Mwanza and Shinyanga regions had been arrested and tortured, were at the preliminary stage by April 1980.
The death penalty was imposed on a number of occasions. It is not known whether the executions took place.
84
