Bangladesh
During the year Amnesty Intemational has mainly been concerned about the continuing imprisonment of political prisoners despite the release of some under general amnesties. It has been concerned also about the inadequacy of measures to protect the safety of political prisoners, several of whom have died in incidents in jails during recent years.
On 27 November 1979 the government announced that the Emergency — proclaimed on 28 December 1974 — had been revoked and that the Emergency Powers Act and the Emergency Powers Rules ofl975 forthwith ceased to exist. However, asaresult of the Fifth Amendment to the Constitution, passed in April 1979, political prisoners have continued to serve sentences passed by military courts during the three and a half years in which martial law was in force. Others are still being held under the 1974 Special Powers Act and releases of some political prisoners during the year have been followed by new arrests on political grounds. Amnesty International cabled President Ziaur Rahman on 30 November 1979, welcoming the government's announcement and pointing out that many political prisoners had been held without trial under the provisions of this Emergency legislation. It also asked for a list of the 730 people said by the government to have been released after the revocation of the Emergency.
The release of political prisoners became one of the major demands made by opposition parties, who boycotted parliament's first session in 1980. The deaths of political prisoners as a result of shooting incidents in jail were the subject of widespread protests on the part of the opposition during the first two months of 1980.
On 18 March 1980, 381 prisoners, mostly political, began a hunger-strike in Dacca Central Jail, for the release of all prisoners
184
held without trial — the official number of detainees was stated by Home Minister, Lieutenant-Colonel Mustafizur Rahman, to be 286. They also urged that all prisoners sentenced by special military courts be given the right to appeal against their sentences. Special military tribunals had been set up after the proclamation of martial law on 15 August 1975 and some 1,000 prisoners are estimated to have been convicted by them, without the right of appeal or other legal safeguards. Later, in Dacca Central Jail 2,700 other prisoners joined in the hunger-strike and on 22 March 1980 political prisoners in Mymensingh Jail went on hunger-strike also.
On 24 March 1980 the government announced the release of five political leaders: the former President of the Democratic League, Khandokar Moshtaque Ahmed; Major (Ret'd) M.A. Jalil and Major (Ret'd) ZiauddinoftheJa/i>i)5ama/ii2nin^Z>a/(JSD),theNational Socialist Party; Gazi Golam Mostafa of the Awami League; M.A. Mannan of the Sramik League, the Labour League. They had all been convicted by military courts, some on charges of corruption, others of sedition. The following day, 25 March, Bangladesh Independence Day, the government announced the release of 793 other prisoners. They apparendy included some political prisoners; the government specifically stated that there were 41 detainees among them. However, political prisoners still held under the Special Powers Act were not released; some have been held for six years without trial and Amnesty International had adopted 10 of these individuals as prisoners of conscience. In addition, the government has not released or decided to review the cases of other political prisoners who have been sentenced to long terms of imprisonment by military courts, all without the right of appeal.
In earlier reports on Bangladesh Amnesty International has criticized the procedures applied by military courts and special courts which, it has said, "fell fa:r short of international standards". In a cable to President Ziaur Rahman on 25 March 1980, which it subsequently published. Amnesty International welcomed the release of the five named politicians but expressed concern that over one thousand other prisoners, including many members of the JSD, remained imprisoned as a result of convictions by military courts, without the right of appeal. Amnesty International pointed out that the recommendations it had made in its February 1978 report had unfortunately remained unimplemented. It had then urged that all those convicted by special military courts and tribunals be retried before ordinary criminal courts applying normal legal safeguards, such as those laid down in Articles 9 and 14 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. It called upon the government to order the immediate retrial of all those so convicted or to release them pending retrial.
185
However, on 29 March 1980, in an inaugural address to the Bangladesh Bar Council, the President stated that "no such amnesty could be granted en masse to all convicts under martial law", and that " a trial, conviction or sentence could not be called bad simply because it had been held or given by a special court under a special law .... Special laws were made to tackle a special situation and special courts were necessary for trial of offences under extraordinary situations".
The release of various political prisoners under amnesties coincided with reports of new arrests, made in the wake of countrywide strikes of workers and government employees during the spring of 1980. During the first two weeks of April 1980, the government arrested 53 members of the Communist Party of Bangladesh, including its General Secretary, Mohammed Farhad. The Bangladesh press reported that the arrests were made in connection with a speech during which Mohammed Farhad was reported to have said that the party would welcome "an Afghan-style revolution" in Bangladesh. On 3 April 1980 Amnesty International wrote to Lieutenant-Colonel Mustafizur Rahman, the Home Minister, expressing concern about the new arrests and asking for further details, as no specific charges appear to have been made at the time of arrest Amnesty International is investigating the case of Mohammed Farhad. Its groups have adopted 44 of these Communist Party members, arrested without charge.
On 31 January 1980 an incident occurred in Rashahi Central Jail in which warders used firearms. Three prisoners died as a result one of whom was reportedly a member of the East Pakistan Communist Party, and 37 individuals, including prison staff, were injured. On 2 February 1980 the government set up a one-man judicial inquiry into the incident which was to report to it by 15 February 1980, but as far as Amnesty International is aware, the findings of the inquiry have not been published. An earlier incident had occurred on 5 December 1979 in Jessore Jail when it was reported that two prisoners died and 56 were wounded during a fight between rival groups in the prison. In a cable of 25 March 1980 to the President Amnesty International stated that it was dismayed to leam about the Rashahi Jail incident and expressed its concern that "measures for the safety of political prisoners in Bangladesh jails appear wholly inadequate". In its previous reports Amnesty International had noted that the government had failed to publish the findings of commissions which it had set up to investigate other incidents of prison killings. One such commission, set up to investigate the killing of four Awami League ministers in Dacca Central Jail in November 1975, had been dissolved by the government without having reached any conclusions. Amnesty International renewed its appeal to the government to institute
186
impartial judicial inquiries into these incidents and to make their findings public.
Brunei
During the year Amnesty Intemational continued to work for the release of nine prisoners who have been held without trial for more than 17 years. They are believed to be the only political prisoners still held out of the approximately 2,500 people detained after an anti-government revolt led by Partai Rakyat Brunei (PRB), Brunei People's Party, in December 1962.
The nine are all former members of the PRB. This party won all the elective seats to the Legislative Council in elections held in August 1962 but did not hold a majority on the council because its representatives were outnumbered by members constitutionally nominated by the Sultan. Subsequently, in December 1962, after the PRB had indicated that it would attempt to introduce amendments to the constitution, the government postponed the first post-election session of the Council. It was in response to this postponement that the PRB attempted to form a government. This acdon led to the party's being suppressed by the Sultan, who declared a state of emergency and, with the help of British troops, put down the revolt and arrested many members and supporters of the opposition.
Those still imprisoned have been held for more than 17 years without charge or trial under the state of emergency still in force, although the government has released others allegedly involved in the revolt (including 40 whose cases had been taken up for investigation or adoption as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International). Amnesty International continued to urge the immediate and unconditional release of those still in detention.
