Albania
The concerns of Amnesty Intemational were legislation creating political offences, political imprisonment, inadequate trial procedures, prison conditions and the death penalty. Information is scarce and difficult to obtain.
Albania is a member of the United Nations; it has not, however, ratified the intemational hiunan rights covenants. Article 39 of the constitution (1976) states that "The rights and duties of citizens are established on the basis of the reconciliation of the interests of the individual and those of the socialist society, with priority given to the general interest. The rights of citizens are inseparable from the fulfilment of their duties and cannot be exercised in opposition to the socialist order." Article 1 of the penal code (1977) defines the main task of penal legislation as the defence of "the whole socialist order from socially dangerous acts", and refers to "bureaucratism and liberalism" as the "chief dangers to the state of the dictatorship of the proletariat". In the same spirit. Article 16 defines penalties as a "means of compulsion of a political and ideological character used by the socialist state in the class struggle". The official view of human rights is also reflected in an article in the Albanian legal joumal Z)r^Ve5iaPopw//ore( Popular Justice) of 1979, which criticizes "capitalist" and "revisionist" states for disguising, in the name of "equal rights for all", the class character of their penal legislation, whereas Albanian'penal legislation, it is claimed, "does not conceal, on the contrary it greatly stresses, that the interests of the party, as the tip of the sword of the working class... are predominant throughout its composition". This claim is borne out by a number of provisions of the constitution and penal code, explicitly restricting the exercise of certain human rights by people whose views and beliefs are disapproved of by the authorities. Thus, while Article 53 of the constitution guarantees freedom of opinion, expression and association, Article 55 prohibits "fascist, anti-democratic, religious or anti-socialist"
254
organizations or propaganda. This prohibition is reinforced by Article 55 of the penal code which makes "anti-state agitation or propaganda" punishable by terms offrom three to 10 years' imprisonment. Thatthe expression of views which are not in line with official political thinking is severely restricted in practice is suggested by an article in Drejtesia Popullore of 1977 which states that "in our country there is no freedom of thought for enemy elements who. speculating on democracy, try to spread their anti-socialist, reactionary, liberal and decadent bourgeois or revisionist views and ideas in order to introduce disruption and degeneration into all spheres of life, art, culture, the economy, the army...." During the year Amnesty Intemational has leamt of three people, two of whom are members of the Greek minority, who have been sentenced under Article 55 since 1977. It has also received allegations that many people are at present serving sentences for "anti-state propaganda" but, in the absence of relevant information in the Albanian news media ôr of reliable, well-documented information from other sources, it has not been able to verify these reports.
Article 37 of the constitution states that "the state recognizes no religion and supports and carries out atheist propaganda". In 1967 Albania was officially proclaimed the first atheist state in the world and churches and mosques were closed or demolished. Religious leaders of the Roman Catholic. Orthodox and Moslem faiths were prohibited from exercising their functions and persecuted. Many are reported to have been sentenced to long terms of imprisonment or banishment for attempting to exercise their right to freedom of conscience. One such case reported to Amnesty Intemational concerns a group of Orthodox priests from the Sarande area who, in 1967. were brought to the town of Delvine, where they were publicly defrocked and had their beards shaved before a jeering crowd. One member of the group, who resisted this treatment, was reported to have been sentenced to eight years' imprisonment for "anti-state agitation"; his subsequent fate is not known. In 1977 Amnesty International members appealed on behalf of three Roman Catholic titular bishops, Nikoll Troshani, Ernest Coba and Antonin Fishta, reported to have disappeared in the mid-1970s after having conducted religious ceremonies in private. Information reaching Amnesty International since then indicates that Bishop Fishta has died and that Bishops Coba and Troshani were in 1975 interned on collective farms in central Albania. The Albanian official press has continued to denounce the persistence of religious practices amongst certain sections of the population and called for their eradication.
The Albanian Constitution does not guarantee freedom of movement: Article 127 of the penal code makes " illegal passage across the
255
border of the state" punishable by up to five years' imprisonment, while Article 47 makes "flight from the state and refusal to return to the fatherland on the part of a person sent on service or allowed to leave the state" a treasonable offence, punishable with imprisonment for not less than 10 years or by death. In past years. Amnesty International has received reports of a number of cases of people sentenced for having attempted to leave Albania without authorization; it is also reported that there have been cases in which Albanian citizens who fled across the border into Yugoslavia were forcibly returned to Albania by the Yugoslav authorities.
In June 1979 the Presidium of the People's Assembly passed a decree on "Internment and Banishment as Administrative Measures", thereby abrogating previous decrees in this field. Under the terms of this decree (No. 5912) the Internment and Banishment Commission {composed on the Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers, the Minister of the Interior, the Chairman of the Supreme Court and the Attorney General) may order the internment or banishment of those who " present a danger to the social system of the People's Republic of Albania". This decree refers to the schedules of Articles 26 and 27 of the penal code, under which a court may impose the penalties of internment ("the obligation to remain in a specified place") and banishment ("removal of a person from his place of residence with or without prohibition to stay in one or more specified places") for a term of from one to five years. Decree No. 5912, however, states that these penalties, when imposed as an administrative measure, may be revoked, curtailed or prolonged (for unspecified periods) on the decision of the commission. Amnesty International is concerned that under the terms of this decree, people may be interned or banished without trial (in contravention of Article 56 of the constitution) for unspecified periods. Furthermore, Article 2 of the decree states that this measure may be used "against members of the family of fugitives living inside or outside the state" — that is, as a reprisal against people who have not themselves necessarily violated Albanian law.
Reports of trial procedures and conditions of imprisonment have also given grounds for concern. Although Article 115 of the penal code makes the extraction of confessions by force punishable by up to eight years' imprisonment Amnesty Intemational has received a number of allegations in recent years of convictions on the basis of confessions extracted under torture; it is also reported that in a number of cases, pre-trial investigation has consisted of up to six months' solitary confinement in cells without daylight during which time there has been no access to family or lawyer. The legislative program initiated by the 1976 constitution and the new penal code of 1977 has been supplemented by the drawing up of a new Penal
256
Procedure Code, a draft of which was discussed on 25 December 1979 by the People's Assembly. At the time of writing Amnesty International was not yet in possession of the text.
Recent reports of conditions of imprisonment confirm that political prisoners continue to be sent to labour camps, such as the copper-mining camp of Spaci, that medical care is poor and that prisoners receive inadequate food, requiring supplementation by parcels from their families. Prisons and camps in which political prisoners are reported to have been held in recent years include those of Tirana, Burreli. Tepelene, Bulqize. Ballsh, Kakarriq, Fier and Rrshen.
The penal code lists 34 crimes (of which 23 are political and military crimes) punishable by the discretionary death sentence.
