Cameroon
The major concerns of Amnesty International were political imprisonment, detention without trial, torture and poor prison conditions. Throughout the year Amnesty International continued to seek the release of some 50 students, teachers and white-collar workers who have been held without trial since July 1976. They were among some 200 people arrested at that time after the appearance in several urban centres of tracts critical of the government of President Ahmadou Ahidjo. They are being held at special "administrative internment centres", directly administered by the President's office and not controlled by the usual prison authorities. Amnesty International believes that they are prisoners of conscience, imprisoned for their political opinions.
According to legislation enacted in the early 1960s, the distribution of literature critical of the government is an offence against the "internal security of the State". An accused person is liable to be tried before a permanent military tribunal but is denied defence counsel and right of appeal. Since independence in 1960 this tribunal is known to have convicted a large number of opponents of the government, some of whom have remained in prison for almost 20 years. The total number of political prisoners is uncertain but Amnesty International has received reports that it may be as high as 200.
Most untried political prisoners are held at two "administrative internment centres", at Tchollire in north Cameroon and at Yoko near Yaounde. At Tchollire, reported to be the harsher of the two, detainees are believed to be held in overcrowded cells, with poor food and no medical treatment. Contact with the outside world by letters or visits is very restricted. Torture during interrogation is known to be inflicted. Suspects have been brutally beaten and some have been subjected to electric shocks to various parts of the body.
On 20 October 1979 army commandos are reported to have killed between 50 and 200 people at the village of Dolle in north Cameroon as a reprisal for the killing of several government officials in the village a few days earlier. In a letter to the President, Amnesty International requested that an official inquiry into the events at Dolle be instituted to establish responsibility for the reported killings. No answer has been received.
In February 1980 Amnesty International appealed publicly to all delegates attending the National Congress of the Union nationale camerounaise (UNC), National Union of Cameroon, the sole
35
political party, to give serious attention to the issue of human rights violations in the country, including the high incidence of detention without charge or trial, poor prison conditions and the use of torture. At the Congress, which is held once every five years. President Ahidjo is reported to have rejected the Amnesty International estimate of the number of prisoners in Cameroon and to have stated that only four of those arrested in 1976 remained in prison. In his closing speech. President Ahidjo referred extensively to human rights and condemned Cameroon's "detractors", who, "under false and sordid pretexts, among which human rights, the last of their discoveries and the last battle horse, are now trying to... take advantage of the good faith and goodwill of the ill-informed". Subsequently, Amnesty International publicly reaffirmed its belief that some 50 people detained in 1976 were still being held and that the total number of political prisoners was some 200. It requested the government to permit the inspection of prisons by an independent humanitarian organization. The request was not acknowledged and no action is believed to have been taken by President Ahidjo's government.
