Turkey
The concerns of Amnesty International were prisoners of conscience and the legislation which leads to their imprisonment; cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment of prisoners; and the death penalty.
Martial law, imposed in December 1978, has been renewed at two-monthly intervals and in April 1980 was in force in 20 of Turkey's67 provinces. The political violence by right-wing and left-wing extremists which provoked the imposition of martial law has continued and increased, resulting in the loss of nearly 3,000 lives in the two years up to April 1980.
Although the main objective of martial law has been to control the violence, it has been used also to close down many publications and organizations. Prosecution continued of writers, translators, publishers, editors and journalists under Article 142 of the penal code, which prohibits "making propaganda for the domination of a social class over other social classes". In February 1980 Amnesty International received reports of the closing down of the socialist daily newspaper Politika and of the arrest of its editor, Osman Ikiz, and one of the paper's journalists, Aydin Engin. Amnesty International has been informed of many other prosecutions under Article 142 but in most cases the defendants remain free while the trial continues.
During the year two cases were brought to the attention of Amnesty Intemational of people charged with "making propaganda for separatism". Professor Ismail Be§ikgi, previously adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience in 1973, when he was imprisoned on similar charges, was sentenced to three years' imprisonment in September 1979. Although Professor Be^ikgi is not himself a Kurd, his imprisonment on both occasions was due to his recognition of the Kurds as a separate ethnic group in his writings, seminars and lectures. This is prohibited by Turkish law. In March 1980 Amnesty International received a report that the Mayor of the city ofDiyarbakir, Mehdi Zana, was being tried by a military court for "making propaganda for separatism". The population ofDiyarbakir is largely of Kurdish origin.
Amnesty Intemational expressed continued concern about Articles 141, 142 and 163 of the Turkish Penal Code in a letter to the then Prime Minister, Biilent Ecevit, in May 1979. Article 141 prohibits forming organizations "aimed at establishing the domination of a social class over other social classes" and Article 163 is used to
301
imprison anyone who "opposes secularism, forms or organizes, plans, manages or administers a society aiming, even partially, to impose religious principles on the basic social, economic, political or legal order of the state".
The arrest and alleged ill-treatment of trade unionists were the subject of several approaches on the part of Amnesty International to the authorities. In August 1979, it wrote to the Prime Minister, Bulent Ecevit about the arrest of members of Devrimci I^qi Sendikalari Konfederasyonu (DISK), the Confederation of Progressive Trade Unions of Turkey, and of allegations that they were beaten while detained in a military prison in Diy arbakir. In his reply, Bulent Ecevit stated that the findings of the medical examination of the detainees by the Diy arbakir Faculty of Medicine "showed that the allegations were unfounded".
In December 1979, Amnesty International wrote to the new Prime Minister, Siileyman Demirel, asking about the arrest the previous November of members of Twrn Ogretmenler Birligi Dernegi (TOB-DER), the Association of All Teachers. The inquiry was made again in February 1980, together with a request for information about the arrest of Kemal Turkler, President of Tiirkiye Maden, Madeni E:^ya ve Makina Sanayii I^qileri Sendikasi {Maden-l^), the Metal Workers' Trade Union, and six of his colleagues, who were charged under Article 142 for singing the "Internationale" at their Union Congress. Further reports of arrests and ill-treatment of trade unionists were raised in a letter to Siileyman Demirel in April 1980 and during a visit to Vahap Asiroglu, the Turkish Ambassador in London, shortly afterwards.
In April 1980 Amnesty Intemational received information that 18 members of the Progressive Youth Organization, arrested in Istanbul on 16 April, had recently been tortured and were being denied access to lawyers. Urgent appeals were made to Siileyman Demirel and to the Minister of the Interior, Mustafa Giilcugil, for an immediate investigation of the allegations.
On 29 April 1980 a further detailed account of torture was received. Dr Dursun Kirba§, an assistant at the Bakirkoy Psychiatric Hospital in Istanbul, was arrested at his home on 28 March 1980 and taken to the Political Police Centre at Gayrettepe, where he was held for two weeks and tortured during interrogation. Both physical and psychological torture are alleged to have been used on Dr Kirba§, includingya/a/^^a (beating of the soles of the feet); electric shocks; threats that his sister would be raped and that a truncheon would be forced up his anus. He was also made to listen to the screams of others undergoing torture. When he was brought before a military tribunal, the charges against him were dismissed and he was released.
302
