Israel and the Occupied Territories
The concerns of Amnesty International in Israel and the Occupied Territories were the arrest and conviction of prisoners of conscience: the use of administrative measures to physically restrict individuals without due process of law. including detaining them without trial: the lack of effective safeguards to ensure that the basic rights of those in custody are protected, which increases the likelihood of ill-treatment In June 1979 Amnesty International sent a mission to discuss these concerns with the Israeli authorities. A memorandum from this mission focusing on the lack of administrative and legal safeguards applied to security suspects ( individuals detained on suspicion of threatening the security of the state) was submitted to the authorities in October 1979 and a reply from the Attorney-Genera I on behalf of the government was received in January 1980.
During the year Amnesty International worked on behalf of a total of 51 individual prisoners and learned of the release of 30. Out of the total. 27 had been tried and convicted of security offences: seven were adopted as prisoners of conscience and 20 were investigation cases. Security offences cover a wide range of acts, such as membership of a hostile or illegal organization (Defence Emergency Regulations of 1945 (DER), Article 85). incitement and hostile propaganda (Security Order 101. 1968) and training in weapons (DER, Article 63 and Security Order 284, 1967) which might in instances where violence was used, cause the case to fall outside the statutory concerns of Amnesty International. However, in a number of cases, and particularly in those involving the charge of membership of a hostile or illegal organization, this legislation has been interpreted very broadly by military courts so that individuals have been sentenced to prison
338
terms for acts which are expressions of poHtical belief and do not involve the use or advocacy of violence.
Amnesty International is concerned also about sentences passed on individuals who refuse service in the Israeli Defence Forces. Among them are draft resisters from the Druse population who. unlike Israeli Arabs, are obliged to perform army service, and Israeli Jews who have refused tours of duty in the Occupied Territories. One of the latter. Danny Amir, was given three consecutive 35-day prison terms and was released in March 1980 only when he agreed to serve wherever he was posted. He was then assigned to duty in the Occupied Territories.
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about the use of administrative orders which, without due process of law, allow the military authorities in the Occupied Territories to restrict movement and to imprison individuals. For the first time since 1976, the Military Government in the Occupied Territories employed DER, Article 112 and expelled a resident of the Occupied Territories to Lebanon in May 1979. The expelled student, Riyad Abu Awwad, was alleged to have been involved with six Israeli Arab students in producing a document which supported the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) as the sole representative of the Palestinian people. The six Israeli Arab students had been placed under house arrest for three months in early 1979 by virtue of an administrative order.
In November 1979 Amnesty International members interceded on behalf of the Arab Mayor of Nablus, who had been detained undl an administrative expulsion order (DER. Article 112) could be put into effect. The order had reportedly been issued as a result of statements made by Mr Shak' a to explain Palestinian violence against the Israeli occupation. On 5 December the Military Governor rescinded the deportation order and Mr Shak'a returned to his post as Mayor.
Amnesty International continued to work on behalf of individuals held under administrative detention provisions which permit the authorities to hold people without charge or trial for renewable periods of up to six months.
During the year the number of administrative detainees fluctuated between six and about 20. Amnesty International worked for 24 of them during the period covered by this report. Ali Awwad Jamal has undergone the longest period of detention, having been held since May 1975.
A new law governing administrative detention for Israel was passed by theparliament) in March 1979, and it introduced a series of judicial and ministerial controls. In February 1980, the Minister of Justice, Shmuel Tamir, announced that a version of this
339
new law would be enacted for the Occupied Territories and that it would: {I ) take away the power to issue an administrative detention order from local military governors and lodge it with the Military Governor of the Territories; (2) initiate review by a military judge after 48 hours: (3) allow appeals to be addressed to the President of the military courts; (4) require review by a military judge every three months: (5) limit the period of the detention order to six months. Despite these changes, Amnesty International is still concerned that the principle of detention without charge or trial is maintained, and that new detention orders may be issued for the same individual, thus allowing the periods of administrative detention to be extended.
Amnesty International continued to be concerned also about the ways in which the system of military justice applied in the Occupied Territories deviates from fair trial practices. In particular, there are no rights of judicial appeal for those tried before the military tribunals in the Occupied Territories, although a military appeals court exists for residents of East Jerusalem and Israel proper. A committee under the direction of a Justice of the Supreme Court, Meir Shamgar, was set up in May 1977 to examine the system of military justice operating in the Occupied Territories. Although the committee's final report, which contained a series of recommendations involving basic changes in the slmcture and organization of the military justice system, was completed in May 1978, two years later the government had not yet acted upon it.
In April 1979 the Israeli Cabinet reversed previous govemment policy by authorizing the Attorney-General to ask the courts for a death sentence for acts of inhuman cruelty. However, during the year no death sentences were passed.
There were a number of news reports of police brutality, and prison conditions remain sufficiently serious to have caused the authorities themselves to express public concern. In addition, allegations of ill-treatment of security suspects in custody in the Occupied Territories continued to reach Amnesty International, both through published press reports and the testimony of former prisoners.
A Justice of the Supreme Court. Haim Cohn. in an opinion acquitting a murder suspect because the confessions had been extracted under duress, warned that police violence upon suspects was becoming an increasingly serious problem (reported in Jerusalem Post. 26 June 1979). In a report issued in February 1980 by a committee set up by the Ministries of Justice, the Interior and the Police to examine the problem of |X)lice violence, it was stated that "the use of violence has become habitual", and that many more complaints of such violence would have been made if complainants did not have to submit them to the police themselves and if they had
340
more confidence that complaints would be investigated {?i\v\y [Jerusalem Post 5 February 1980).
Prison conditions were the cause of several protests by prisoners during the year, including one supported by a public sit-in at the offices of the Inlerjiational Committee of the Red Cross in Jerusalem in October 1979. In a public statement in March 1980. a Prison Services Commissioner. Haim Levy, charged that "prisoners in Israel are kept in conditions worse than those of anywhere in the Western world", that prisons were seriously overcrowded and that hundreds of prisoners were forced to sleep on the fioor {Jerusalem Post 18 March 1980).
Among reports of ill-treatment appearing in the press were those concerning the case of a released former Amnesty International adopted prisoner of conscience, Ismail Ajweh. After an investigation carried out by the Attorney-General's office into charges of ill-treatment, the interrogating officer was tried by a disciplinary court, reprimanded and transferred. The Attorney-General, while admitting that Ajweh had been slapped and struck on the hands and face, stated that "there are no grounds for saying that the conditions and manner of his interrogation caused injury or any significant aggravation to the state of his health . . Nader Fayiz el-Afouri, on "whose behalf Amnesty International appealed in January 1979, expressing serious concern about his health, was released in February 1980 from the psychiatric ward in Ramlejail. sufTeringfrom seriousmentàl instability and the loss of some of his physical faculties. He is now under care in a mental hospital. The Israeli authorities have denied that his present state was caused by ill-treatment in custody.
Testimony reaching Amnesty International supports the view that the dominant forms of ill-treatment are most painful techniques of physical restriction, particularly enforced standing and remaining in uncomfortable positions for long periods, and deprivation of sleep.
In its meeting with the authorities in June 1979 and in its memorandum submitted to the government in October 1979, Amnesty Intematiohal focused on safeguards, both administrative and legal, applying to security suspects in custody in the Occupied Territories and found them to be inadequate. The memorandum examined in some detail procedures leading to prolonged incommunicado detention, including restrictions on a prisoner's access to lawyer, family, and to medical care. It also examined the legal safeguards available under the system of military justice in the Occupied Territories. In sum. Amnesty International concluded that "procedures are so deficient as they now stand that they do not provide adequate minimum protection for arrested persons. This enhances the possibility that the basic rights of prisoners may be routinely violated".
341
Among its specific conclusions, Amnesty International stated its view that:
"(1) there is sufficient prima facie evidence of ill-treatment of security suspects ... to warrant the establishment of a public inquiry ... (2) the present administrative procedures do not enable the Israeli authorities to bring forward conclusive evidence to refute allegations of ill-treatment... (3) the lack of such conclusive evidence is directly related to the extended-period of incommunicado detention... (4) certain legal provisions and practices enhance the possibility of ill-treatment. . . these include: restrictions on the role of defence counsel in preparing the defence... the frequent reliance in security cases on uncorroborated confessions as the effective basis for conviction . . . the absence of effective opportunities for judicial appeal... (5) the machinery for investigating complaints of ill-treatment ... is inadequate."
Amnesty International therefore recommended that:
"a public and impartial committee of inquiry should be established to investigate the allegations of ill-treatment in their totality and the administrative and legal procedures and practices relevant to the arrest, confinement, interrogation and trial of security suspects. The committee's findings, conclusions and recommendations should be made public." Amnesty International recommended also that, "Pending the establishment and reporting of such an inquiry . . . immediate steps | should] be taken to ensure that security suspects under interrogation are protected against possible ill-treatment Measures to this end should include access to family, lawyer, and independent medical doctor promptiy after arrest and at regular, brief intervals thereafter."
The reply of the Attorney-General, on behalf of the Israeli authorities, rejected in toto the Amnesty International conclusions and recommendations, stating that "The Ministry of Justice and other officials concerned with the administration of justice in Israel and the administered areas, conduct an ongoing review of the treatment of security detainees, and there is thus no need for the committee of inquiry you recommend." In its response to the Attorney-General, Amnesty International stated that "the Attorney-General, in his reply, has not relieved the Amnesty International concern that the procedures now in effect neither provide sufficient protection for suspects in custody nor enable a factual assessment of allegations of ill-treatment Amnesty International therefore calls upon the Israeli
342
authorities once again to act positively on the recommendations made in the memorandum."
