Spain
Amnesty International considers that during the year under review Spain has not maintained the progress of recent years in the protection of human rights. The way in which the anti-terrorist legislation has continued to be applied, the use of ill-treatment and torture and the increasing number of prosecutions intended to stifle non-violent freedom of expression are immediate and grave threats to human rights.
During the year armed conflict between extremist groups of the left and right and the forces of public order has continued, especially in the Basque country. In 1978 and 1979 the government introduced measures which gave new powers to the judiciary and the police, to deal with this situation. The Amnesty International Report 1979 described the principal elements of this new legislation(Law 56/1978 of4 December 1978 and Decree-Law 3/1979 of 26 January 1979) which was renewed for another year.
Briefly, these powers authorize the police to detain not only individuals who are members of armed groups but also those who defend publicly by oral, written or any other means, the conduct or activities of any person who is a member of an armed group or who even associates with such members. These powers are so all-embracing and so vague in definition that people may be detained for defending or associating with others even though no specific offence may, in fact, have yet been committed by those they defend or with whom they associate.
Under these powers a detainee may be held in a police station, completely incommunicado, without the assistance of a lawyer, for a period of 72 hours which, on the order of a magistrate of the Audiencia Nacional, National Court, in Madrid, can be extended for a further seven days. The requests for extension made by the police are invariably granted, even on the most insubstantial grounds. In Amnesty International's view it is particularly serious that individuals may be held without access to lawyers, a practice which is clearly in contravention of rights guaranteed by the constitution of December 1978 in Article 17(3).
A further consequence of this situation was the continuing allegations of ill-treatment and torture of detainees in police stations during this lO-day period. This is in large measure due to the impossibility of obtaining legal assistance and the almost complete
297
lack of control by the competent magistrates. Occasionally intervention from outside is successful in obtaining the release of detainees held incommunicado, but rarely is it possible to secure access to lawyers as stipulated in the constitution. During the period under review Amnesty International has successfully requested the authorities in a number of cases to use their good offices to secure the constitutional rights of detainees.
Not all detainees under these new laws were ill-treated or tortured and there were great differences between regions. However, there was overwhelming evidence of a systematic use of the illegal and unconstitutional practices described above. In a substantial number of cases the plaintiffs have brought legal actions against the police, but in most they have been unsuccessful {sobreseido) because of their inability to provide corroborative evidence. Even in cases where there is indisputable evidence, it is difficult, if not impossible, to obtain redress. The proceedings are characterized by a lack of urgency on the part of the judicial authorities and a failure by the police to cooperate with them.
Dr Xavier Onaindia was arrested on 13 June 1979 in Bilbao and spent nine days incommunicado in the Indauchu police station. During this period he suffered substantial injuries from beatings, electric shocks and deprivation of sleep. These were comprehensively described in two medical documents which corroborated his allegations and which were issued by two different independent doctors one day after his release. Criminal proceedings against the police for torture were begun {diligencias previas 1736/79 of 25 June) in the Bilbao court. However, it was not until 10 months after the opening of the inquiry that the police agreed to hold an identity parade. Dr Onaindia positively identified three officers, but at the time of writing the judge has still failed to issue the necessary order enabling proceedings against the police to continue. No charges have ever been preferred against Dr Onaindia.
In October 1979 Amnesty International sent a mission to Spain to investigate the allegations of ill-treatment and torture and to examine the application of the an ti-terror ism laws. The mission consisted of two doctors, Dr Ole Vedel Rasmussen and Dr Hans Drominsky-Petersen, and an interpreter, Vibeke Pentz-Miller, all from Copenhagen, Professor Kurt Madlener of the Max Planck Institute for International Comparative Penal Law in Freiburg/Br., and a staff member of the International Secretariat of Amnesty International. The two doctors examined people in Madrid, Barcelona and Bilbao who had made allegations of ill-treatment and torture; Professor Madlener had discussions on the law.
Amnesty International found from its inquiries that ill-treatment
298
amounting to torture occured in police stations in all three cities. The use of the new laws by the police, the lack of control by the competent magistrates and the denial of the constitutional right to legal assistance were all, in their varying degrees, responsible for the continuation of ill-treatment and torture.
In February 1980 a government commission of inquiry into torture allegations started work with a limited brief. It is composed of members of parliament and at the time of writing it has not yet produced a report. However, it should be noted that even this body has been denied access to essential information and institutions.
The imprisonment of conscientious objectors simply for refusing to do military service, as distinct from the prosecution of individuals in cases involving freedom of expression and association, has in the past few years not been common. This is principally because of the policy of permitting people liable to military service to delay their entry into the armed forces on grounds of conscience until the introduction of a new law on military service. In January 1980 the text of the projected law was published; unless it is substantially amended, it could result in a return to the practice of imprisoning conscientious objectors. Amnesty International considers the law to be unsatisfactory in three essential respects.
First, conscientious objectors may apply for exemption only on the grounds of profound religious or ethical convictions. Amnesty International has consistently urged that all members of the Council of Europe should adhere to the principles of Resolution 337 of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe. This declares in its basic principles that, with respect to Article 9 of the European Convention on Human Rights, people should be released from the obligation to perform armed service if they refuse to do so for "religious, ethical, moral, humanitarian, philosophical or similar motives".
Second, the nature of the alternative civilian service as proposed by the authorities appears to be unsatisfactory and is twice as long as military service, a practice which Amnesty International considers to be punitive.
Third, during the period of this service, conscientious objectors are forbidden to engage in any political or union activity apart from exercising their normal rights to suffrage and maintaining their existing affiliations to political or union organizations.
Anyone convicted and imprisoned under the new law would be considered for adoption as a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty International.
Frequently people who are conscientious objectors associate with others to obtain alterations in legislation and improvement in the
299
conditions of service. During the year Amnesty Intemational intervened in the cases of six civilians charged with sedition who were threatened with trial by military tribunals in Valencia. It considered that they were exercising their right^to non-violent freedom of expression. A similar case occurred in March 1980 in Bilbao where a total of 20 people are, at the time of writing-in prison awaiting trial by a military court.
On 16 March 1980, José Daniel González López was arrested in Bilbao while distributing a leaflet. No a la Mili, "No to Military Service". This was considered damaging and insulting to the army and on conviction he could be sentenced to up to six years in prison. Two days later, 19 other demonstrators were arrested for supporting him and charged with distributing similar leaflets. All have been adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience.
During the year editors, writers, a film director and journalists were charged with offences relating to their work. The judicial authorities consider that they have disseminated comments, allegations and ideas that are damaging and disrespectful to the courts or to the armed forces or organs of state.
Juan Luis Cebriàn, the prize-winning editor of the Madrid daily newspaper El Pais, was fined and given a suspended prison sentence for publishing, in April 1978, a leading article entitled"The Press and Democracy", which condemned the existing laws on the press as obsolete. The article was written in connection with the conviction of a fellow editor, which Juan Luis Cebrián strongly condemned. The prosecution appealed and the case will go to the Supreme Court.
Miguel Angel Aguilar, the editor of Diario 16, a Madrid daily newspaper, is facing trial by a military tribunal for publishing an article giving details of an alleged attempted coup by the army.
Pilar Miró is the director of the film "The Crime of Cuenca" which won a prize at the Berlin Film Festival and deals with the events in Cuenca at the beginning of the century, in which the Guardia Civil was involved in the torture of suspects. She, too, is also awaiting trial before a military court.
300
