South Africa
The main concerns of Amnesty International were political imprisonment, detention without trial and banning, torture, prison conditions and the death penalty.
Political debate in South Africa during 1979 and 1980 was dominated by the apparent acceptance by Prime Minister P.W. Botha and his government of the need to introduce reforms in the apartheid system to reduce racial tension and promote national unity. Goveniment statements concerning plans for possible liberalization in areas as diverse as black trade union rights and labour relations, job reservation and the Immorality Act, raised expectations of change. By April 1980, however, very little had been achieved to jusdfy the optimism and expectation aroused since mid-1979. In no area was this more marked than in the area of human rights. During the year there were new waves of arrests and detentions, a further spate of political trials and the government continued to use banning orders to restrict and suppress political opposition.
There were also ominous signs that the government's "total strategy" concept, which provides a context for some limited and controlled liberalization, has as its corollary a commitment to greater ruthlessness in dealing with real or perceived enemies of the state. This was presaged in a number of ways: by increased spending on defence, by closer involvement of the military command in government decision making and by tighter control over press reporting of sensitive issues such as defence and internal security. It was seen also in the government's reaction to an incident in January 1980, when three alleged members of the African National Congress (ANC) seized a bank in Pretoria and took a number of hostages. They are reported to have demanded the release of Nelson Mandela, the ANC leader, who has been held at Robben Island maximum security prison since he was sentenced to life imprisonment in 1964. Police soon stormed the bank and killed the three guerrillas, who were widely denounced in the white press and community but almost equally acclaimed as heroes by blacks. Subsequently, the Steyn commission of inquiry into press reporting of defence matters recommended that the press should in future be prohibited from reporting demands made by guerrillas in such situations.
After the Pretoria incident, nine alleged members of the ANC were charged with treason. They were the second group within a year
75
to face such charges, rather than charges under the more familiar Terrorism and Internal Security Acts commonly used against political offenders in recent years. This, too, was a new development Prior to September 1979, when 12 members of the ANC were brought to trial in the Pietermaritzburg Supreme Court, treason charges had not been used for political offenders since the marathon treason trial of the late 1950s, when 156 prominent opponents of apartheid were tried and eventually acquitted.
Several new black political organizations were formed during the year to articulate black grievances and fill the vacuum caused by the banning of the Black Consciousness movement in October 1977. Within a very short time, however, such organizations as the Congress of South African Students (COS AS) and the Port Elizabeth Black Civic Organization (PEBCO) became the object of security police harassment and official repression. Ephraim Mogale and other leading members of COS AS were detained under Section 6 of the Terrorism Act in November 1979 and held incommunicado for five months until April 1980. Most were freed without being charged. Ephraim Mogale and another student, Thabo Makunyane, were, however, brought to trial on political charges in late April.
Further detentions occurred at the beginning of 1980, after a strike by black workers at the Ford Motor Company in Port Elizabeth. The strike was sparked off by the dismissal of Thozamile Botha, leader of PEBCO, who was subsequently detained by security police on 10 January together with two other leading members of PEBCO. They were held incommunicado for six weeks and then released and immediately restricted under five-year banning orders, the terms of which prohibited all three from having further contact with PEBCO and made it impossible for Thozamile Botha to continue working at Ford.
The banned former leader of the Azanian People's Organization (AZAPO), Ishmael Mkhabela, was detained in March 1980 and held incommunicado for several weeks. He had previously been detained without trial for more than six months after the formation of AZAPO in May 1978. Shortly after Ishmael Mkhabela's release without being charged in April, Minister of Police Louis le Grange publicly threatened further action against AZAPO, COSAS and other black organizations. He claimed that by commemorating in March the 20th anniversary of the Sharpeville killings and by supporting the major campaign by blacks for the release of Nelson Mandela, prompted by Robert Mugabe's election victory in Zimbabwe, they were furthering the aims of banned nationalist organizations.
In late April Marais Steyn, Minister of Coloured Relations, made similar allegations of agitation after the start of a widespread boycott of
76
schools by "Coloured" students protesting against discrimination and the marked disparities in their education. The Minister singled out for particular criticism Curtis Nkondo, leader of the Soweto Teachers' Action Committee and prominent member of AZAPO. Curtis Nkondo was detained without trial by security police on 23 April. Several other black leaders and students suspected of involvement in the organization of the boycott also were detained incommunicado.
The lack of adequate safeguards in the treatment of detainees held incommunicado under the Terrorism Act and similar security legislation was again amply illustrated during the year by new allegations of torture made by former detainees and by defendants and witnesses at several political trials. In at least one case, that of Cynthia Montwedi, the Minister of Police agreed to an out-of-court settlement while denying liability, after Cynthia Montwedi instituted a legal action for damages. She alleged that after her detention in April 1978 she had been subjected to electric shocks and physical assaults during interrogation by security police at John Vorster Square police station in Johannesburg. A similar settlement was agreed in July 1979, when the family of Steve Biko, the Black Consciousness leader who died in detention in September 1977, received compensation for his death in custody. However, in making the award the government again refused to accept liability for the ill-treatment which caused Steve Biko's death. The government effectively forestalled the family's attempts to ascertain the full extent of such ill-treatment by agreeing to a settlement out of court. Thus the govemment prevented any opportunity for the further cross-examination in court of the security police officers who had custody of Steve Biko, and whose disclosures at the official inquest in November 1977 had caused widespread protest.
A further development in the Biko case occurred in April 1980 when the Medical and Dental Council announced, after what it called a preliminary investigation, that no disciplinary action would be taken against three doctors who had attended Steve Biko shortly before his death. The Council's assertion that there was no obvious evidence of improper conduct, which appeared to take no account of statements made by the doctors themselves at the inquest, was met with widespread incredulity.
Allegations of torture were made at two long-running political trials, which concluded in mid-1979. In the first, Sechaba Daniel Montsitsi and three other Soweto student leaders were convicted of sedition and sent to prison for terms of two to four years in May 1979. Seven other defendants received suspended sentences. The second major trial, that of 66-year-old Zeph Mothopeng and 17 other alleged members of the banned Pan-Africanist Congress of Azania (PAC) ended in June with all but one of the accused being convicted under
77
the Terrorism Act They were sentenced to terms of effectively five to 15 years' imprisonment In all, 13 of the 18 defendants alleged torture during pre-trial interrogation by security police, including Johnson Nyathi, who claimed that he had been thrown out of a window by security police anci seriously injured. His claim was dismissed and he was subsequently convicted of attempted escape and given an extra year's sentence to add to the 10-year term already imposed.
Of a number of new political trials taking place during the year, possibly the most significant was the treason trial which began in September 1979, not only because the accused were charged with treason but also for the following two reasons. During the course of the trial, the defendants dismissed their counsel and refused to take any further part in the proceedings when the judge ruled that certain state witnesses would be heard in closed session. At the conclusion of the trial in November 1979, 11 of the accused were convicted and sentenced to prison terms ranging from 13 to 18 years. The other defendant, James Mange, was sentenced to death. This was the first death sentence to be imposed for treason since the Second World War. No one has been executed for treason since 1914. James Mange was given leave to appeal against sentence in January. By April 1980 the appeal had not been heard.
The sentence imposed on James Mange, and the execution in May 1979 of Solomon Mahlangu, the first person to be hanged for a politically motivated offence since the mid-1960s, appeared to indicate a move towards greater use of the death penalty in political cases. The execution of criminal offenders also continued at a high rate during the year. According to figures issued by the Minister of Police in February 1980, a total of 133 people under sentence of death were hanged during 1979. All but two of those hanged were blacks.
Several incidents drew attention to the plight of convicted political prisoners, some 500 of whom were reported to be serving sentences at the beginning of 1980, and suggested increasing tension between prisoners and prison staff. In mid-1979, five male prisoners on Robben Island and two women in Kroonstad prison received additional sentences. It was alleged that they had attacked prison officers. Disciplinary charges were brought against four women in Potchefstroom Female Prison in March 1980. At Pretoria Central Prison the escape of three white political prisoners in December 1979 appears to have resulted in harsher conditions for those who remain. The campaign in early 1980 for the release of Nelson Mandela, imprisoned forthe past 17 years, served also to highlight one of the main problems facing convicted prisoners, that is the government's continued refusal to grant political prisoners remission of sentence.
78
The government maintained its poUcy of extending the punisliment of political offenders through the use of banning orders. For example, several long-term prisoners released from Robben Island in late 1979 were almost immediately restricted under banning orders, as was Isaiah Moeng at the time of his release in April 1980 after an eight-year prison sentence. Earlier, in June 1979, after the replacement of Justice Minister James Kruger, there appeared to be a prospect of some reduction in the use of administrative banning orders. This possibility was openly suggested that same June by Df Piet Koomhof, Minister of Cooperation and Development, in an address to the United States National Press Club. In August, James Kruger's successor, Alwyn Schlebusch, announced the estabhshment of a judicial commission of inquiry into security legislation and soon afterwards revoked existing banning orders on several white trade union organizers who had been restricted in late 1976. At about the same time, however, the optimism aroused was dispelled when a banning order was imposed on Priscilla Jana, a prominent defence attorney in political cases, and several existing banning orders were renewed In December, two former detainees prominent in PEBCO, Lizo Pityana and Moki Cekesani, were banned and placed under partial house arrest, and at the end of 1979 more than 150 banning orders were in force. Prosecutions for alleged contraventions of individual banning orders also continued and in one case, that of the Anglican priest David Russell, resulted in a prison sentence of 12 months being imposed in February 1980. The next month Lilian Ngoyi, a veteran campaigner against apartheid, died having spent the last 15 years of her Ufe under a banning order.
A pattern of human rights violations similar to that prevailing in the four provinces directly administered by the South African Government was also to be found in the three African "homelands" which the South African Government has declared" independent". In the Transkei particularly, many critics or suspected opponents of the Matanzima administration were detained incommunicado and without trial during the year. They included several journalists, and Fikile Bam, a former political prisoner, on whose behalf Amnesty International appealed in November 1979. He was released soon after this appeal was made. By April 1980, however, other detainees for whom Amnesty International campaigned were still beheved to be held incommunicado.
In addition to its work for individual prisoners of conscience and other victims of human rights violations, Amnesty International campaigned against the use of banning orders and against the death penalty, reporting on these issues to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights and other appropriate United Nations bodies. In
79
March 1980, in an address made in New York to the United Nations Special Committee Against Apartheid, it called on the South African Government to implement immediately certain specified reforms as an earnest indication of its intention to promote fundamental change. These included; the revocation of all banning orders; the removal of indefinite incommunicado detention; the repeal of repressive legislation, particularly that providing for mandatory minimum sentences and for unlimited detention of potential state witnesses; the granting of remission to all political prisoners; the immediate release of those who are old or infirm preparatory to granting a general amnesty to all political prisoners before the end of 1980.
