Iraq
The foremost concerns of Amnesty International during the year continued to be widespread arrests of actual or suspected opponents of the government, the inadequacy of political trial procedures, the routine and systematic torture of political detainees and the death penalty, the use of which has greatly increased.
In mid-July 1979 Saddam Husain succeeded Ahmad Hassan A1 Bakr as President of the Republic and was reported to have uncovered a conspiracy involving high-ranking members of the government and the ruling Ba'ath Party. Twenty-one people were executed shortly thereafter and a subsequent purge of members of the party and the armed forces resulted in arrests and further executions. There was increasing opposition to the government from certain elements of the Shi'i community. Political activity, including anti-government demonstrations and speeches, the distribution of leaflets and attacks on officials, met with a harsh government response. Widespread arrests and executions of Shi'is occurred and in April 1980 large numbers of Iraqis of Iranian origin were deported across the border into Iran. Members and supporters of the once legal Iraqi Communist Party (ICP) continued to face a government directed campaign of intimidation marked by extensive arrests, short-term detention without trial and torture, as a matter of routine. All those in custody were released under a general amnesty in August 1979. Many members of the ICP have since gone into exile or underground and reports of arrests have been fewer. In addition. Kurdish opposition in the autonomous region (of Kurdistan) continued, including hit-and-run attacks on government officials and property, and the government responded with arrests and a number of executions.
Under the general amnesty announced on 16 August 1979, prisoners convicted by the Revolutionary Court or by special courts, including those sentenced to death, were released. Kurdish soldiers and civilians convicted of crimes carried out in the autonomous region were also amnestied. According to official reports, 725 political prisoners benefited from the amnesty, including 400 Kurds and 24 communists. Some unofficial sources have claimed that 4,000 or
332
more poUtical prisoners were released, including several thousand Shi'is. Amnesty International wrote to the authorities for details of the amnesty but received no reply. Unofficial sources, however, have confirmed the release of 84 Kurds, whose plight Amnesty International investigated between 1976 and 1979, and of 14 former freemasons, all elderly professional men charged with espionage in 1974 and adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International in 1975. Only one of those whose cases Amnesty International investigated, Abdul Karim Sattar A1 Sheikhly, was known not to have benefited from the amnesty. He was a former Ambassador, arrested in early 1978 for alleged anti-government activities and sentenced to six years' imprisonment. In April 1980 Amnesty International received reports that he had been murdered while under house arrest.
According to information received by Amnesty International, considerably more than 24 ICP members or supporters were released under the amnesty, although precise figures are not available. Among those released were seven party members, including a member of the Central Committee of the ICP Suleiman Yusif Istifan, who had all been held incommunicado in the General Security Headquarters in Baghdad since their arrest in November 1978. Amnesty International members had been appealing to the authorities on their behalf since May 1979. and in July 1979 their plight was the focus of a concerted campaign. At least 10 members of the Christian community also, who had been sentenced in April 1979 to between one and five years' imprisonment for attending unauthorized religious meetings, were released in August 1979.
Some 10.000 people, mainly Shi'is were reportedly arrested during the summer of 1979, following massive and at times bloody demonstrations staged in major cities to protest against the arrest of the Shi'i leader Ayatollah Muhammad Baqr A1 Sadr. Amnesty International received the names of 22 Shi'i and three Sunni religious leaders, and wrote to President Ahmad Hassan Al Bakr on 2 July expressing concern that they had been arrested "for exercising their right to freedom of opinion and expression". Some of these 25 were later reported to have been executed. Amnesty International does not know how many of those arrested remained in prison after the August amnesty. There have, however, been extensive arrests of members of the Shi'i opposition since the amnesty, although details are known only in the cases of a few well known individuals.
The most prominent case was that of Ayatollah Muhammad Baqr Al Sadr. a 50-year-old religious leader and scholar who became a rallying point for Shi'i opposition. He was arrested briefly in May and June 1979 and thereafter placed under strict house arrest, with no water or electricity supplies and no access to medical attention or to
333
friends, or students. Death threats against him were reported. Concerted appeals were made on his behalf: on 17 October. Amnesty International expressed concern that the severe restrictions might be detrimental to his physical and mental health and urged his release: on 11 April 1980. after reports that Ayatollah A1 Sadr and his family had been rearrested on 5 April. Amnesty International again urged his release: in mid-April Amnesty International members expressed their concern at reports that Ayatollah A1 Sadr and his sister. Bint al Huda. had been executed on 8 or 9 April. At the time of writing Amnesty International has received no confirmation from the Iraqi Government that the Ayatollah is alive.
Amnesty International appealed on behalf of three scientists. Dr Husain Al Shahristani. a 35-year-old chemist and director of research atthe Iraqi Atomic Energy Commission, arrested about the beginning of December 1979, was the focus of an urgent appeal on 30 January after reports that he had been severely tortured It was later learned that he had been sentenced to life imprisonment. His colleague. Dr Ja' afar Dhia Ja'afar. a physicist and head of the Experimental Physics Department at the Commission, was arrested allegedly because he intervened with the President on Dr Shahristani's behalf. Dr Hassan Rajai. a consultant to the Ministry of Oil. was sentenced to seven years" imprisonment. The charges against the scientists are not known and the plight of all three men is being investigated by Amnesty International.
At the time of writing. Amnesty International was particulariy concerned about two ICP members who were arrested on 8 February 1980. They are Dr Safa Al Hafidh. editor of the monthly ICP journal Al Thaqafa AlJadida and member of the Presidential Committee of the World Peace Council, and Dr Saba Al Durrah. an economist and author.
Amnesty International has in addition investigated the cases of 33 Ba'athists who were alleged to have been implicated in a conspiracy reported in July 1979, and who were sentenced in August by a special court from one to 15 years' imprisonment. Twenty were charged under Article 175 {i) of the penal code with being party to a criminal conspiracy; and the others were charged under Article 247. with withholding information about the conspiracy. Amnesty International groups were requesting the government to supply information about their trial, with particular reference to defence and appeals procedures and the nature of the evidence used.
The inadequacy of legal safeguards, particularly for those charged with capital offcnces. continues to be a cause for concern. The majority of death sentences are passed either by the Revolutionary Court in Baghdad, or by special courts such as the special court of
334
Kirkuk, which was set up specifically to try Kurds arrested in the autonomous region and charged with political offences. The procedures of these courts do not conform to the legal safeguards guaranteed by Iraqi domestic law and by the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights: trials in both types of court are always summary and held in camera. Tribunals in both consist of representatives of the government executive and not of the judiciary; defendants are held incommunicado during pre-trial detention: there are very severe restrictions on the rights of the defence in the Revolutionary Court and no right of defence at all in special courts; convictions in both courts are often based on confessions extracted under torture; there is no right of appeal to a higher court, although the death sentence must be ratified by the President and the prisoner may petition the President for clemency.
On 2 August 1979. at the start of the conspiracy trial. Amnesty International issued a news release expressing concern about the trial procedures of the special courts and stating that "Those who are being arrested face trial before a special court that provides none of the basic legal rights that guarantee a fair triar*. The special court, set up by a decision of the Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) on 28 July with a tribunal of seven RCC members, sat from 1 to 6 August. It tried 68 people and passed 22 death sentences which (except for one passed in absentia) were carried out two days later. As far as is known, there was no defence counsel present nor was' any appeal against the verdict allowed.
During the year Amnesty International received testimonies of torture from a number of former prisoners. One of these. Burhan A1 Shawi. a 25-year-old journalist, was examined in Copenhagen by members of the Amnesty International Danish medical group. He reported that on 3 March 1978, he was arrested by members of the security forces and held in one of their headquarters in Baghdad. There he was blindfolded and
"beaten on various parts of my body with hard blows, by sticks, by rubber tubes and by severe kicks. I was thrown about from one corner to another, hitting the walls and crashing down on my face or back, for the hard beating to commence now on my face and back, on the sensitive parts of my body such as the kidneys, the neck, the sex organs and the elbow. I was also caned and flailed until my feet were swollen."
He also alleged that he had been sexually assaulted, had had a thick rod and a cold bottle-like object inserted into his rectum, and had been burnt in 35 different places on his body with a hard object the size of a pencil. He lost consciousness several times and the last time,
335
about nine days after his arrest, regained consciousness to find himself lying in the street near his home. In Copenhagen, Burhan AI Shawi underwent a general examination by two doctors and was examined by a dentist, a dermatologist and a neuro-psychologist. They found that he was easily fatigued, suffered from impairment of memory about periods before and during the torture episode, from impaired power of concentration, low back pain on exertion, dribbling after urination and pain in both thighs when walking. The physical examination showed 35 circular scars left by third degree bums and a computer tomography scan revealed mild cortical atrophy (a wasting away of the outer layer of the brain). The Danish doctors concluded that the objective findings "might indicate that the present condition... is due to the torture".
Amnesty International received 14 other testimonies of torture, most covering the period January to August 1979. The torture allegedly took place in various security headquarters in Baghdad, Ba'quba, Al Hilla and Basra, and in the Ministry ofDefence building. According to these testimonies, the most common torture techniques are kicking, beating with the hands or a rubber truncheon on all parts of the body, beating with an electric stick (particularly on the lips and gtniizh). falaka (beating on the soles of the feet), and sometimes rape. Psychological ill-treatment also is frequent: insulting the prisoner or the prisoner's family, threatening to rape the prisoner or female members of the family, threatening execution, mock executions, threatening to charge the prisoner with a capital offence, making the prisoner listen to others being tortured or look at others after torture. One prisoner was put half naked into a small closet and subjected to extremes of temperature. Another had his toes squeezed tightly in a clamp-like instrument called a mangana, and another had cold water poured over the nose and mouth causing near suffocation. Most prisoners were blindfolded throughout interrogation and one man was held in solitary confinement and saw no one for nine months. Prison conditions in all cases were very poor, medical attention was not always available and contact with families was forbidden.
Reports of death under torture are frequent, but Amnesty International is often unable to ascertain whether a reported prison death was, in fact, a judicial execution not officially reported, or a result of ill-treatment during interrogation.
Amnesty International is concerned also about the increasing use of the death penalty. Executions have been more frequent than in previous years, particulariy for non-violent political activity. Legislation in force since 1976 makes membership of, or affiliation to, a political party other than the Ba'ath Party a capital offence for members of the armed forces, for men who retired or left the armed forces after 1968
336
(in force since 1978). for members of the Ba'ath Party (in force since 1974) and for former members of the Ba'ath Party (in force since 1976). Since 31 March 1980 a new law maíces it a capital offence to be a member of, or to be affiliated to, a party called Al Da'wa Al Islamiya (a predominantly Shi'i group which has been in existence illegally since the mid-1950s). This law can be applied retroactively. These provisions violate the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which Iraq ratified on 25 January 1971 thereby agreeing to ensure the freedom of expression and association and to reserve the death penalty for only the most serious crimes. They also contravene the United Nations General Assembly resolution passed by consensus on 8 December 1977 which reaffirmed that the main objective as regards the death penalty was to restrict progressively the number of offences for which it may be imposed with a view to the desirability of abolishing it altogether.
Official Iraqi news media referred to 26 executions carried out from May 1979 to April 1980: unofficial reports indicate that the figure is much higher.
Official reports cite the execution of 21 men, including five members of the Revolutionary Command Council who were charged with "conspiring against the (Ba'ath) Party and the revolution" and were executed by firing-squad on 8 August The firing-squad consisted of several civilian and military members of the Ba'ath Party from different areas of the country and it has been reported unofficially that because some were inexperienced in handling rifles, death was not instantaneous in all cases. The same unofficial sources claim that only 15 out of the 21 were executed at that time. At least two are said to have died under torture and another, Abdul Khaliq Al Samarrai, a former member of the National Command of the Ba'ath Party, was reported to have been killed in prison before the trial. Four Iraqis, convicted by a Revolutionary Court of bribery and economic espionage, were executed on 16 December 1979. This is the first time that Amnesty International has heard of the death penalty being imposed for this offence in Iraq. Four others were sentenced to death on the same charges on 28 February 1980, but there has been no confirmation that the sentences have been carried out. On 19 March. Talib Karim Alwan was hanged after being convicted of shooting and killing four people at a religious procession in Kerbala in February.
Because few executions are officially reported in the Iraqi press and all political trials are held in camera, it is very difficult to estimate the exact number of executions. Amnesty International received the names and some details of 114 people executed between May 1979 and April 1980 (over and above the officially reported executions). These include Kurds charged with political or military involvement in
337
the Kurdish resistance, members of the armed forces charged with anti-Ba'athist political activity and those suspected of membership of or affiliation to Al Da'wa Al Islamiya.
Amnesty International has interceded on behalf of all those executed whose names were known. The cases of 83 of them had been investigated and Amnesty International wrote to the authorities expressing concern about the reported executions and requesting further information about the trial procedures.
