Bolivia
The major concerns of Amnesty International were political killings and torture. Political instability led to renewed bloodshed during the year. Amnesty International was concerned about acts of violence perpetrated by members of the army against the civilian population, particularly against trade unionists. In July 1979 the military government of General David Padilla stepped down and allowed elections to take place. As no civilian candidate had an overall majority, Walter Guevara Arce took over as caretaker president until new elections could be held in 1980. His government was ousted in a violent, but short-lived coup in November 1979, led by Colonel Alberto Natusch Busch, in which as many as 200-unarmed civilians were killed by the army. After only two weeks in power Colonel Natusch Busch was forced to stand down and another civilian caretaker President, Lidia Gueiler, was installed.
On 7 November 1979 Amnesty International protested to the military commanders about these deaths, calling for the immediate release of trade unionists, liber Forti and Simón Reyes, who had been arrested on the day of the coup.
On 25 March 1980 Amnesty International urged the President to initiate an inquiry into the brutal murder of Jesuit priest Luis Espinal and expressed its concern that his death signalled the start of a campaign of politically motivated killings. According to reports, a death list of suspected left-wing sympathizers and trade union leaders had been drawn up and many people had been threatened.
Father Espinal, an outspoken critic of the right-wing military and of former President Banzer, was found dead on 22 March 1980, bound and gagged. He had been shot several times and the Medical College of La Paz confirmed that he had been tortured. Father Espinal, who was bom in Spain but adopted Bolivian nationality, was a member of the Bolivian Permanent Assembly for Human Rights and founder of the moderate left-wing weekly magazine Aqiti, whose offices had been bombed several weeks earlier.
The murder of Father Espinal prompted protests by the trade unions and caused the resignation of the Minister of the Interior who accused the right wing of carrying out a destabilization campaign to provoke another military coup. The Minister of the Interior alleged
113
that the army intelligence service had raided his offices in March, removed documentation and detained and tortured four officials.
