Jordan
The main concerns of Amnesty International during the year included long-term detention without trial of political prisoners and the lack of basic legal safeguards in trials held by the military court.
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan is a constitutional monarchy .with King Hussein at its head. Martial law. first proclaimed in 1967, continued in force during the period covered by this report. Its provisions invest the Prime Minister, in his capacity as martial law governor, with wide powers to arrest anyone considered a threat to state security and to suspend a broad range of legal and political rights guaranteed under the constitution. Under martial law political prisoners are either held without trial or brought before a military court.
Amnesty International has worked on behalf of six prisoners of conscience in Jordan. Four were sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment for alleged membership of the Communist Party prohibited under the Anti-Communist Law of 1953. They include Imad Mulhim, an agriculture student at the University of Jordan in Amman, who is accused of being a member of the National Union of Jordanian Students, affiliated to the Communist Party. He was sentenced by a military court in September 1978 and is being held in al-Mahatta Prison in Amman. Also serving 10-year sentences in al-Mahatta Prison forthe same offence are Muhammad Abu Shama'a, a member of the Executive Committee of the Bank Employees' Union and Nabil Ja'anini, a graduate in chemistry from Madaba. According to a letter from the Minister of Justice, Najib Arshidat, Nabil Ja'anini "was tried by the military court for being enlisted as a member of the banned Communist Party and being in possession of prohibited Communist leaflets contrary to Article 3 subsection 1 and 5 of the Resistance of Communism Law". Hussein Abu Gharaibeh, a 30-year-old student from Yarmouk, is serving a 10-year sentence in Irbid Prison.
In 1979 Amnesty International learned of the release of two of its adopted prisoners of conscience: Hussein Abu Gharbieh. detained without trial since 2 January 1977, was released on 4 September 1979: Adnan al-Asmar. a 25-year-old student arrested early in 1978
343
charged with belonging to the Communist Party, was released on 2 August 1979. Amnesty International had made urgent appeals for his release in August 1978 when it was learnt that he was in danger of losing his sight as a result, according to reports, of a beating in Abdeli Intelligence Service Prison.
Amnesty International has received and is investigating reports that there are at present 40 administrative detainees held without trial in Jordanian prisons and that some of them have been detained for up to five years.
There have been a number of amnesties during 1979. In August 75 Palestinians were reported to have been freed after a meeting between King Hussein and the Chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization. Yasser Arafat in the garrison town of Mafraq in northern Jordan. In September 1979, after the visit of Yasser Arafat to Amman, 13 more Palestinians were released under a royal amnesty. Eleven of these had been serving life sentences. In January 1980 there was a further royal amnesty which affected 800 prisoners, most of whom appear to have been detained for common law offences and not for political reasons.
The death penalty is still in force in Jordan under both the penal code and martial law regulations. Over the past few years, death sentences have been passed in absentia for the sale of property in territory now occupied by Israel. However, the Jordanian authorities have assured Amnesty International that "no executions for the offence of the sale of land to the enemy have been — or will be — carried out since the 1967 war". In July 1979 Amnesty International cabled King Hussein expressing concern over reports that two Palestinians, Rasim al-Hindi andMahmud al-Nowahy(orTuwaihee), had been sentenced to death. Amnesty International asked for commutation of such sentences on humanitarian grounds but has received no reply.
344
