Libya
During the year Amnesty International was concerned about the increasing number of people arrested and detained for their political beliefs, many of them currently serving sentences of life imprisonment, and about the large number of offences, many of a political nature, which carry the death penalty. In early 1980 Amnesty International received reports of ill-treatment, of a number of deaths in custody and of the murder of several Libyans living abroad, apparently in accordance with an official programme to "liquidate" enemies of the revolution.
Amnesty International groups continued to be concerned about the 77 adopted prisoners of conscience; new cases were investigated of journalists and writers arrested in December 1978 and accused of forming a Marxist organization. Most adopted prisoners are at present helcl in Tripoli Central Prison and Kuweifiya Prison, Benghazi. Those awaiting the outcome of their trial are held in Jdeida Prison, about 15 km from Tripoli.
In March and April 1980 an Amnesty International mission visited Libya to observe parts of two trials of its adopted prisoners of conscience and to discuss the concerns of Amnesty International with government authorities. The first trial involved a group of 18 journalists and writers; most had been arrested during a week of cultural and litarary activities in Benghazi in December 1978. After their arrest some were alleged to have been beaten and detained in solitary confinement without access to a lawyer or their families for three months. Sixteen were held in Jdeida Prison, one was released on provisional liberty and another was said to be abroad and was therefore tried in absentia.
During the trial of the 18 before the Criminal Court, the prosecution claimed that they had formed a Marxist organization whose ideals were opposed to the principles of the 1 September 1969 Revolution, and that they had held meetings for the discussion of Marxist principles and distributed written material during the week of cultural activities. The defendants were accused also of attempting to infiltrate and dominate two (state owned) newspapers, Al Usbu' Al Siydsi, Political Week, and AI Usbu' Al Thaqajî, Cultural Week. They were, in addition, alleged to be in possession of Marxist books.
The 18 were represented by seven lawyers, some chosen freely by the defendants, others appointed by the court. The defence lawyers
345
maintained that the trial was concerned principally with the rights to freedom of expression and opinion. They claimed that there was no evidence of the existence of an illegal political organization and that newspaper articles written by the defendants were published with the acceptance not only of the newspapers" editorial board but also of the leadership of the country. In this regard, a large number of newspaper articles and poems written by the defendants were presented by the defence to the tribunal for their consideration. Defence lawyers also drew attention to irregular arrest and detention procedures, to the alleged ill-treatment the defendants had suffered and to the fact that now the defendants faced the death penalty, whereas before the 1969 Revolution, similar charges carried a maximum of 10 years' imprisonment. Defence lawyers also argued that the Shari'a, Islamic Law, provides for the death penalty for a very limited number of offences, none of them offences of a political nature. On 15 April 1980. after the case for the defence had been completed, the tribunal accepted the defence lawyers' request to be allowed to submit written memoranda to supplement their oral submissions. The verdicts were expected to be pronounced during May or June 1980.
In a memorandum submitted to the Libyan authorities on 30 April 1980. Amnesty International stated that the arrest and continuing detention of these people contravened provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which the Libyan Government ratified in 1970.
The second trial observed by Amnesty International was a retrial of 10 defendants (one of whom was being tried in absentia) originally arrested in 1975. They had first been tried before the Criminal Court in 1976. together with II others, on charges of forming a secret political organization, said to be called the National Front, and of distributing false information about the country's economic situation. In November 1976 the court acquitted 11 and sentenced the remaining 10 to life imprisonment. All were adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience. They subsequently appealed against the sentences, and in March 1979 the Supreme Court upheld the appeal and ruled that the 10 be released. However, the cases of two of the 10 defendants were referred back to the Criminal Court as a result of the charges of false information. On 15 April 1979 the Criminal Court ruled that it was not competent to hear the'cases. Subsequently the Prosecution for the Security of the Revolution altered the charges against the 10. so that they were all rearrested and questioned again about the same offence. The 10 defendants remain in detention pending the outcome of their second trial.
In its memorandum of 30 April 1980 to the Libyan authorities
346
Amnesty International drew attention to the fact that the arrest and imprisonment of this group of 10 people was in violation of Article 19 and 20i 1) of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and Article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Their retrial for the same offence contravenes Article 416 of the Libyan Code of Criminal Procedure and Article 14 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
In February 1980 the official Libyan press published a declaration issued by the third meeting of the Revolutionary Committees at Gar Younis University. Benghazi. Several passages of the declaration authorized the "physical liquidation" of enemies, of the Revolution abroad as well as of other elements said to be obstructing the revolutionary change in political or economic ways. In the months following the declaration, four Libyans were killed in other countries and Amnesty International also received reports of deaths in custody including that of' Amer Deghayes, a former Ba' athist leader who died within days of his arrest. Hundreds of arrests were reported to have taken place in the weeks after the declaration and Amnesty International issued several urgent appeals expressing concern at'the arrest of individuals, requesting information from the authorities about their place of detention and charges against them and urging that they be granted immediate access to a lawyer of their choice and to members of their family.-On 25 April 1980 Amnesty International issued a news release condemning the killings of Libyans in foreign countries and calling on the authorities to renounce their program of ""physical liquidation" of enemies of the revolution. This issue was raised by the Amnesty International mission during talks with government officials in March and April 1980. The mission was told, however, that the program of "physical liquidation" had not been put into effect.
On 27 April 1980. Colonel Mu'ammar Gaddafi announced that any Libyans living abroad who did not make arrangements to return to Libya would be liquidated. On 28 April the official newspaper Al Zahaf Al Akhdar stated that the program of "physical liquidation" had begun. It warned that the families of Libyans who did not return would face reprisals.
During the year Amnesty International has also received several reports of the torture and ill-treatment of both political detainees and common law criminal prisoners. Ill-treatment allegedly occurs in centres belonging to the Intelligence Service, where detainees have no access to a lawyer or to their families. Under Law 84 of 1975 {establishing the Prosecution for the Security of the Revolution), detainees may be detained incommunicado for unlimited periods. Methods of torture most commonly reported include beatings on the soles of the feet and electric shock. In March and April 1980 the
347
Amnesty Intemational mission made verbal and written requests to visit four Amnesty International adopted prisoners of conscience held in Tripoli and Benghazi, but these were not granted.
At the time of writing, official discussions are reported to be continuing on a draft law concerning the legal profession, under which private practice would be abolished and lawyers would become employees of the Secretariat of Justice. Lawyers fear that this will reduce their independence in defending political prisoners.
In August 1979 Amnesty International issued a news release together with appeals from its worldwide membership calling on Colonel Mu'ammar Gaddafi to declare an amnesty for all prisoners of conscience on 1 September 1979, the 10th anniversary of the Revolution.
After its mission in March and April 1980 Amnesty Intemational submitted a memorandum setting forth its concerns to the authorities in which it called upon the Libyan authorities to put an end to "physical liquidation" and to implement fully the provisions of the international instmments guaranteeing human rights which they had ratified.
