Venezuela
During the year Amnesty International has been mainly concerned about allegations of arbitrary imprisonment and short-term detention, "disappearances", killings and torture by security forces.
The government of President Luis Herrera Campins, which took office in March 1979, set free more than 100 political prisoners, most of whom had been charged with guerrilla activities and were being tried by military courts. It is reported that about 20 political prisoners remain in detention in Cuartel San Carlos in Caracas and La Pica Prison in the state of Monagas. Twelve of these prisoners are held in connection with the kidnapping of an American industrialist, William Niehous. There is also a group of peasants charged with the killing of several soldiers in 1973. The pacificación, amnesty, has been extended to those who, Hke Douglas Bravo (who was in hiding), were active in the guerrilla movement during the 60s.
During 1979 and the begi^ining of 1980 there have been allegations of some arbitrary arrests, torture and killings by the security forces: Dirección de Inteligencia Militar {DIM), Policía Técnica Judicial (PTJ) and Dirección de Seguridad e Inteligencia Política (DISIP), as well as by the Metropolitan Police. Allegations that plain-clothes security agents have caused the deaths of many people, sometimes at the moment of their arrest and sometimes during peaceful demonstrations, have been extensively reported in the Venezuelan press — the deaths, for instance, of Rubén Cipriano Bustamante, aged 16, Andrés Hernández Rosales, aged 19, Rafael Humberto Hernández Rondón, aged 17 and Marisol Valera Villegas, aged 19. Many others have been injured
The former political prisoner Nicolás Montes Beltrán "disappeared" after visiting the Cárcel Modelo at the end of March 1980. He was reportedly seen later in the DIM, but DIM Director General Rafael
171
Machado Santana has denied this. Angel Rodriguez "disappeared" on 8 February after leaving his family in Barquisimeto. It is reported that he had previously been detained by the PTJ. Amnesty International issued urgent appeals on behalf of both Nicolás Montes and Angel Rodnguez.
Amnesty International is also concerned about allegations that Argentinian security forces may have been operating in Venezuela. Two Argentinian nationals, Monica Susana Pinus de Binstock and Horacio Campiglia, reportedly left Mexico to travel to Brazil, via Panama and Caracas on 11 March 1980. No trace of them has been reported in Brazil and it is feared that they may have been abducted and forcibly repatriated to Argentina during their stopover in Caracas. Amnesty International cabled its concern to the Venezuelan Minister of Foreign Affairs.
In October 1979 a demonstration of workers, organized by the Confederación de Trabajadores de Venezuela (CTV), the Venezuelan trade union central, in support of a draft bill to increase salaries, was violently broken up by the police. On the previous day, in Valencia, 150 kilometres west of Caracas, a political meeting was prevented by the National Guard and one man was killed. On 30 October the Chamber of Deputies passed a resolution condemning "the indescribable attack by the Metropolitan Police and the Valencia Police".
Arbitrary detentions are reported to continue. Illegal searches by the DISIP are common. For example, on 12 August 1979, the DISIP illegally entered the Instituto Universitario Pedagógico de Caracas, Teachers' Training College, and detained five workers at gun-point, without producing a warrant or identifying themselves. The workers were later released.
In November 1979 two members of the staff of Diario de Caracas, chief editor Tomás Eloy Martí nez and journalist Elisabeth Fuentes, were held in custody and interrogated by DISIP for publishing a prediction by a Brazilian clairvoyant that President Luis Herrera would not complete his term of office. Journalist Olmedo Lugo was detained in December 1979 and held for 22 days for criticizing the Minister of Tourism. In January 1980 the DISIP arbitrarily detained journalist Los Arcos Ayape.
Mutinies in Sabaneta Prison in April 1979 and in the Cárcel Modelo in Caracas in November 1979 resulted in the deaths of at least 17 prisoners; these highlighted the overcrowded conditions in the prisons, as well as slow legal proceedings, allegations of corruption in the judiciary and ill-treatment of prisoners by the guards.
There have been reports that Colombians illegally working in Venezuela are ill-treated and are sometimes killed or "disappear". Amnesty International has therefore welcomed assurances from the
172
Venezuelan Government that allegations that Colombians had been killed in Venezuela would be investigated. The results of such investigations have so far not been made public. In January 1980 a Colombian, Petra Sierra de Méndez, sent the Presidents of Colombia and Venezuela detailed information about her son, Pedro Antonio Méndez, who had been detained by the Venezuelan authorities on 14 July 1978 and who has since "disappeared".
In many cases of allegations of misconduct by members of the security forces, inquiries are opened by the Venezuelan authorities; these sometimes lead to the conviction of security forces' agents. In February 1980 a tribunal sentenced to nine years' imprisonment four former agents of the DISIP found guilty of killing Jorge Rodnguez, founder and Secretary General of the Liga Socialista, the Socialist League, in 1976.
Asia
The vast scale of political imprisonment in Asia- which usually takes the form of detention without trial - has meant that more general initiatives have been employed by Amnesty International to complement the more specific methods traditionally used in work on behalf of political prisoners. During recent years Amnesty Intemational has published reports on most countries of Asia These detail the findings in different countries of violations of human rights, specifically within the statutory concerns of Amnesty Intemational. They also urge governments to grant amnesties to prisoners of conscience and to extend full legal safeguards to other political prisoners. The countries thus covered are: Bangladesh, the People's Republic of China, India, Indonesia, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, the Republic of Korea, Pakistan, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Viet Nam and, more recently, Malaysia (August 1979), Singapore (January 1980), Afghanistan (September 1979), Taiwan (revised edition — March 1980), and Laos (March 1980).
In May 1979 Amnesty Intemational submitted evidence to the United Nations revealing a consistent pattern of gross violations of human rights in Afghanistan. It also requested the United Nations to keep human rights in Indonesia under review.
A major and positive development in Asia was the release by the Indonesian Govemment of untried political prisoners allegedly involved in the 1965 coup. Throughout the past 15 years Amnesty International has given the highest priority to its work for the release of these many thousands of political prisoners, held without trial and without any form of legal protection or redress. Their release has been
174
widely welcomed. There are signs, however, that a similar pattern of repression including widespread long-term detention without trial, has developed elsewhere in Asia. In other countries, such as Viet Nam and Laos, thousands of political prisoners detained for many years in "re-education" camps fece the prospect of indefinite detention. It is apparent that this practice is being justified on the grounds that the release of such prisoners would constitute a threat to the security of the state.
Observers from Amnesty International and other international organizations have noted that in those relatively rare instances in which political prisoners have been tried, most of the trials have lacked the basic safeguards necessary to ensure a fair trial. In Taiwan, for example, the court does not usually allow defence witnesses to be called in trials of political prisoners. Prisoners awaiting trial are often held for long periods incommunicado during which they are said to make "confessions". The facilities essential to the preparation of a defence are inadequate. In the Republic of Korea similar violations of internationally recognized norms for ensuring fair trial have been documented during the trials of several dissidents. In Pakistan summary military courts do not allow political prisoners to be represented by a lawyer or to appeal against judgment. In the People's Republic of China the trials in October 1979 of two dissenters were closed to the public and to foreign observers; the court did not admit defence witnesses.
The adoption of new legislation in China has not, as was expected, been accompanied by an increased protection of fundamental rights and freedoms; indeed, a trend to curtail civil liberties has been observed. In Bangladesh, although the Emergency Powers Act and Emergency Powers Regulations were revoked in November 1979, the government retained special powers under the Special Powers Act In Sri Lanka the government introduced Emergency Regulations on proclaiming a state of emergency in July 1979, and although these were allowed to lapse in Decembèr, similar special powers were retained under the Prevention of Terrorism Act and other special legislation.
Amnesty International has received allegations from several Asian countries concerning the phenomenon of the "disappearance" , of political prisoners. In Afghanistan such "disappearances" were a major problem. The previous government of President Hafizullah Aminhad, in November 1979, itselfpublished a list of 12,000 people, mainly political prisoners, neariy all of whom, the government said, had "died in detention" in Kabul prisons in the period after April 1978. Reports from the Philippines of abductions by the military followed by extrajudicial killings, a practice known as "salvaging",
175
have become more numerous in recent years, particularly from those areas of the country where the military is engaged in activity against guerrilla movements. In the instances of both these countries. Amnesty International is studying the dimensions of the problem and considering what appropriate measures should be taken by the countries concerned, in line with Resolution 33/173 on "Disappeared Persons" adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on 20 December 1978.
Amnesty International is also concerned about the increased use of the death penalty. In the People's Republic of China more than 40 executions were reported between October 1979 and January 1980. In Malaysia nine men were executed between 14 March and 4 April 1980; more were convicted under special legislation. The death penalty has remained a concern also in Pakistan, the Republic of Korea, Bangladesh, Taiwan, Thailand, Viet Nam, Japan, India and Singapore.
Amnesty International delegations visited Viet Nam in December 1979 and Afghanistan in February 1980. In both instances discussions on issues pertaining to human rights were held with the heads of state, government officials, other institutions, associations and individuals. In February 1980 a delegation went to Taiwan and in March 1980 an Amnesty International delegate was sent to Taipei to observe the trial of leading dissidents. Amnesty International also sent a delegate to Sri Lanka in August 1979 both to discuss its concerns on that country with government officials and to observe the Lawasia Conference.
Amnesty International submitted memoranda, based on the findings of these visits outlining the areas about which it remained concerned, to the governments of Afghanistan, Viet Nam and Sri Lanka. In March 1980 it submitted an aide mémoire to the new Indian Government concerning matters such as preventive detention, the treatment of prisoners and the incidence of police brutality.
The Lawasia Conference, which held its sixth meeting in Colombo, adopted an important resolution reaffirming the validity and applicability of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights to all people within the Lawasia region; establishing a Permanent Standing Committee on Human Rights; urging the ratification of the international covenants relating to human rights by governments within the Lawasia region; and encouraging its Standing Committee to work towards adherence to the United Nations international instruments relating to human rights, including those concerning law enforcement and refugees.
