Zaire
Amnesty International approached the government about a wide range of himian rights issues during the year. In February 1980 it submitted a 22-page memorandum outlining its concerns and suggesting a series of measures which would improve the situation and help prevent further violations of human rights. These concerns included the arrest and detention without trial of people suspected of criticizing or opposing the
89
government; the continuing imprisonment of political prisoners in spite of an amnesty in July 1978 for all prisoners convicted of offences against the security of the state; the harsh conditions of imprisonment in many prisons and detention centres; the use of torture; the high rate of mortality among political prisoners and untried detainees and the lack of safeguards to protect them; the frequency with which the death penalty is imposed and carried out.
The political situation in Zaire appeared more stable than during the previous two years, when there were armed rebellions against President Mobutu Sese Seko's government in the south of the country. There were, however, a number of illegal strikes in Kinshasa in late 1979 as a resultof the government's policy of restraining wages while repeatedly devaluing the currency. After student unrest on campuses throughout the country in February and March 1,979, students in Kinshasa demonstrated for higher grants in November and December. There were strikes in November 1979 at the Institut supérieur de techniques appliquées (ISTA), Higher Institute for AppUed Technology, in Kinshasa, as a result of which many students were arrested. In January 1980 the State Commissioner (Minister) for Higher Education, Mungul Diaka, was dismissed from office and placed under house arrest He had been appointed in March 1979 in a gesture of conciliation toward the student community, with whom he was generally popular. In January 1980 he was accused of embezzUng public funds. However, he escaped from house arrest before being brought to trial. It was not clear whether he was guilty of embezzlement or whether, as many people in Zaire suggested, the charges were merely a pretext for his dismissal and arrest After his arrest employees of the Department for Higher Education were reported to have been arrested and students demonstrated in favour of his reinstatement In March and April 1980 there were further disturbances in Kinshasa and students were once again detained. At the end of April President Mobutu ordered the Kinshasa university campus to close. Several days later, while visiting Brussels, the Secretary of State for International Cooperation claimed that no students were in detention but it was impossible to verify this claim.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of more than 30 long-term prisoners of conscience. In June 1979 Amnesty International focused particular attention on Mwarabu Mak Lubia, a former member of the armed forces, and made a worldwide appeal on his behalf to President Mobutu. Later in the year the President ordered the release of Mwarabu and 17 others convicted in 1975 of plotting the overthrow of the state. Amnesty International believed that their trial had been unfair and that many of those convicted were prisoners of conscience. All 18 men released in October 1979 from Angenga
90
military prison were sent to their home towns and villages where, in early 1980, they remained under a form of house arrest.
After the October releases Amnesty International remained concerned about more than 20 people convicted in March 1978 of complicity in a similar alleged plot against President Mobutu. Several civilians convicted in March 1978 were released in November 1979. In February 1980 Amnesty International issued concerted appeals on behalf of Kisonga N' Sunda, a woman sentenced to death in March
1978	whose sentence had subsequently been commuted to life imprisonment Kisonga N'Sunda was accused of complicity in a plot against the President but the only evidence against here was that her sister owned a bar in Kinshasa named after Kisonga N'Sunda; here, according to the military prosecutor, soldiers had met to plan a campaign of terrorism against President Mobutu. Kisonga N'Sunda had also been present at a church service in memory of one of her husband's dead colleagues which, the prosecutor alleged, had been a meeting of conspirators. At the end of April 1980 reports from Kinshasa indicated that Kisonga N'Sunda had been released.
In May 1979 a number of senior lawyers in Kinshasa and in the east of Zaire were arrested. The President of the Kinshasa Bar Association, Maître Matunga, was detained for two weeks after he had refused on behalf of other lawyers to accept a government proposition that all lawyers should give up their independent status and become civil servants. The proposition was made by the President of the Council of Justice (head of the judiciary), Kengo-wa-Dondo. The government alleged thïil Maître Matunga and several other lawyers had been involved in smuggling and other common-law offences but it is evident that the real reason for their arrests was political. Eight months later, in January 1980, the structure of the judiciary was changed and Kengo-wa-Dendo was dismissed, both as President of the Council of Justice and as Procureur général de la République, State Prosecutor.
In late 1979 Amnesty International learned of the arrest of a number of students and workers at Kinshasa and of seven people in eastern Kivu region who were detained because of their links with Zairean opposition leaders living in exile. In November 1979 Amnesty International sent appeals to various officials on behalf of six men and one woman from Ilakala-Swima who were detained in Uvira prison. No formal charges were brought against them but they were held in harsh conditions and given no food. They were eventually released in February 1980. Among those detained in Kinshasa in late
1979	were teachers and workers accused of fomenting strikes, and students from the Institut supérieur de techniques appliquées. Three PETROZAIRE workers and five ISTA students were reported to
91
have been killed while in the custody of the Centre national de documentation (CND), National Documentation Centre, in late 1979 and early 1980. Other detainees are known to have been transferred from Kinshasa to Ekafera detention camp, near Befale in Equateur region. In late 1979 a senior official described this camp as a "re-education camp for young people out of work". The camp has been described by its inmates as a concentration camp where hundreds of detainees have died over the last few years.
In July 1979 civilians were reportedly shot dead during two separate clashes with the armed forces. The first incident occurred in northern Shaba region when the armed forces apparendy attempted to supress unauthorized local religious cults. The number of people killed or detained was not known and the incident received very little publicity. The second incident, which occurred in neighbouring Kasai Oriental region on 19 July 1979, received more widespread publicity. More than a hundred people were reported to have died in a diamond-mining area near the regional capital, Mbuji-Mayi, when troops first ordered hundreds of people searching for alluvial diamonds to disperse and then opened fire. Several people in the crowd were shot dead and many more drowned after they tried to escape by swimming the Lubilanshi river. During the ensuing chaos, other civilians were arrested and detained for several days. Five local parliamentary representatives immediately called for a parliamentary inquiry into the killings, but this was refused by President Mobutu, who criticized them and went so far as to accuse the entire Baluba ethnic group (which had been involved in both the incidents in Shaba and Kasai Oriental) of betraying him.
The killings near Mbuji-Mayi received considerable publicity in November 1979, after the International Federation of Human Rights had drawn public attention to the incident, reporting that 215 people had been killed. The Zairian authorities responded by claiming that only three people had been shot dead during an exchange of gunfire between police and armed diamond miners. The State Commissioner for Foreign Affairs (Foreign Minister), Nguza Karl-i-Bond, invited several international organizations, including Amnesty International, to form a commission of inquiry to investigate the claims made by the International Federation of Human Rights. Amnesty International declined the invitation because it seemed unlikely that an investigation would be able to establish exacdy what had happened four months earher and because it was concerned about a wide range of human rights violations in Zaire and did not wish to restrict its dialogue with the government to this one incident The International Federation of Human Rights continued to press for an inquiry but by March 1980 it had still not been permitted to enter Zaire.
92
In addition to tiie killings in July 1979, Amnesty International was also concerned about the number of death sentences and executions during 1979 and early 1980. The precise number of executions is not known but in July 1979, for example, two executions in Makala prison were publicized by the authorities and one person was reportedly executed in public in Bukavu prison. In January 1980 the trial of more than 30 people on charges including murder and armed robbery was broadcast on television. At the end of January 1980, 28 people were condemned to death; they are believed to have been allowed to appeal against the sentences. In March 1980 six people, including two civilians, were condemned to death by a military court from which there was no right of appeal or cassation. By April 1980 more than one hundred people were believed to be under sentence of death in Zaire.
