Djibouti
Amnesty International has been concerned about well-documented reports of torture on a number of occasions since independence in 1977, and other violations of human rights. The government denied such allegations and invited Amnesty International to send a mission of inquiry. The invitation followed publicly expressed concern by Amnesty International and its call for an inquiry into the use of torture against many of those arrested in connection with an armed attack on Randa military barracks in March 1979; one torture victim, Omar Mohamed Omar, had subsequently died. In January 1980, Maitre Amand D'Hondt of Belgium visited Djibouti as a delegate of Amnesty International. He met President Hassan Gouled and other government officials and interviewed several detainees awaiting trial in Gabote and Dikhil prisons.
Amnesty International was concerned about two other incidents involving torture in 1979. After an alleged assassination attempt had been made on the Director of Security, Ismael Omar Quelle, in June 1979, a number of critics of the government including two parliamentary deputies were detained and tortured. One of the deputies, Mohamed Houmed Mohamed "Souleh", had recently delivered a speech in parliament denouncing the use of torture and other violations of human rights. The deputies received suspended sentences at their trial before a special state security court, against which there is no right of appeal. Other defendants were imprisoned. The Inter-Parliamentary Union was apprised of this case. According to information available to Amnesty International there is considerable doubt whether any assassination attempt took place. No substantive
42
evidence has been made public to justify the convictions of the nine accused. Amnesty International believed them to be prisoners of conscience.
In the second incident, an armed attack on Khor Angar military outpost on 5 July 1979, five soldiers were killed. Amnesty International cabled President Gouled on 16 July protesting against the torture of a considerable number of arrested suspects and the deaths under torture of Kamil Ali Mohamed and Abdulkader Hassan Hanfare. During his visit to Djibouti the Amnesty International delegate received firsthand confirmation from victims, witnesses and physicians of the systematic pattern of torture in all security or politically-related incidents since independence as well as in many non-political cases. Torture was used to extract "confessions", often the sole evidence against the accused in court. Formal complaints lodged by torture victims who had retracted their "confessions" in court had not resulted in any official investigation. Torture was inflicted by the Brigade spéciale de recherche, special security unit, in an undesignated detention centre known as Villa d'AmbouU or Villa Christophe — no longer in use — during the 10-day legal limit on detentionrife à vue, or, for military detainees, by military security officers at army barracks. During this period, legal safeguards against torture, such as access to a doctor or lawyer, were ineffective.
Well-attested torture methods included: la balançoire, the swing, on which the victim is suspended naked from a horizontal bar placed between tied wrists and feet; forcible swallowing of soapy water or disinfectant; beatings with electric cables and rubber pipes; electric shocks; the insertion of a bottle into the anus; near-asphyxiation through intense exposure to heat and smoke. The names of torturers were given to the delegate, who provided them to the government.
President Hassan Gouled formally assured the delegate that he would undertake to eliminate the use of torture. The delegate also discussed legal questions such as the inadequacy of safeguards during garde à vue custody, the length of pre-trial detention, the restrictions on legal rights in the security court and the apparently arbitrary arrests of political opponents such as members of the banned Afar political party Mouvement populaire de libération. Popular Liberation Movement, after violent incidents against the government. In no recent case has the prosecution obtained convictions on charges of using violence against the state. Atthe time of the delegate's visit, 41 detainees were awaiting trial in connection with the Randa and Khor Angar incidents.
Amnesty International later submitted a report to the government recommending the implementation of the articles of the United Nations Declaration on the Protection of all Persons from Torture
43
and calling for improvements in the protection of legal rights and an end to arbitrary arrests.
