Syria
The main concems of Amnesty International included long-term detention without trial of political prisoners, abductions from Lebanon of alleged political opponents, the use of torture to extract confessions during interrogation, the lack of basic legal safeguards in trials of political prisoners by state security courts and the death penalty for both political and criminal offences. In a cable to President Hafez-al-Assad on 30 January 1980. Amnesty International reaffirmed concerns raised in its publication. Amnesty Intemational Briefing: Syria and asked for assurances that steps would be taken to release all prisoners of conscience, to review the cases of all people detained without trial and to stop torture.
353
In the year under review there was a deterioration in the poHtical situation in northern Syria. The towns of Latakia, Deir-az-Zor, IdHb, Horns, Hama and Aleppo were the focus of street violence, strikes and killings, and the army was called in to restore law and order. The authorities attributed the unrest to an alliance between ihelkhwan al-Muslimin (Moslem Brotherhood), Israel and the United States Central Intelligence Agency. Foreign observers are now prevented from travelling to the north. On 25 April Amnesty International publicly expressed its concern at reports of systematic and numerous arrests in the region, of detention in makeshift, often secret prisons, torture and summary executions by troops in northern Syria.
During the year Amnesty International worked on behalf of 157 political detainees, 50 were adopted prisoners of conscience, and learned of the release of 80 of them. The adopted prisoners of conscience included nine Syrian Kurds, members of the Kurdish Democratic Party (KDP), who have been in detention without trial since 1973 for protesting against the relocation of Syrian Kurds under the Arab Belt Plan — a plan to move Kurds from north Syria and replace them with Arabs. In April 1980 Amnesty International learned that two members of this group, Daham Miro, the 5 9-year-old Chairman of the KDP from Hama, and Kana'an Agid, a 45-year-old farmer, had both been released. No information has been received confirming the releases or the continued detention of the other seven prisoners. Still under adoption are the cases of 18 members and supporters of the previous government, including the former President Noureddin Atassi, arrested after the coup in November 1970 which brought President Hafez al-Assad to power. All are being detained without trial in a special wing of al-Mezze military prison in Damascus. In December 1979 these prisoners organized a protest against prison conditions and their prolonged detention without trial.
Amnesty International groups have worked also on behalf of 20 people alleged to be political opponents and critics of the Syrian Government who have been abducted at various times from Lebanon and are detained without trial in Syria. One such case is that of Khalil Brayez, a 45-year-old former army captain at the Aleppo military academy. He was abducted by Syrian security forces from Lebanon in November 1970. reportedly for the criticism he expressed in two books on the performance of the Syrian army in the 1967 war against Israel. He is being held without trial in al-Mezze military prison in Damascus.
Amnesty International learned of the release of 63 of the 66 people whose cases it had taken up in 1979 after their arrest and detention without trial for alleged support of prohibited Marxist movements. They included Omar Kashash, arrested on 14 June 1978
354
for membership of the poHtical bureau of the illegal wing of the Communist Party led by Riyad Turk, and Yusuf Abdul Kay, a 28-year-old graphic designer from Qamishli who was detained in May 1978 for alleged membership of a Marxist organization. The three detainees still in prison are Salah al-Din Suleiman, Khodr Jaber and Muhammad Maatouk, all army officers.
Amnesty International learned also of the release of Zouhair al-Shulak, a 61 -year-old lawyer and businessman arrested in April 1970 for writing articles in the Lebanese press critical of the Syrian administration. Zouhair al-Shulak's term of imprisonment should have ended in 1975, but he was not released until April 1980.
Twenty executions were reported during the period under review. On 24 June 1979.14 people were sentenced to death {\2in absentia) by the State Security Court of Aleppo, accused of involvement in the massacre of over 60 military cadets on 16 June atthe Aleppo artillery school. On 28 June. 14 civilians and one army private were executed in al-Qala'a Prison, Damascus. The charges against them ranged from murder to membership of armed gangs, and in at least one case the charges dated back to incidents in 1977 and included the assassination in early 1977 of Major Ali Haidar, the security chief of the city of Hama. In June 1979 Amnesty International members urgently appealed against the executions and called for commutation of death sentences. On 26 December 1979 four civilians were reportedly hanged and one member of the armed forces shot in al-Mezze military prison, Damascus. These executions were believed to be for alleged involvement in the massacre of the military cadets in Aleppo.
In January 1980 the Damascus Bar Association repeated its call for an end to the state of emergency and for reforms in the emergency legislation: for the abolition of state security courts: for a boycott of such courts by all lawyers: and for the release or fair trial of all untried detainees. On 20 January 1980 the-Regional Command of the Ba" ath Party in Syria announced the setting up of a committee to review the cases of all untried prisoners held under the state of emergency legislation. A planned one-day strike on 31 January by the lawyers in support of their call was deferred after discussions with government officials. In its cable of 30 January 1980 Amnesty International urged the President to take into account the request of the Syrian lawyers for the release of all those detained without a proper court order as well as the protection of the lawyers' freedom of expression. On 9 April a decree was issued dissolving three professional syndicates (unions) of lawyers, medical practitioners and engineers because they had "deviated from syndicates' goals and objectives and violated regulations".
355
On 5 March 1980, in a letter to the Minister of the Interior in his capacity as Emergency Law Governor, Amnesty International welcomed the establishment of the committee to review the cases of those held without trial and provided a list of names of untried detainees, asking for further information about their situation. There have been reports that in February and March 1980 large number-s of untried detainees were released, among them people whose cases had been taken up by Amnesty International. No exact figures are available.
President Hafez al-Assad on 4 March 1980 presented a draft Bill to the Syrian People's Assembly, amending Article 5 of the State Security Court Law No. 47 of 1968, which, if passed, would limit the wide powers of arrest of the Emergency Law Governor and his deputies. The misuse of these powers has been widely recognized in Syria and was raised in Amnesty International Briefing: Syria.
