Tunisia
The concerns of Amnesty International were: the arrest, trial and imprisonment of prisoners of conscience; irregularities in trial procedures; torture and ill-treatment and the use of the death penalty.
Amnesty International continued its work on behalf of prisoners of conscience in Tunisia, who include trade unionists arrested as a result of a one-day general strike on 26 January 1978, members of the El Amel El Tounsi, "The Tunisian Worker", group arrested in 1973, 1974 and 1975 and members of the Ech-Chaab, "The People", group arrested in November 1978.
The prisoners of conscience at present adopted by Amnesty International are serving sentences of up to 10 years' imprisonment in Tunis Civil Prison. Bourj Er-Roumi Prison near Bizerte and the prisons of Sfax, Sousse and Kasserine.
Fourteen prisoners of the El Amel El Tounsi group tried by the State Security Court in 1975 are still serving sentences of between 6 and 9 years, and have all been adopted.
On 23 March 1979, eight prisoners arrested in November 1973 and later adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International were granted only conditional releases upon completing their sentences. All of them are now living under administrative surveillance and Amnesty International has received reports that the restrictions on
356
them were tightened after the armed attack on the town of Gafsa in January 1980.
On 3 August 1979 nine prisoners of conscience benefited from a conditional amnesty on the birthday of President Habib Bourguiba. Habib Achour, Secretary General of tiie Union générale des travailleurs tunisiens (UGTT), the General Union of Tunisian Workers, who was serving a sentence of 10 years" imprisonment, was released but was subsequently placed under strict house arrest. Five others, originally arrested in 1968 on charges of conspiracy against internal security and membership of an illegal organization, were serving, at the time of their release, sentences varying from LO to 22 years. After their release, Noureddine Ben Khader, Gilbert Naccache, Rachid Bellalouna, Ahmed Ben Othman Raddaoui and Abdulla Rouissi were ordered to remain in restricted residence in designated towns and to report to the police twice a day. Two other prisoners, Omrane Allouane and Ahmed Karoud. both members of the El Amel El Tounsi group, benefited from the 3 August amnesty also but under similar restrictions. However, these have since been relaxed.
The other person affected by the conditional amnesty was Mohamed Salah Fliss, who had approximately four years of his sentence still to serve. He was, however, rearrested in mid-February 1980, when the amnesty was apparently withdrawn. He was held in Bourj Er-Roumi Prison near Bizerte. In a cable to President Habib Bourguiba, Amnesty International expressed concern at this rearrest and requested information regarding Mohamed Salah Fliss's present situation. He was again conditionally released on 30 April 1980.
After the conditional amnesty of 3 August 1979, Amnesty International wrote to President Habib Bourguiba, welcoming the release of nine adopted prisoners of conscience but expressing concern at the conditional nature of the amnesty and at the continuing restrictions placed upon those released. On 18 January 1980, Mohamed Chaabane and Ahmed Triki, both Deputy Secretary-Generals of the regional UGTT office at Sfax, were released by a presidential amnesty. Both of them had been sentenced to two years' imprisonment, and at the time of their release had only approximately one week of their sentences still to serve. On 20 March 1980 an additional presidential amnesty released (conditionally, according to reports) eight trade unionists who were serving sentences of up to eight years.
In August 1979 Amnesty International sent an observer to attend part of the trial of a group of 49 adopted prisoners of conscience. They had been arrested during November 1978 in connection with the publication and distribution of a clandestine version of Ech-Chaab. the official newspaper of the UGTT. The 49 defendants were charged
357
under various articles of the Tunisian Penal Code and the Press Code, Law 154 of 7 November 1959 and Law 33 of 12 June 1969. with the formation or membership of an unauthorized organization, distribution of false information and distribution of an illegal newspaper. They were tried before the Criminal Court in Tunis, the proceedings beginning on 19 July. Some defendants claimed that they had been tortured and called for one minute of silence in memory of Hamadi Zellouz who. they claimed, had been arrested with them and had died in police custody as a result of torture. Immediately after this session, two of the defendants were reportedly beaten in the cells of the Palais de Justice.
The second session of the trial was attended by an Amnesty International observer on 11 August 1979. Families oflhe defendants were forcibly denied entry to the trial and some individuals were struck by the police. Approximately 13 relatives of those on trial were arrested, and so were two of the defendants on provisional liberty who had been denied access to their own trial.
At the second session all defendants protested that they were being tried in camera, claimed that the section of the court reserved for the public was filled with members of the political police and refused to answer questions put by the tribunal until the procedures were normal. Some defendants threatened to start a hunger-strike in protest at the conduct of the trial. Lawyers for the defence repeatedly protested about the conduct of the trial and finally announced their withdrawal without having presented the case for the defence.
In verdicts pronounced on 21 August 1979 all 49 defendants, including those on provisional liberty who had been barred entry to the courtroom on 11 August, received sentences of imprisonment. The majority were sentenced to three years" imprisonment, with one sentence of three years and nine months and a minimum sentence of one year's imprisonment. All were ordered also to pay fines.
On 23 August 1979 Amnesty International issued a news release and cables were sent to the Minister of Justice. Salaheddin Baly, urging a thorough judicial review of the case and pointing out that the trial procedures of 11 August 1979 did not comply with international standards guaranteed by the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which the Tunisian Government ratified in 1969.
The verdicts were appealed against on 26 March 1980. All of the sentences were reduced by the court and some defendants were given suspended sentences.
During the year Amnesty International issued numerous urgent appeals on behalf of its adopted prisoners of conscience who were reported to have been tortured or to be in poor health as a result of ill-treatment or unsatisfactory prison conditions. In some instances
358
Amnesty International received reports that an improvement had taken place. In one case it was reported that a prisoner was removed from prison to hospital.
On 27 March 1980, 15 people were sentenced to death (two in absentia) by the Cour de sûreté de l'Etat, State Security Court in Tunis, after being convicted of participating in an armed attack on the town of Gafsa on 27 January 1980. Amnesty International appealed to the President to commute the sentences on humanitarian grounds and reaffirmed its total opposition to the death penalty. On Thursday 17 April, after an unsuccessful appeal, the 13 were hanged.
After its international campaign early in 1979 on behalf of imprisoned trade unionists and other prisoners of conscience in Tunisia. Amnesty International submitted a report to the United Nations of "a consistent pattern of gross and reliably attested violations of human rights".
On 25 October 1979 Amnesty International wrotç to President Habib Bourguiba expressing concern at the continued imprisonment of prisoners of conscience which, it believed, contravened the constitution of Tunisia and its obligations under international law. The letter drew attention to the fact that the right to legal defence was consistently violated during trials of prisoners of conscience and that in one instance defendants had been prevented from attending their own trial. It added that it had received frequent and detailed reports of torture and ill-treatment of political detainees and that many prisoners were reported to be in poor health because of ill-treatment and unsatisfactory prison conditions. Amnesty Internationa! concluded its letter by calling on President Bourguiba to guarantee constitutional and internationally agreed rights.
