Lesotho
The Amnesty International concerns were detention without trial and alleged killings of civilians by anti- and pro-government forces.
Long-standing antagonism between the ruling National Party of Chief Leabua Jonathan and supporters of the exiled Basutoland Congress Party (BCP) leader Ntsu Mokhehle, once more dominated events and led to loss of life. In May 1979 there were bomb explosions in Maseru, and a serious clash occurred between armed insurgents reportedly supporting Mokhehle and members of the paramilitary Police Mobile Unit(PMU). Other more protracted disturbances took place in November 1979. Following the murder by insurgents of Chief Lepatoa Mou, a cabinet minister, the government took strong retaliatory action and a number of civilians in the Butha-Buthe district were reported to have been killed or assaulted by the PMU. According to refugees from the area, more than 600 of whom had fled across the border to South Africa by the end of December, some 50 or more suspected supporters of Mr Mokhehle were killed by the PMU. This was denied by the government By April 1980 the situation appeared calmer. It was reported that at least 180 out of a total of some 7 80 refugees had returned home after the government guaranteed their safe conduct.
The disturbances of 1979 appeared to originate in events during 1970 when, faced with apparent defeat at the hands of the BCP, the government of Prime Minister Chief Jonathan cancelled the first post-independence election, declared a state of emergency and detained a number of BCP leaders, including Ntsu Mokhehle. Subsequently, in January 1974, what appears to have been an ill-organized and abortive coup attempt by the BCP led to a number of civilian deaths and the detention of more than 170 BCP supporters, some 40 of whom were ultimately brought to trial and convicted of treason or other offences.
A number of arrests are also believed to have been made following the disturbances in 1979 but none of those detained were known to have been brought to trial by the end of April 1980. In early April Amnesty International requested the government to supply information about a prominent church leader, MacDonald Mabote, who was detained without trial on 15 March. On 15 April the government informed Amnesty International that MacDonald Mabote, a Vice-President of the Evangelical Church, had been released a few days
54
earlier after signing a confession statement in which he admitted providing financial and other support to Ntsu Mokhehle.
