Nepal
Amnesty International remained concerned about continuing arrest and imprisonment on political grounds. However, during the year it welcomed the release of many political prisoners.
On 13 April 1980 King Birendra announced a general amnesty for all political prisoners and exiles except those charged with criminal offences. The amnesty, announced shortly before a referendum which was due to be held on 2 May 1980,
220
is reported to have affected more than 150 people held under the Raj Kaj Act and the Public Security Act 1961 (PSA), legislation under which the majority of political prisoners have been held
On 25 May 1979, after riots and demonstrations in support of political reform which had, it was reported, led to more than 40 deaths, King Birendra promised a referendum to offer citizens the choice of maintaining the Qxhimgpanchayat (partyless) system or replacing it with a multi-party system. After the King's proclamation, a ban on public meetings, demonstrations and freedom of speech was lifted although political parties remained illegal pending the outcome of the referendum. At the same time a number of people arrested both before and during the anti-government demonstrations were released Among those freed in June 1979 were four individuals whose cases had been taken up for investigation or adoption as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International — Ram Chandra Rai, Ashok Upadhya, Mahanth Thakur and Ram Chandra Tiwari.
Although political parties were still formally banned after the May 1979 proclamation of the referendum, vigorous campaigning for and against the restoration of the multi-party system was allowed to take place. However, this was accompanied by reports of violence on both sides. Moreover, despite the releases that occurred in the period immediately after the announcement of the referendum, many people charged with political offences, some of whom had been in detention without trial since 1974, remained in detention and new arrests were made including the rearrest of people who had been released in June 1979. On 8 March 1980 former detainees, Brikesh Chandra and Ram Chandra Tiwari, were rearrested for protesting against rises in the cost of living.
The legislation under which people may be charged for political reasons — the Raj Kaj Act, the PSA and the Organizations Control Act — also remained in force during the interim period of the referendum campaign. The Raj Kaj Act covers the offences of rebellion and treason, for which the maximum penalty is death, and sedition, for which the maximum penalty is three years' imprisonment and a fine of 3,000 Rupees. Under the PSA, people may be held in preventive detention under renewable nine-month detention orders up to a maximum of three years, although cases of continuous detention for as long as nine years have been reported The Organizations Control Act stipulates conditions under which associations may be formed while prohibiting all political parties or advocacy of support for the party system.
In a telegram to the King on 17 April 1980, Amnesty International welcomed the amnesty but expressed concern about the recent arrest of more than 250 members of the Nepal National Teachers'
221
Association reportedly under the Organizations Control Act. It subsequently learned that the teachers had been released on 12 April 1980 but not as part of the general amnesty.
