Zambia
Amnesty Intematicaial remained concemed about the use of administrative detention orders imposed under the Preservation of Public Security Regulations. Such detention orders, which are authorized by the President, have an unlimited duration and cannot be challenged in the courts. Habeas corpus is not available to those detained under the regulations; they are neither charged nor brought to trial. Their only recourse is to appeal to a review tribunal presided over by a High Court judge, but the President is not obliged to accept the recommendations of the tribunal and can order continued detention even in cases in which the tribunal finds insufficient grounds to warrant it.
Those detained under the Preservation of Public Security Regulations in 1979 and early 1980 were a disparate group. They included former supporters of the opposition United Progressive Party (UPP), which was banned in 1972 when Zambia became a one-party state; members of the so-called "Mushala gang", said to be respKDnsible for a series of attacks on civilians in the northwest of the country, and several foreign nationals suspected of espionage. Most of the suspected UPP sympathizers were detained in August 1979, when at least 12 arrests were made after a strongly-worded letter calling for his resignation was sent to President Kenneth Kaunda. However, a number of other former UPP supporters have been detained under presidential orders since September 1978. They were arrested after
93
an incident at Chililabombwe, where a fire at a hall was said to have been started deliberately and was officially attributed to disgruntled supporters of Simon Kapwepwe, the former UPP leader, who had attempted unsuccessfully to challenge Dr Kaunda for the presidency. Those detained included John Chisata and Faustino Lombe, both close associates of Simon Kapwepwe. They have not been charged in connection with the Chililabombwe incident and were still being detained without trial in April 1980. They have been adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International.
A number of detainees were released during the year. In May 1979 William Chipango, a former Mayor of Livingstone, and three other former members of the banned African National Congress (ANC), were freed after more than six years in prison. Having been detained in 1973, they were tried on treason charges and sentenced to death in 1976. In October 1978 their convictions were overturned by the Appeal Court, which also awarded them damages for ill-treatment in detention, but they were again detained under presidential orders until their release in May 1979. In October 1979 at least six political detainees were among the more than a hundred prisoners freed by President Kaunda in an amnesty marking the 15th anniversary of independence. In the same month, several foreign nationals suspected of espionage for the government of Bishop Abel Muzorewa in Rhodesia were released also. They included two airline pilots arrested four months earlier after Rhodesian military raids on Zimbabwean refugee camps and guerrilla bases in Zambia. Further releases occurred in March 1980, when several other foreigners detained in connection with the Rhodesian conflict were freed after Robert Mugabe's election victory had brought that conflict to an end.
