Sudan
The main concern of Amnesty International was the detention without trial of political opponents.
The renewed use of presidential detention powers between May and August 1979 against two groups of political opponents, Ba'athists and Communists indicated a further weakening of the 1977 "national reconciliation" policy. All political parties are banned except the government-supported Sudanese Socialist Union. Several hundred people were detained without charge or trial, many of them in the wake of widespread demonstrations and trade union strikes against government economic policies.
The first detentions since 1977 under the State Security Law, which provides for indefinite detention without charge or trial, took place in April 1979, when a considerable number of alleged members of the banned Arab Ba'athist Socialist Party were detained They included Youssif Himad Hassan, a bank manager; Mohamed Ali Jadeen, Under-Secretary in the Finance Ministry and advocate Mohamedeen Omer Mohager. On 1 May 1979 Amnesty International expressed concern to President Gaafar Numeiri about these detentions and the breakdown in the "national reconciliation" policy, under which all political prisoners had earlier been freed
It is believed that these people were detained because of their opposition to President Numeiri's support for the terms of Egypt's peace treaty with Israel. They were accused of contact with the Iraqi Ba'athist Government, which had imposed an oil boycott on Sudan on these grounds. Amnesty International called for their trial or release
80
and, where sufficient details were available, proceeded to adopt them as individual prisoners of conscience. Some detainees were to be tried in early 1980 on charges of membership of an illegal organization. Amnesty International requested further details from the Attorney General and expressed its belief that the detainees were prisoners of conscience.
The largest group of political detainees were members or alleged sympathizers of the banned Sudan Corrimunist Party, which the government accused of instigating the demonstrations and strikes of August 1979 and of succeeding months. Those detained included former known leaders of the Communist Party, such as Saudi Daraj and Youssif Hussein, as well as hundreds of other left-wing opponents. Among them were trade unionists Mokhtar Abdullah and Mahgoub Seed Ahmed; lawyers Kamal el-Gizooli and Abdullah Saleh; academics Mohamed Murad (history), Mohamed Seed el-Gaddal (history), Mohamed Suleman (chemistry), Hashim Sidig el-Malik (drama); ¿le well-known poet Mahgoub Sharif; former youth movement leader Khalil Elias; southern member of parliament Tartisio Morgan. The veteran trade unionist Gasim Amin was released after suffering a stroke shortly after his arrest. He subsequently died in hospital in Prague.
On 17 August 1979 Amnesty International informed President Numeiri of its concern about these large-scale arrests and called for the detainees to be charged and tried if it was alleged they had committed a criminal offence or otherwise released. No charges were brought and, where sufficient information was available. Amnesty International adopted them as prisoners of conscience. In March 1980 Amnesty International focused particular attention on the plight of the prisoner of conscience, Saudi Daraj.
By April 1980 many detainees had been freed unconditionally, some were released on medical grounds after suffering serious illness. Some 300 are still detained without trial. Several detainees had been adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience during previous periods of detention.
The Vice-President of the Southern Region High Executive Council, Samuel Am, was detained on 3 June 1979 and publicly accused of plotting to change the southern constitutional arrangement. His case was taken up for investigation by Amnesty International. He was freed without being charged in early 1980.
On 28 November 1979 detainees in Kober prison in Khartoum and other prisons throughout Sudan went on hunger-strike in protest against the denial of family visits, poor food and delays in obtaining adequate medical treatment. The strike ended three days later when some improvements were obtained.
81
Amnesty International learned of allegations of torture which were made in May 1979, during a court-martial of 45 military officers and former officers in Jebel Awlia army barracks. They were charged with conspiring to use violence against the government. The government appointed a commission of inquiry into the allegations, the conclusions of which are not known.
