Democratic Yemen
The concerns of Amnesty International were: the arrests of members of the political opposition, summary trials, disappearances and executions.
On 21 April 1980, Abd al-Fattah Ismail resigned as President of the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen (PDRY) and Secretary General of the Yemeni Socialist Party in favour of his premier. Ali Nasser Mohammad, Abd al-Fattah Ismail had'come to power in June 1978 after the execution of his political rival, Salim Rubaya Ali, who had been convicted of plotting to take over power and of directing the assassination of the President of the Yemen Arab Republic Ahmad al-Ghashmi. Salim Rubaya Ali's execution was reported to mark the beginning of a widespread purge of the army, the party apparatus and the administration.
Amnesty International has 43 adopted prisoners of conscience in three categories: government officials of pre-independence days, detained on charges of high treason and feudalism; individuals arrested for opposing government policies — for example, 10 farmers arrested for demonstrating against the government's decision to ban the consumption, sale and purchase of the narcotic shrub qat; and people who had "disappeared" or been arrested during government purges — for example, the first President of the PDRY, Qahtan al-Shaabi, arrested in 1969. Amnesty International recently received reports that he was killed in detention in 1978.
Amnesty International is concerned also about prison conditions. It knows of two prisons, al-Mansura prison and Mu'askar al-Fatah detention camp, although the number of detention centres in the country is believed to be larger. Conditions in Mu'askar al-Fatah are believed to be the worst in the country and torture resulting in death is known to have taken place there. The conditions are better in al-Mansura prison, visited by Amnesty Intemational during the 1975 mission. Since June 1978 Amnesty International has repeatedly appealed to the authorities to improve conditions in Mu'askar al-Fatah detention camp.
Amnesty International has repeatedly asked the govemment to release prisoners of conscience, to provide fair trials to all detainees and to bring prison conditions up to the standards required by the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. So far all Amnesty International's appeals have been ignored.
326
