Poland
283
The major concerns of Amnesty Intemational have been the official persecution of human rights activists by a variety of methods, including detention for up to 48 hours in police custody, summarily imposed sentences of imprisonment of up to three months and politically motivated arrest, trial and conviction on false criminal charges. Instances of police brutality have been reported and conditions of detention — in particular the treatment of detainees in police custody and investigative detention — give cause for serious concem. In certain cases reported to Amnesty Intemational, legal safeguards and trial procedures have been deficient. The death penalty is still in force and there were some executions during the year.
The period under review has seen an intensification of repressive measures applied by the authorities to members of and sympathizers with unofficial groups established to protect human and civil rights. At the same time, there has been a continued growth in the membership and activity of those groups, which originated in autumn 1976 with the creation by a group of intellectuals in Warsaw of the Komitet Obrony Robotnikow (KOR), the Workers' Self-Defence Committee, to provide financial and legal assistance to workers prosecuted or imprisoned after the strikes and disturbances in Radom and Ursus in June 1976. Such groups now include the Komitet Samoobrony Spolecznej{KSS), Committee for Social Self-Defence (formerly KOR), the Movement for the Defence of Human and Civil Rights, Farmers' Self-Defence Committees, Believers' Self-Defence Committees, Student Solidarity Committees, the Society for Educational Courses and (in Radom, Gdansk, Sopot, Katowice and Szczecin) Free Trade Unions. Unofficial publications produced by these groups regularly provide information about arbitrary and unconstitutional acts by the authorities and about individual victims of human rights violations.
Detention in police custody for up to 48 hours (the maximum period for which a person may be detained without being formally charged) has been widely and. Amnesty International believes, increasingly used in an attempt to intimidate members and supporters of unofTicial human rights groups. Many leading activists, including KSS "KOR" members Jacek Kuron, Henryk Wujec, Jan Litynski, Piotr Naimski and Adam Michnik, have been repeatedly detained; some have been held for periods considerably exceeding 48 hours,
284
having been rearrested immediately after formal release. It has been reported, for instance, that Miroslaw Chojecki, Manager of the unofficial publishing house, Niezalezna Oficyna Wydawnicza {NOWA), had spent a total of approximately five months in police custody (without being sentenced) between September 1976 and March 1980. Meetings of KSS "KOR" have on a number of occasions been prevented by the expedient of arresting those taking part. As a result of similar harassment, the Society for Educational Courses, which was founded to make good alleged deficiencies in the official educational program and which started a new season of lectures in November 1979, was obliged to cancel its public lectures and hold small seminars.
In September 1979, Robotnik, "The Worker", published a "Charter of Workers' Rights", many of the signatories were arrested and detained for questioning in Gdansk, Szczecin, Radom and Katowice.
The authorities have on a number of occasions resorted to mass detentions in an attempt to forestall unofficial demonstrations commemorating events in Polish history. At least 90 people in Warsaw, Krakow, Gdansk and Lublin are believed to have been arrested before 11 November 1979, the 61 st anniversary of the restoration of Polish independence. During the 10 days preceding the commemoration on 13 December 1979 of workers killed during riots in Gdansk in 1970, some 200 people, including leading members of Free Trade Unions, were reported to have been detained. A number of workers at the Elektromontaz factory in Gdansk who took part in the demonstration were subsequently dismissed from their jobs. One of them, Tadeusz Szczepanski, a 20-year-old driver and an associate of the unofficial Founding Committee of the Coastal Free Trade Unions, "disappeared" on 16 January 1980, theday after his dismissal: his severely mutilated body was reportedly found in a river on 18 March. The cause of his death has not been established.
Widespread detentions took place also in Warsaw, Krakow, Wroclaw. Poznan, Lublin, Gdansk, Sopot and Gdynia before the elections of 23 March, after KSS "KOR" and other unofficial groups had distributed leaflets calling for a boycott of elections. These groups themselves estimate that from I to 23 March 1980. 168 people were detained and 126 houses were searched. A number of people detained by police during the past year have reported that, during interrogation, they were threatened with beating, assassination, charges of theft or espionage, or with confinement in a psychiatric institution if they did not agree to stop their activities in defence of human rights. Others have allegedly been beaten, kicked and otherwise physically assaulted during detention. Jan Switon of Katowice, a collaborator in the journal Robotnik, is alleged to have had his face burned with a
285
cigarette while being detained by police at Zawiercie on 23 February 1980. On 18 March 1980, Tomasz Michalak, a photographer and worker for NOWA publishing house, was reportedly kicked downstairs by police in Warsaw after he had been detained for 48 hours. On 21 and 22 March he was again detained and allegedly beaten by police.
On 25 February 1980 KrzysztofLechowski, a student supporter of KSS "KOR" and contributor to Robotnik, was summoned to the Voivodship Militia Command in the Mostowski Palace, Warsaw. According to his written statement, he was punched and his head was banged against the wall when he refused to answer questions during interrogation; one interrogator held a pencil to his ear, threatening to perforate his eardrum and hot water was poured over him; he was also threatened with being doused with boiling water and given electric shocks. This treatment came to an end only when he agreed to sign a statement that he would cease to cooperate with KSS "KOR".
The authorities do not appear to have taken steps to deal with police brutality; it is reported that victims who filed complaints have only rarely obtained redress. The only such case that has come to the attention of Amnesty International was a private action brought in March 1980 by Tomasz Kosciewicz of Slupsk, which led to the conviction and imprisonment of two police officers on charges of having beaten him up after he had refused to clean a lavatory while in detention.
In recent years dissenters have not, in general, been formally charged and tried. This situation has changed during the year; since September 1979 at least six human rights activists have been sentenced by a "Court for Petty Offences" to summarily imposed terms of imprisonment of up to three months. Thus, on 24 March 1980 Adam Wojciechowski, a leading member of the Movement for the Defence of Human Rights and an Amnesty International member, together with Anatol Lawina, a member of KSS "KOR", were sentenced to two and three months' imprisonment respectively on charges of disturbing public peace and littering a public place after they had distributed leaflets calling for a boycott of the 23 March elections. Adam Wojciechowski had previously been sentenced to two months' imprisonment in September 1979 after attempting to prevent a search of his fiat by police officers on the grounds that their search warrant was incorrect.
On 10 December 1979 Andrzej Czuma, Wojciech Ziembinski, Jozef Jankowski and Bronislaw Komorowski were sentenced to terms of imprisonment of up to three months on charges of having " slighted the Polish people by asserting that they were not free", "holding an illegal gathering" and "obstructing traflic", after they had spoken at an unauthorized demonstration on the 61st anniversary of Poland's
286
independence. People serving these summarily imposed sentences are normally sent to work camps, where they work a seven-day week, doing heavy manual labour, such as cleaning and building for local authorities. In addition, there has been a tendency since 1979 to penalize dissenters by bringing what Amnesty International believes to have been false criminal charges against them. Kazimierz Switon, one of the founders of the Committee of Free Trade Unions in Katowice and a member of the editorial board of Robotnik, was sentenced in March 1979 to a years imprisonment on charges of "assaulting police officers". A farmer, Jan Kozlowski, a founding member of the Provisional Committee of the Independent Farmers' Trade Union, and editor of an unofficial paper published by the independent peasant's movement, was sentenced to two years' imprisonment on I February 1980 on charges of assault. In April
1979	Tomasz Michalak, a photographer working for the unofficial publishing house NOWA was arrested on charges of forgery. As a result of public pressure he was released, although, according to reports charges against him were not withdrawn. Most recently, Miroslaw Chojecki, manager of NOWA, was arrested on 25 March
1980	on charges of appropriating state property. At the time of writing he is detained in Mokotow Prison in Warsaw. Another such case is the much publicized one of the retired metal worker, Edmund Zadrozynski from Grudziadz, arrested in July 1979 on a number of ordinary criminal and economic charges, the most serious of which involved allegedly inciting his son Miroslaw to theft and receiving regular financial gain thereby. On 15 March 1980 he was sentenced to three years' imprisonment although the two chief witnesses against him {including his son Miroslaw), themselves defendants at the same trial, withdrew their statements, claiming that they had made them under pressure from the State Procurator and the police. Both, however, subsequently withdrew their retractions, although one is reported to have borne at the time clearly visible bruises.
A common feature in all these cases is that the accused were active members of unofficial groups critical of government policies and that they had a history of harassment, including detention and threats of arrest. Where these cases have been brought to court, evidence against the accused has been insubstantial and there have been strong grounds for believing that st-'.tements have been extracted from witnesses under police pressure. An Amnesty International member, Austrian lawyer Dr Gunther Hagen, and French lawyer Françoise Cotta attended Edmund Zadrozynski's trial as observers. On the basis of their reports. Amnesty International concludes that Edmund Zadrozynski and key witnesses were denied due legal safeguards and that the evidence against Edmund Zadrozynski wa.S- weak and
287
contradictory and should have resulted in his acquittal. A number of further charges against him are due to be heard at a later date by a higher court.
The case of Edmund Zadrozynski highlights certain aspects of the Polish judicial system which are open to abuse. Chief among them are the extensive powers granted to the State Procurator and the police. Investigation and examination of a case are the responsibility of the State Procurator and may be conducted by the police under the former's supervision. The State Procurator may legally deny the accused access to a lawyer until the investigation has been closed. In the case of Edmund Zadrozynski, it is reported that the investigation, which lasted six months, was conducted by the police and that during that period he was not permitted contact with his lawyer. Amnesty International believes that such conditions do not provide adequate legal safeguards and are not conducive to fair trial. In November 1979 it expressed concern to the authorities about reports that Alicja Wesolowska. a 35-year-old employee of the United Nations Development Program (UNDP), arrested in Warsaw on 10 August 1979 while travelling under UNDP instructions to a new posting in Ulan Bator, had been held incommunicado since her arrest. Amnesty International urged that she be given access to a lawyer of her choice and to United Nations (UN) officials and that UN legal advisers and international observers be present during her trial. Alicja Wesolowska was reportedly able to appoint a lawyer of her choice only in December 1979: it is not known to Amnesty International whether she had adequate access to her lawyer. The authorities refused the request of Dr Kurt Waldheim, the UN Secretary-General, to be allowed to send a UN observer to the trial, and a Swedish judge assigned by the International Commission of Jurists to obser\'e the trial was refused entry into Poland. On 7 March 1980 Alicja Wesolowska was sentenced to seven years' imprisonment, deprivation of civil rights for five years, confiscation of property and a fine, by the military court in Warsaw on charges of spying for an intelligence service of a member state of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). She is reported to have pleaded guilty. The trial was held in camera.
Amnesty International is investigating four other cases of people convicted of espionage, in all of which the defendants are reported to have been denied due legal safeguards and the trial was held in camera.
At the end of June 1979 parliament passed a revised military service law. Among the changes introduced were provisions for alternative civilian service for those physically unfit for the armed forces. In January 1980. a director of the Ministry of Religious
288
Affairs told Reuters that, under new legislation, Polish citizens would be allowed to declare themselves conscientious objectors and opt for alternative state service.
During the year Amnesty International learned of eight people sentenced to death for aggravated cases of murder. In two cases known to Amnesty International the death sentence was carried out.
