Guatemala
The foremost concerns in Guatemala of Amnesty International were the torture and murder of prisoners, and killings by government forces (these include paramilitary groups auxiliary to conventional military and police forces).
Despite the existence of anti-government guerrilla movements and government statements accusing the leadership of universities, trade unions and legal opposition parties of "subversion", no cases of long-term political imprisonment have been reported But hundreds have been held, interrogated, tortured and eventually murdered. The government has routinely denied responsibility for the killings.
During the year an estimated 1,800 people were reported held, "disappeared" and killed, or shot outright Evidence indicates that the government used illegal and arbitrary forms of execution.
The government attributes the killings to "independent", " anti-communist" groups acting outside official control. It has not however, denied that the killings took place. The government distinguishes between the killings of "common criminals", which it maintains were carried out by the semi-clandestine Escuadrón de la Muerte, Death Squad, and killings of "communists" and "subversives", which it attributes to the Ejército Secreto Anticomunista (ESA), Secret Anti-communist Army. The justification by the government for these distinctions is not easily supported by the available evidence.
Most of the killings occurred after the victims had been held without a warrant and after they had "disappeared"; the authorities always denied responsibility. The bodies were generally found some time later, in rural areas, often far from the place of abduction, mutilated and showing signs of torture — cigarette bums, traces of insecticide in the hair, multiple cuts, castration, severed hands. The removal of victims from local areas and mutilation of faces, amputation of hands or decapitation appear to be intended to prevent identification.
According to press reports, one unidentified campesino, peasant farmer, found murdered in San Marcos Department on 1 December 1979 was "crucified in Roman style". His hands were bound behind his head and he was suspended from a pole placed through the triangles formed by his arms.
Evidence of torture and the testimony of the few survivors of "disappearance" suggest that one objective of detention is interrogation, although secondary to that of murder. Survivors have described the interrogation as extensive and sophisticated. It includes the use of
140
tape recordings concerning the political activities both of those under interrogation and of their acquaintances. A 16-year-old girl, on whose behalf Amnesty International appealed in October 1979, was hooded, beaten and raped after being held by detectives of the National Police for having handed out trade union leaflets. She was released after several weeks. The injuries she sustained caused her to suffer temporary blindness.
In April 1979 Interior Minister Donaldo Alvarez Ruiz, responsible for the police, referred to the murders attributed to the death squads as the liquidation of criminals. He said the level of action compared favourably with that of the "famous Brazilian ¿"jcMarfmo da Morte". In 1979 police spokesmen issued statistics to the press on Death Squad killings, reporting that 1,142 men and 82 women had been killed between January and June 1979. In November 1979, according to one Guatemalan newspaper, the cases of 3,252 victims of the Death Squad had been reported in the first 10 months of 1979 alone. In January 1979 National Police spokesmen informed the press that the Death Squad was responsible for an average of five killings a day.
While authorities attributed most of the killings and "disappearances" to the Death Squad, threats and killings of trade unionists, academics, and political opposition figures were officially attributed to the ESA, Secret Anti-communist Army. In March and April 1980 Amnesty International repeatedly appealed on behalf of threatened students and academics of the national University of San Carlos. At least 28 students, teachers and administrators were killed during this time, including three members of the university governing council (which is independent of government control).
Despite the death toll, which authoritiés attributed to the ESA, President Lucas Garda refused to meet those university administrators who had survived the attacks. He continued to maintain — as did handbills signed "ESA" — that the university was a centre of subversion.
In May 1979 Amnesty International appealed on behalf of Rector Saúl Osorio, whose name together with those of other educationalists, had featured on an ESA death list. Rector Osorio went into exile in early April 1980. Interior Minister Alvarez had warned university personnel in 1979 that those threatened by the ESA would have to "take their own precautions" and that nothing whatsoever could be done "if these people participate in demonstrations and public gatherings".
Members of the university council labelled subversives by the authorities and subsequently found murdered included Dr Hugo Melgar, murdered on 24 March 1980 together with his chauffeur after receiving death threats. Dr Melgar, a professor of law for 18 years,
141
had assisted the university legal aid office, which the government had attacked for assisting the relatives of the "disappeared" and for advising trade unions. Council member Dr Julio Afonso Figueroa, economist and Director of the Institute of Social and Economic Research at the university, was killed together with his wife on 27 March. The student representative on the Council, 27-year-old engineering student Alejandro Coti López, was abducted in the presence of uniformed members of the National Police on 5 March by men in three unmarked cars near the university. The next day he was found dead in a ravine about 22 kilometres from the capital. His hands were bound and his hair was impregnated with an insecticide called Gamezán. He had apparently been asphyxiated. Torture by means of a rubber hood dusted with Gamezán has reportedly been a common practice of the National Police since the 1960s — Guatemala: Amnesty International Briefing Paper (1976).
On 11 March Interior Minister Alvarez was questioned by the local press about the killings at the university. The Minister said that the University of San Carlos was "the same thing" as the guerrilla organizations active in Guatemala, and that Alejandro Coti López had been killed by the E S A because he was a "member of the Ejército Guerrillero de los Pobres'^ (EGP), the Guerrilla Army of the Poor.
In the last week of March the university council reported that an army unit had taken over the School of Veterinary Medicine experimental farm in Patutal, Suchitepéquez. The troops painted death threats and the initials of the ESA on the buildings.
One of the most recent killings was that of law professor John Dahinten who was shot dead on 9 April. Professor Dahinten had headed a commission of inquiry in July 1978 into the Panzós massacre of May 1978. The commission had been severely critical of army actions.
Amnesty Intemational groups repeatedly appealed on behalf of victims who had "disappeared" in rural areas. Among these were nine Indian campesinos from Uspantán, El Quiché Department, detained between 19 August and 9 September by uniformed Army troops. On 26 September a delegation of Indians from Uspantán, who had been refused an audience with President Lucas, went to the capital to protest against the "disappearance" of the nine to the National Congress. A member of parliament agreed to read their statement. On 7 December seven of the nine "disappeared" were found shot dead.
In January Uspantán Indians sent another delegation, this time of some 400 men, women and children to Guatemala City to ask that the killings, new detentions and "disappearances" be investigated and that the virtual military occupation of the Uspantan area (where guerrillas had been active) be ended. Indian representatives reported
142
almost 60 killings and "disappearances", which they attributed to army forces in the area acting without provocation. For three weeks the delegates unsuccessfully requested audiences with government officials. During its time in the capital the group, which was being housed by Roman Catholic nuns of the Belgian School, was denounced as a guerrilla force by i\\QJefe del Cuerpo de Detectives de la Policía Nacional, Chief, Detective Corps of the National Police, Manuel Valiente Tellez.
On 24 January the National Police arrested labour lawyer and leader of the moderate opposition party Frente Unido de la Revolución (FUR), the United Front of the Revolution, Abraham Ruben Iscamparic, as he was leaving his office after meeting the Indian delegation. Its members had asked him to support their request for an audience with the National Congress to ask for the withdrawal of troops from their region. Later that same day he was found dead; before his murder he had evidently been tortured.
On 31 January some 22 members of the delegation went to the Spanish Embassy hoping to gain assistance in their attempts to obtain a hearing from the Guatemalan authorities. Informed of the peasants' presence, the police surrounded the building. When the delegates saw the police outside, they at first refused to leave. Despite a demand by Ambassador Máximo Cajal y López that police stay out of the embassy and the agreement of the delegation to withdraw peacefully, police stormed the embassy. Thirty-eight people died, some from gunshot wounds and others in an ensuing fire. Only the Ambassador and Gregorio Yuja Xona, a Quiché Indian, survived First reports concerning the incident claimed that the delegates had taken hostages in the embassy. Amnesty International made a statement to the effect that, while it did not condone the taking of hostages in any circumstances, it deplored the police attack on the embassy and feared for the lives of other Quiché Indians in the capital who were urging the government to guarantee human rights. The statement said that since 1976 government troops were known to have kidnapped and killed hundreds of Indians in the Indian townships of El Quiché Department.
The sole survivor of the Indian delegation to the Spanish Embassy, Gregorio Yuja Xona, was taken badly injured to the same private hospital as the Ambassador, at the Ambassador's insistence. Kept there under police guard, Gregorio Yuja Xona was abducted that night The next day he was found dead, evidently the victim of torture, and with a note pinned to his body warning that "the Ambassador will be next". Police denied responsibility for his murder. The chain of police-linked killings continued.
On 2 February student Liliana Negreros was arrested when
143
members of the Comando Seis, riot squad of the National Police, attacked the funeral procession of the 21 Indian peasants who died in the Spanish Embassy. Her arrest by Comando Seis was widely reported in the Guatemalan newspapers. On 19 March an estimated 38 decomposing bodies were found in a deep ravine in San Juan Comalapa by Indians searching for the "disappeared" rural leader Nehemias Cumes; few of these bodies could be identified. The press reported that one of the dead was Liliana Negreros. All the bodies were found with short ropes around their necks; these had apparently been tightened by the use of a stick. Each victim had a bullet in the head. Among others identified were student Rodolfo Palencia, "disappeared" on 7 March, and trade unionist César Aníbal Cano Garcia, an employee of the glass factory CAVISA, who was detained on 21 February by detectives of the National Police.
Others who were murdered in hospital while apparently in police custody included César Augusto Ramirez Orellana, survivor of five gunshot wounds in a death squad attack, who was murdered in his hospital bed in Zacapa on 15 January 1979; police remarked that he was a "common criminal". Juan José Reyes España, a 30-year-old prisoner receiving medical treatment, was shot on 15 May 1979 in Chiquimula hospital by masked men while police guards stood by. Rolando Eddy Troche Cisneros, wounded by police in Solola in October 1979 and taken to hospital in Quetzaltenango under police guard, was then removed from the hospital, tortured and shot dead.
Prisoners killed while in police custody included Carlos Humberto Garaa Archila, aged 28, who was abducted and killed while being taken by National Police officers to Zacapa Hospital on 18 November 1979. Moisés Garcia Ortiz, Prudencio Ramirez and José Esteban Garda Zabaleta were abducted and killed on 16 January 1980 during transfer from Zacapa city jail to the Salama Prison Farm. On 28 January 1980 Marina Elizabeth Montenegro Herra, aged 30, was abducted and killed during transfer from a women's prison to the Salama Prison Farm. It is reported that many others have been killed immediately after their release from the El Pavón Prison Farm outside Guatemala City, from the Jutiapa Prison, or from other detention centres.
An Amnesty International mission visited Guatemala from 10 to 15 August 1979. The delegation comprised Dan Gallin, Secretary General of the International Union of Food and Allied Workers (lUF); Fernando Álvarez de Miranda, member and former President of the Spanish Cortes, Parliament; and a member of the International Secretariat of Amnesty International. The mission was received by Vice-President Dr Francisco Villagrán Kramer, Minister of the Interior Donaldo Álvarez Ruiz and Minister of Labour Carlos
144
Alarcón Monsanto. During the five days of the mission the local press reported that death squads had killed 42 people.
In a memorandum to President Lucas Garcia, which incorporated the findings of the mission, the Secretary General of Amnesty International expressed grave concern about the increase since mid-1978 in the killings and "disappearances" of trade unionists, academics, lawyers, campesinos and local church leaders. It included representative cases of "disappearance" and apparent extrajudicial execution and estimated -that in the previous 18 months the government had acquiesced in the killing of "well over 2,000 people" and that abuses continued: "On some days, as many as 17 unidentified bodies were found". The memorandum drew special attention to the murders of trade unionists, noting that "to be a union leader or active member of a trade union in Guatemala today means risking one's life", and to the murder and intimidation of opposition leaders. In no case was Amnesty International aware that investigations into the murders had been carried out or that the perpetrators had been held accountable under the law. The memorandum recommended that the Organization of American States be invited to investigate human rights in Guatemala.
Amnesty International testified to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States on 3 December 1979. It detailed individual cases of human rights violations and noted that in Guatemala the disappearances of political opponents, organized or tolerated by the government, and political killings, were two of the most serious violations of human rights.
On 12 September 1979 Amnesty International began a campaign focusing attention on the political murder encouraged by the Guatemalan Government, by publicizing the details of repression and by issuing appeals from its worldwide membership urging the authorities to call a halt to the killings. An Amnesty International survey. The Human Rights Year in Guatemala — A Calendar of Abuses, covering the period beginning 29 May 1978, when over 100 Kekchi Indians were killed by the army in Panzós, Aha Verapaz, to 29 May 1979. It documented cases of "disappearance", torture and political murder day by day. Other campaign documents covered the plight of trade unionists, religious persecution, the killing of political opposition leaders and measures taken against campesinos, journalists, academics and lawyers.
The government's reply was to deny responsibility for political violence, and in the domestic news media in Guatemala it accused Amnesty International of being pro-communist, terrorist and an agent of the British Crown. The authorities refused to examine the substance of reports or individual cases submitted by Amnesty International. Vice -President Dr Francisco Villagrán Kramer called,
145
however, for the cases to be investigated and for the government to invite the Organization of American States to Guatemala for this purpose. Vice-President Villagran, who has repeatedly threatened to resign on the issue of human rights, has consistently criticized his own government. In March 1979 he remarked to the foreign press that "death or exile is the fate of those who fight for justice in Guatemala". In February 1980 he commented that "there are no political prisoners but only political murders in Guatemala".
On 18 January 1980 Amnesty International wrote to President Lucas Garda reckling the questions raised in the 1979 Memorandum and noting the absence of an official response. It reaffirmed its interest in establishing a direct and formal dialogue with the government. No response has been received.
On II March 1980 the United Nations Commission on Human Rights expressed its profound concern about the situation in Guatemala, and urged the government "to take the necessary measures to ensure full respect for the human rights and fundamental freedoms of the people of Guatemala". The Commission decided to keep the human rights situation there under review.
