Paraguay
The positive trend noted in the previous A mnesty International Report on the state of human rights in Paraguay was partly reversed during the period covered by this present report. Once again the main target of persecution appears to be members of the peasant organization, Ligas Agrarias, which was created in the late 1950s and supported by the Roman Catholic Church. The state of siege, which has been renewed as a matter of routine every three months throughout the 26 years of General Alfredo Stroessner's presidency, continued in force in Asunción, the capital. The government claims, contrary to the opinion of prominent jurists, that this constitutional provision gives the President the right to keep people in indefinite detention without charge or trial. Furthermore, when the state of siege became limited to the capital, the tribunals ruled that people arrested in other parts of Paraguay could be transferred to Asunción and there be held under the state of siege. The state of siege combined with the wide powers of the police and the inability of the judiciary to achieve independence from the executive provides the framework for violations of human rights: prolonged detention without trial, ineffectiveness of habeas corpus, detention incommunicado, torture and unacknowledged detentions or "disappearances",
The Amnesty International adopted prisoners of conscience Severo Acosta Aranda, aged about 50, detained without trial since 1964, and Argentinian lawyer Ami'lcar Santucho, aged 57, detained since 1975, were released during the year. Amnesty International continued to campaign for the release of telecommunications engineer Virgilio Bareiro, aged 51, detained without charge or trial since 1964. It re-adopted Alfonso Silva Quintana, aged 48 and his wife, Maria Saturnina Almadade Silva, aged 50, who had earlier spent 10 years in detention without trial until their release in early 1978. Their rearrest in 1979 is attributed to the couple's humanitarian assistance to Severo Acosta Aranda and to other people who remained in detention after their own release and who had no close relatives to assist them. The food parcels the couple had delivered to the prison for these detainees were deemed by the authorities to be "logistic support". Trial proceedings against the couple were begun, but since about September 1979 have been in abeyance.
159
Amnesty International was also investigating the cases of 12 people arrested in the past year and alleged to be held in secret detention without trial in the Departamento de Investigaciones, police headquarters, and other notorious detention centres in Asunción. Peasant leader Constantino Coronel, aged 48, previously detained from April 1976 to July 1978, who after his release narrowly escaped several assassination attempts, was himself later charged with a criminal rather than political offence. He is being held in an ordinary prison in the town of Encamación, where he has been reported to be chained to the wall. Independent observers have, however, concluded that it was his position as a peasant leader that directly led to his present condition.
New information has come to light in the past year on three of those listed as "disappeared" after their arrest at the end of 1975 and whose cases were first presented in Deaths under Torture and Disappearance of Political Prisoners in Paraguay, Amnesty International (1977). These were Miguel Angel Soler, Secretary General of the Paraguayan Communist Party, Derlis Villagra and Ruben González Acosta, also Communist Party members. On 3 October 1979 Amnesty International released news that it had submitted testimony to the Paraguayan Supreme Court as new elements for the habeas corpus proceedings. It detailed the torture and mutilation while in police custody that led to the deaths of the three men a few days after arrest This information was also sent to the United Nations Secretary-General for consideration by the United Nations Commission on Human Rights. Paraguay has been listed by the Commission for the past three years as being on its confidential agenda. The Minister of the Interior responded by issuing a communique denying that the three men had even been living in Paraguay. In a public refutation in February 1980 Amnesty International offered several testimonies affirming that these arrests had taken place before eye-witnesses in Asunción. In April 1980 Amnesty International prepared a submission for the United Nations giving an account of the secret disposal of three tortured bodies in the River Paraguay, from which they were later washed ashore. One was identified by witnesses as Derlis Villagra.
Irregular detention procedures and the infliction of torture on political detainees in Paraguay caused Amnesty International to issue urgent appeals on behalf of 32 people. These included the reported "disappearances", in May 1979, of 16 people and, in March 1980, of seven peasant farmers, two of whom were wounded women, and one of whom, Apolonia Flores, was 12 years old. The Paraguayan Government made the seven's names public in an official communique, which also listed 10 people as "killed in a shoot-out". Although the Paraguayan press was forbidden to report on the matter, it later
160
became clear that some 300 people had been taken to the Departamento de Investigaciones in Asunción and that an unknown number of peasants were being held in Villarrica and Paraguan. The ostensible reason for these large-scale raids on peasant communities was a hold-up of a bus by a small group of peasants, who demanded to be taken to Asunción to draw attention to peasants being evicted from their land and to their living conditions. Although the official communique described them as "common delinquents", the government's response was a raid on villages in different parts of the country involving an estimated 5,000 soldiers, militia, and local government supporters. Among those arrested and killed were a number of well-known leaders of the Ligas Agrarias, whose members have had a long history of harassment, detention without trial and torture. Amnesty International cabled President Stroessner expressing concern about the large number of arrests and the physical safety of the detainees. It made reference to the ill repute of the infantry division of Villarrica in dealings with peasants. On 2 April Amnesty International publicly stated that the raids "appeared to be a renewal of repressive campaigns which have followed attempts by the peasants to organize themselves".
A Brazilian state deputy who went to investigate these arrests was able to speak to a prisoner who after one year's secret detention had been removed from Investigaciones to a barracks because of the arrival of numerous new detainees. He was Remigio Jiménez, who had lived for 20 years in Brazil. In May 1979 Amnesty International issued urgent appeals on his behalf He has remained in detention incommunicado since that time.
The government does not normally respond to international communications about human rights. One exception was its response to the August 1979 Amnesty International appeal concerning the arrest in Paraguay of an Argentinian couple and their three-year-old child. The Foreign Ministry replied that they were detained "for forging personal documents for terrorist elements to enable them to enter Argentina" and that they had given false names. They were released shortly afterwards.
In June 1979 Amnesty International interceded on behalf of a lawyer, Mario Milciades Melgarejo, himself a member of the ruling Colorado party who was imprisoned between June and August 1979 for "subversion" — he had acted as a lawyer for the inhabitants of the township of Fernando de la Mora against the Paraguayan authorities.
The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (lACHR) presented a new report on Paraguay which led to the adoption of a resolution by the General Assembly of the Organization of American States in La Paz in October 1979. The Commission's report
161
recommended that the Paraguayan Government give a precise date for an on-site investigation, that the state of siege be lifted in the whole territory and that the prisoners remaining untried in detention be released or brought to trial. Despite giving its agreement to such an investigation by the lACHR more than two years ago, the government has not permitted it to take place.
Peru
Throughout 1979 and the early part of 1980 the concerns of Amnesty International continued to be the periodic lai^e-scale, short-term arrests of trade unionists, political activists and community leaders of the pueblos jóvenes (the poor neighbourhoods surrounding the coastal cities); the taking over of the administration of justice by the army so that civilians were brought as a matter of routine before military courts for a broad range of offences; the ineffectiveness of habeas corpus and the lack of the right to appeal to civilian courts; consistent allegations of severe ill-treatment during interrogation of peasant communities by members of the investigative police and of harsh measures taken by the Batallón Sinchi, a special assault unit of the Guardia Civil, the Civil Guard.
Massive political arrests of people involved in social protest took place in May 1975, in January and July 1976, in July 1977, in May 1978 and in January and June 1979. On each occasion thousands were arrested in connection with demonstrations against the deteriorating standard of living or attempts at a general strike. At the same time, imprisonment and ill-treatment of peasants and Indians belonging to rural communities involved in land disputes increased. Amnesty International protested against the arrests of campesinos, peasant farmers, and the attack on peasant communities of Alto Piura, Bagua Chica and San Juan de Ondores. In Alto Piura, 58 campesinos were arrested. In San Juan de Ondores, 300 members of the Batallón Sinchi look military action against the peasants in a dawn raid on 18 December 1979. Two people died, 15 were wounded and 44 were arrested; huts were sacked and burned and cattle and sheep killed.
Another major concern was the detention of hundreds of teachers during the 108-day strike of Sindicato Unico de Trabajadores de la
162
Educación del Peril (SUTEP), the Peruvian teachers' union. The strike began on 4 June 1979, demanding unconditional recognition of the teachers' trade union and an increase in salaries.
In the first month alone, more than 700 teachers were detained and some 2,000 dismissed from their jobs. By September, the 100,000-member organization claimed, the military and police repression had left at least 30 dead, many of them teachers, women and school children, as well as hundreds wounded.
Shortly before Christmas 1979 the government announced an amnesty for political prisoners: 28 SUTEP teachers adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience were released. Twenty-five Cromotex textile workers, whose cases had been investigated by Amnesty International were released also.
The process of political "normalization" in Peru, initiated by the Constituent Assembly elections and furthered by the drafting of a new constitution (finished on 12 July 1979), now faces crucial tests. The new constitution, whose provisions include the abolition of the death penalty, limits the jurisdiction of military courts, reinforces the right of habeas corpus and guarantees freedom of expression and political rights: it is scheduled to take effect in July 1980, when a civilian government elected in May 1980 takes over from the military rulers who have governed Peru since October 1968.
United States of America
Amnesty International has continued to strive for the abolition of the death penalty and against impending executions; this has been its highest priority during the past year. In the early months of 1980 more than 600 people were on death rows throughout the United Slates of America (USA). Two executions took place in 1979. In May, John Spenkelink was electrocuted in Florida; and in October Jesse Bishop was gassed to death in Nevada. In both cases Amnesty International issued international appeals for clemency. On 29 and 30 May 1979 an Amnesty International mission went to Florida to plead with state officials for the commutation of death sentences facing more than 130 prisoners in that state. In December 1979 an Amnesty International
163
mission visited California, Ohio, Georgia and Washington, D.C., for discussions with state and federal officials concerning the death penalty. At the conclusion of this mission Amnesty International called upon President Carter to establish a presidential commission on the death penalty in the USA, and in April 1980 a detailed proposal for such a commission was presented to the President
During the year four prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International in the USA were released on parole; James Earl Grant and T.J. Reddy of the "Charlotte Three"; Ben Chavis of the "Wilmington Ten"; Imari Obadele {Amnesty International Beport 1978 and Amnesty International Report 1979). Many other cases were investigated, some involving attendance at trials. In two cases, which had been studied for several years, those of Gary Tyler and Elmer "Geronimo" Pratt, Amnesty International decided that there were grounds to doubt the validity of the convictions. Gary Tyler, a black youth, was sentenced to death in November 1975 on a charge of murdering a white youth in October 1974 during a racial incident in Louisiana His sentence was subsequently commuted to life imprisonment. In February 1980 Amnesty International urged Governor Edwin Edwards of Louisiana to grant Gary Tyler a new trial or to release him. "Geronimo" Pratt, a former leader of the Black Panther Party, was convicted in 1972 of the murder in 1968 of a white woman in Santa Monica, California. He has consistently maintained his innocence and witnesses testified at his trial that at the time of the murder he was at a meeting in Oakland, California. In 1979 documents obtained under the Freedom of Information Act showed that"Geronimo" Pratt was a subject ofCOINTELPRO, the Federal Bureau of Investigation counter-intelligence program, designed to disrupt groups considered to be subversive and to discredit their leaders. In December 1979 Amnesty International stated that "the interests of justice can only be served by granting Mr Pratt a retrial".
After publication of the report of the Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE), Fulfilling Our Promises: The United States and the Helsinki Final Act, Amnesty International wrote to Attorney General Benjamin Civiletti in April 1980 welcoming the Commission's recommendations that ". . . the Justice Department should establish a more effective mechanism to review cases brought to its attention by the CSCE, the State Department, Amnesty International, reputable private groups or other CSCE signatory states". Amnesty International noted the Commission's statement Uiat "We cannot state conclusively that there have not been varying degrees of racial discrimination or localized political motivation in accusing, arresting and prosecuting certain of these individuals or in meting out unusually harsh sentences".
164
Many inquiries were directed to state and federal authorities concerning allegations of ill-treatment of prisoners throughout the USA. In May 1979 Amnesty International wrote to Norman A. Carison, Director of the US Bureau of Prisons, about an alleged assault by guards on prisoners in Lewisburg Penitentiary on 16 December 1978. In his reply Norman Carlson agreed that force had been used by prison staff, but stated that:" After reviewing the reports of the incidents, I am convinced the force used was necessary, given the nature of the disturbance and the demonstrated assaultiveness of the inmates involved".
On 28 August 1979 Amnesty International urged Governor Dixie Lee Ray of the state of Washington to arrange for independent investigation into the treatment of prisoners at Walla Walla State Penitentiary. Amnesty International referred to reports it had received of the severe ill-treatment of prisoners at Walla Walla on 8 July 1979, in particular of Carl Harp, and said that "For some time now we have been receiving information about conditions at Walla Walla which leads us to believe that the incidents which occurred on 8 July are not unprecedented . . .". In a reply from the Department of Social and Health Services it was stated that "The situation you described together with other alleged incidents is being thoroughly investigated by independent bodies. Corrective action consistent with investigative fmdings will be instigated"
Research was continued into allegations that undocumented Mexican workers in the USA and Mexican-Americans were being subjected to ill-treatment by the authorities. After extensive interviews in California, New Mexico and Texas with Mexican-American organizations and individuals and with lawyers, a report was submitted to the International Executive Committee of Amnesty International. Its conclusions were that
.. there is no systematic physical ill-treatment of undocumented workers by the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS), but that there is systematic psychological ill-treatment designed to deter them from asserting their rights under US law. In addition, or perhaps as part of the same pressure, INS officials and Border Patrol agents behave with quite unnecessary rudeness and roughness in their dealings with undocumented workers. It is difficult to escape the conclusion that this behaviour is due to racial discrimination. Border Patrol agents are much more likely to use physical brutality when apprehending
undocumented workers____Police brutality, especially towards
members of ethnic minorities is widespread and severe, resulting in death in many cases. Although it is probably not due to
165
official policy, it is undoubtedly able to occur so frequently because it is officially tolerated Prosecutions of policemen do take place, but nearly always result in acquittals or very light sentences."
Work continued on a special study of individual cases of American Indians and Blacks alleging political motivation for criminal charges.
