Grenada
In March 1979, after the overthrow of the government of Eric Gairy, many ministers, officials and supporters of the previous government were arrested and held without charge or trial, some for more than a year. Amnesty International first expressed concern about these detentions to the new Prime Minister, Maurice Bishop, in April 1979. Further appeals were made in July and August 1979. More arrests took place in October and November 1979 of people alleged by the government to be plotting its overthrow. Amnesty International wrote to Maurice Bishop: "Our concern is that all those who are at present detained, including those recently arrested and accused of intending the violent overthrow of the government, should be given a fair and public trial".
On 26 November 1979 Amnesty International informed Maurice Bishop that it had received allegations that some detainees had been subjected to ill-treatment. A reply received from the Prime Minister's Office stated that: "... any allegation of ill-treatment of any detainee is entirely false".
In March 1980 Amnesty International again raised the subject of the detainees with Maurice Bishop and urged him that . . in the interests of human rights, all those people at present detained should be charged with specific offences or released".
Cases of detainees have been reviewed at intervals by special tribunals established for this purpose, but these hearings have been held in camera and detainees have not been allowed legal representation. Releases have taken place from time to time. On 15 December 1979 the Grenada Newsletter, a local publication, estimated the number of detainees to be 77 but said that the figure was provisional. On 31 December 1979 the same publication announced the release of 37 detainees during December and on 29 March 1980 reported a further 13 releases. According to information given to Amnesty International by the Grenada Council for Human Rights, there were 56 people detained in April 1980.
In November 1979 Amnesty International wrote to Maurice Bishop appealing for a commutation of the death sentence passed on Septimus Gilbert, convicted of murder.
139
