Cyprus
Amnesty International had no adopted prisoners of conscience in Cyprus but was concerned about the fate of people missing since the hostilities of 1974. It followed closely developments towards establishing an independent Committee on Missing Persons as proposed by the Secretary General of the United Nations, which would investigate the fate of missing people from both communities.
Czechoslovakia
The main concerns of Amnesty International were: imprisonment of people for expressing opinions disapproved of by the authorities; poor prison conditions for those convicted of political offences; harassment and ill-treatment of dissenters by the police; the death penalty.
International interest in human rights in Czechoslovakia centred on the persecution and imprisonment of members of the Committee for the Defence of the Unjustly Persecuted, Vybor na obranu nespravedlive stihanych (VONS), which was established in April 1978 to monitor violations of human rights in Czechoslovakia. VONS is the most active section of the Czechoslovak unofficial human rights movement. Charter 77.
On 29 May 1979 the State Security Police arrested 10 VONS members suspected ©factions hostile to the interest of the state. On 30 July Amnesty International informed the Czechoslovak President that it had adopted the 10 in pre-trial detention as prisoners of conscience and asked him to order that judicial proceedings against them be discontinued. On 11 September the Office of the Federal
261
Procurator ruled that the cases of four of the accused, Jarmila Beiikova, Dr Ladislav Lis, Vaclav Maly and Dr Jiri Nemec be removed from the indictment of the other six. The four were released on 22 December but criminal proceedings against them were still continuing in April 1980.
The trial of the other six VONS members was held on 22 and 23 October 1979 before the Prague Municipal Court. The prosecution charged that the accused had prepared statements about people whom they considered to be "unjustly persecuted" and had circulated this information in Czechoslovakia as well as abroad with the intention that it be used against the Republic. On 23 October the court found all six defendants guilty of subversion " in collusion with foreign powers" and "on a large scale" (Article 98, part 1 and 2, sub-section (a) and (b) of the penal code) and sentenced Petr Uhl, an engineer, to five years' imprisonment; Vaclav Havel, a playwright, to four and a half years; Dr Vaclav Benda, a philosopher and mathematician, to four years and Otta Bednarova and Jiri Dienstbier, both journalists, to three years. Dana Nemcova, a psychologist, was given a two-year sentence suspended for five years.
Amnesty International delegated an Austrian lawyer, Henry Goldmann, to observe the trial and the appeal hearing. He was excluded from both proceedings. On 20 December, he was detained for four and a half hours and expelled from the country for" interfering in Czechoslovakia's internal affairs". On 7 January 1980 Amnesty Intemational protested to the Minister of Justice against the exclusion, detention and expulsion of its representative.
In a letter to the judicial authorities on 2 November 1979 and in an internatiofially distributed document about the trial, Amnesty International detailed the inadequacies of the proceedings: the trial was not public; it was hasty (each of the two days' proceedings lasted from 10 to 11 hours); no one was allowed to take notes of the proceedings; no defence witnesses were called and the defendants were frequently interrupted and were thus unable to present a proper defence.
Another VONS member, Albert Cerny, a former actor who had been arrested on 26 March 1979 on charges of subversion( Article 98, part 1 of the penal code) was sentenced by the Regional Court in Brno on 27 November 1979 to three and a half years' imprisonment for participation in VONS and for possessing and disseminating "anti-state" texts.
Other cases of people sentenced to terms of imprisonment for exercising their right to freedom of expression and adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International during the year include Professor Jaroslav Sabata, a psychologist and Charter 77 spokesman, serving a nine months' prison sentence who had 18
262
months added to his sentence. He was first sentenced in 1972 to six and a half years' imprisonment for subversion and was released in December 1976 on three years' probation. In May 1979 the District Court of Prague 6 ordered that the 18 months remaining from his first sentence be added to the second nine months' sentence. An Amnesty International observer was refused a visa. Jan Zmatlik, a sociologist and Charter 77 signatory, who had been in pre-trial detention since August 1978, was convicted in July 1979 by the Prague Municipal Court of producing and attempting to disseminate "anti-state" materials and sentenced to three and a half years' imprisonment for "making preparations for the subversion of the Republic" (Article 7, part 1, and Article 98, part 1 of the penal code). In October 1979 his sentence was reduced to two and a half years' on appeal. Dr Jaromir Savrda, a writer, was found guilty in August 1979 by the District Court in Ostrava of duplicating and circulating copies of the samizdat (unofficial) literary journal Petlice (Padlock) and sentenced to two and a half years' imprisonment for incitement (Article 100), after 11 months in pre-trial detention. Dr Josef Danisz, a lawyer who defended many Charter 77 signatories, was convicted in January 1980 by the District Court in Hradec-Kralove of "insulting a public official" (Article 156, part 2) and "insulting a state organ" (Article 154, part 2) and sentenced to 10 months' imprisonment The court also disbarred him for two years. In September 1979, acting as defence lawyer for Professor Jaroslav Sabata, he criticized the Chairman of the Court for his conduct of a trial in 1978 and complained about the brutal treatment of another Charter 77 signatory by the police. The persecution of Dr Danisz goes back to the autumn of 1975 when he complained to the authorities that a public official had threatened him with assault. In March 1979, the Association of Prague Lawyers expelled him for unprofessional conduct. Petr Cibulka, a worker and Charter 77 signatory serving a two-year sentence, went on hunger strike because of unacceptable working conditions in prison and repeated physical attacks on him by non-political prisoners. For this he was tried in January 1980 by the Plzen Municipal Court and sentenced to a further six months' for "frustrating the purpose of custody". The Procurator appealed against the verdict and called for a five-year sentence. In March 1980 the appeal court quashed the six-month sentence and imposed a one-year sentence.
Widespread harassment of Roman Catholic priests and laity was reported in the second part of 1979. According to incomplete reports, by the end of December 1979 at least 20 people had had their homes searched, at least 40 had been questioned by the police and in Moravia and Slovakia alone at least 10 were detained for up to 48 hours. During house searches police seized large quantities of religious
263
literature, pictures and photographs and printing and copying equipment. Eleven people were charged and six of them remanded in custody: Josef Adamek. a retired printer; Jiri Kaplan, an engineer, Jan Krumpholc and Josef Vlcek, both workers and two Jesuit priests, Frantisek Lizna and Rudolf Smahel. The remaining five, Josef Brtnik, Svatopluk' Krumpholc, Tomas Kvapil, Dr Mecislav Razik and the well-known theologian, Dr Josef Zverina, were released from detention but the authorities continue to investigate their cases.
Jiri Kaplan andDr Josef Zverina were charged with "obstructing the state supervision of churches and religious societies" (Article 176) and the remaining nine with "illicit trading" (Article 118). The six who were remanded in custody have been adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience. Jiri Kaplan was released from custody at the end of December 1979 and the remaining five early in January 1980. At the time of writing Amnesty International had not learned that criminal proceedings against any of the 11 have been dropped.
On 16 November 1979 the police searched the homes of five Slovak Roman Catholic priests and a number of Roman Catholic laity in Presov in Slovakia. Criminal proceedings were initiated against the 65-year-old Jesuit priest. OskarFormanek, accused of saying mass in private houses, of condemning communist atheism, of having loaned religious books and of having been in contact with religious bodies in the West. It is alleged that he was interrogated on 12 occasions and that he had to be taken to hospital. His condition has been described as serious. His trial was to be held on 12 January 1980 in Presov but it has been postponed twice.
During the year prison conditions continued to fall below internationally accepted standards.
Petr Cibulka has been continually beaten up by fellow prisoners and forced to carry out work for which he is not physically fit. In May 1979 he was punished by being transferred to an underground cell and put on half rations. Amnesty International appealed to the authorities on his behalf in May and July 1979, and in September 1979 when reports about his ill-treatment persisted, urged the Minister of Justice to see that he was treated humanely. In February 1980 it learned that he had again been placed in an underground cell, that his food ration had been cut and that the beatings by non-political prisoners were still happening.
During the year under review many people holding views disapproved of by the authorities were persecuted in waya which did not involve imprisonment. Many dissenters were repeatedly detained, mostly for up to 48 hours, and summoned for questioning by the police; their homes were searched, in some cases without a police warrant, and
264
they were brutally treated by the police.
On 30 October 1979 State Security Police took Jiri Legerski, a former miner and a Roman Catholic, who is suffering from a malignant cancer, from the hospital in Opava. They searched his home twice and took him twice to the police station for interrogation in connection with criminal proceedings instituted against a group of Roman Catholics accused of disseminating religious literature. When he refused to answer any further questions, he was taken back to the hospital, completely exhausted, in the middle of the night.
On 4 November Ivan KyncI was beaten up by the police for refusing to be photographed and fingerprinted during a 48-hour detention. He was one of nine people who had been arrested on 2 November on suspicion that they were preparing an act of terrorism. All nine were released without cfiarge "after 48 hours.
On 25 January 1980, after police had broken up a private performance in the flat of their friend, Rudolf Battek and Ivan Kyncl were handcuffed and taken separately to a remote village some 60 kilometres from Prague and abandoned there after questioning.
Two people known to the authorities for their dissenting views were forcibly confined in psychiatric institutions. Tomas Liska, a student, was confined to the psychiatric hospital in Prague-Bohnice on 23 August. On 31 August he was transferred to another psychiatric clinic in Prague from which he was released on 3 September. Tomas Liska and two friends had been arrested on 20 August in Poland when they tried to join Polish human rights activists in a hunger-strike to protest against the detention of 11 VONS members in Czechoslovakia. They were escorted to Prague and Tomas Liska's two associates were released on 23 August. Professor Julius Tomin, one of the dissenters subjected to continuous harassment, was arrested on 5 October 1979 in northern Bohemia and taken to the psychiatric clinic in Horni Berkovice. where he was given injections against his will. He was released on 8 October.
During the year Amnesty International learned of the execution of two Czechoslovak citizens convicted of murder. One of them was Robert Bares, whose death sentence in September 1978 provoked strong protests in Czechoslovakia as well as abroad.
In April 1980 Amnesty International had 38 cases under adoption and investigation.
265
