Hungary
The main concerns of Amnesty International related to legislation restricting freedom of expression, the imprisonment of those attempting to exercise their right of freedom of movement and the death penalty.
A new penal code, enacted in December 1978, came into force on 1 July 1979. It contains a number of features distinguishing it from the previous penal code of 1961. Certain minor offences are no longer punished under the penal code, being dealt with instead under the law concerning petty offences, the civil and labour codes or state administrative law. Penalties other than imprisonment (primarily fines or corrective labour) have been introduced for lesser crimes. Recidivists are sentenced more severely than previously; the minimum period of imprisonment has been raised from 30 days to three months. The maximum sentence of 15 years, or 20 in the case of multiple offences, has remained unchanged.
Under Article 148 of the new penal code dealing with incitement (retaining, with minor alterations, the provisions of the former Article 127) those who publicly criticize official policies are liable to conviction. As before, those who commit an act liable to "incite" others to "hatred" of Hungary's constitutional order or Hungary's allies, as well as those who "incite" to national, racial or religious "haired", are punishable by from one to eight years' imprisonment. "Preparations" to commit such an act of incitement before a large public or as a member of a group are now punishable by up to two years' imprisonment (up to three years' under the previous penal code). There have been reports that an unspecified number of peasants, workers and students have been sentenced to short terms of imprisonment under this article but Amnesty International has not been able to confirm them.
Freedom of movement is restricted and Article 217 of the new penal code makes "unauthorized crossing of the border" an offence punishable by up to three years' imprisonment; the penalty under the
278
previous penal code for this offence was six months' to five years' imprisonment Paragraph 5 of Article 217 prescribes up to two years' imprisonment for people convicted of making preparations aimed at an unauthorized crossing of the border. On 11 October 1979. Gyor County Court sentenced Erhard Franz Haller, a 49-year-old citizen of the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG) to six months' imprisonment under Article 217; he had tried to cross the Hungarian border into Austria with a friend from the German Democratic Republic (GDR) and her child. His friend was extradited to the GDR. In a similar case in March 1980, Gyor County Court sentenced an FRG citizen to five months' imprisonment for having attempted to smuggle a young Pole across the Hungarian border into Austria. The Pole was extradited to Poland where he was reportedly due for trial.
Amnesty International noted that Zsolt Takacs, an adopted prisoner of conscience released in February 1979 after serving a sentence for attempting to leave Hungary without authorization in order to join his wife in Switzerland, had, by the end of 1979, left for Switzerland with official permission.
The new penal code retains the death penalty for a number of political and military offences as well as aggravated cases of murder; economic crimes are. however, no longer punishable by death. In the period under review, Amnesty International learned of two cases in which the death penalty was carried out and one in which it was commuted to a life sentence. On 6 December 1979 Henrik Molnar was executed; he had been convicted of the murder of a 13-year-old girl and of seriously wounding a boy. On 28 March 1980 Joszef Magyar, convicted of killing a woman, was executed. On 1 October 1979 Karoly Dobay. a soldier who deserted from his unit and wounded two police officers while trying to escape, was sentenced to death. The next day Amnesty International appealed to the head of state. Janos Kadar, for a commutation of this sentence. On 30 November 1979 the Presidential Council commuted Karoly Dobay's sentence to life imprisonment
279
