Haiti
Since the parliamentary elections in February 1979 respect for and observance of human rights has again deteriorated. Amnesty International concerns include arbitrary detentions, torture and harassment by the police and the tontons macoutes, a paramilitary group in the service of the government and known officially as the Voluntaires de la sécurité nationale, directed at all sectors of the population but especially at political leaders, journalists and human rights activists. It is also concerned about deaths in prison and about the illegal deportation of suspected political opponents.
Amnesty International is investigating the cases of Ulrich Désiré, Emmanuel Noel, Robert Thelesuma and Gustave Colas, all arrested in February 1979 and still in detention at the Pénitencier National, State Penitentiary. Reports indicate that they have been kept incommunicado in very poor conditions, ill-treated and denied visits and legal counsel. In December 1979 Amnesty International appealed on behalf of these and other prisoners reported to be in poor health. The Minister of Foreign Affairs said that Ulrich Désiré, a former customs officer, had been involved with a group of terrorists who were trying to import arms and explosives illegally for subversive purposes. Amnesty International believes that Ulrich Désiré is being held for the peaceful expression of his political beliefs.
The case of Sylvio Claude, arrested in February 1979 and again in August, is an example of the violation of civil and human rights. According to the constitution, the accused must be brought before a judge within 48 hours. This was not carried out in any of the politically motivated arrests and specifically not in the case of Sylvio Claude. Intimidation impelled him to withdraw from the February 1979 elections in which he intended to stand against Max Adolphe, known for her brutal methods of interrogation of political prisoners. Shortly after the elections, Sylvio Claude was arrested by plain-clothes agents, taken to Casernes Dessalines; here, he reported later, he had been beaten and given electric shocks to the soles of his feet; he was
147
then put on an aircraft and deported to Colombia. He returned to Haiti a few months later, and in July 1979 he announced the formation of the Parti démocrate chrétien haïtien, Haitian Christian Democrat Party. On 30 August he was arrested and wounded by a gun shot He was first held in Casernes Dessalines and later transferred to the Pénitencier National. In February he went on hunger-strike together with other political prisoners, apparently members of his party, whose names were not known at that time by Amnesty Intemational: Lévy Jean-Baptiste, Jeane-Lionel Jean-Baptiste, Clothaire Saintus, Lorius Dorange, Antoine Cangé and Louis Gilles. Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Minister of Foreign Affairs expressing concem about Sylvio Claude and requested information on the others. Names of other political prisoners brought to the attention of Amnesty International are: Roland Jeannite, Gérard Civil, Beauchard Jocelin, Morin J. Beauvais, Hilaire Joseph, Andréas Baptiste and Louis Jules.
Amnesty International received a number of allegations of bmtality, torture and in some cases killings carried out by the tontons macoutes. In August 1979 a tonton macoute called Ti-Crab was reported to have killed an unarmed civilian. Harassment of the population was reported in the small town of Source-Matelas. In November 1979 a former member of the tontons macoutes testified in a federal court of the United States of America that individuals imprisoned in the François Duvalier Barracks at Cayes were "beaten in the head" and "often their hands and feet are tied together and a hard piece of wood or a metal bar is passed behind their knees". He said that political prisoners were not allowed to consult lawyers. In one case, the killing of Robert Taylor in July 1979, the tonton macoute responsible was promptly brought to trial and sentenced. This appears to be an isolated case.
The rights of assembly, association, expression, thought and information were severely repressed during the year. The two political parties founded in 1979, the Parti démocrate chrétien haitien, founded by Sylvio Claude, and the Parti démocrate chrétien du 26-Juin, founded by Gregoire Eugène, were both obliged to suspend their activities, as a result of the arrest or continuous harassment of their leaders and members. A joumalist from a radio station was arrested but later discharged; others have been prosecuted. The Press Law which was finally promulgated in April 1980 makes it an ofience to criticize the President-For-Life or his mother. On 9 November 1979 men armed with clubs broke up a meeting organized by the Ligue haïtienne des droits humains, the Haitian Human Rights League. Its President, Gérard Gourgues, sustained head injuries; some foreign diplomats who attended the meeting were injured also. The govemment has reportedly tried to deport Sylvio Claude to another country
148
against his will or to place him in a psychiatric institution, after a psychiatrist who examined him in prison had stated that he was not responsible for his actions. Sylvio Claude's family strongly denied that he was mentally ill.
Protection against arbitrary detention and observance of the right to trial have not improved during the year. The State Security Tribunal, established in 1977 to provide remedies against such violations of human rights, did not function, and in December 1979 the government informed the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights that the tribunal had been integrated into the existing judicial structure in order to ensure that defendants should have the right to legal counsel and appeal. None of the political detainees has so far been protected against arbitrary detention or ill-treatment In response to international concern about the detention without charge or trial of many political prisoners, including Sylvio Claude, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Georges Salomon, announced the creation of a human rights division in his Ministry.
In February 1980 Sylvio Claude, an adopted prisoner of conscience, was the focus of an Amnesty International campaign. He was released in April 1980.
No new information has been received about prisoners adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International who were missing. The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, in a report published at the beginning of 1980, produced a list of 151 people who, between 1974 and 1977, were reportedly executed or who died in prison for lack of medical attention.
During the year several Haitian citizens including Haitians living abroad who had returned home to visit were arbitrarily detained and expelled after vague accusations of subversion or of being communist agitators. One such returning citizen, Franz Voltaire, who visited Haiti in August 1979, was held in thQ Pénitencier National for three days and then put on an aircraft to New York. At the Pénitencier National he came across several other political prisoners, and later described conditions as wholly inadequate.
149
