Comoros
Amnesty International remained concerned about 43 political detainees held without trial since the government of President Ahmed Abdallah came to power in May 1978. They include Salim Himidi, former Interior Minister, Ali Toihir 'Keke', former Secretary General for Defence, and other officials, security officers and jeunesse révolutionnaire, revolutionary youth, leaders of the overthrown government of President Ali Soilih. In May 1979, on the new government's first anniversary, Salim Himidi and others were reportedly taken to Voidjou military camp and severely beaten.
In late September 1979 Amnesty International received information which suggested that Salim Himidi, Ali Toihir and two other detainees had been sentenced to death by a secret tribunal. They were said to be in imminent danger of execution. On 1 October Amnesty International publicly expressed concern over these reports, but noted assurances by Foreign Minister Ali Mroudjae that the detainees would receive public trials with the right to be represented by lawyers of their choice. After further communications with the government, Amnesty International publicly stated on 24 October that there was no longer any basis for fears that the prisoners' lives were in danger. It asked the government for details of Âe legal procedures under which they would be tried.
Amnesty International later learned that the Federal Assembly had approved a presidential bill on 29 August 1979 to establish a special court of justice for these trials, to include two 15-member commissions, one referred to as juridiction d'instruction, investigation, and the other siS juridiction de jugement, trial. The members of the commissions were not nominated until 7 March 1980. The investigation commission was composed of government officials and security officers, while the trial commission included the Prosecutor General. By the end of April 1980 the government had given no information about the date or nature of the proposed trials.
40
On 12 January 1980 the government again-denied that there were political prisoners in Comoros. It said that the detainees were held for common crimes such as theft and murder. In the view of Amnesty International the prolongation of detention and the creation of a special court in conditions of near secrecy point to political considerations. While awaiting the government's statement on the proposed trial, to which it was invited to send an observer. Amnesty International pursued its investigations into the cases of those detainees whom it believed were prisoners of conscience, such as Salim Himidi, Ali Toihir, the Radio Comoros journalists Dini Zaid and Salim Youssouf and others. Amnesty International called on the government to bring the detainees to early trial or release them.
A number of unrelated political arrests were reported during 1979 and 1980. Five students, who were without legal representation, were sentenced to short terms of imprisonment in August 1979 for holding student protest meetings in Moroni, the capital, and elsewhere. Amnesty International believed they were prisoners of conscience. Other short-term political detentions, further details of which could not be obtained, were reported from Anjouan in October 1979.
Those detained since 1978 are held in poor conditions in Moroni Central Prison. Family visits, denied totally at first, are still very restricted. Prisoners sleep on mats on the cement floor. Medical treatment is poor, however, seriously ill prisoners are given hospital treatment Little reading material is allowed. Amnesty International urged the government to improve the prison conditions of the detainees.
