Zimbabwe
Zimbabwe achieved independence from the United Kingdom on 18 April 1980, and became the 50th country to join the Organization of African Unity and the 43rd member state of the Commonwealth. The new government headed by Prime Minister Robert Mugabe, which formally took power at independence, was the fourth administration within a year. After elections in 1979, in which the Patriotic Front (PF) parties did not participate, the so-called Transitional Government headed by Ian
94
Smith was replaced at the beginning of June 1979 by a new government under the leadership of Bishop Abel Muzorewa. This in turn was replaced in December 1979. Following the Lancaster House agreement in London, which provided for a return to legality some 14 years after the Unilateral Declaration of Independence (UDI), an interim British administration was established under a Governor, Lord Soames, to supervise majority rule elections as a prelude to the granting of independence. These elections, held in February 1980, resulted in a convincing victory for the two PF parties, which won 77 out of the 80 seats reserved for Africans. Fifty-seven of those seats, an outright majority in Parliament, were won by Robert Mugabe's Zimbabwe African National Union ( ZANU-PF) party. All 20 seats reserved for whites were won by the Rhodesian Front party led by the former Prime Minister, Ian Smith.
The period up to the end of 1979 was characterized by further large-scale violations of human rights as the war between the internal administration and the externally-based Patriotic Front continued and increased in intensity. The establishment of a new government under Bishop Abel Muzorewa in June had no ameliorative effect. The pattern of repression established under previous governments continued unchanged and was indeed further extended when in July t^e new government renewed the state of emergency for another six months and in September further extended martial law. Some 150 long-term political detainees held under the Emergency Powers Regulations were released in July and August, at the time of the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting in Lusaka, Zambia. However, the government refused to free other prominent political detainees at the outset of the Lancaster House Conference in September and it was not until November, when the conference was near its end, that detained political leaders such as the Reverend Canaan Banana and Enos Nkala were released. Even at that time there were conditions attached to their release and it was not until Lord Soames took office as Governor that they were freed of all restrictions. Similarly, some 80 long-term political detainees remained in detention under the Emergency Powers Regulations until January 1980, when Lord Soames ordered their unconditional release.
The most severe violations of human rights prior to the Governor's arrival undoubtedly occurred within the framework of martial law. By May 1979, the martial law regulations first introduced in September 1978 had been imposed in some 90 per cent of the country, giving the Rhodesian security forces and any person assisting them extensive powers of arbitrary arrest and detention without trial. As a result, many thousands of African civilians suspected of supporting or assisting nationalist guerrillas were detained without trial during the
95
period of Bishop Muzorewa's administration. So great were the numbers of those detained that in October 1979 the Ministry of Combined Operations announced that all prisons, including those in the main towns not under martial law, were being declared martial law areas. This was necessary because the prisons and detention camps situated within the 95 per cent of the country by then under martial law could not accommodate all those who had been detained. Details of the numbers of detainees under martial law were at no time revealed by the government but authoritative unofficial sources estimated in August 1979 that there were at least seven thousand. Subsequently, in October, reports suggested that the number of those detained or imprisoned under martial law had risen to between eight and 15 thousand.
The use of torture, already a long-standing problem, increased drastically after the introduction of martial law and as a result of the extension of arbitrary powers to all members of the security forces, including the auxiliaries recruited in large numbers to support Bishop Muzorewa's United African National Council (UANC) and the Zimbabwe African National Union (ZANU) party led by the Reverend Ndabaningi Sithole. In October 1979, an Amnesty International representative informed a United States Congressional committee that the use of torture had by that time reached "epidemic proportions".
With the introduction of martial law, new military courts — S{>ecial Courts Martial — were created with jurisdiction to try political cases in martial law areas. They were given sentencing powers equal to those of the High Court, including the power to impose the death penalty. They were staffed by military officers, often without legal training; no case is known of in which an accused was permitted defence representation. Trials before Special Courts Martial were conducted summarily and in many cases — although precisely how many has never been divulged — those convicted were sentenced to death. Death sentences passed by Special Courts Martial, unlike those of the High Court, were not subject to review by the Appeal Court. Instead, they were referred to a specially established Review Authority, whose unidentified members sat in camera. Also, before 2 May 1979, martial law prisoners sentenced to death had no right to petition the President for clemency, unlike prisoners sentenced to death by the High Court A preliminary court ruling then upheld the rights of martial law prisoners to seek clemency, but in mid-June this decision was overturned by the Appeal Court. Almost immediately, executions held in abeyance pending the outcome of the Appeal Court hearing were carried out and at least 27 prisoners are believed to have been hanged in the last two weeks of June. At the end of July, Bishop
96
Muzorewa's government announced that no martial law prisoners would be executed until their sentences had been confirmed by the President, Josiah Gumede. However, it is uncertain to what extent this decision resulted in a reduction in executions.
No information is available concerning the number of people sentenced to death under martial law. Nor is it possible to know how many executions were carried out, either of martial law prisoners or those sentenced by the High Court, in the period May to December 1979, as all executions have been carried out in secret since April 1977. However, all the indications are that many hangings were carried out in Salisbury's Central Prison, at least until the end of October, at which time they were said to have been discontinued following a request made by British Government representatives at the Lancaster House Conference in London.
The Lancaster House Conference concluded in December with an agreement between the parties to the conflict, the Patriotic Front and the internal administration of Bishop Muzorewa, to return Rhodesia to legality under British rule as a prelude to majority rule elections and independence. As soon as this agreement was achieved, Bishop Muzorewa and his government resigned and in mid-December Lord Soames took up his post in Salisbury as Governor of Rhodesia. Shortly before his arrival, the outgoing administration released some 2,000 convicted political prisoners. However, several thousand other convicted political prisoners were still being held when the Governor took office.
On 18 December 1979 Anilnesty International publicly appealed to the Governor to seize the "unique opportunity" presented by the resumption of British authority to end abuses and promote future respect for human rights. It called on Lord Soames to implement immediately an eight-point program including the unconditional release of all political detainees and the revocation of restriction orders; the abolition of Special Courts Martial and suspension of other political trials; and immediate ending of the use of the death penalty. Amnesty International also urged the Governor publicly to ban torture and establish machinery for investigating torture allegations; to issue an assurance that all political prisoners should be released and to begin preparations for this; and to publish the names of and other relevant details about all people sentenced to death and executed since UDI in 1965. The program also requested that the British authorities should permit the International Committee of the Red Cross access to prisons and detention camps used to hold martial law detainees and sentenced political prisoners in order to investigate their treatment and facilitate their release. Such permission had always been denied by previous administrations.
97
A number of these measures were implemented on the Governor's arrival in Salisbury. Special Courts Martial were suspended with immediate effect and restriction orders imposed on former detainees were revoked. The Governor made clear his intention not to use the death penalty by commuting 11 outstanding death sentences to terms of imprisonment. Consequently no executions took place during the Governor's four-month tenure of office.
Despite these improvements, major issues affecting human rights were still unresolved when an Amnesty International mission visited Salisbury in early January 1980. Detention without trial was still in use, with an estimated 5,000 people still held under the martial law regulations and smaller numbers of detainees held under provisions of the Emergency Powers Regulations. Some releases had occurred but it was not until mid-January that the Governor ordered the release of the last group of long-term detainees held under ministerial order. In addition the Governor maintained previous Rhodesian policy by refusing to grant the International Committee of the Red Cross access to martial law detainees and sentenced political prisoners. In January this latter group of prisoners was estimated by Amnesty International to number between 3,000 and 6,000, but subsequent releases in March and April indicate that the actual total was considerably higher. Very few convicted political prisoners had been released by the time of the mission, although the Governor had set up a review of all convicted prisoners' cases to establish which of them could be classified as political prisoners and released "in the spirit" of the Amnesty Ordinance issued by the Governor on 21 December 1979. This review, in the first instance at least, was carried out by Rhodesian officials with the Governor's administration playing a passive role.
During the Amnesty International mission and in a subsequent public statement issued on 17 January, Amnesty International criticized the Governor's failure to proceed more quickly with the release of detainees and convicted prisoners. Concern was also expressed about the administration's failure to take affirmative action on the question of torture and its refusal to divulge the names of those secretly executed by former Rhodesian administrations. In response, the Governor claimed that torture was already illegal under Rhodesian law and said that it would be "gratuitously offensive" to the police and other Rhodesian forces if he were to take the sort of action suggested by Amnesty International. The Governor also dismissed as "absurdly high" Amnesty International's estimate of5,000 martial law detainees still held but he did not at this time issue alternative figures and he did not accede to its request that independent humanitarian bodies be granted access to them.
The concern of Amnesty International about continuing human
98
rights violations was, in January, brought to the attention also of the leaders of the five main black political parties contesting the election, including former Prime Minister Muzorewa and the joint leaders of the Patriotic Front, Joshua Nkomo and Robert Mugabe. At the same time, Amnesty International appealed to each of these leaders to do everything possible to ensure that their political supporters refrained from any actions that would be contrary to the spirit of reconciliation. A specific request was also made to Robert Mugabe to order the immediate and unconditional release of more than sixty ZANU "dissidents" detained without trial in Mozambique. The British authorities also exerted strong pressure for the release of this group of prisoners. They were freed and allowed to return home from Mozambique at the end of January.
The run-up to the election at the end of February was marked by widespread reports of intimidation and human rights violations, most of which were officially attributed to supporters of Robert Mugabe's ZANU (PF) party. However, many reports were also received, largely from unofficial sources, about alleged violations committed by Rhodesian security forces and the auxiliaries. Several well-known political figures were arrested or detained, although in most cases only briefly, in the weeks immediately prior to the election. They included Garfield Todd, former Prime Minister from 1954 to 1958, and senior ZANU (PF) officials such asDzingai Mutumbuka and Justin Nyoka. One week before the election, on 21 February, Amnesty International again appealed publicly to the Governor to make immediate improvements ¿Tecting human rights.-While welcoming the significant progress already made, particularly the reduction in the number of martial law detainees to below 2,000, Amnesty International condemned the administration's continued use of repressive legislation inherited from the former government and its failure to act more decisively to end outstanding abuses.
Despite this renewed appeal, further progress in restoring human /rights was achieved only after the election, held from 27 to 29 February, had resulted in an outright victory for Robert Mugabe's ZANU (PF) party. The release of the remaining martial law detainees, numbering some 1,3(X), was completed within the next two weeks and martial law was lifted throughout the country on 20 March. The release of convicted political prisoners, only 109 of whom had been recommended for release prior to the election, was also greatly accelerated. A new Amnesty (General Pardon) Ordinance was signed by the Governor on 20 March. This extended the terms of the earlier Amnesty Ordinance of 21 December, by extending a free pardon to all prisoners convicted and imprisoned for politically-motivated offences committed before 1 March 1980. According to
99
official sources, it was expected that "some hundreds" of prisoners would benefit from this measure but this appears to have been a gross underestimate. On 10 April, a week before independence, the Justice Ministry reported that more than 7,600 prisoners had been released under the Governor's amnesty programme, probably one third of whom were convicted political prisoners.
In March, the first steps were also taken to dismantle the system of so-called "protected villages". Since the beginning of guerrilla warfare in the early 1970s, some 200 of these fenced and fortified encampments had been established by the Rhodesian authorities in an attempt to prevent contact between the nationalist guerrillas and the African rural population. By the end of 1979 some 600,000 African civihans had been forcibly removed from their homes into "protected villages", to which they were usually restricted throughout the hours of darkness and in some cases also for much of the day. This situation was ended on 11 March, when all restrictions governing entry into or departure from "protected villages" were lifted; the inhabitants were told that they were free to move back to their former places of residence.
The significant improvements affecting human rights made during the seven weeks between the election and independence were introduced by the Governor in consultation with, and on behalf of, the incoming coalition govemment headed by the Prime Minister designate, Robert Mugabe. However, action was taken almost immediately after independence by the new govemment, several of whose leading members, including Robert Mugabe, were former prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty Intemational. On 21 April President Canaan Banana, also a former prisoner of conscience, acting on the advice of the Cabinet, granted a further amnesty for prisoners who had been excluded in the Governor's amnesty of 20 March. As a result, a fiirther 10,000 prisoners were reported to have been released by 25 April. However, one problem remaining at the end of the period under review was the continuation of the state of emergency, which had been renewed by the Govemor in January, for a further six months.
Amnesty Intemational continued throughout the year to campaign for the release of all prisoners of conscience and for a general amnesty for political prisoners. Substantial relief assistance was made available to individual prisoners of conscience and their dependants by the worldwide membership of Amnesty International. In April 1980 an Amnesty Intemational representative attended the Zimbabwe independence celebrations at the invitation of the govemment of Prime Minister Robert Mugabe.
The Americas
Violations of human rights continued to be widespread in the Americas during the year covered by this Report — 1 May 1979 to 30 April 1980. Torture, disappearances, arbitrary arrests and extrajudicial killings were reported in many countries in the region and especially in Argentina, Chile, El Salvador, Guatemala, Uruguay and Paraguay, where violations of human rights seem to be a permanent feature of government policy dealing with dissenting political groups or individuals.
Among the major concerns of Amnesty International were the political killings and disappearances carried out or acquiesced in by the governments of El Salvador and Guatemala, which led to thousands of deaths; the fate of "disappeared" people in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Haiti and Mexico; the denial of trial to more than 600 people held in Argentina at the disposal of the National Executive Power (PEN), many of whom have been detained for more than four years without charge; use of the death penalty in the United States of America (USA), Barbados, Jamaica, Trinidad and Cuba. The responses of Amnesty International included a campaign on Guatemala, reports on Uruguay and Argentina and submissions on human rights violations in a number of countries to the United Nations and other intergovernmental organizations.
Amnesty International is dismayed at reports that refugees and workers without proper documents are subject to various forms of ill-treatment in several countries, among them: Haitians in the Dominican Republic, Colombians in Venezuela and Mexicans and Haitians in the USA. In the USA instances of police brutality, especially towards ethnic minorities, were severe and resulted in deaths. Amnesty International is concerned also about reports that Haitians arriving illegally in the USA were summarily sent back to Haiti, where some
102
were reportedly imprisoned and tortured. In December 1979 Amnesty International testified before a federal court in Miami, Florida, about human rights in Haiti in a legal case concerning the deportation of Haitian refugees.
In contrast to the high incidence of human rights violations in the region during the year, there were also important events that reflected a great and growing awareness of human rights issues. The new government in Nicaragua incorporated international human rights norms into its legislation. The issue of the death penalty received official attention during the year. Committees were set up in Barbados, Jamaica and Trinidad. Local human rights groups continued their work even under very difficult and dangerous circumstances, such as those in Argentina, El Salvador, Bolivia, Chile and Guatemala. There were several international meetings of human rights activists, such as the one organized in November 1979 in Quito, Ecuador, by the Instituto Latinoamericano de Investigaciones Sociales (ILDIS), Latin American Institute for Social Research, on the subject of human rights in Latin America, and the meeting organized by Amnesty International in San José, Costa Rica, in January 1980, to discuss continental action against torture, "disappearances" and extrajudicial killings. On the intergovernmental side, the Organization of American States (OAS) ratified the statutes of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, and produced reports of importance on Chile, Uruguay, Paraguay, El Salvador, Haiti and Argentina. Following growing international concern over the problem of "disappeared" prisoners, especially in Chile and Argentina, the United Nations set up a special working group to examine this issue and consider the implementation of emergency procedures. The Human Rights Committee, set up under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, during its seventh session on 15 August 1979, for the first time concluded consideration of a communication submitted to it under the Optional Protocol. It was the Committee's view that the communication in question revealed a number of violations by Uruguay, the State Party involved, of the provisions of the Covenant. The communication concerned the case of José Luis Massera Lerena, an Amnesty International adopted prisoner of conscience.
The mission of Amnesty International to Colombia in January 1980 prompted an important public debate on and awareness of human rights in that country.
Amnesty International missions were sent also to the USA, Nicaragua, Guatemala, Bolivia, Mexico, Chile and Brazil.
103
