Cuba
In November 1979 the government announced the end of a program by means of which some 3,600 political prisoners had been released since December 1978. These included many prisoners of conscience, such as Dr Martha Frayde Barraqué. Most of the prisoners who had been given additional sentences for their refusal to cooperate with the prison authorities were released. Eduardo Cuencio Sobrino, arrested in 1962 for "counter-revolutionary" activities and given a 10-year sentence, was re-sentenced four times for a total of 13 additional years but freed through the release program in May 1979. The re-sentencing of political prisoners due for release continued to be a major concern of Amnesty International. In December 1977 an Amnesty International delegation visiting Cuba was informed by the governnient that political prisoners Servando Infante Jiménez, Fermín Álvarez Santos and Pascual Espinoza Alvarez had been given additional sentences due to expire in 1978. They are. however, reported to be still in prison. This suggests they may have been sentenced again to further imprisonment.
The Amnesty International Report 1979 noted the number of offences punishable by the death penalty in a new penal code approved in December 1978, enacted in December 1979. Amnesty International was concerned that a few days before the new code came into force two men were sentenced under Law 425 of 1959, aimed at preventing terrorist activities, which was abolished under the new penal code. The two, American citizens, were given 24-year sentences for dropping religious literature while flying over Cuba and for illegal entry when they landed because of a shortage of fuel.
According to its Article 3(2) the new penal code shall be applied retroactively to offences committed before it came into force if this favours the accused. Article 60 of the Cuban constitution also states that penal laws have retroactive effect if favourable to the accused. However, Angel Cuadra Landrove, an Amnesty International adopted prisoner of conscience, was one such accused who has not benefited from these provisions. Amnesty International lawyers' group appealed for his immediate release.
Armando Valladares Pérez, a prisoner of conscience since 1961, who is reported to be virtually paralysed after undertaking several hunger-strikes, was in an orthopaedic hospital, from which on 2 April 1980 he was taken back to the hospital of the Combinado del Este Prison in Havana. It is feared that his condition may worsen.
127
Amnesty International issued urgent appeals on his behalf.
During 1979 the political prisoners known as plantados — those political prisoners who have refused prison discipline as a protest against their treatment as common criminals — twice went on hunger-strike to protest, first, against the harassment and ill-treatment of a political prisoner, Eloy Gutiérrez Menoyo, and, second, against the transportation, allegedly in appalling conditions, of some 100 prisoners from Combinado del Este Prison to Boniato Prison at the end of July 1979. It is reported that prisoners were taken in small vans totally inadequate to cover the distance of approximately 1,000 kilometres. It is claimed that in Boniato the political prisoners are subject to harassment from the guards and from the common criminals held in the same prison. Amnesty International conveyed its concern about the transfer to the Vice-President.
Amnesty International has obtained information about several political trials held in 1978. Eduardo Gómez Boix was arrested on 30 July 1978, held incommunicado for 45 days on the premises of Seguridad del Estado, state security police, tried and convicted of activities against the security and stability of the nation and sentenced to eight years' imprisonment. In fact, his alleged "crime" consisted only of his having written against the official ideology of the Cuban state, although he never published or distributed his writings. After being held in Seguridad del Estado, he was put under observation for several weeks in a psychiatric hospital among mental patients. He reported that he was subjected to psychological pressure by the medical staff of the institution. From the hospital he was transferred to Combinado del Este Prison where he remained until his release in September 1979. The following is the wording of the judgment passed on Eduardo Gómez Boix:
"Having proved that the accused Amaro Eduardo Gómez Boix, 43 years of age and who is described above, an individual known to be reactionary from his statements and declarations, who several years ago was dismissed from his job as journalist at the Cuban Broadcasting Institute and for that reason began to write several literary works in which he directed his hatred at our revolution, stating among other things that the communist ideology is the cause of all the sorrows and sufferings of the soviet people, that Lenin, Stalin and other communist leaders are all the same since they are the product of a brutal and despotic system, praises and defends the bourgeois way of life and blames the socialist countries and the Palestinians for the wars in Indochina, Africa, America and the Middle East, written works a great quantity of which were taken possession in
128
a search carried out for that purpose in the home of the accused by members of the Department of State Security . . . That the facts that are declared to have been proved constitute an offence AGAINST THE SECURITY AND STABILITY OF THE NATION . . . since the accused, through the production of written propaganda, incited against the Socialist Order and International Solidarity . . . The accused Amaro Eduardo Gómez Boix is sentenced as a perpetrator of a crime against the security and stability of the Nation to eight years' loss of liberty . . .".
During 1979 hundreds of Cubans tried to leave Cuba illegally because of difficulties in obtaining passports and entry visas to the United States of America (USA) or other countries or for political or economic reasons and in some cases to escape prosecution. Those who were caught are reported to have been imprisoned in La Cabaña Prison in Havana. There were several attempts to force entry into the embassies of Peru and Venezuela. These resulted in injuries and in one case in April 1980 a Cuban guard was killed. After the latter incident the government withdrew police protection from the Peruvian Embassy and some 10,000 Cubans rushed onto the premises seeking political asylum. Later, the government decided to grant passports to any person wanting to leave Cuba and provided facilities for them. At the time of writing more than 100,000 Cubans have arrived in the USA.
Amnesty International estimates that at least 250 long-term political prisoners are still held in Cuba. On several occasions, both by letter and in meetings. Amnesty International has requested Cuban officials to pirovide information about the precise charges against these prisoners and details of their trials, which in most cases are reported to have been summary, with insufficient opportunities for the defence. Amnesty International has requested the government to explain case by case the precise reasons for the exclusion of these prisoners from .the release program which came to an end in November 1979. Although the government stated that only terrorists and war criminals would be excluded, many were in fact released. Amnesty International possesses information showing that in most cases the prisoners ought to have qualified for the. amnesty. Relatives have alleged that the decision to hold these prisoners is arbitrary and motivated by their longstanding opposition to the government. Dissimilar treatment seems to have been accorded to prisoners convicted of identical crimes at the same trial: some have been released, others not.
Amnesty International continued to receive information about
129
Jehovah's Witnesses convicted of "crimes" related to their religious beliefs. The religious group is forbidden in Cuba. It is reported that in November 1979 there were at least 20 Jehovah's Witnesses in the women's prison of Nuevo Amanecer in Havana.
