Saudi Arabia
The concerns of Amnesty International were: inadequate trial procedures (characterized by lengthy pre-trial detention and frequent summary trials), the death penalty and ill-treatment of prisoners. Amnesty International does not have sufficient knowledge about political prisoners in the country to be able to assess the extent of political imprisonment.
The Government of Saudi Arabia is in the hands of the Royal family. Justice is administered according to a fundamentalist interpretation of the Shari'a. Islamic law. based on the Qur'an and the Sunna, the way of life and pronouncements of the Prophet. The Kingdom has no constitution but is, according to reports, preparing to introduce an "organic law" in the near future. On 16 April 1980 Amnesty International, in a letter to the Saudi authorities, requested them to introduce legislation that would guarantee freedom of expression, ensure that no individuals could be arbitrarily detained and guarantee all detained individuals a trial without undue delay and according to procedures conforming to internationally recognized standards. In the same letter it called on the authorities to abolish the death penalty and other forms of inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
Islamic law provides the death penalty for adultery (if the convicted person is married), murder, rape and sodomy. Islamic law also provides for the severing of the hand for repeated theft and flogging for grave but lesser offences. During the year under review there were at least four cases of severing of hands for robbery and at least one case known to Amnesty International of flogging for consumption of alcohol. However, the number of Saudis sentenced to flogging may indeed be greater.
Amnesty International was aware of 79 executions during 1979 and the early part of 1980; sixteen were for murder and rape and 63 involved alleged members of the group which attacked the Holy Mosque in Mecca on 9 January 1980. Those executed forthe Mosque attack were convicted of attacking worshippers and sowing dissent among Moslems inside Islam's holiest shrine, according to a fatwa (religious edict) delivered by the religious judges in Mecca. On this occasion. Amnesty International issued a statement condemning the executions and the summary trials and asking the government to abolish the death penalty and to ratify the International Covenant on
352
Civil and Political Rights. One hundred and seventy-three of those who participated in the Mosque attack but were not involved in the fighting received prison sentences of varying length. There are reports that the women and children involved are to be sent to special reform institutions. The total number of those arrested in connection with the Mecca incident is uncertain, but reports indicate that it may be greater than the figures quoted by Amnesty International.
Nasser Said, a Saudi opponent of the government who claims to be the Secretary General of a clandestine opposition group called the Union of the People of the Arabian Peninsula, disappeared on 18 December 1979 in Beirut after informing reporters that his group supported those who attacked the Mosque but did not participate in the attack. Numerous reports allege that the Saudi authorities are responsible for Nasser Said's disappearance but Amnesty International has been unable to confirm them; its inquiry about them to the Saudi authorities has received no reply.
Amnesty International also received information concerning a number of arrests which took place in Qatif and other cities ofthe eastern province heavily populated by Shi'is, after demonstrations expressing Shi'i discontent.
Amnesty Intemational knows of three prisons for criminal offenders, the Jeddah prison, the Dammam central prison and the Riyadh prison, where ill-treatment of prisoners is reported to occur from time to time.
