Korea
(the Republic of)
The main concerns of Amnesty International continued to be political imprisonment, torture and the death penalty. On 26 October 1979 President Park Chung-hee was assassinated by the Director of the Korean Central Intelligence Agency, Kim Jae-kyu. Eight days previously the government had declared martial law in the city of Pusan in the face of student demonstrations and rioting. After President Park's death, martial law was extended to many other parts of the country and a series of martial law provisions was promulgated On 6 December former Prime Minister Choi Kyu-hah was elected President and gave public assurances that he would promote freedom in South Korea. Amnesty International sent a cable to President Choi on 6 December congratulating him on his election and urging him to consider repealing Emergency Regulation No. 9 (ER9) under which an estimated 200 prisoners were then held. It also appealed for the release of all prisoners of conscience. On 7 December President Choi announced that ER9 was rescinded and that 68 prisoners were being released that day.
208
Amnesty International wrote to President Choi on 14 December welcoming these steps and requesting specifically to be informed whether the government would release Kim Chi-ha, the poet, Kang Hee-nam, Presbyterian Minister, and Lee Woo-jae and six other members of the Korean Christian Academy who were among its adopted prisoners of conscience. Amnesty International subsequently learned that the Reverend Kang Hee-nam, who was serving a 10-year sentence, had been released in late December 1979 but that the others remained in prison. On 19 December the government announced an amnesty to celebrate the inauguration of President Choi, including the release of eight prisoners jailed under ER9 but those convicted under other legislation used to suppress political dissent, the Anti-Communist Law and the National Security Law, had not been affected.
ER9 had been used since May 1975 to restrict freedom of expression and suppress political opposition. It prohibited criticism of the constitution, of the government and of ER9 itself and the reporting of dissent and banned political meetings and demonstrations. The majority of prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International since May 1975 had been convicted under the provisions of ER9 restricting freedom of expression. Amnesty International had adopted as prisoners of conscience 10 journalists formerly employed by the Dong-A company, arrested in late 1978 for publishing A Log of Democracy and Human Rights. They had previously been dismissed from the Dong-A for publishing accounts of arrests and detention of students. In May 1979 seven of the journalists were sentenced to terms of imprisonment of one-and-a-half to two-and-a-half years but ail were released in November and December 1979. Others released on the repeal of ER9 were religious leaders and politicians adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience, including Cho t ae-won and Noh Nyung-koo, two students arrested in April and sentenced in August to prison terms of one year and two and a half years respectively for possession of a document critical of the government; Hahn Hwa-kap (press secretary to Kim Dae-jung, a prominent member of the opposition New Democratic Party) arrested in December 1978 for distributing copies of a statement by Kim Dae-jung which contained criticism of the constitution, the useofER9 and the detention of political prisoners; Father Chung Ho-kyung arrested in August for criticizing the arrest of Oh Won-chon, a member of the Catholic Farmers' Association; and two Presbyterian Ministers Kim Kyung-sup and Baik Yoon-suk, arrested in August for criticizing the government
Other prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International had been released under amnesties between May and August 1979. In total 160 political prisoners were freed, nearly all convicted for
209
violations of ER9.
On 3 May the government paroled five students convicted under ER9, who were due for release between May and October. A further 16 were released on 12 May following their "repentance of past deeds", and on 17 July 86 political prisoners, including 64 students, were released by suspension of execution of sentence or on special parole. These included the Reverend Park Hyung-kyu, a Presbyterian minister sentenced to five years' imprisonment for making a speech critical of the government, and Yang Sung-oo, a poet arrested in July 1977, sentenced to five years' imprisonment under ER9 and Article 104 of the Criminal Code for "defamation of the state". On 15 August a further 53 were conditionally released including eight Koreans formerly resident in Japan who had been convicted under the Anti-Communist Law and National Security Law.
Most of these prisoners were released ^conditionally and were liable to re-imprisonment without a new trial. This happened in the cases of three prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International. The Reverend Moon Ik-hwan, Father Moon Chung-hyun and Father Hahm Se-woong had been arrested in connection with a declaration calling for the restoration of basic freedoms and the release of political prisoners. They were re-arrested during 1978 and 1979 for peaceful criticism of the government and imprisoned when the government cancelled suspension of execution of their sentence. They were released in early December 1979.
During January and February 1980 there were some developments towards the restoration of civil rights for former political prisoners. Some universities said they were prepared to reinstate students earlier expelled for political activity. On 15 February Seoul National University announced the reinstatement of the two professors dismissed for their political activities and 243 students of a total of296 expelled for violations of the emergency decrees. On 29 February President Choi Kyu-hah ordered the restoration of civil rights of 648 people who had previously been convicted of violations of the Emergency Regulations, including Kim Dae-jung and former president Yun Po Sun. People convicted under other legislation were not affected
Amnesty International continued to work for the release of prisoners of conscience not affected by these developments because they had been tried under other legislation such as the Anti-Communist Law or the National Security Law. Prosecutions were brought in May 1979 against six staff members of the Korea Christian Academy and a professor who worked with the Academy. On 17 April 1979 the Korean press reported that the seven had been arrested on suspicion of forming a "pro-communist group" in June 1976 because they had listened to North Korean radio broadcasts.
210
possessed Marxist-Leninist books published in North Korea and had tried to "organize a base involving peasants, workers, youths, students and women and spread the secret cell with an aim of building a Socialist State in South Korea". Under the Anti-Communist Law, under which the seven were tried, people who belong to, or are affiliated with, praise, or in any other way encourage or benefit an anti-state organization, may be punished with imprisonment for five to seven years. By 20 April 1979 only three of the accused had been allowed access to their lawyers. None was allowed to see members of their families until 12 May 1979 and Amnesty Intemational received reports that during the trial, which started on 14 July, all the defendants stated that they had been tortured in order to compel them to sign "confessions".
The allegations included prolonged beatings, burning with cigarettes, threats of execution and deprivation of sleep. On the grounds of these allegations, thejudge dismissed the testimony obtained by the Korean Central Intelligence Agency (KCIA) and the prosecutor during interrogation but found all seven guilty on other evidence and sentenced them to terms of imprisonment of between one-and-a-half and seven years. In January 1980 the Appeal Court reduced five of the sentences and acquitted two of the defendants. Another two were given suspended sentences and released. All had been adopted by Amnesty Intemational as prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty Intemational continued to work for the release of Professor Lee Yong-hui convicted in May 1978 under the Anti-Communist Law. He was released in January at the expiry of his sentence.
Amnesty Intemational has repeatedly urged the release of other of its adopted prisoners of conscience, some of them imprisoned for many years. They included those imprisoned in 1974 in connection with the People's Revolutionary Party (PRP) case. In November and December 1979 Amnesty International appealed on humanitarian grounds to President Choi for the release of the poet Kim Chi-ha after it had been leamed that he was again seriously ill with tuberculosis. In November he was moved to Seoul Sudaemoon Prison Hospital. He has been imprisoned since 1975.
Amnesty International also continued to appeal for the release of Soh Sung and Soh Joon-shik arrested in 1971 for their part in widespread student demonstrations in connection with presidential elections. Soh Sung is serving a sentence of life imprisonment His brother Soh Joon-shik remains imprisoned under the provisions of the Public Security Law, although his sentence expired in May 1978. This Law, passed on 8 July 1975, allows for continued imprisonment to "control anti-state criminals and espionage agents for North Korea
211
even after they have finished prison terms".
Eight people were arrested after women workers of the YH Trading Co. protested against the closure of their factories by holding a demonstration at the Seoul office of the New Democratic Party, the main opposition party. Police stormed the building on 11 August 1979. One woman died and on 13 August police arrested the Reverend In Myung-jin of the Urban Industrial Mission, and the Reverend Moon Dong-hwan and Suh Kyung-suk of the Korean Christian Action Organization and Dr Lee Moon-young and Koh Eun, and three leaders of the women's union. They were charged with instigadng the workers' protest actions, under the Law on Assemblies and Demonstradons which prohibits meetings called to protest against or criticize the government or its policies. They were adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience. All were subsequently released on bail in December 1979.
During October and November 1979 up to 140 people were detained in connection with an alleged pro-communist group, the "South Korean National Liberation Front". On 14 November the government announced the arrest of 23 people including Lee Jae-oh, Secretary-General of the Amnesty Intemadonal Korean Committee in South Korea, who had been adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience after his arrest in August for violations of ER9, and Im Hon-yong, literary critic and member of the Executive Board of the Amnesty International Korean Committee. In cables to President Choi, on 16 November, 27 November and 6 December, Amnesty International expressed concern at the arrests and requested full details of the charges. No reply has been received In February 1980 Amnesty International learned that the trial of 73 of the defendants had opened at Seoul District Court. They were accused under the Anti-Communist Law and National Security Law. On 15 April Amnesty International cabled President Choi expressing concern that the prosecution had requested the death sentence for eight defendants. Sentences announced on 2 May included four death sentences and four terms of life imprisonment; 29 defendants received suspended sentences, the others terms of imprisonment ranging from two years to life imprisonment.
A number of political prisoners have been tried under the martial law provisions. These had severely restricted political meetings and discussion of recent events and temporarily closed colleges and universities. On 14 December Amnesty International wrote to President Choi Kyu-hah to request a copy of the martial law provisions and to inquire about people arrested under them, particularly Lee Bu-yong, former reporter on the Dong-A Ilbo and the Reverend Yun Ban-ung, both former Amnesty International adopted prisoners
212
of conscience. They had been sentenced to three years and two years respectively for their involvement with the movement for increased democracy. Yun Ban-ung was exempted from serving his sentence and released on 17 March 1980.
On 27 November Amnesty International sent a cable to President Choi expressing concern at the arrest under martial law of 123 people including Quaker leader Ham Suk-hon and former president Yun Po-sun for organizing a peaceful meeting at Seoul Young Womens' Christian Association (YWCA) to protest against the indirect presidential elections. In February 1980 Amnesty International addressed President Choi about allegations that some 20 of those arrested had been systematically beaten at the Army Security Command Investigation Centre.
Fifty-nine of those arrested were given Summary Court sentences of from 15 to 20 days. Some of the others were released after investigation. Eighteen stood trial for violations of the martial law provisions and were given sentences of imprisonment ranging from two to four years. On 29 January the Seoul garrison commander exempted Ham Sok-hon and Yun Po-sun from serving their prison terms of two years and one year respectively but confirmed sentences of from one to four years on the other 15 defendants.
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the commutation of the death sentences of six Korean residents in Japan and also to press for re-trials to consider evidence of alibi. During the year under review, one of the sentences imposed on Lee Chul was commuted to life imprisonment in the 15 August amnesty. Amnesty International appealed for clemency for all other individuals known to have been sentenced to death, including the seven men convicted of assassinating President Park Chung-hee.
