Kampuchea
Amnesty International concerns centred on the forcible repatriation of Kampuchean refugees to Kampuchea where there was danger of their being imprisoned for political reasons, ill-treated or executed. Amnesty International was concerned also about the detention of people by the authorities of the People's Republic of Kampuchea (PRK) for the purpose of "re-education".
During the year, fighting continued between the forces of the
205
Government of the People's Republic of Kampuchea, established in Phnom Penh, and those of the Government of Democratic Kampuchea, usually referred to as "KhmerRouge", which had been overthrown in January 1979. The latter still controls some areas of the country as well as refugee camps on the Thai border, while the population of other refugee camps along the border with Thailand are controlled by groups of anti-communist opposition forces. More than 150,000 Kampucheans have fled across the border into Thailand to escape the fighting and resulting food shortages.
After having received reliable reports that some civilian Kampucheans had been killed for either planning to escape to Thailand or on being returned from there to Kampuchea, Amnesty International cabled the Prime Minister of Thailand, on 30 April 1979, urging him to grant asylum to all Kampuchean civilians seeking refuge there. On 31 May 1979 Amnesty International also asked representatives of Democratic Kampuchea to "ensure the safety of those civilians who had forcibly been returned to its authority and to abjure any forms of reprisal". After about 40,000 refugees, the majority women and children, were forcibly repatriated at the beginning of June, Amnesty International again cabled the Prime Minister of Thailand, on 15 June 1979, urging him to grant temporary asylum to refugees who faced the risk of being returned
The plight of the Indochinese refugees, their ever-growing numbers and the increasing inability of the countries to which they fled to cope with a situation of such immense proportions, led to an international conference in Geneva on Indochinese refugees. On 18 July 1979, Amnesty International cabled Dr Kurt Waldheim, the Secretary-General of the United Nations, at the opening of the conference expressing concern for Kampuchean refugees threatened with possible death, torture or political imprisonment, if returned to their country or not rescued from the border region where thousands were concentrated. It urged the conference to ensure that no further refoulement of Kampuchean refugees take place, that the tens of thousands forcibly repatriated during the previous months be allowed to re-enter camps in Thailand and that all participating countries make every possible effort to assist the Thai authorities to flnd a more lasting solution. Since May 1979, the national sections of Amnesty International had been urging the governments in their countries to facilitate such a solution, more especially when there were reports in early 1980 that groups of refugees were subjected to ill-treatment in the camps in Thailand and again faced increased danger of forcible repatriation.
In August 1979 a special tribunal established by the PRK tried in absentia Pol Pot and leng Sary, the Prime Minister and Foreign Minister in the overthrown Government of Democratic Kampuchea.
206
They were charged with genocide and both were condemned to death. During the trial, witnesses testified to having participated in arrests for political reasons and in torture and killings committed on the orders of the authorities of Democratic Kampuchea. Victims of imprisonment and torture also testified against the accused Khmer Rouge leaders. Documents on prisons and mass graves also were presented to the court.
Amnesty Intemational received little documented information about people who were tried and sentenced to a term of "reeducation" after the directive of the Kampuchea People's Revolutionary Council (KPRC) of 15 April 1979. Throughout the year under review, broadcasts from Radio Phnom Penh reported that soldiers of the armed forces of Democratic Kampuchea who had been captured or who had surrendered to the new authorities were allowed to rejoin their families after a short period of" re-education" and after they had, according to the broadcasts, "promised to do their best to redeem themselves and become new citizens". In mid-November 1979, the KPRC issued a memorandum on an amnesty, to take effect on 7 January 1980, the first anniversary of the overthrow of the government of Democratic Kampuchea. The memorandum specified that "prisoners detained after investigation showing that they owed only a small blood debt to the people, who after successful re-education have become awakened, grasped the line of the Kampuchea National United Front for National Salvation (KNUFNS) and KPRC, confessed and admitted their wrongdoing done to the nation and people, and have pledged to reform and follow the line of the KNUFNS and KPRC, will be released . . .". Amnesty Intemational has, at the time of writing, not received any confirmation of those releases.
