Mauritania
The main concerns of Amnesty International were arrest and detention without trial of political opponents of the government.
During a year of political instability Mauritania saw seversd changes of government and important shifts in foreign policy. In a bloodless reshuffle on 3 June 1979 Lieutenant-Colonel Mustapha Ould Saleck was ousted as President of the Republic and replaced by Lieutenant-Colonel Mohammed Mahmoud Ould Louly. On 5 August 1979 Mauritania signed a peace treaty with the Frente Popular para la Liberación de Saguia el Hamra y Rio de Oro (POLISAÍUO), People's Front for the Liberation of Saguia el Hamra and Rio de Oro, thereby renouncing all claims to the disputed Tiris el Gharbia region of former Spanish Sahara. On 7 January 1980 Lieutenant-Colonel Mohammed Khouna Ould Haidalla became President, adding to his other portfoUos of Prime Minister and of Minister of Defence.
On 10 July 1979 the government announced the release of 22 detainees, arrested in May 1979 — this followed protests by the black communities against government proposals to strengthen the "Arabi-zation" of school curricula. This educational policy was widely seen by the non Arabic-speaking black communities as a means to increase the power of the politically dominant Maure (Arab-Berber) community, by restricting the educational advance of black pupils. After the release of the detainees in July 1979 the government ordered a six-year moratorium on its "Arabization" plans.
On 4 October 1979'^rmer President Moktar Ould Daddah, overthrown by a military coup in July 1978, was reportedly freed from
63
detention and allowed to travel abroad. One week later three former ministers of his government, Hamdi Ould Mouknass, Ahmed Ould Mohammed Salah and Boubakar Alpha, were placed under house arrest Amnesty International appealed to the Government of Mauritania for the release of these prisoners and of a former member of parliament, Mohammed Lamine Ould Hormatallah, arrested earlier in the year. The government has not answered this appeal.
On 1 April 1980 the government announced that it had arrested and would bring to trial an unspecified number of members of a clandestine movement in favour of greater equality for the Haratine, Arabic-speaking freed slaves of the Maures. Amnesty International has received reports that possibly as many as 50 suspected members of this movement were arrested after demonstrations on 10 March 1980 in the capital, Nouakchott, and several other towns. It is reported that they will be tried for offences against the security of the state.
Amnesty International has received reports of the house arrest in mid-April 1980 of several former high officials, including the Chief of Staff and the director of the nationalized SNIM company, both named Ahmedou Ould Abdallah. These arrests are believed to have taken place after renewed disagreements about Mauritania's relationship to its Arab neighbours, Morocco and Algeria, in the wake of its withdrawal from the Saharan war. At the time of writing Amnesty International was investigating their cases.
