Uruguay
Amnesty Intemational concems in Uruguay are the high number of prisoners of conscience, torture, unconstitutional detention procedures and trial proceedings that do not conform to recognized standards of fairtrial. On27 June 1979 Amnesty International issued a report-Po/Ziica/ Imprisonment in Uruguay to coincide with the sixth anniversary of the dissolution of the elected parliament which marked Umguay's transition to de facto military mle.
Among the 14 prisoners of conscience whose cases were presented in the report are: retired general U'ber Seregni, aged 63, presidential candidate in the 1971 elections; trade union leader Héctor Rodri guez, aged 61, former member of parliament and labour delegate to the International Labour Organisation; primary school teacher Didaskó Pérez Baccino, aged 43, Secretary General of the Federación Uruguaya de Magisterio, Umguayan Teachers' Federation, at the time of his arrest; nurse Ana María Salvo, aged 25, abducted by joint Umguayan and Argentinian security forces in Argentina and clandestinely transferred to Umguay; Alfonso Fernández Cabrelli, municipal lawyer, historian and journalist; Julio Castro, aged 70, educator, journalist and UNESCO expert on literacy training, who remains "disappeared" since his arrest in August 1977. They were charged with "attack on the morale of the Army and the Navy", "subversive association" or "assistance to a subversive association" because of their writings, trade union work or political affiliation. The charge of subversive association applied to present or past support for the main trade union organization Convención Nacional de Trabajadores, National Convention of Workers, or any of the 14 political groups and parties outlawed by decree in 1973.
166
The repon scrutinizes the system of military justice which deals with all cases of people accused of political or trade union activities. The Law of National Security of 1972 brought civilians under military justice despite a clear provision to the contrary in the constitution. A decree law of 1975 made military justice retroactively applicable to cases where the alleged offences had been committed before 1972. Because civilian defence lawyers have been severely harassed, most prisoners have had a military officer without legal training appointed by the state as defence counsel. Thus, members of the armed forces intervene at all stages of a case in which it is alleged that a political offence has been committed: the citizens are arrested without warrant by members of the armed forces; they are hooded and subjected to various forms of violence, and taken to some military barracks for interrogation and torture; after "confession" they are brought before a military examining magistrate to ratify their statements; either they do not dare to retract them, for fear of being returned for renewed torture, or, if they do so, the juez de instrucción, military examining magistrate, takes no notice of their retractions and allegations of ill-treatment; the prosecutor is a military officer, and so in most cases is defence counsel; the juez de primera instancia, trial judge, is a military officer, as are all the members of the Supremo Tribunal Militar, the Supreme Military Tribunal, who hear the appeals, compulsory in all cases where the sentence is more than three years' imprisonment Amnesty International stated, when publishing its report, that this closed circle of military justice for those who are believed to disagree with the ideology and policies of the ruling armed forces has ensured that "all safeguards against unlawful detention have been eliminated" and that "there are no longer any domestic remedies against arbitrary imprisonment, torture and death at the hands of the armed forces and the police".
The report examined conditions in a variety of detention centres and prisons. Political detainees are first held incommunicado in military barracks or police departments for a considerable time. This is where interrogation takes place, and torture has become routine practice: — plantón, prolonged standing; submarino, immersion in water until near drowning; picana eléctrica, electric shocks; hanging by the wrists.
After presentation before the juez de instrucción, military examining magistrate, most prisoners are transferred to military prisons, the men to the Establecimiento Militar de Reclusión No. 1 (EMR 1) also called the Penal de Libertad after the small town in which it is situated, the women to Establecimiento Militar de Reclusión No. 2 (EMR 2) or Penal de Punta de Rieles, a district of the capital Montevideo. Some prisoners were held in a special sector of the
167
common prison Punta Carretas until mid-1979 when most of them were transferred to EMR 1. It is interesting to note that the 20 imprisoned military officers are not held in the military prison under the authority of the Ministry of Defence but'm Punta Carretas and in the police headquarters, both of which are under the authority of the Ministry of the Interior and the civilian administration of the Director of Penal Institutions.
The report also contained an interview with former First Lieutenant Julio César Cooper, who had himself taken part in the torture of political detainees and was able to confirm the information on torture held by Amnesty International from his own experience in the armed forces. "Ninety per cent of the members of the armed forces take an active part in the torture of political detainees", Lieutenant Cooper affirmed.
Amnesty International concluded by urging the government to "release all prisoners of conscience; ensure that law enforcement agencies observe the legal safeguards enshrined in the constitution and international instruments to which Uruguay is a party; return to ordinary justice in accordance with the Uruguayan Constitution (Article 253); establish an independent inquiry into all allegations of unlawful arrest and detention, ill-treatment and torture, and in proven cases provide for compensation for the victims, according to Uruguay's undertakings under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights".
The government has neither replied to these recommendations nor implemented them.
A considerable number of prisoners have been released in the past year, mostly at the expiry of sentences ranging from three to six years. Several prisoners died from a combination of illness, neglect and ill-treatment in prison, while others, such as Amnesty International adopted prisoners of conscience Ruben Porteiro Pérez and Héctor Gómez, were released a few days before their deaths from terminal illnesses. Arrests and reports of torture have decreased since the waves of arrests that took place from 1975 to 1977.
However, there are still at least 1,500 prisoners of conscience and other political prisoners (in a population of two and a half million); those "disappeared" after arrest have not yet been accounted for, either dead or alive; no investigations of torture allegations have taken place and people are still being arrested without legal guarantees.
Amnesty International allocated the cases of 164 people to its groups for adoption as prisoners of conscience or for further investigation, bringing the total number of prisoners on whose behalf it worked to more than 400.
It issued nine urgent appeals, mostly concerning prisoners' serious
168
ill-health. Several prisoners were in urgent need of operations or other medical treatment that cannot be provided by the military prison hospital. One such appeal urged the release on humanitarian grounds of Mario Walter Soto who was suffering from terminal cancer.
An urgent appeal was issued on behalf of Carlos Ramos, arrested with a number of other people in early December 1979 and held incommunicado in the police headquarters. Amnesty International lawyers' groups interceded on behalf of lawyer Dr Ramón Diaz, editor of the economic review Búsqueda who was arrested in March for an article he had written in 1977 criticizing changes in the legal system by Institutional Act No. 8. Charged with desacato, insulting behaviour, he was pardoned by President Aparicio Méndez and released after a week's detention. Amnesty International also pleaded on behalf of those prisoners who had served their sentence or whose release the military judge had granted before the expiry of their sentence, when the executive power ignored the judicial ruling and kept them in detention nnátr Medidas Prontas de Seguridad(MPS), prompt security measures. Textile worker and trade union leader Juan Ángel Toledo Reyes, aged 48, was arrested in mid-Í977 and sentenced to two years' imprisonment. In December 1978 he was granted provisional release but instead was transferred to the Fourth Cavalry Regiment, where detainees under MPS are held in disused railway carriages, in conditions of overcrowding and in notably unhygienic conditions, plagued hy flies and rats. Although the military doctor had exempted Juan Angel Toledo from physical work because of knee injuries, he was reportedly obliged to perform forced hard labour such as quarrying stone, carrying bricks and hoeing the land Amnesty International has also expressed concern about several people "retained" under MPS after the expiry of a comparatively short sentence, in the Artillery Group No. 4 in the town of San Ramón, and several women in similar situations held in military barracks in the town of Paso de los Toros.
Amnesty International made public eight detailed testimonies of torture and other illegal procedures to which political detainees have been subjected. It had adopted as a prisoner of conscience Alcides Lanza, aged 61, an experienced trade unionist and leader of the shop employees' union, who was released in July 1979 after three and a half years' imprisonment In his testimony he described a method of torture applied to male prisoners previously unknown to Amnesty International, el chanchito, the littie pig. The prisoner is put in a wooden box, lying for hours on end on a narrow iron bar, with his hands handcuffed behind his back. Another and more severe variation of this torture involves the use of a T-shaped iron bar with the sharp end upwards; the prisoner is raised towards the lid of the box with his
169
toes hardly touching the floor. The constant pressure on his testicles makes any movement impossible. "After many hours of this torture, I was unable to move, and my legs, hips and arms were completely numb," Alcides Lanza stated
In September 1979 there were persistent reports that harassment had greatly increased in the Penal de Libertad. Frequent exercise drills at night accompanied by various forms of brutality and violence, and the placing of some common law prisoners in this strictly political prison gave rise to speculations that there was a premeditated plan to provoke an uprising among the prisoners. This prisoner protest, it was suggested, would then give the prison guards a pretext for shooting down a number of prisoners. Although there could be no conclusive evidence that such a plan existed. Amnesty International considered the fears of the relatives and the incidents that did take place serious enough for it to express its concern to the authorities.
After three years' suspension the International Committee of the Red Cross was able at the beginning of 1980 to resume its visits to Uruguayan prisons.
International intergovernmental organizations have remained critical of the failure by the government to honour its international undertakings in the field of human rights. At the General Assembly of the Organization of America States (OAS), held in La Paz in October 1979, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (lACHR) again presented a critical report on Uruguay which led to the adoption of a resolution by the assembly. The government continues to refuse the lACHR permission to conduct an on-site investigation.
In August 1979 the Human Rights Committee established under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights adopted its first resolution on a complaint submitted to it the case of former member of parliament José Luis Massera Lerena and members of his family. The Committee resolved that there had been breaches of Articles 7, 9 (2,3,4), 10(1), 14 (1,2,3) and 25, and declared that the government " is under an obligation to take immediate steps to ensure strict observance of the provisions of the Covenant and to provide effective remedies to the victims". The government has not yet complied with its obligation to submit a report on the human rights situation to the Committee.
Amnesty International submitted information on Uruguay to the Secretary-General of the United Nations for consideration at the United Nations Commission on Human Rights. Uruguay has been listed by the Commission for the past three years as being on its confidential agenda.
The Uruguayan Government announced in 1979 that the draft of a new constitution would be submitted to a referendum in November
170
1980. The text has not yet been made public. According to a government representative, several of the Institutional Acts decreed by the government since 1976 will be incorporated in the new constitution.
