Taiwan
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about new arrests and the continued detention of suspected political opponents on charges of sedition under the provisions of martial law drawn up afterthe state of siege was declared in 1949; the holding of trials and appeal reviews by military tribunals and the inadequacy of basic legal safeguards; instances of torture and ill-treatment during interrogation and the use of the death penalty as punishment for certain criminal and political offences. These concerns were described in Taiwan (Republic of China): Amnesty Intemational Briefing Paper, published on 20 March 1980. Also mentioned were the cases of several among the more than 110 |X)litical prisoners whose cases have been taken up by Amnesty International, 53 of these were adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience. In this publication it was stated that several hundred were believed to be detained on political grounds. The exact figure was not certain.
During mid-1979, several writers were detained for short periods. Among them were Chen Po-wen, a 43-year-old Taiwanese writer, and Yang Yu-jung, owner of a printing company. Both were arrested on 7 August 1979 at Yang Yu-jung's printing company where issue No. 46 of Ch'ao liu (Time) was being printed, a hand-written mimeographed paper which covered the sessions of the Taiwan Provincial Assembly and the activities of the opposition. Both were release^ on bail on 23 August 1979. Chen Po-wen was re-arrested in December 1979 for his participation in a demonstration in Kaohsiung.
In early September 1979, Amnesty International appealed for the
236
release of Hung Chi-Hang, publisher of Fubao Chihsheng (Demo Voice). Hung Chi-liang, who was a candidate in the December 1978 supplementary parliamentary elections, was arrested on 30 August 1979 on suspicion of sedition in connection with a visit he had made to the People's Republic of China earlier that year. Amnesty International issued similar appeals for the release of Chang Hua-min, a 54-year-old historian, who was arrested on 4 September 1979 on suspicion of sedition in connection with his writings. He had previously been adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience when, in 1966, he was sentenced to eight years' imprisonment on charges of making pro-communist propaganda. After his release in 1974 he continued to write political essays, most of which were banned, and actively supported an opposition candidate during the December 1978 election campaign. On 30 October 1979 Amnesty International wrote to Prime Minister Sun Yuan-Suan expressing concern about the continued detention incommunicado of both Hung Chi-liang and Chang Hua-min, requesting information of the charges against them and recommending that they should be allowed immediate access to a lawyer of their choice. Chang Hua-min was charged with making pro-communist propaganda and sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment by a military court which tried him in camera at the end of January 1980. He was again adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience. Hung Chi-liang was charged on 29 December 1979 with accepting Communist instructions to conduct opposition activides advocating peaceful reunification with the People's Republic of China and to overthrow the government. He was tried by military court on 11 April 1980. At the time of writing, the verdict had not been announced. Amnesty International also urged the unconditional release of Li Ching-jung, a 5 3-year-old journalist and editor of Fubao Chihsheng who was detained for one day on 3 October 1979 on suspicion of sedition, re-arrested on 26 December 1979 and subsequently held incommunicado for almost four months. Li Ching-jung was eventually charged with sedition for writing articles advocating the peaceful reunification of Taiwan with the People's Republic of China and spreading propaganda beneficial to the Communists and was tried by a military tribunal on 25 April 1980. At the time of wriUng, the verdict had not yet been announced.
Mass arrests took place after a Human Rights Day demonstration in Kaohsiung on 10 December 1979 (known as the "Kaohsiung incident"). The demonstration was organized by the Meilitao {¥ormosz) magazine which began publication in August 1979 and whose editorial board comprised a coalition of the different strands of opposition to the Nationalist government. It ended in violent clashes with the police. On 13 December 1979 Amnesty International cabled
237
President Ciiiang Ching-lcuo, asicing for confirmation of the arrests and requesting to be informed of the specific charges. In another cable on 18 December 1979, it urged the immediate release of all those detained in violation of the right to freedom of expression. Upon receiving reports of ill-treatment of some detainees including Lin Yi-hsiung. Amnesty Internationa! cabled the President on 10 January 1980, requesting his government to investigate these reports and to allow all prisoners immediate access to their lawyers and families, and also urging his government to release immediately people against whom no evidence had been produced showing that they were directly involved with the violence which occurred at the end of the demonstration. On 11 January 1980 Taiwan military authorities stated they had detained more than 150 people in connection with the Kaohsiung incident of which, they said, 87 had already been released. Amnesty International received a communication from the Government Information Office dated 5 February 1980, saying that "the government has carefully investigated the reports of maltreatment during the interrogation of prisoners and attests that they are completely false".
Also, in February 1980, Amnesty International sent a two-member delegation to Taiwan, Professor C. F. Ruter. a Dutch Professor of Criminal Law, and a member of its International Secretariat, to convey to the appropriate authorities the concern of Amnesty International about the recent arrests and to inquire about the legal situation of those detained The delegation expressed concern about the fact that detainees had already been held incommunicado for more than two months; the validity of confessions made under such circumstances and requested assurances that the rights of defence would be fully respected. The delegates also met members of the prisoners' families and their lawyers, and visited Green Island prison where, according to the authorities, 115 detainees were then held. The delegates interviewed political prisoners whose cases were known to Amnesty International, some had been detained for almost 30 years.
The trial by military court of eight people charged with sedition commenced on 18 March and lasted nine days. Amnesty International commissioned Dr M. Sandor, lecturer in law at Hong Kong university, to observe it. The accused were: Huang Hsin-chieh, member of the Legislative Yuan; Shih Ming-teh, general manager of Formosa; Yao Chia-wen, attorney-at-law; Chang Chun-hung, member of the Taiwan Provincial Assembly; Lin Yi-hsiung, lawyer and member of the Taiwan Provincial Assembly; Lin Hung-hsuan; Lu Hsiu-lien, lawyer and director of a publishing house; and Chen Chu. All had either executive or editorial functions on the Meilitao magazine. The government alleged that the Meilitao magazine was a legal cover for
238
subversion and iiad been used to instigate the Kaohsiung incident and increase public violence to that end. The defendants made statements in court in which they denied the charges and withdrew confessions which they said had been obtained by illegal means, including deprivation of sleep, threats, fraud, intimidation and violence. On 18 April 1980 the defendants were all found guilty: Huang Hsin-chieh was sentenced to 14 years' imprisonment; Shih Ming-teh to life imprisonment and the other six to 12 years. The court based its decision on confessions made during interrogation and the pre-trial hearings from which the defendants' own lawyers were barred. It dismissed objections to trial by a military court and to the validity of the retracted confessions and refused defence requests to produce and cross-examine witnesses as well as other material evidence. The eight defendants joindy appealed and requested that the case be transferred to a civil court.
Thirty-three others, many of them writers who contributed to Meilitao magazine, or office staff, also arrested for their involvement in the Kaohsiung incident, were charged with " interference in public, functions" or committing "acts of violence or threats" against policemen and directing others to do so. Investigation hearings by a civilian court were held from 16 to 18 April 1980. A number of defendants revoked their previous depositions which, they said, had been extracted through "illegal means" and in some cases had been "fabricated" by their interrogators.
On 30 April 1980, 10 others were charged by a military prosecutor with helping one of the defendants in the previous trial to escape arrest Eight were held incommunicado at the beginning of January. Another, C.M. Kao, Secretary General of the Presbyterian Church, was arrested on 24 April 1980. On 25 April 1980, Amnesty Intemational sent a cable to President Chiang Ching-kuo, expressing its concem about his arrest
In early 1980 Amnesty Intemational welcomed the release on bail for medical reasons of Yu Teng-fa, one of its adopted prisoners of conscience who had been tried in March 1979 and sentenced to eight years' imprisonment It also expressed its concem about the execution on 29 May 1979 of Wu Tai-an, an alleged communist "agent" who had been sentenced to death for "conspiracy" in April 1979 after appearing as a prosecution witness in the March 1979 trial of Yu Teng-fa.
239
