Malawi
The main concerns of Amnesty International remained detention without trial, harsh prison conditions and the treatment of Jehovah's Witnesses.
There were signs of renewed tension in early 1980 when it was announced that several prominent political figures had been dismissed from office and expelled from the ruling Malawi Congress Party (MCP). One of those dismissed, Gwanda Chakuamba Phiri, was widely regarded as a close confidant of President Hastings Kamuzu Banda. Before his removal from office in February 1980, Gwanda Chakuamba Phiri held two ministerial portfolios, with responsibility for both the Southern Region and for Youth and Culture. He was responsible also for the Young Pioneers — the youth wing of the party. They remain a powerful force in Malawi politics. After his dismissal, Gwanda Chakuamba Phiri was reported to have been detained.
Among other senior figures removed from office early in 1980 was Aleke Banda, a former Secretary General of the MCP and in recent years managing director of the nationally important Press Holdings company and other national institutions. He was dismissed from all his posts in January, for alleged "gross breaches of party discipline". The same allegation was made against David Basa Kaunda, another former cabinet minister, on his expulsion from the MCP on 13 February, six weeks after his dismissal as Minister of Local Government. As all members of parliament must be members of the MCP — the only legal political party — David Basa Kaunda automatically lost his parliamentary seat when he was expelled from the MCP. According to some reports, he has been detained.
The use of detention without trial has been a persistent problem throughout the years since independence in 1964. It does not, however, appear to have been used extensively since 1977, when more than two thousand long-term political detainees were released. At that time, Albert Muwalo Nqumayo, a former Minister of State in the President's office, was blamed for the widespread use of detention. However, despite Muwalo's execution for treason in September 1977, the government has yet to introduce any significant reforms affecting human rights and remains obdurate in its refusal to respond to inquiries, interventions or appeals from abroad. In March 1980 the United Nations Commission on Human Rights drew attention to this obduracy and publicly criticized the government for its failure to
59
cooperate or even reply to the Commission, which since 1977 had been trying to investigate the alleged persecution of Jehovah's Witnesses.
Amnesty International was not able to estimate the number of political detainees. They were believed to include several former associates of Albert Muwalo Nqumayo, at least one former government minister and two chiefs arrested in 1973. Late in 1979, Amnesty International learned of the rearrest of a former political detainee who had been held for several months in 1977, and in March 1980 made a formal inquiry about him to the Commissioner of Police but no response was received. Late in March 1980, Amnesty International urged President Banda to order the immediate and unconditional release of all prisoners of conscience and long-term political detainees, to mark the 20th anniversary of his own release from detention on 1 April 1960 during the nationalist struggle for independence.
