Thailand
The concerns of Amnesty International were prisoners of conscience, detention of political prisoners without trial, the death penalty and the re^w/emewiof Kampuchean refugees.
On 1 August 1979 the Thai Parliament repealed one martial law provision, Martial Law Decree No. 22 of the National Administrative Reform Council (promulgated in 1976), which provided for the indefinite detention of prisoners without trial for "endangering society". On 9 November 1977 the govemment had stated that 887 prisoners were held under that decree, many were believed by Amnesty Intemational to be held for political reasons. Prime Minister Kriangsak Chamanand had himself expressed concern about the application of this legislation when stating in parliament that "as time passed by there were complaints against the abuse of powers".
The repeal of Decree No. 22 was welcomed by Amnesty International in a cable to General Kriangsak on 7 August 1979. Amnesty Intemational also requested a list of names of the released prisoners and information about two of its adopted prisoners of conscience, Vichai and Somboon Barnlu-Silp, who had been arrested in October 1976 under the Anti-Communist Law. Both were subsequently acquitted and released in February 1980.
Further information about the release of prisoners was obtained from official sources on 9 August 1979 when a spokesman for the Corrections Department was reported as having stated that 500 people would be due for release as a result of the repeal but that more than one third were expected to be held on other charges. It was reported that 351 of the detainees were held in prison and that 200 were held in police stations. Of the detainees in prison, but due for release, 103 were rearrested immediately on other unspecified charges.
Despite the repeal of the martial law provisions, restrictive legislation such as the Febmary 1979 Prevention of Communist Activities Act, under which political prisoners can still be held without trial, continued in force. Prison sentences of up to 10 years or even life can be imposed for "communist activities" which are broadly defined by the Act. Suspects can be held without trial for 180 days on the orders of the Director General of the Police Department and a court can order further detention of 270 days. Under Decrees No. 8 and 29 of October 1976, individuals arrested for offences under
240
the Act are to be tried by a special military court and have no right of appeal.
Amnesty International learned that detainees about whom it was concerned, Supap Pas-Ong and six others, who had been arrested in connection with trade union activities in March 1976 and tried on charges of "communist activity", had been acquitted and released on 15 August 1979. It had investigated their cases and had urged that their trial be expedited.
On 20 November 1979 the criminal court of Bangkok acquitted Udom Pkakrom and 10 co-defendants of charges of involvement in an attack by communist insurgents on a military camp, resulting in the killing of soldiers and civilians. The defendants had denied any involvement in the attack, and claimed that they were arrested on false charges for having been critical of the authorities. Two of the accused, Chao Chainarong and Vinai Boonwan were reported to have been rearrested on respective charges of robbery and possessoin of narcotics but, to the knowledge of Amnesty International, they have not been tried. Their cases are at present being investigated by Amnesty International.
Early in 1980 General Kriangsak resigned in the face of growing discontent with the economic policies of his government. On 3 March 1980 General Prem Tinsulanonda, Chief of the Army and Defence Minister, was elected Prime Minister.
Shortly after the new government came to power, the Interior Minister, Pratnang Kiratiburti, announced that the police had been instructed to take coordinated action to fight crime and that he would formally propose to the government and parliament that the death penalty be made mandatory for "the most serious offences" including rape, kidnapping and murder. In April 1980 Amnesty International expressed concern about this proposal to several government ministers and stated that it was unconditionally opposed to the death penalty.
During the year Amnesty International was concerned about the plight of refugees from Kampuchea who crossed the border into Thailand After receiving reports that 42,000 Kampuchean refugees had been forcibly repatriated from 2 to 12 June 1979 by Thai police and that police brutality occurred during the repatriation. Amnesty International appealed on 15 July to the Secretary-General of the United Nations urging the conference held under the auspices of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees that "no further refoulement of Kampuchean refugees take place, that the tens of thousands of refugees forcibly repatriated during the past months be allowed to re-enter transit camps in Thailand and that all participating countries make every possible effort to assist the Thai authorities in finding a more permanent solution". Earlier, in May 1979, Amnesty
241
International had appealed to the Thai Prime Minister to stop further refoulement of the thousands of Kampuchean refugees who had crossed the border. Amnesty International welcomed the subsequent action of the Thai authorities in allowing the refugees to remain in Thailand.
