Algeria
The concerns of Amnesty International were arrests of individuals for exorcising the right of political expression, the restriction still placed on Ahmed Ben Bella, reports of ill-treatment and the passing of death sentences.
In February 1980 Algeria completed its first year under the Presidency of General Chadli Benjedid who succeeded Houari Boumedienne. During the year there were a number of incidents of social unrest
322
leading to arrests which appear to constitute punishment for the expression of political views.
In September and October 1979, in preparation for the celebration in November of the 25 th anniversary of the Algerian revolution, the authorities launched a "cleaning-up" campaign which resulted in many arrests. According to official figures, more than 1,000 were arrested, tried and sentenced to periods of between three months and four years in prison, more than half receiving sentences of six months or more. Although many were sentenced for petty crimes and misdemeanours, several reports indicate that some of those imprisoned were political opponents of the govemment. Press reports from Algeria spoke of the establishment of work camps for some of those arrested. Others were reported to have been conscripted into the armed forces.
In January 1980 demonstrations broke out in several cities in eastern Algeria, apparently led by Moslem activists protesting against practices such as the serving of alcohol in restaurants which, they claimed, violated Islamic standards. Amnesty Intemational does not know how many demonstrators were arrested.
In March and April 1980 govemment security forces arrested in Tizi-Ouzou, the principal town of the Berber Kabyle region of Algeria, hundreds of demonstrators and a number of known proponents of Kabyle culture, calling for greater rights of Berber cultural expression. This movement gained force after the government decided in January and February 1980 to establish a precise timetable for the "Arabization" of public administration, the economic sector and higher education.
On 23 April 1980 Amnesty International sent a cable to the Algerian Govemment, followed by urgent appeals from its worldwide membership, expressing concern about the arrests of members of the staff of Tizi-Ouzou University, of the hospital and of the state electricity company, where there were strikes supporting Berber demands. Official reports stated that 32 people had been arrested, tried and sentenced and that 40 of the security forces and protesters had been injured. Reports of up to 30 dead have not been confirmed. By the end of April 1980, calm had apparently returned to the Kabyle region.
The situation of the one prisoner of conscience adopted by Amnesty Intemational in Algeria, former President Ahmed Ben Bella, improved to some extent during the year. On4 July 1979 it was announced that he would be released from prison in Douira the next day, as an act of clemency on the occasion of the 17th anniversary of independence. However, it soon became clear that he had not been released but placed under house arrest. He now lives with his family in
323
Msila, a town southeast of Algiers; he is permitted visitors but they are subject to surveiHance; he is not allowed telephone calls and his mail, is censored from time to time.
During the year Amnesty International received occasional reports of ill-treatment in Algerian prisons, in particular in Tizi-Ouzou. These accounts allege beatings, particularly falaqa, beatings on the soles of the feet. Amnesty International has not been able to confirm this information.
Algeria retains the death penalty, usually commuted to life imprisonment. According to the 1980 United Nations publication. Capital Punishment: Report of the Secretary General. 42 death sentences were passed in Algeria between 1974 and 1978, but only one was carried out (this United Nations report publishes information received from member states). Amnesty International received' reports of death sentences passed on Massaoud Mohamed, for murder, and on a Moroccan citizen, Abdelhaq Ben Abdessalem Meti. In both instances, Amnesty International cabled President Benjedid, requesting commutation of the sentences on humanitarian grounds but it has not been able to confirm whether the sentences were, in fact, commuted.
