Nigeria
The major concern of Amnesty International continued to be the death penalty.
Nigeria returned to civilian rule on 1 October 1979, when the military authorities duly handed over power to the government of President Shehu Shagari. The new Nigerian constitution either repealed or modified several decrees enacted during military rule. Of particular
68
significance was the abolition of special military tribunals which imposed mandatory death sentences, without the possibility of appeal, for seven offences, including armed robbery and treason. Although the death penalty still remained mandatory /or a reduced number of offences, all of these were placed under the jurisdiction of the High Courts, with the possibility of appeal to the Federal Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court. In. a presidential amnesty on 1 October 687 prisoners convicted of criminal offences were released.
During the first months of office the new administration took several positive measures regarding executions and prisoners convicted under retroactive legislation. On 4 October 1979 the Chief of Army Staff, Major-General T.Y. Danjuma, announced that there would be no more public executions, arguing that their deterrent effect had "worn off'. In his New Year address of 1 January 1980 President Shehu Shagari announced the release of 31 prisoners arrested in early 1977 and convicted according to the Foreign Exchange Anti-Sabotage Decree of August 1977, which was repealed in October 1979. Referring to its retroactive use, President Shehu Shagari declared that "the element of backdating laws to suit the offences is repugnant to the fundamental human rights of our citizens, as enshrined in our Constitution". In late January 1980 the Nigerian authorities announced that all prisoners sentenced to death for armed robbery whose sentences had not been confirmed by 30 September 1979 would no longer be executed. These prisoners are to be given a new trial before the Federal High Court. Amnesty International has been unable to ascertain the precise number of prisoners on death row at the time of this announcement although it may have been as high as 500.
In the five months before the return to civilian rule, 25 death sentences were reported to have been passed for armed robbery. On 30 January 1980 the Abakaliki High Court sentenced 32 people to death in connection with an incident in February 1973, when three police officers and one councillor were killed. The only reported executions for armed robbery since the advent of civilian rule took place on 8 December 1979, when four people were executed by firing-squad.
On 3 March 1980,50 detainees held on vagrancy charges died of suffocation in a police van while they were being transported from Lagos to Ikoyi prison. Following the deaths, the government ordered an official inquiry and five police officers and one investigating magistrate were taken into custody.
69
