Singapore
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about the arrests and indefinite detention without trial under the Internal Security Act (ISA) of individuals alleged to have acted in a manner prejudicial to the security of the state. In \.\\q Report of an Amnesty International Mission to Singapore 30 November to 5 December 1978, published on 31 January 1980. Amnesty International expressed its long-standing concern about the systematic use of preventive detention without charge or trial under the ISA and about evidence of widespread physical and psychological ill-treatment of detainees, in some cases amounting to torture. During the year, Amnesty International continued to work on behalf of 20 individuals under adoption and investigation and urged the implementation of the recommendations it had made to the government in its report. Amnesty International also expressed concern about the executions which took place in October 1979.
According to Section 8 of the ISA, an individual may be detained should the President be satisfied that this was necessary, "with a view to preventing that person from acting in any manner prejudicial to the security of Singapore or any part thereof or to the maintenance of public order or essential services therein". Such detention can be for periods of up to two years and the two-year detention order may be renewed an indefinite number of times. In the Amnesty International mission report it was estimated that some 50 people were detained under the ISA at Moon Crescent Detention Centre and that an unknown number of people were detained at the Whitley Road Holding Centre, the main Special Branch interrogation centre. The report also calls attention to the use by the government of a variety of techniques to induce mental and spiritual collapse, such as the denial of medication, with the aim of extracting self-incriminating statements to be used as confessions, and points out that the practice of imputing guilt by such means rather than by establishing the validity of evidence through normal legal procedures violates elementary rules of law.
The Amnesty International report recommended that the Singapore Government should take immediate steps to sign and ratify the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, introduce legislation for the abolition of the ISA and ensure that all persons held at present under the ISA should be released immediately and unconditionally or be brought to trial at an early date in an open court.
229
II further recommended that the government should institute immediate, independent and public commissions of inquiry into the allegations of torture and ill-treatment of detainees and implement the recommendation of the 1966 Constitutional Commission by making the right to freedom from torture a specific provision of the Singapore Constitution.
In response to the recommendations of Amnesty International, Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew subsequently instituted a commission of inquiry into the procedures in the interrogation and detention centres, with particular reference to those instances of torture and ill-treatment cited in its report. The commission was headed by S. Dhanabalan, Senior Minister of State, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and included Professor Jayakumar, Dean of the Law Faculty of the University of Singapore and Michael Cheok of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The Prime Minister's Office issued a statement on 31 March 1980 saying that the report of the commission of inquiry concluded that "the process of interrogation does involve psychological stress. But there is no basis for the lurid accounts of torture and assault described in the Amnesty International report". However, as far as Amnesty International is aware, the commission examined the cases of only three of the 21 detainees listed in the Amnesty International report as having been ill-treated. As far as can be ascertained from the press statement issued by the Prime Minister's Office, the commission did not, for example, investigate the case of Ho Piao whose sworn affidavit is reproduced in the Amnesty International report. Nor, to the knowledge of Amnesty International did the government publish in full the medical records it was stated had been examined by commission members Dhanabalan and Cheok. It is for these reasons that Amnesty International believes that the inquiry did not meet the criteria for a full, open and independent investigation into all cases of reported ill-treatment and publication of the whole of the commission's findings as had been recommended in the Amnesty International report.
During the year, the situation of a few long-term detainees was reported to have improved, however, Amnesty International also learned of new arrests under the ISA. On 11 September 1979, Amnesty International wrote to Prime Minister Lee to welcome the release of Said Zahari, a journalist and poet who had been arrested in "Operation Cold Store", a security operation on 2 February 1963 in which 133 participants of the anti-government opposition were arrested. Said Zahari, who had been adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience, was never tried but was exiled in November 1978 to Pulau Ubin from which he was subsequently released. Another person arrested in "Operation Cold Store", Dr Lim Hock Siew, a leader of the Barisan Sosialis, Socialist Front,
230
who had also been adopted as a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty International, is still held in Pulau Tekbng. to which he had been exiled in November 1978. In February 1980, Lee Tze Tong, a trade union leader who had been elected to the Singapore Assembly for the Barisan Sosialis m the 1963 elections, and who had been in detention since October 1963, was released into exile in Pulau Ubin. On 15 February 1980, Amnesty International wrote to Prime Minister Lee welcoming the improvement in Lee Tze Tong's situation but urging that he be released unconditionally.
HoPiao, a former Secretary of the National Seamen's Union who was also arrested in "Operation Cold Store", has been held without trial continuously since 1963. During his detention. Ho Piao has undergone long periods of solitary confinement and has been subjected to rigorous interrogation in a room deliberately maintained at an artificially cold temperature where he was repeatedly doused with cold water and assaulted. Ho Piao's plight was described in the Amnesty International Newsletter in September 1979 and various appeals were made on his behalf.
In April 1979 nine students and teachers were arrested for alleged involvement in pro-communist activities and for attempting to overthrow the government by means of an armed struggle. All but one were subsequently released, and at least six of them were released before the 30-day interrogation period had expired. However, Tan Peng Lim, a 33-year-old lecturer in mathematics at the Singapore Polytechnic, was still in detention at the end of April 1980. He is also reported to have been deprived of his Singapore citizenship. Under the Banishment Act (Banishment Ordinance) 1959, any Singapore citizen who is a citizen by registration or naturalization may be deprived of his citizenship should the government be satisfied "that it is not conducive to the public good that the person should continue to be a citizen of Singapore". At the end of April 1980 five people were believed to be detained under the Banishment Act and held indefinitely in Singapore jails because of their refusal to accept banishment to another country.
Another concern of Amnesty International was the death penalty. On 5 October 1979 Amnesty International cabled President Benjamin Sheares expressing concern about the execution of Wong Kee Chin and of Lee Kin Kheong on 19 October 1979. Both men had been sentenced to death for drug trafficking. At the same time, it appealed for commutation on behalf of 11 prisoners believed to be under sentence of death. On 2 November 1979, Amnesty International cabled President Sheares urging him to commute the death sentence recently confirmed by the Singapore Criminal Court of Appeal on Siti
231
Aminah Binti Jaffar, also sentenced to death for drug trafficking. She was 18 years old at the time of the offence.
