Djibouti
Continuing concern about earlier allegations of torture and the situation of Ethiopian refugees were Amnesty Intemational' s major concerns during 1984.
On 12 January, the Minister of Justice and of Islamic Affairs responded to an inquiry made by Amnesty Intemational in 1983 concerning the detention and alleged torture of Ali Mohammed Houmed (known as "Moyale"), Hussein Houmed Ahmed and seven other people suspected of belonging to an opposition group called the Mouvement populaire de libération (MPL), Popular Liberation Movement. The nine, apparently suspected of having committed acts of political violence between 1977 and 1979, had been detained in 1983 after returning from exile in Ethiopia. The Minister informed Amnesty Intemational that they had been charged with offences against state security and with criminal offences. He stated that normal judicial procedures were being followed and that none of them had t^en tortured. All nine were reportedly released in November 1984, at least five of them without trial.
In December Amnesty International received reports that at least 18 further alleged members of the MPL had been detained on returning to Djibouti from Ethiopia. They were apparently suspected of being involved in acts of political violence. At least five of the 18 were reported still to be detained at the end of 1984. They included Mohamed Kamil, the former secretary-general of the MPL, as well as a former gendarme and a former soldier.
In November representatives of the Govemments of Djibouti and Ethiopia and the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) met to consider the program of voluntary repatriation of Ethiopian refugees in Djibouti which began in September 1983. They decided to end the program on 31 December 1984. By then, some 32,(300 refugees had retumed to Ethiopia from Djibouti, either individually or under the auspices of the UNHCR program. Amnesty International received allegations that some refugees were forced to register for the voluntary repatriation program but was unable to verily them. Up to 3,000 Ethiopian refugees were still in Djibouti at the end of 1984 and Amnesty Intemational remained concemed that individuals facing imprisonment as prisoners of conscience, torture or execution in Ethiopia should not be involuntarily retumed there.
vili
Amnesty International Report 1985
