Israel and the Occupied Territories
Amnesty Intemational's concerns were the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience; the continued use of administrative measures, with no judicial involvement, to physically restrict individuals without charge or trial; arbitrary arrest and short-term detention without charge or trial; and the denial of
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
intemationally accepted rights to prisoners captured by the Israeli Defence Force (IDF) in south Lebanon. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about allegations of ill-treatment and torture of detainees in Israel, the Occupied Territories and south Lebanon.
During 1984 Amnesty Intemational adopted five prisoners of conscience, three of whom were released during the year, and investigated the cases of 32 possible prisoners of conscience, nine of whom were released. Eighteen of the 37 prisoners were convicted of security offences and two were conscientious objectors to military service in Lebanon. Sixteen of them were under restriction orders.
One of the adopted priscHiers of conscience was Mahmud Muhammad A1 Gharbawi, a bookshop owner from Gaza He was charged with possessing inciting material, namely copies of a poster depicting three Arabs in front of the walls of Jemsalem, with the colours of the Palestinian flag in the sky. In the opinion of the judge the poster was designed to incite. He was also charged with possessing certain banned books by Palestinian poets and writers. In his defence, Mahmud Muhammad Al Gharbawi said thathe had asked the authorities for a list of books banned in Gaza but was told no published list existed He was sentenced on 16 January to one year's imprisonment, six months of which resulted from a previous suspended sentence passed in 1982 on similar charges. He was released on 24 December. Amnesty International has received many reports ofjoumalists, students and bookshop owners in the Occupied Territories who have been arrested, and in some cases convicted, for similar reasons.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed that some selective conscientious objectors in Israel faced imprisonment for refusing to serve in Lebanon According to Amnesty Intemational's information, 24 reservists and regulars were sentenced to between 14 and 35 days' imprisonment during 1984, at least four of whom had been given repeated prison terms. Amnesty Intemational considered them to be prisoners of conscience and appealed for their unconditional release.
Amnesty Intemational investigated the cases of 16 people imprisoned for betanging to, or associating with, the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO). One such was SihamAbdal-Salamal-Barghouti, ateacherfrom AlBireh in the West Bank, arrested in February 1982 and sentenced to two and a half years' imprisonment with two and a half years suspended. She was charged with being a member of the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (DFLP), a faction of the PLO, and actively assistingit. The Israeli authorities, inaletterto Amnesty Intemationalon 24 July, said that Siham al-Barghouti held a senior position in the DFLP and quoted from the court decision:
"This is not a case of a one-time activity but a complex network of
contacts, the transmittal of messages, the giving and receipt erf"
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
information, etc., that are likely to create a serious security danger. .. Anyone who is a member of the DFLP automatically subscribes to its policy of using ruthless terrorism as a political tool . . . (therefore) persons such as Siham must be seen to have advocated violence".
Amnesty Intemational, however, reiterated its view that membership of an organization engaged in violent activities does not of itself necessarily demonstrate the use or advocacy of violence. While Amnesty Intemational recognized that military wings of various FLO factions carried out acts of violence, some individuals in, or associated with, the PLO were engaged in exclusively political and diplomatic activity and did not themselves necessarily advocate the use of violence. Nothing in the charge-sheet or in the letter from the authorities showed that Siham al-Barghouti had advocated violence, and Amnesty International considered that she may have been a prisoner of conscience.
Detentions by the IDF in south Lebanon continued to be a cause of concem. A1 Ansar detention camp was reopened on 12 December 1983, havingbeenclosedon24 November 1983 folbwinga prisoner exchange Amnesty Intemational Report 1984). The number of new detainees rose steadily, and by the end of 1984 there were over a thousandinmates including Palestinians and Lebanese Shi'a Muslims suspected of opposition to the IDF. The detainees held in Al Ansar camp were accorded neither the status of prisoners of war under the Third Geneva Convention, northerighttobeconfrontedwith, andrefute, any evidence against them. The Intemational Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) has been given regular access to Al Ansar since 27 December 1983, and family visits were allowed during 1984, but no visits by lawyers were known to have taken place.
Amnesty Intemational was also concemed that people arrested in south Lebanon were held incommunicado for long periods during interrogation by the Shin Beth (the Israeli security forces). Neither families nor humanitarian organizations such as the ICRC had access to interrogation centres in south Lebanon, which were situated in the military barracks at Mar Elias, in the former tobacco warehouse in Nabatiyeh, the Israeli Intelligence Headquarters in Tyre, and the Israeli Army Headquarters in Sidon and in Kfarfalous. The ICRC was permitted to meet detainees 30 days after arrest but not in the interrogation centres themselves.
About 140 Lebanese and Palestinians, almost all of whom had eariier been held in Al Ansar, were transferred in November 1983 to the military prison of Atlit in Israel, in accordance with a 1983 law for the extension of Emergency Regulations. This provided for the arrest and detention of people who were not Israeli citizens or inhabitants of Israel " if there is good reason to presume that considerations of state security or
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
public safety require it". On 18 April Amnesty International expressed its concem about the incommunicado detention of those in Atlit, saying that they had been denied communication with their families or organizations such as the ICRC and that only two had been allowed to see a lawyer. The organization was further concemed that they had been denied the right to respond to the evidence being used as the basis for their detention, and that the appeal procedures did not provide adequate opportunity to challenge the legality of detention.
The authorities replied to Amnesty International on 23 December stating that ' ' after some delays, ICRC delegates now conduct visits to the detainees on a regular basis, and talk to them freely and without witnesses. The ICRC has a list of all persons being held" but that "to date, security difficulties have prevented actual family visits from taking place". The authorities assured Amnesty Intemational that since the appeals committee started its hearings "every detainee has appeared before it and a number of detainees have been released, either for lack of evidence or for medical reasons", that several lawyers had met and represented detainees, and that some detainees had made use of the right to petition the High Court Amnesty Intemational noted, however, that the ICRC's first visit to Atlit took place only on 9 July, after seven months' incommunicado detentioa The organization remained concemed aboutreports thatonly averyfewdetaineeshadbeen abletomeet a lawyer, that lawyers had difficulty obtaining permission to visit their clients and that detainees were still denied the right to answer the evidence against them. At the end of 1984 there were still 121 ofthis group in Atlit prisoa There were also three women similarly detained in Neve Tirze prison in Israel who had been arrested in south Lebanon in June.
In November Amnesty Intemational issued a document ' ' Town Arrest Orders in Israel and the Occupied Territories'' setting out its concerns about the use of administrative measures, with no judicial involvement to confine people to their towns or villages by day and their homes by night, usually for sbc-month renewable periods (see Amnesty International Report 1981 to 1984). The authorities subsequentiy informed the organization that a new directive had been issued in September orderingthe police to use "every possible means of reducing the d amage" to the restricted individual's personal life and hvelihood, and that more detailed information was being provided to those restricted regarding the reasons for the orders. During 1984 Amnesty Intemational received details of70 people under restriction orders, 25 ofwhom had their orders lifted during the year. They included students, joumalists, lawyers and teachers.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the widespread practice of arbitrary arrest and short-term detention without chaise or trial. It received a number of reports of schoolchildren and
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
students being kept in incommunicado detention for up to 18 days -most often in Al Fara' a detention centre - frequently without being interrogated or informed of the reasons for their arrest Some people have been arrested repeatedly in this way.
During 1984 Amnesty Intemational received an increasing number of reports of ill-treatment and torture of detainees in the custody of the police or security forces in Israel, the Occupied Territories and south Lebanoa In Israel proper, dozens of regular, border and military police were charged during 1984 with beating or assaulting criminal or security suspects, on arrest orduringquestioningatthe police station. Seventeen were given suspended sentences of between two weeks' and one year's imprisonment, or prison sentences of one to three months. In the Occupied Territories allegations mcluded the routine use of prolonged periods of hooding and enforced standing, beatings, sleep deprivation and subjection to hot and cold showers, as well as insults, threats to and humiliation of detainees and members of their families. There have also been reports of medical treatment being delayed or denied. Al Fara'a detention and interrogation centre near Nablus, where most of the inmates were young people, was frequently cited. Moshe Biton, one of two police officers convicted in 1984 for ill-treating dtainees in Al Fara'a, was sentenced in September by Tel Aviv district court to four months' imprisonment plus eight months suspended for causing grievous bodily harm to a Jenin schoolteacher in 1983 {sqq Amnesty International Report 1984). He was appealing against sentence.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed that arrest and detention procedures in the Occupied Territories still failed to provide the safeguards necessary to prevent the ill-treatment of prisoners. In particular it noted that any soldier had the power to arrest without a warrant; that security suspects could be held for up to 18 days without legal access before being brought before a court; and that existing safeguards such as habeas corpus, trial within a trial (at which the admissibility of a confession is decided), as well as the machinery for investigating complaints of ill-treatment were, for a number of reasons, largely ineffective and unsatisfactory.
In south Lebanon there were reports of the ill-treatment and torture of Palestinian and Lebanese detainees at interrogation centres run by the Shin Beth. The interrogation techniques described were similar to those reported in the OccupiedTerritories, although there were reports ofsome instances of harsher treatment
Two death sentences for murder passed in 1983 (see
national Report 1984) were commuted on 8 August to life imprisonment following an appeal to the military appeals court.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
