South Africa
Amnesty International was concerned about the imprisonment or restriction of prisoners of conscience. It was also concerned about the detention without trial of other suspected opponents of the government and of local administrations in African "homelands" (which the South African Government has declared "independent" but which are not recognized internationally). Prisoners of conscience included detainees held without trial, prisoners serving sentences imposed by the courts, people restricted under banning orders and many thousands of black people imprisoned under the so-called "pass laws", which apply only to blacks. Detention without trial was used extensively and there were new allegations of torture and ill-treat-ment of political detainees. There were also further deaths in detention under suspicious circumstances. Amnesty International was also concerned about the continued use of the death penalty.
Major constitutional changes were put into effect despite widespread opposition. New racially-based parliamentary assemblies granted direct representation to the "Coloured" (i.e. mixed race) and Indian minorities, numbering respectively less than three million and one million people. However, blacks - an overall majority ofthe population- contmued to be denied parliamentary representation or any say in government Elections for the Coloured and Indian assemblies were held in August in the face of a boycott campaign organized by the United Democratic Front (UDF), a co^ition of groups of all races opposed to the constitutional changes, and the National Forum, a coalition of groups espousing "black consciousness". The tumout was low: less than 30 per cent of Coloureds and 20 per cent of Indians voted. In September, P W Botha relinquished office as Prime Minister and was elected South Africa's first executive State President There was widespread civil unrest, particularly in the second half of 1984, due to opposition to the constitutional changes, continuing discontent among young black people over educational grievances -which resulted in a protracted boycott of schools in many areas - and opposition among urban blacks to rent increases and other local issues. In September violent disturbances broke out in several black townships in the "Vaal triangle" south of Johannesburg and spread to other townships. The government reacted by deploying large numbers of paramilitary police and, on some occasions, troops in the townships. Several hundred people were arrested and at least 170 people were reportedly killed, most apparently as a resuh of police action.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Significant changes were made affecting black people prosecuted under the pass laws, which regulate where they may live and work and restrict their freedom of movement, following the publication in April of the findings of a commission of inquiry into the structure and functioning of the courts. This criticized the conduct of trials of pass law prisoners before special Commissioners Courts with jurisdiction over blacks only and described the use of separate courts for different races as "unnecessary, humiliating and repugnant". It recommended that pass law prisoners should be tried before magistrates courts, a proposal which the govemment subsequently implemented and which was believed to have resulted in a marked decline in the number of such convictions. The commission also criticizedthe imprisonmentofblacks under the pass laws, which resulted in South Africa having per capita one of the highest prison populations in the world, and commented that pass law prisoners were "not real malefactors" but "the needy victims of a social system that controls the influx of people from the rural to the urban areas by penal sanction".
Shortly before publication of the commission's report an Amnesty Intemational mission visited South Africa to investigate the administration of the pass laws and observe trials of people prosecuted under them. The mission found that proceedings in Commissioners Courts were characterized by extreme brevity and such serious shortcomings that defendants did not receive fair trials.
Many people were detained without trial for political reasons during 1984 both by the South African security police and by security police in the Ciskei, Transkei and Venda "homelands". Amnesty Intemational intervened in more than 300 cases, many involving detainees considered to be prisoners of conscience, but the total number of p eople arrested for political reasons, some of whom were held only briefly, was far higher. They included officials of black trade unions, black and white student activists, leaders of the Coloured and Indian communities opposed to the elections, officials of the UDF and other anti-government political organizations, journalists and church and community workers. Many were held under Section 29 of the Internal Security Act, 1982, which permits the security police to hold uncharged detainees incommunicado for interrogation indefinitely and to withhold all information about them. Those arrested in the "homelands" were held in similar circumstances under local legislation. For example, at the beginning of 1984 several people arrested in November 1983 were still detained incommunicado in the Venda "homeland". They included Samuel Mugivhela Tshikhudo, a 50-year-old farmer, who died in mid-January a few hours after security police had him admitted to hospital. Amnesty International, which had earlier pressed the Venda authorities tocharge or release the detainees and prevent them being tortured or ill-treated.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
publicly expressed its concem over this death and its fears for the safety of the remaining detainees. Subsequently, the organization learned that Samuel Mugivhela Tshikhudo had apparently died from a disease akin to typhoid, probably contracted in detention However, no inquest into his death had been held by the end of 1984.
A month after the death the authorities allowed the remaining detainees to be medically examined. All were severely debilitated and had lost a lot of weight through malnourishment and other factors, and one had apparently attempted suicide. Most of the detainees were released uncharged but two were tried. PetrusMudzielwana received an e ight-month prison sentence and Tendamudzimo Ratshitanga, a prominent Venda poet, was jailed for five years for allegedly assisting guerrillas. His trial was attended by an Amnesty Intemational observer who reported that the conviction was based on inadequate evidence. The case was taken up for investigation by Amnesty Intemational.
There were recurrent political arrests in Ciskei, where many people had been detained and tortured in 1983, as a boycott of bus services by Mdantsane residents continued throughout 1984. Those detained included community leaders, one of whom, Priscilla Maxongo, had been held incommunicado and without charge for more than five months by the end of 1984. She was the subject of an international appeal by Amnesty Intemational. In Transkei too, there were many politically motivated arrests. In late August, some 250 students were arrested and held for several weeks following months of unrest at the university.
A number of people were placed in preventive detention under Section 28 of the Internal Security Act Among them were four black community leaders from Cradock arrested in March in connection with local protests over rent and education grievances and held for several months. Leading officials of the UDF and other organizations campaigning for an election boycott were also arrested in August and placed in preventive detention. Seven of them successfully challenged their detention orders in the Natal Supreme Court and were released on 7 September, but new detention orders were then issued against them. Five of the seven, together with Paul David, a former prisoner of conscience whose detention had also been ordered, then entered the British Consulate in Durban on 13 September and sought sanctuary there. This provoked a diplomatic dispute between the British and South African Governments. On 6 October George Sewpershad, M. J. Naidoo and MewaRamgobin, all leading members of the Natal Indian Congress and the UDF, left the consulate voluntarily and were redetained. The three others - Archie Gumede, a national president of the UDF, Paul David and Billy Nair- were still in the consulate on 10 December when all preventive detention orders were revoked by the
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Minister of Law and Order. They then left the consulate but Archie Gumede and Paul David were immediately rearrested andcharged with treason. The three who left the consulate on 6 October and three other UDF leaders who had been detained in Johannesburg - Dr Essop Jassat, Aubrey Mokoena and Curtis Nkondo- were also charged with treason. All eight were remanded in custody for trial in 1985 after an Attorney-General prohibited their release on bail. They were considered by Amnesty International to be prisoners of conscience.
There were many new arrests following the outbreak of township disturbances in early September. Amnesty Intemational made numerous interventions on behalf of those detained urging their early release or trial and the introduction of full safeguards against torture or ill-treatment. Some of those detained were children; on 28 September some 58 children under 16 were released from police custody and a further 46 were freed three days later. In early November there was a two-day general strike by black workers in the Witwatersrand and Vaal industrial areas, which received support from the two mainconfederations of black trade unions, student and other groups. A few days later, security police detained members of the committee which organized the strike and the leaders of the two union confederations, Chris DIamini and Phiroshaw Camay. They were held incommunicado for interrogation. Kate Philip, a white student leader, was also among those detained. Amnesty Intemational considered that they were probably prisoners of conscience and appealed on their behalf. The trade union leaders and Kate Philip were freed in early December but the strike committee members were charged with subversion and released on bail for trial in 1985. Many other detainees, however, remained in incommunicado detention at the end of 1984.
There were new allegations of torture and ill-treatment of detainees but for the first time a security police officer was prosecuted and imprisoned after the death of a political detainee. In Febmary security police sergeant Jan Harm van As received a 10-year sentence for the murder in July 1983 of Paris Malatji, who had been shot in the head at close range while held at Protea police station in Soweto. In another case, a police constable who had shot Saul Mkhize, leader of a black community threatened with forcible relocation, in 1983 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984) was acquitted of murder.
There were many new political trials and potential state witnesses continued to be held in incommunicado detention for long periods. A few, when they appeared in court, refused to give evidence for the state and then received long prison sentences for contempt; the maximum penalty for refusing to testify was five years' imprisonment. .
Two banned people - Dr Beyers Naude and Moki Cekisani, both adopted prisoners of conscience- had their banning orders prematurely
vili
Amnesty International Report 1985
lifted in September. However, anew banningorderwasimposed in late October when Abel Dube, who had been held in preventive detention since 21 April 1982, was released but immediately restricted to Messina. Another former banned person, Charles Nqakula, was officially designated an inhabitant of Ciskei and prohibited from entering other parts of South Africa When he did so, he was arrested Similar action was taken against Steve Tshwete, a leading member of the UDF in the Eastern Cape.
The death penaky continued to be one of Amnesty International's main concerns. A total of 114 people convicted of criminal offences were hanged in Pretoria Prison. Several others were sentenced to death or executed for criminal offences inCiskei, TranskeiandVenda. Itwas not known whether executions also took place in Bophuthatswana Benjamin Moloise, who was sentenced to death in 1983 for a politically motivated murder, was not executed in 1984, and no other political prisoners were sentenced to death during the year.
Amnesty Intemational submitted information on its concerns in South Africa to UN bodies including the Ad Hoc Working Group of Experts on southem Africa
