Greece
Amnesty International's main concem was the continued imprisonment of large numbers of Jehovah's Witnesses for refusing on conscientious grounds to perform military service. Since 1977 unarmed military service for four years has been offered to Jehovah's Witnesses, but Amnesty Intemational did not consider this a satisfactory altemative because it was twice the duration of armed military service and because there was no altemative civilian service outside the military system. At the end of 1984 Amnesty Intemational knew of approximately 300 Jehovah's Witnesses imprisoned for conscientious objection to military service.
Amnesty Intemational leamed that Jehovah's Witnesses had also been arrested and prosecuted for "proselytism" (trying to convert others) underCompulsory LawNo. 1672/1939(amendingCompulsory Law No. 1363/1938). In 1984, 285 such arrests were reported. Of those arrested, 81 people were brought to trial, of whom 14 were sentenced to between four andsevenmonths' imprisonment, suspended for three years, and six months' police surveillance; 58 were acquitted and nine had their cases postponed until 1985. Amnesty Intemational knew of no Jehovah's Witnesses imprisoned for proselytism at the end of 1984, but was concemed that the prosecutions violated their right to freedom of religion, including the right to "manifest [their] religion or belief in worship, teaching, practice and observance", as laid down in Article 9 of the European Convention on Human Rights, to which Greece is a State Party.
In October the Secretary General of Amnesty Intemational, accompanied by a staff member, had meetings in Athens with the Prime Minister, Andreas Papandreou, the Minister of Justice, George Mangakis, and the Foreign Minister, loannis Charalambopoulos. Among the issues raised were the continued imprisonment of conscientious objectors to military service; allegations that some criminal suspects had been ill-treated; and the retention of the death penalty in law. The Amnesty International delegates welcomed a new draft law on torture, which was subsequently passed by the Greek parliament in November: public officials - civil or military - convicted of inflicting physical or psychological torture face prison terms of from two years to life.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
