Sri Lanka
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about reports of random killings of non-combatant Tamil civilians by members of the security forces. It also remained concemed about the detention of Tamils, members of left-wing opposition parties and students under legislation permitting long-term detention without charge or trial. It continued to receive reports of widespread torture of detainees. Several reports of deaths in custody, allegedly as a result of torture or shooting, were received The alleged victims were criminal suspects from the Sinhalese community as well as Tamil political detainees in army and police custody.
Throughout 1984 a state of emergency remained in force with the stated purpose of combating violence by Tamil groups advocating a separate state for the minority. The govemment stated on 17 November that, between 1977 and 31 October 1984, 96 members of the armed services and 182 civilians had been killed by Tamil extremist groups. Dozens more such deaths were reported later in the year.
During 1984 there were increasing reports of unarmed Tamil civilians being deliberately shot dead in reprisal for attacks by Tamil extremist groups on security forces personnel In June Amnesty International released Sri Lanka: Current Human Rights Concerns and Evidence of Extrajudicial Killings by the Security Forces, July 1983 - April 1984. The document included 43 eye-witness accounts of extrajudicial killings during 1983 and presented further reports of such killings during March and April 1984. It said there had been a clear failure by the govemment to investigate s ecurity force killings adequately. Only in one case was an inquest known to have been held and there were no prosecutions. The govemment responded in detail on 30 July and reiterated its "firm commitmentto the principle that violation of human rights by any party, including the Armed Services, can never be justified. This applies particularly to the right of life". The government stated that the killings of July 1983 had been investigated but that there had not been sufficient evidence connecting any official with a specific
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
offence. It said that 149 servicemen had been discharged for breaches of discipline. The govemment noted that one of the 48 alleged victims of extrajudicial execution was in fact alive and it "categorically" denied "that it permits or condones the use of torture for any purpose whatsoever".
On 31 August Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of National Security about incidents in Mannar between 11 and 13 August during which at least five Tamil civilians were reportedly shot dead in reprisal for the killing of six soldiers in the area on 11 August. Amnesty Intemational asked to be informed of the outcome of an investigation by a Cabinet Sub-Committee established on 15 August (which was not available by the end of 1984).
Amnesty Intemational wrote on 21 December to President J.R Jayewardene expressing its concem about allegations that at least 90 unarmed civilians were killed by members of the security forces in the Mannar area on 4 December, apparently in reprisal for the killing of a soldier. Amnesty Intemational also cited accounts of earlier alleged extrajudicial executions by the security forces, including three in Point Pedro on 1 September and 16 in Vavuniyaon 11 September. Amnesty Intemational observed that a persistent pattern of extrajudicial executions by the security forces, in reprisal for the killing of their own men, appeared to be emerging. It notedthatnomembers ofthe security forces had been brought to justice for involvement in any of the reported extrajudicial executions and that, in those few instances where official inquiries had been ordered, the outcome had not been made public.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed that growing numbers of Tamils were arrested and held under the Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA) which permits detainees to be held incommunicado for up to 18 months without trial The Act also permits trial under specialprocedures which curtail normal legal safeguards. The majority of those arrested were people suspected of knowing about the activities of Tamil extremist groups. The PTA was also usedto detain people participating in peaceful opposition activities.
By the second half of 1984 hundreds of arrests under the PTA were being reported each month from all over the north and on several occasions Amnesty Intemational raised individual cases with the authorities. By the end of the year. Amnesty Intemational was investigating the cases of 36 detainees held under the PTA as possible prisoners of conscience.
On 4 October the Minister of National Security announced that 350 detainees were in custody under the PTA and that 125 terrorist suspects would shortly be charged in the High Court. However, to Amnesty Intemational's knowledge, by the end of 1984 none had been charged. On 20 December officials stated that in one week in December 1,000
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
arrests had been made under the PTA; unofficial reports put the figure higher.
Among those reportedly held under the PTA at the end of 1984 were 24 members of the Janata Vimukhti Peramuna (JVP), National Liberation Front, a left-wing party banned in mid-1983, who were arrested on 8 November. The policeallegedthafsubversive literature, guns and ammunition" had been discovered but Amnesty International was investigating reports that no arms had been found and that they were detained for listening to a political speech.
Amnesty Intemational knew of only one case in which a person arrested under the PTA was tried Father Aparanam Singarayer, a Roman C atholic priest, was arrested on 14 November 1982. Aftertwo years' detention his trial before the Colombo High Court started in November, when he was charged with failure to inform the police of the commission of an offence, and of the whereabouts of a wanted persoa He was initially detained in Gumnagar Army Camp where he was aUegedly ill-treated by two police officers of the Criminal Investigation Department He was charged on the basis of statements made, reportedly under duress, while in army custody. These statements were admitted in evidence under the changed rules of evidence which apply under the PTA. At the end of 1984 the trial was still continuing.
Members of left-wing parties and students were detained without trial during 1984 underemergency regulations. Duringclashesbetween police and students at Peradeniya University on 19 June two students were killed and on 2 3 June, 100 students were detained for questioning. Eighteen members of left-wing parties were also reportedly arrested on 19 June. In a letter to the National Security Minister on 31 August, Amnesty Intemational gave the names of 64 students and three JVP members known to have been arrested and urged the government to charge or release them. They were reportedly released after several weeks. The govemment announced that inquests would be heldinto the deaths of the two students and that there would be an impartial inquiry. In one case, that of Rohana Ratnayake, the magistrate retumed a verdict of justifiable homicide, due to the police shooting in the performance of their duties.
Amnesty Intemational received many reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees in army custody or in police stations, themajority of whom had been arrested under the PTA. There were frequent reports of such detainees being beaten, in several instances with plastic pipes filled with sand Released detainees stated that they had been beaten while hanging upside-down, had had needles inserted in variousparts of the body and had been bumed with cigarettes. One person reported witnessing soldiers shooting a fellow detainee through the hands; the victim subsequently died in army custody. Among the places where
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
torture reportedly occurred were Elephant Pass Army Camp, Palaly Army Camp, Vavuniya Army Camp and Jaffna Fort There were also allegations of torture by special police interrogators at the newly establishedBoosa Army Camp in the south. Members of the Sri Lanka Freedom Party and a number of JVP members or suspects were also allegedly beaten and ill-treated after arrest
Amnesty Intemational received reports of deaths in custody allegedly after torture of both criminal suspects and political detainees. During July it asked the govemment to inform it of the outcome of inquests into the deaths of four criminal suspects in the Kalutara, Koluwela, Ambalangoda and Kotahana police stations. Although some police officers were reportedly brought to court in connection with deaths in police custody. Amnesty Intemational did not leam of any convictions.
Amnesty Intemational was also investigating several reports that Tamil detainees died in custody during 1984 as a result of torture or shooting. Official statements said that they had committed suicide or had been shot while trying to escape. In July Amnesty International asked the govemment to hold inquests into the deaths of five Tamil detainees in police or army custody. During the first half of 1984 no such inquests were held. Following a number of allegations that suspects in the custody of the security forces had been extrajudicially executed, the Minister of National Security directed on 20 May that inquests be held under new emergency regulations into all deaths in custody. He ordered an inquest into the death of one detainee who officials s aid had taken poison after arrest at Valvettitural The outcome had not been published by the end of 1984, to Amnesty International's knowledge. On 3 December, 32 Tamil detainees arrested on suspicion of terrorist activities died at Vavuniya Army Camp. Amnesty Intemational was investigating reports that several had been deliberately shot by army personnel. The govemment stated that they had died "tryingto escape'' while the camp was under attack. Amnesty International did not leam of any inquests into their deaths.
On 6 June the Minister of National Security announced that Emergency Regulation 15A - which had permitted the disposal of dead bodies in secret and without inquests - was repealed, a decision which Amnesty Intemational welcomed The new inquest procedures - laid down in Emergency Regulation 5 5 B-G promulgated on 14 June-were the subject of detailed discussions between Amnesty Intemational and the Minister of National Security on 19 July. In a letter to the Minister on 31 August Amnesty Intemational expressed concern that the legal safeguards provided by ordinary inquest procedures were substantially weakened Among other things. Amnesty Intemational expressed concern that initial investigation was conducted by the security forces
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
insteadofindependent magistrates, that the police still had(exceptional) powers to dispose of dead bodies without an inquest "in the interest of national security" and that an inquest would be held only if the police applied for one and not at the discretion of the magistrate.
Although the penal code still provided for the death penalty no judicial executions were known to have been carried out since the present govemment assumed office.
