Cameroon
Amnesty International was concerned about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, some of whom were released during 1984, and the detention without trial of other politicalprisoners. Over 200 people, some of whom may have been prisoners of conscience, were convicted after trials which did not meet internationally accepted standards for fair trial Amnesty International received reports of torture, and of over 120 executions, although that figure was denied by the authorities. Some of those reportedly executed were not known to have received any trial, and others were said to have been sentenced to death after summary trial procedures.
During a presidential election in mid-January, which was won by President Paul Biya, Amnesty International received reports of the detention without trial of at least 13 prisoners of conscience. Twelve people were reportedly detained on suspicion of possessing literature supporting an opposition party, or of criticizing President Biya. All had been released by June. Gabriel Nyeck Minka, a trade unionist who had lived in France for several years, was detained atDouala airport on 14 January - the day of the election - and held until April, when he was released after suffering heart palpitations.
At the end of January the only long-term prisoner of conscience adopted by Amnesty International, Martin Ebele-Tobbo, was released from Tcholliré centre de rééducation, "re-education" centre. He had not been tx\Qd{sQQ Amnesty International Report 1984). Atleasttwoother long-term political detainees whose cases Amnesty International was investigating were also released in 1984. They were Jean Kona and Thomas Mabong, both held without trial since January 1982.
On 6 and 7 April units of the armed forces stationed in Yaounde, the capital, attempted to overthrow the government but were defeated by units loyal to the authorities. According to the govemment, fighting between rival military units resulted in 70 people being killed and 265 unaccounted for. However, Amnesty International received reports suggesting that there were hundreds of deaths. On 18 April a state of emergency was declared in Yaounde and the district of Mfoundi. This gave the authorities emergency powers of detention and permitted military tribunals to judge both civilian and military personnel suspected of crimes against state security. From late April, the Yaoundé military tribunal sat on at least six occasions to try people charged with offences arising from the attempted coup. The proceedings were held in camera. Many defendants were represented by lawyers. In November President
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Biya announced that a total of 1,205 people had been detained on suspicion of involvement in the coup attempt, of whom 491 had been tried. Of these, he said, 232 had been acquitted, 51 had been sentenced to death, and 205 had been sentenced to terms of imprisonment. He stated that a further 5 2 people were awaiting trial and that one person had died in pre-trial custody. Amnesty Intemational received later reports that three people apparently unaccounted for had been sentenced to death in their absence. However, the authorities did not reveal the names of those tried or any other information concerning the trials. It was therefore impossible to determine the fate of individual detainees from official accounts, but many were released uncharged
From May onwards Amnesty Intemational repeatedly urged the govemmentto pubUsh the names of all those convicted, together with details of the charges against them By the end of 1984, Amnesty Intemational believed that between 30 and 100 people detained after the coup attempt were still held without trial although President Biya stated in November that no more trials were envisaged Amnesty Intemational believed that some might be prisoners of conscience. One such was Ahmadou Bello, former managing director of Cameroon Airlines, arrested in April after returning to Cameroon from a business trip. He had notbeen present in the country atthe time of the attempted coup. Another such untried detaineewasColonelNgouraBeladji, who had reportedly remained loyal to the government during the events of 6 and? April but had nevertheless been detained Atleastfivepeoplewho had been acquitted by the Yaounde military tribunal also continued to be held. They included Nana Mamadou, a former government official, and Issa Tchiroua, an engineer, who were reportedly still detained in Yokoprison de production, labour camp, following their acquittal
Amnesty Intemational continued to call for the trial or release of long-tenn political detainees who may have been prisoners of conscience. They included Luc Minkoulou, an army sergeant held without trial since September 1979. He was reportedly detained after being accused anonymously of involvement in a coup attempt He was allegedly tortured soon after being imprisoned Amnesty Intemational also continued to appeal for the trial or release of Winston Fonyonga, Vincent Nteh, Ferdinand Langsi and Fokemba, detained in March 1983 {sQQ Amnesty Intemational Report 1984). At the end of 1984 at least two of the four were reported still to be held, apparently without trial, atTchollire "re-education" centre.
Amnesty Intemational was concerned that the military tribunals were not conducted in accordance with intemationally accepted standanJs of fair trial. In March, before the coup attempt. Amnesty Intemational made public its concerns after the Yaounde military tribunal had sentenced three people to death on 28 February. Comman-
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
dant Ibrahim Oumarou and Captain Salatou Adamou were convicted of subversion, conspiracy and conspiracy to murder, as was former President Ahmadou Ahidjo who was convicted in his absence. The organization was concemedthat thedefendants were not represented by legal counsel and by allegations that the two defendants in detention had been tortured
During the trials arising from the April coup attempt Amnesty Intemational repeatedly expressed its concern that the military tribunals fell short of intemationally accepted standards, notably in that they permitted no right of appeal, and that there were inadequate safeguards against the admission of evidence obtained under duress. At least one person accused of a political offence - Rose Zia - is reported to have been sentenced to a term of imprisonment by the Yaounde military tribunal after she had earlier been acquitted of the same offence by the same tribunal.
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about reports that torture was inflicted in a room called la chapelle, the chapel, at the Yaounde headquarters of the Brigade mixte mobile (BMM), a paramilitary police force. Similar reports had been received in previous years. Prisoners were reportedly hung upside down and beaten with sticks. In March a pregnant woman was allegedly tortured in this way when she refused the sexual advances of one of her jailers, and subsequently miscarried.
Some prisoners held after the attempted coup were reportedly ill-treated in military custody, especially at the Groupement mobile. Mobile unit, camp in Yaounde. Some were reportedly made to crawl naked over rough ground and had urine thrown over them: one was said to have had boiling water poured on his hands when he asked for water. Many people convicted of offences arising from the coup attempt reportedly did not receive adequate food Amnesty Intemational was concerned about reports that eight people convicted of offences against state security had died of malnutrition by the end of the year. Up to 50 prisoners held in Yaounde central prison were reported to be weak from malnutrition and in danger of death, including Abdoulaye Mazouz, former Secretary General of the Ministry of National Education, who was also reported to have had his artificial leg removed after his arrest Moreover, some ill prisoners were reported not to be receiving adequate medical treatment Amnesty Intemational urgently appealed for all prisoners to receive adequate food and medical attentioa
President Biya's November announcement that 51 people had been sentenced to death after the April coup attempt didnotindicate whether any death sentences had been carried out, but the President explicitly rejected the figure of 120 or more executions which had been reported by Amnesty International Basing its opinion on reports from several
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
sources, including eye-witnesses, Amnesty International continued to believe that 120 or more people were executed, including individuals reportedly extrajudicially executed by govemment forces immediately after the coup attempt. For example, an anaesthetist who worked at Yaounde central hospital was reportedly shot by a member of the security forces on or about 8 April because he had the same family name as former President Ahmadou Ahidjo.
