Singapore
Amnesty Intemational continued to appeal for the release of one prisoner of conscience who had been detained without trial since 1966. It was concerned that two people were hanged in 1984 and that measures were under discussion toincrease the imposition of mandatory sentences of caningfor criminal offences.
Chia Thye Poh, a former member of parliament for the Barisan Sosialis, Socialist Front, editor of the party's newspaper and assistant lecturer at Nanyang University, had been held in preventive detention under the Internal Security Act (ISA) since 26 October 1966. Under the ISA there is no judicial review of detention and the Minister of Home Affairs may renew detention orders every two years on the grounds of national security. The govemment has maintained that C hia Thye Poh might be released if he publicly abjured support for the Communist Party of Malaya (CPM) and its commitment to the forcible overthrow of the govemment. Amnesty International was concemed that the prisoner's alleged connection with the CPM had never been proved in court and that his continued detention without charge was contrary to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Amnesty Intemational continued to call for his release as a prisoner of conscience.
Tan Chu Boon was sentenced to one year's imprisonment in November 1983 for having under his control a tombstone with an inscription which' 'tended to advocate acts prejudicial to the security of Singapore" and possessing a document containing the same inscription (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984). He lost his appeal to the High Court against conviction buthis one-year sentence was reduced to one month.
Chia Beng Chye was executed in January and Murgay a Rajendrain Septembei^ bothhadbeenconvictedofdrugtrafficking. Since the death penalty was made mandatory in 1975 for trafficking in a specified quantity of certain dmgs, 16 people have been executed under this provision. Amnesty International expressed regret at these executions and appealed on behalf of another four prisoners whose petitions for c lemency (the fmal appeal available to them) were before the President
In July 1984 it was reported that stiffer sentences, including mandatory canings of six to 12 strokes, were to be introduced for a variety of offences. Four bills amending the penal code and related legislation were before pariiament Caning has been a mandatory
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
punishment, in most cases in addition to terms of imprisonment, for some 30 offences since 1973. Amnesty International opposes caning on the grounds that it constitutes cruel, inhuman and degrading punishment
