Brazil
Amendments to the Lei de Seguranqa Nacional{hS>t^), Law of National Security, approved by Congress in December 1983 resulted in ¿he release of all Amnesty International's adopted long-term prisoners of conscience by the middle of 1984. This legislation had been used frequently in the past to detain prisoners of conscience. The organization was concemed about continuing short-term arrests of members of banned political parties and of priests and lay workers living in the interior, apparently for the peaceful expression of their conscientiously held beliefs. During the year, Amnesty Intemational received reports of torture and arbitrary killings carried out by local authorities or with their acquiescence. Particular targets were mral trade union leaders, peasants and Indians following disputes over land tenure.
On 6 April 1984 the last prisoner of conscience adopted by Amnesty Intemational, Juvencio Mazzarrollo, a newspaper editor, was released
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
after serving 18 months of a four-year prison sentence for writing articles critical of the govemment This followed a review by the Superior Federal Tribunal which reduced his sentence to two months and 20 days.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the arbitrary arrest of eight civilians and one military officer under emergency measures imposed on 18 April in Brasilia and 10 surrounding cities. These permitted security forces to search and detain people without warrant, suspended the right to free assembly and subjected the press, television and radio to censorship. Amnesty International believed that the nine had been detained for supporting a campaign for direct elections to choose a successor to the outgoing President, General Joao Baptista Figueiredo. By 2 May all had been released after the emergency measures were lifted
In October Amnesty Intemational leamed that alleged members of communist organizations had been arrested in cities throughout Brazil Under the amended LSN, membership of the Brazilian Communist Party is an offence ptmishable by up to five years' imprisonment None of those arrested were accused of acts of political violence but of infihrating the campaign to elect the civilian presidential candidate, Tancredo Neves. All were released after questioning.
On 15 November Amnesty Intemational called upon the authorities to investigate the killing of 31-year-old journalist Mario Eugenio de Oliveira, who worked for the Correio Braziliense newspaper and Radio Planalto in the capital Brasilia He was shot on 12 November in the Radio Planalto car park by three assailants allegedly driving police vehicles. The autopsy report concluded that the murder weapon was a shotgun of a type issued to the Brazilian police force. Before his death Mario Eugenio de Oliveira had been investigating police "death squads" in Brasilia and had received numerous death threats. Such death squads, said to consist of members of urban police forces, were allegedly responsible for the extrajudicial executions of thousands of criminal suspects and vagrants since the 1970s. Further killings were reported during 1984 despite reported attempts by the authorities to curb the death squads' activities.
In July Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Minister of Justice asking for a prompt investigation into allegations that on 19 May Raquel Canc^do e Silva, an elected town coimcillor, had been tortured in the custody of the military police in Porto Velho. On 20 May a judge ordered her release and she was transferred to a hospital where tests showed she had a displaced kidney due to blows to the side of her body. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed at reports of torture of common prisoners and criminal suspects.
During 1984 there was a marked increase in the number of disputes
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
over land, particularly in the states of Par^ Goias and Bahia While Amnesty Intemational takes no position on conflicting claims about the possession of land, it continued to be concemed by allegations that rural trade union leaders, peasants and Indians were being arbitrarily detained, ill-treated and, in some instances, killed by local authorities or with their acquiescence. The Comissao Pastoral da Terra (CPT), the Catholic Church's Land Commission, estimated that 40 peasants linked to the rural trade union movement had been killed by gunmen in the pay of local ranchers in the first seven months of 1984 alone. Throughout the year complaints about the apparent failure of state and federal authorities to investigate such allegations reached Amnesty Intemational.
Early on 9 September amied agents of the federal police and GETAT - a govemment land agency - raided union headquarters in Buriti, Sao Sebastiao do Tocantins, and allegedly threatened and beat peasants attending a meeting. They then arrested 13 peasants without warrant and drove them to the military p>olice headquarters in Augus-tinopolis where they reportedly threatened and interrogated them for several hours about their union activities. Four of the peasants were allegedly severely beaten. All were released the same day.
In December 1984 Amnesty Intemational wrote to the govemment about reports that four peasants from Axixa, in Goias state, had been beaten after their arrest on 11 November by police. Amnesty Intemational was also informed that the men, who were accused of the murder of a rancher and his wife, had been coerced into implicating a local priest in the killing. Consequently, on 29 November Father Josimo Moraes Tavares and a lay worker, Lourdes Goi, were detained and accused of being behind the crime. Both were released after a week but the four peasants were kept in pre-trial detention.
Amnesty Intemational sent appeals to the authorities after learning that a band of armed mercenaries had, on 2 November 1984, attacked members of the Pataxo Ha Ha Hae tribe, seriously injuring one man, Antonio Julio da Silva. The mercenaries were allegecUy employed by ranchers who, it was said, had illegally settled on the Paraguagii-Caramaru reserve in the state of Bahia Amnesty Intemational was concemed that the lives of the Pataxo Ha Ha Hae were at risk because of the failure of federal police and state authorities to disarm the mercenaries and arrest those responsible for the attack.
vili
Amnesty International Report 1985
