Swaziland
Amnesty International was concerned about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and the detention without trial of other suspected opponents of the govenv ment. All prisoners of conscience held at the beginning of 1984 were released in March and April but there were new politically motivated arrests during the year of both Swazi nationals and South African refugees and political exiles. Most of the South Africans, some of whom were allegedly tortured or ill-treated, were deported to other countries of asylum but there were reports that several were forcibly returned to South Africa despite fears that they might be imprisoned and tortured there.
There were further indications of a power struggle within the govemment, culminating in the dismissal in June of the Ministers of Finance and Foreign Affairs, the Army Chief of Staff and the Commissioner of Police, and the subsequent removal from office of Prince Sozisa, Chairman of the Liqoqo, or Supreme Council of State.
At the beginning of 1984,19 people were held under administrative detention orders signed by the Prime Minister, Prince Bhekimpi Dlamini. They had all been arrested in the last five months of 1983 in
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
connection with opposition to the deposing of the Acting Head of State, Queen Regent Dzeliwe, and her replacement by Queen Regent Ntombi. Four of the detainees had been adopted as prisoners of conscience: Douglas Lukhele, a former Attorney-General and High Court judge; Arthur Khoza, a senior civil servant; and two members of the royal family, Prince Sulumlomo Dlamini and Prince Thunduluka Dlamini. Amnesty Intemational was investigating the cases ofthe other 15 detainees, who, unlike the first four, had been charged with treason Some of them had applied successfully to the courts to be released on bail but administrative detention orders had then been imposed. Such detention orders, which could not be challenged in the courts, were for a maximum of 60 days but could be renewed immediately upon expiry any number of times, so providing a basis for indefinite detention without trial. All those held at the beginning of 1984 had had their detention orders renewed at least once.
The 15 prisoners charged with treason were due to stand trial in May. However, in March the government suddenly released eight of them together with Douglas Lukhele and Arthur Khoza Amnesty Intemational welcomed this development but on 27 March made a renewed appeal for the release of Prince Sulumlomo Dlamini and Prince Thunduluka Dlamini. The organization also urged the Prime Minister to cancel the detention orders imposed on the seven remaining prisoners charged with treason. The two princes and the seven prisoners were freed on 18 April at the direction of Queen Regent Ntombi and all treason charges were dropped
In late March and April there was a series of violent clashes between Swazi security forces and members of the African National Congress (ANC) of South Africa, some of whom were based in Swaziland while others apparently entered Swaziland after being expelled from Mozambique after its Nkomati Accord with South Africa There were several deaths on both sides and many suspected ANC members were arrested. Some had undoubtedly been involved in violent activity but others were recognized refugees of long standing who did not appear to have been involved in violence. Several were prosecuted and imprisoned for possessing weapons but the majority were held uncharged pending deportation. In April it was reported that armed men had forcibly removed alleged ANC members from two police stations. The govemment blamed the ANC for both incidents but the ANC alleged that four prisoners taken from Bhunya police station had been taken to South Africa. This was denied by both the Swaziland and South African authorities.
In July Amnesty Intemational received reports that 48 detained ANC activists had gone on hunger-strike in protest against torture and ill-treatment in custody. The organization expressed its concem to the
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
govemment over these allegations and called for an inquiry. It urged the authorities not to repatriate alleged ANC members to South Africa in view of fears that they might be tortured there. No inquiry was known to have been established but most of the alleged ANC members were deported to other countries in late July.
In December the govemment said that some ANC members had returned to the country and ordered 23 of them to report to the police or face summary deportation to South Africa. Amnesty Intemational was concemed about this threat and again urged the authorities not to repatriate people who would be at risk qf torture in South Africa.
In early October a former student leader of South African origin, Bhabalazi Bulunga, was arrested at Big Bend. He was held uncharged for about 10 days and then forcibly repatriated to South Africa, where he was detained by security police. Amnesty Intemational protested to the Swaziland authorities over his arrest and repatriation and called on the South African authorities to release him. He was freed uncharged in late December but was not permitted to retum to Swaziland.
The Minister of Finance dismissed in June, Dr Sishayi Nxumalo, the former Army Chief of Staff, Colonel MangomeniNdzimandze, and another senior army officer, Major Abednego Dlamini, were arrested in November. The police stated only that they were being held in connection with security matters. None of them had been charged or released by the end of 1984 although the law requires that people who are arrested must be charged or released "within a reasonable tune", normally considered to be 48 hours. Dr Nxumalo was dismissed shortly after announcing the discovery of a large-scale fraud involving the customs union with South Africa in which senior politicians were allegedly involved Dr George Msibi, a member of the Liqoqo, then claimedthatDr Nxumalo and the army and police chiefs dismissed with him had threatened the Queen Regent with"bloody revolution" unless she dismissed their political opponents. This was denied by Dr Nxumalo who instituteda court action againstDrMsibifordefamation. However, before this could be heard, the govemment enacted by decree new legislation granting members oiVat Liqoqo immunity against civil court actions, retroactive to March. Amnesty International appealed on behalf of Dr Nxumalo and the two army officers following their arrest and called forthem to be charged or released in accordance with the law. It also expressed concern over reports that Dr Nxumalo had become seriously ill while in custody and had required hospital treatment.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
