Guyana
Amnesty International was concerned about allegations of ill-treatment of suspects in police custody and a number of deaths during, or shortly after, detention. Serious malnutrition among prisoners continued to be reported, and by the end of 1984 no reply had been received to Amnesty International's 1983 letter to the Minister of Home Affairs about this (see Amnesty International Report 1984).
In February Amnesty International wrote to President Bumham expressing concern at the reported incommunicado detention of Paul Termassee, President of the Democratic Labour Movement, who was arrested on 9 February at Timehri Airport No reply was received but he was released on 14 February.
In December Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Home Affairs about the ill-treatment of detainees in police custody, stating that it had received reports that ill-treatment was occurring with increasing frequency. Most of the more recent complaints concerned criminal suspects. Although Amnesty International did not have sufficient information to assess the extent of ill-treatment, it said that it was concerned by the seriousness of some of the cases reported and noted that the allegations referred to police stations in different parts of the country. A number of suspects alleging ill-treatment had been held incommunicado for several days, in some cases without their relatives being informed of their whereabouts. Amnesty International asked if allegations of ill-treatment made by nine men arrested in the North West District in February had been investigated The nine, who were later released without charge, alleged that they had been stripped naked after their arrest and beaten while being questioned about a theft One of the nine further alleged that he had been subjected to electric shocks, by being made to hold a piece of iron above his head while kneeling on a car battery. Although the Commissioner of Police was reported to have stated that the allegations would be investigated, Amnesty International had received no information about this by the end of 1984.
Amnesty International referred also to three cases where prisoners had died after being held in police custody. In April Trevor Waterman died in the Georgetown Public Hospital liie day after he had been held at Kitty Police Station for questioning. An autopsy report found the cause of death to be suffocation. Abrasions and internal bleeding were also noted Two police ofificers have since been charged with manslaughter and released on bail. In May 1984 an inquest jury investigating the death of Cleveland Alexander in police custody at Brickdam Police
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Station, Georgetown, found he had died from injuries inflicted by the police force. Amnesty Intemational told the government that as far as it was aware, no law enforcement officers had been charged Amnesty Intemational referred also to aprevious incident in 1982 when a suspect had reportedly been found dead in a police cell in Brickdam Police Station by relatives, after being held for four days on suspicion of theft A subsequent post-mortem had found the cause of death to be internal bleeding from a punctured lung caused by broken ribs; no inquest had been held Amnesty Intemational called for a prompt and impartial investigation of these complaints. It urged the govemment to ensure that all those in police custody be allowed prompt access to relatives, lawyers and medical personnel; and that practical steps be taken to ensure implementation of the UN Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials, including training of police officers in accordance with the Code.
