Viet Nam
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concerned aboutthe long-term detention without trial of several thousand people allegedly associated with the government of the former Republic of (South) Vietnam. It was also concerned about other political prisoners arrested since 1975, many of whom were held without charge or trial and some of whom the organization believed to be prisoners of conscience. These included leading religious and intellectual figures arrested in 1984. The death penalty was also an Amnesty Intemational concern.
Amnesty International welcomed the release of significant numbers of people from "re-education" camps during 1984. It remained concerned, however, that several thousand who had been intemed in such camps since 1975 or 1976 under a collective administrative order continued to be held. The basis of their detention was said to be their position in pre-1975 southern Viet Nam, but they had been denied the opportunity to defend themselves against individual accusations. Amnesty Intemational regarded their continued detention without charge or trial as a violation of the provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (to which Viet Nam became a party in 1982) relating to arbitrary detention, the right to fair trial and the right to be presumed innocent until proved guilty.
Amnesty Intemational considered some of those held in the camps to be prisoners of conscience. They included Dr Tmong van Quynh who had remained imprisoned in Nam Ha camp. Ha Nam Ninh province, since being required to register for "re-education" in 1975 apparently because he had been a memberof a non-communist political
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
party. The organization was also concerned at the detention for "reeducation" of several Roman Catholic priests and Protestant pastors among them military chaplains. A senior Vietnamese churchman stated in June 1984 that approximately 200 priests were detained in "reeducation" camps or prisons. Amnesty International adopted as a prisoner of conscience Father Trinh Cong Trong of the southem Vietnamese diocese of Vinh Long, a youth worker arrested in February 1976, reportedly while travelling to invite a North Vietnamese priest to address Vinh Long Catholics on the subject of the church in northern Viet Nam
In June 1982 Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach had declared his country's willingness to release all those remaining in "re-education" camps on condition that the USA would accept them for resetüement US Secretary of State George Shultz responded in September 1984 that his administration was prepared to establish an immigration program for 10,000 current and former "re-education" camp inmates. Despite meetings between representatives of the two governments, however, there was no significant progress reported by the end of 1984. In July Amnesty Intemational repeated its June 1982 appeal for the unconditional release of all those remaining in "re-education" camps.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemedaboutthe imprisonment without trial of other individuals arrested since 1975 for political reasons, some of whom it believed to be prisoners of conscience. They included former lawyers Vu Ngoc Tmy and Dao Van and former joumalist and senator Pham van Tam (also known as Thai Lang Nghiem), all ofwhom had been imprisoned without charge or trial since mid-1978.
Amnesty Intemational was investigating the case of Thai Nhu Sieu, an ethnic C hiñese resident of Hanoi. Expelled from the mling Lao D ong (labour) party in 1972, Thai Nhu Sieu was the former editor of 7a« Viet Hoa (Xin Yue Hua), the official journal of the Sino-Vietnamese Association in the Democratic Republic of (North) Viet Nam. He was arrested in 1978 atatimeoftensionbetweenChinaandVietNam. Five years after his arrest, in June 1984, Thai Nhu Sieu was tried for subversion and spying for China and sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment.
The organization welcomed the release in January 1984 of 63-year-old poet Bui Hoang Cam, adopted as a prisoner of conscience after his arrest in Hanoi in August 1982 on a charge of "having cultural relations with foreigners". He had reportedly attempted to send some poems to his daughter in the USA.
Amnesty Intemational remained concemed about the imprisonment of four Jesuit priests whom it considered to have been wrongly convicted of subversion in June 1983. In a letter to Prime Minister
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Pham van Dong, it urged their release and that of Protestant pastor Hu Hieu Ha, detained since December 1983 when his church in Ho Chi Minh City was closed.
In a series of urgent appeals Amnesty Intemational expressed its concem about the arrests of groups of religious and intellectual figures it believed had been imprisoned for the non-violent expression of their beliefe. It adopted as prisoners of conscience 12 Buddhist monks and nuns, including some of Viet Nam's foremost Buddhist scholars, who were arrested in April and were still in detention at the end of 1984. It also adopted three former writers arrested in May 1984 who remained in detention at the end of the year. They included the well-known novelist Doan Quoc Sy, who had spent four years in "re-education" between 1976 and 1980 when he had first been adopted by Amnesty Intemational as a prisoner of conscience. All three had been forbidden to write since 1975. They were held incommunicado at Phan DangLuu prison. Ho Chi Minh City, as of December 1984.
Amnesty International was concemed at reports that three influential religious figures had been restricted by internal exile or house arrest The Buddhist monks Thich Quang Do and Thich Huyen Quang remained confined to the villages to which they had been sent in 1^82 when the local authorides in Ho Chi Minh City decided that their presence was "dangerous for the well-being of the people". Monsignor Nguyen Kim Die n, Roman Catholic Archbishop of Hue, was reportedly confined to his palace in April and repeatedly interrogated by police after he had publicly expressed his opposition to the formation of a government-sponsored Catholic council. He was also reportedly accused of being an accomplice of Father Nguyen van Ly, a priest in his diocese who had been sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment in December 1983 for "opposing the Revolution and destroying the people's unity". Amnesty Intemational adopted Father Ly as a prisoner of conscience.
Amnesty Intemational has received few reports of torture or other deliberate Ul-treatment of prisoners since 1975. The organization welcomed reports received in 1984 that two "re-education" internees who had allegedly been shackled, placed in dark isolation cells and denied family visits in camp 1870, XuanPhuoc, PhuKhanh, had been allowed to return to normal camp life.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed that at least 13 people were condemned to death in 1984 for murder, cormption, subversion and espionage, and appealed for the commutation of all death sentences. It was particularly concerned that no judicial appeal was allowed against sentences imposed by the Supreme People's Tribunal, although those condemned to death had the right to ask the President of the State Council for clemency. The right of the defendant to appeal against
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
conviction and sentence is guaranteed by Article 14(5) ofthe Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
By the end of the year at least three of the 13 people known to have been sentenced to death in 1984 had been executed and a person sentenced to death in 1982 had also been executed. Two people sentenced to death inDecemberforespionage and subversion had their sentences commuted to life imprisonment
