Malawi
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, two of whom continued to be imprisoned after an unfair trial and under sentence of death until June when their sentences were commuted to life imprisonment Other prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty Intemational were released during 1984 but the organization remained concemed that some suspected opponents of the govemment continued to be detained without trial. There were reports of ill-treatment of prisoners and there was continued concem about the use of the death penalty.
On 7 Febmary the National Traditional Court of Appeal rejected the appeals of Orton Chirwa, a former Minister of Justice, and his wife. Vera, a law lecturer, against their conviction in May 1983 on charges of treason. The appeal court also confirmed the death sentences imposed after their trial. Amnesty International then appealed to Life-President Kamuzu Banda to grant them clemency and expressed the view that
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
they were both prisoners of conscience. Orton and Vera Chirwa were arrested in December 1981 with their son, Fumbani, who was not brought to trial. Amnesty International believed that they had been arrested on account of their non-violent opposition to the government, and that the proceedings in their trial had been unfair (see Amnesty International Report 1984). Appeals for clemency were also made by the UN Commission on Human Rights, the Secretary-General of the UN and a number of governments.
There was no immediate response to these appeals but on 24 February the authorities released Fumbani Chirwa from what they described as "protective custody". He was returned to the border with Zambia and freed uncharged He subsequently confirmed to Amnesty International that he had been detained incommunicado and in solitary confinement at Zomba Prison for almost two years and at times had been chained by his ankles to a bar in his cell and handcuffed. He was held in a section of the prison reserved for political prisoners, and for criminal prisoners awaiting execution.
Amnesty International renewed its appeals for clemency for Orton and Vera Chirwa around Kamuzu Day, 14 May, an occasion sometimes marked by humanitarian measures. The government made no reference to the Chirwas but it did announce the release of 13 prisoners reportedly detained for anti-social behaviour or for seeking to undermine the stability of the country. The names of those freed were not made public but Amnesty International subsequently confirmed that they included four university students detained without trial since February 1983. Zangaphe Chizeze, Edge Kanyongolo, Tubby Chibwana and Mack Willie Killion had all been adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International following their arrest for reportedly attempting to form a new political group in opposition to the Malawi Congress Party (MCP), the only party permitted under the constitution
Sofiliano Faindi Phiri, a former nominated member of parliament who was adopted as a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty International after he was sentenced to five years' imprisonment in 1981, was also believed to have been released in May. He had expressed views about development in the Chikwawa area which were interpreted as insulting to the President He was believed to have been granted one third remission of sentence.
On 30 June the government announced that Life-President Banda had commuted Orton and Vera Chirwa's death sentences to life imprisonment Amnesty International welcomed this but continued to campaign for their release as prisoners of conscience. The organization obtained copies of the judgment delivered in May 1983 following their trial before the Southern Regional Traditional Court at Soche and of the judgment in February 1984 of the National Traditional Court of
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Appeal. It made both these documents public in December together with an expert legal commentary by an Amnesty Intemational delegate who had attempted to observe the appeal proceedings but had been refused access to the court By being tried before a traditional court rather than a high court, Orton and Vera Chirwa were placed at a disadvantage: the right to legal representation was denied and mles of evidence observed in the high court did not apply. The appeal court judgment criticized other aspects of the Chirwas' trial, such as the court's failure to observe its own mles relating to the issues of jurisdiction, admissibility of evidence and the need to call witnesses. Some of the court's mlings, the appeal court stated, were "wrong in law". It also castigated the court for failing to base its judgment on an analysis and evaluation of the evidence, commented that it" made some extraordinary findings" and stated that "The record is littered with unnecessary abuse which is not part of the traditional law".
Despite this catalogue of criticism, the appeal court upheld the judgment of the lower court and confirmed the death sentences. It did so, however, without providing a reasoned argument for the decision. This led Amnesty Intemational's delegate to suggest that much of the judgment must have represented the views of a minority of the five appeal court judges who had been overridden by a majority which made " little attempt to provide reasons for its conclusions". According to the delegate, although much of the appeal court judgment was well-reasoned and demonstrated that "judged by normal legal standards" the trial of the Chirwas was "so riddled with irregularities that the convictions could not stand", ultimately " 'tradition' and'custom' " had been invoked "to cure every irregularity and illegality" and justify upholding the Chirwas' convictions.
In publicizing the two courts' judgments, Amnesty Intemational appealed again for the immediate and unconditional release of Orton and Vera Chirwa and expressed concern also about their conditions of imprisonment However, they were both still held at the end of 1984.
Several political detainees were also believed to be still held at the end of 1984, mostly in Mikuyu Prison, near Zomba. They reportedly included a journalist, a local govemment worker from Nsanje and a former senior official of the MCP. There were also some indications of renewed govemment pressure on members of the Jehovah's Witnesses sect In June a cabinet minister was reported to have warned that the govemment would not tolerate any revival of the sect, which was banned in 1967. At the end of 1984 Amnesty Intemational was investigating allegations that a number of Jehovah's Witnesses living as refugees in Zambia, including young children, had been abducted fi'om there by members of the Malawi Young Pioneers, youth wing of the MCP, ill-treated and imprisoned in Malawi.
vili
Amnesty International Report 1985
In late 1084 Amnesty International received information alleging systematic ill-treatment of convicted criminal prisoners, especially at Dzeleka Prison, which since late 1983 had apparently been used to detain hard-core offenders in punitive conditions after they had completed their prison sentences. Such prisoners were reported to have been manacled naked in punishment cells, given one-quarter rations and routinely beaten for minor infringements of prison rules.
Amnesty Intemational remained concerned about the use of the death penalty. At least one person sentenced to death for murder by a traditional court had his sentence confirmed upon appeal although a co-defendant had his sentence quashed. It was not known whether any executions were carried out in 1984 but Amnesty Intemational received information that there were more than 80 prisoners under sentence of death.
