United Kingdom
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about allegations of torture and ill-treatment during interrogation of political suspects in Northem Ireland. The organization continued to be concemed about judicial procedures in political cases in Northem Ireland, and continued to investigate a number of shootings by security forces there. Amnesty Intemational was concemed about arrests of miners reportedly for exercising their freedom of expression and about allegations of ill-treatment of arrested miners by the police.
At the beginning of September Amnesty International received reports that 23-year-old Paul Camana had been ill-treated during his interrogation by the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) in Castlereagh Holding Centre, Belfast between 11 and 16 August 1984. He had been arrested under the Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA) after being stopped at a police checkpoint in Londonderry. He alleged that he had been punched, slapped, kicked and spat on and that black plastic bags had been repeatedly pulled over his head and moulded to his face so that he could not breathe. He was allowed access to his solicitor only after 72 hours, when the ill-treatment was said to have stopped. On 17 and 18 September two Amnesty Intemational delegates, a doctor and a lawyer, went to Northem Ireland to interview Paul Caruana, his lawyer and medical personnel. On the basis of a detailed medical examination and the interviews the delegates concluded that Paul Caruana's account of ill-treatment and torture was consistent with the signs and symptoms they observed In view of this Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, on 14 December, urging hhn to investigate the allegations fully and promptly.
Amnesty International received several reports about the ill-treatment of Jacqueline Moore, a pregnant woman, and her mother, Anna Moore, in November 1983 at the Castlereagh interrogation centre. They were arrested on 14 November under anti-terrorist legislation, in
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
connection with a bombing two years earlier in which 17 people were killed Both women alleged that they had signed confessions after ill-treatment, which they withdrew as soon as they saw a solicitor. On 9 August 1984 the organization wrote to the govemment about the allegations, asking whether an inquiry had been carried out On 30 August it was informed that an investigation had been carried out and that the report was being considered by the Director of Public Prosecutions and the Police Complaints Board. No further information was available at the end of 1984.
The report of an official inquiry into the workings of the Emergency Provisions (Northem Ireland) Act 1978 was published in April 1984 {ste Amnesty Intemational Report 1984). Written by a senior English judge, the report did not respond to criticisms that Amnesty Intemational had submitted regarding proceedings in the so-called' 'Diplock Courts" in Northem Ireland. These differ from normal courts in several respects, notably in that they have no jury and only a single judge. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that the report's recommendations were not sufficient to remove the risks of unfair trial in that it did not propose adequate safeguards to ensure that statements obtained through interrogation were voluntary, such as a legally enforceable code goveming interrogation and other aspects of the treatment of detainees. Nor did it recommend safeguards against the risk of involuntary or unreliable confessions - uncorroborated by any other evidence -becoming the sole basis for conviction.
In late 1984 the courts threw out two cases based entirely on the testimony of former accomplices of those accused ("supergrasses") (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984). On 18 December Lord Chief Justice Lowry dismissed the case against 35 people on trial in Belfast on a total of 180 charges, on the grounds that the testimony of Raymond Gilmour, a former accomplice and the chief witness, was "entirely unworthy of belief'. Many ofthe defendants had been held in custody for over two years. On24December, 14people jailed inApril 1983 on the basis of the testimony of Joe Bennett, a former Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF) accomplice, wontheir appeal against convictioa The judge said the sentences and convictions were "unsafe and unsatisfactory".
In 1984, as in previous years, there were incidents in which members ofthe security forces shotpeople dead in circumstances lhatgave rise to accusations that the killings were premeditated {see Amnesty Intemational Report 1983 and 1984). Amnesty Intemational sent a mission to Northem Ireland to meet lawyers acting for the families of someof those killed, and others, to investigate whether any of the killings by security forces resulted from a deliberate govemment policy to eliminate its opponents or whether they resulted from the necessary use of force in
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
law enforcement and self-defence. The killings were diflTicult to investigate partly because they took place in a context of violence against the security forces by Republican paramilitary organizations. However, investigation was also hindered by the inadequacy of official information on suspicious killings. Inquests were held only after long delays, and in the cases of particular interest to Amnesty Intemational, they still had not been held after 26 months. There were also accusations by one coroner that the police had supplied his office with incomplete and misleading information on some of the more suspicious killings. Official investigations were also carried out by the police, who are required to investigate all killings, including those by the police or army. Their findings are given to the prosecuting authorities to determine whether anyone should be prosecuted for a criminal offence, and to a police complaints body to decide on disciplinary proceedings. However, unless there is a trial, the findings of the police investigation are not usually made public. In 1984 there were three trials of members of the police or army for killings while on duty. In one a soldier was convicted of murder, in this case there were no grounds to suspect that the killing resulted from official policy or decision. In the two others police officers were acquitted on the grounds that their use of lethal force had been reasonable in the circumstances. Although criminal trials made more information public on the killings than other official investigation methods, they did not address wider questions such as indirect official involvement in killings or the appropriateness of legal and administrative norms for the use of lethal force in law enforcement. Because of this, and the standard of proof required by criminal justice. Amnesty Intemational believed that acquittals in criminal trials did not resolve doubts about official involvement in the killings. The organization was continuing to investigate the killings at the end of 1984.
Amnesty International was investigating allegations arising from the miners' strike in Great Britain which began on 6 March 1984 and continued into 1985. These included allegations that detained miners were ill-treated in police custody; Amnesty Intemational was informed of a number of civU cases initiated against the police for alleged ill-treatment. Amnesty Intemational also investigated allegations that miners were arrested for exercising their right to freedom of expression through lawful picketing. By 11 December there had been8,830 arrests in England and Wales, and by the end of December there had been 1,419 arrests in Scotland. Well over half were charged with "breach of the peace" and "obstructing the police". By 7 December, 104 had been sentenced and imprisoned in En^and and Wales. Amnesty Intemational received reports that many miners were arrested for participating or attempting to participate in peaceful pickets under circumstances not prohibited by law. Most miners were provisionally released from
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
custody on condition tliat they agreed not to picket or demonstrate in connection with the current dispute except to peacefully picket at their place of work. Some miners had greater restrictions imposed on their freedom of movement, for example, curfews or a total ban on travelling to complete counties. Many lawyers stated that such restrictive bail conditions were unusual for offences of this nature. A number of miners were imprisoned for breaching their bail conditions.
Amnesty International remained concemed about allegations of ill-treatment in police custody made by Derek Treadaway and three other prisoners from Birmingham (see/^wneiiy Intemational Report 1984). Derek Treadaway alleged that in April 1982 he had made a confession as a result of plastic bags being placed over his head and tightened around his neck. Towards the end of December 1984 Derek Treadaway's solicitors received a letter from the police stating that the Police Complaints Board had investigated the complaint and did not consider the evidence sufficient to initiate criminal proceedings. Derek Treadaway was continuing to pursue his case through civil action.
