Algeria
During 1984 Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the long-term detention without trial of people arrested on political grounds in 1982 and 1983, prolonged incommunicado detention and reports of ill-treatment of detainees. After a presidential pardon in May, 13 prisoners accused of opposition activities - whose cases Amnesty Intemational was investigating- were released, as were a number of others whose cases were of concem. At least four executions were carried out during the year.
On 8 May a presidential pardon led to the release of 92 political prisoners from various political groups who were to be tried by the State Security Court at Medea Thirteen of them had been arrested in December 1983 and were first accused of belonging to an illegal organization, the Organisation socialiste des travailleurs (OST), Socialist Workers Organization. However, after they went on hunger-strike early m 1984 to demand political prisoner status, the authorities altered the charge. They were then accused of collaborating with previously arrested individuals suspected of trafficking in arms and of threatening the security of the state. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that they were held in garde à vue (incommunicado detention) for longer than the law allowed, that by mid-April the judicial investigation necessary before the trial had not begun, that the president of the State Security Court - who must approve lawyers pleading before the court- had not yet done so, and that the prisoners had been denied access to their lawyers since March. The organization believed that they were probably prisoners of conscience but was still carrying out its investigations when the prisoners were released
The presidential pardon also covered 23 leading members of the
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Islamic movements and a number of people, including former officials in the governments of the early 1960s, who were arrested in October 1983 and subsequently held in Berrouaghia Prison (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1983 and 1984). Before the pardon, in February, the Minister of Justice replied to earlier inquiries by Amnesty Intemational on the legal basis of the arrests, and particularly the role of military personnel in carrying out the arrests. He cited a presidential decree of November 1982 under which military security personnel assume the powers of the judiciary police in matters of army security, attempted subversion of the state, plots against the national economy and espionage. On 4 May, before learning of the presidential pardon. Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Minister of Justice expressing concem that those arrested in October 1983 had been held mgarde a vue by the police for longer than the law allowed, that several of them claimed to have been ill-treated, immediately after their arrest and during \hQivgarde a vue detention, and that pre-trial investigations were progressing only very slowly. Amnesty International also raised the cases ofthe various prisoners on whose behalf it was working and called for detainees held without trial to either receive a prompt and fair trial or be released.
According to unconfirmed reports, after the May presidential pardon a number of prisoners from different groups, including Muslim fundamentalists and a number arrested on suspicion of arms trafficking, were still being held in detention without trial.
At least four executions were carried out in 1984 and Amnesty Intemational learned of one death sentence. Those known to have been executed were: Toufik Bensaadi, sentenced in 1982 for rape and attempted murder, Abdeslam Madani, sentenced in 1981 for murder, and Miloud Belhachemi and Mohamed Lakari, both sentenced in 1982 for murder. The death sentence was passed in May 1984 on Ahmed Bendhouma, who was convicted of rape and murder, and on 8 June Amnesty Intemational called for it to be commuted It also wrote to the President on 10 December expressing its regret at the executions which had taken place during 1984 and reiterating its opposition to the death penalty.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
