Zambia
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the detention without trial of alleged opponents of the government, including one prisoner of conscience and several possible prisoners of conscience. The organization was also concerned about what appeared to be extrajudicial executions by soldiers of alleged smugglers and about the continued use of the death penalty.
On 10 April Zambia acceded to the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and its Optional Protocol, as well as the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
The government continued to use the Preservation of Public Security Regulations to authorize the indefinite detention without trial of people considered a threat to public security. They included a number of people detained in 1981 who allegedly conspired to help several prisoners awaiting trial for treason to escape from custody. In October, to mark the 20th anniversary of Zambia's independence. President Kenneth Kaunda announced the release of 239 prisoners, including at least six political detainees, from the group detained since 1981. One of them - Nkaka Chisanga Puta - had been adopted by Amnesty Intemational as a prisoner of conscience. However, two of this group -Faustino Lombe and Major Ronald Chansa- were still in detention at the end of 1984 and Amnesty Intemational was investigating whether they might be prisoners of conscience. In November 1983 the High Court inNdola had heard a habeas corpus application filed by Faustino Lombe, alleging that he had been detained only because he supported the late Simon Kapwepwe, a former Vice-President. Judgment was not given until August 1984, when the court rejected the applicatioa
In August the Appeal Court in Lusaka began to hear the appeal of seven men sentenced to death in 1983 for treason (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984). At the end of 1984 the court had still not
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
reached a decision, but judgment was expected early in 1985. In 1983 six of this group, including Valentine Musakanya, a former Governor of the Bank of Zambia, and Edward Shamwana, a lawyer and former High Court Commissioner, had filed a petition against the prison authorities alleging torture, solitary confinement, degradation and discrimination. This was heard in the High Court in October. The state reportedly argued that the court should not hear such petitions since the Prisons Act provided full machinery for redressing prisoners' grievances. Judgment was reserved an(i had not been given by the end of 1984.
Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about reports that a number of people in the Copperbelt area which borders Zaire were killed by Zambian soldiers deployed to prevent smuggling. The organization was concemed that some of these killings might have been extrajudicial executions of individuals detained by the army. Eleven alleged smugglers were killed in four separate incidents during September and October at Chililabombwe on 9 September, 6 October and 11 October, and in Ndola on 14 October. In the last incident it was reported that the body of a woman shot as an alleged smuggler was found to have been disembowelled when it arrived at Ndola General Hospital. Amnesty Intemational wrote to President Kaunda in November seeldng an assurance that a police inquiry had been initiated to investigate these incidents and to determine whether there was any criminal responsibility attached to the suspects' deaths. The organization also called for formal inquests to be held at the earliest opportunity and sought an assurance that soldiers and other law enforcement personnel were under orders not to carry out summary execution of suspects.
In December 1983 two criminal suspects died in police custody in Ndola. Alfred Mailoni reportedly jumped to his death from the second floor of Ndola police station and Cornelius Musopelo died of brain damage after receiving multiple injuries. In March an Ndola coroner found that Alfred Mailoni had committed suicide. However, four police officers were charged with the murder of Comelius Musopelo. In May they were discharged by a magistrate who said that although forensic evidence proved that Comelius Musopelo "died in violent circumstances in police custody", there was no evidence to show who struck the fatal blow. In January, Jim Zulu, a bartender, died after three days of interrogation at Kitwe police station. Two police officers were found guilty of his manslaughter in November and each sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the widespread use of the death penalty in Zambia. At least 26 people were reported to have been sentenced to death in 1984, 13 for murder and 13 for armed robbery. At least 10 executions were reportedly carried out during the year.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
