Burkina Faso
Amnesty International's main concerns were the imprisonment of three prisoners of conscience for trade union activities, the reported detention without trial of suspected opponents of the government and the death penalty.
In August 1984 the name of Upper Volta was changed to Burkina Faso on the first anniversary of the coup which brought Captain Thomas Sankara to power.
Three leading officials of the Syndicat national des enseignants africains de Haute-Volta (SNEAHV), National Union of African
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Teachere of Upper Volta, were arrested on 9 March in the capital, Ouagadougou. They were then taken to the military barracks in Koudougou, where they reportedly remained in detention without trial for the rest of the year. The three - Jean Pagnimba Bila, Ousmane Ismaël Kindo and Joachim Sib - were respectively Secretary General, Deputy Secretary General and Foreign Relations Secretary of the SNEAHV. Shortly afterwards the Defence Minister, Major Jean-Baptiste Lingani, said they had been detained because of their "subversive political activities", and accused them of seeking to undemiine the government with financial assistance from unnamed foreign powers. However, no formal charges were brought against them and their union's reported opposition to certain government policies was believed to have been the real reason for their arrest. In protest, other SNEAHV leaders called a strike on 20 and 21 March which was apparently supported by nearly half the union's 6,000 members. The government took the view that the strike was politically motivated and dismissed all the teachers who supported it. President Thomas Sankara later stated publicly that some 1,300 teachers had been dismissed However, in October the authorities announced that teachers who demonstrated their support for the govemment would be permitted to return to their former jobs.
In late March Amnesty Intemational expressed its concern about the detention of the three trade union officials and called for them to be brought to trial promptly or released However, the govemment did not respond Amnesty International subsequently adopted Jean Pagnimba Bila, Ousmane Ismaël Kindo and Joachim Sib as prisoners of conscience and called for their immediate release but they were still detained without trial at the end of 1984.
At least four other people were known to be detained without trial for political reasons at the end of 1984. Joseph Ouedraogo, former President ofthe National Assembly, had been arrestedin October 1983 and was reported to be held either under house arrest or in Po military camp with other former senior officials. Three members of the Ligue patriotique pour le développement (LIPAD), Patriotic League for Development, were also still in detention without trial. Two of them-Adama Toure and Arba Diallo - were former ministers in President Sankara's govemment Eleven LIPAD members had been arrested in October in Ouagadougou, but the eight others were held only briefly.
In late May the authorities announced that an attempt to overthrow the govemment had just been discovered and thwarted. The alleged ringleader, Colonel Didier Tiendrebeogo, and 25 others were charged with plotting to overthrow the govemment and tried before a military court. Colonel Tiendrebeogo, four other soldiers and two civilians were tried, convicted and sentenced to death on II June. They were executed
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
the following day. Five other defendants were sentenced to imprisonh ment with hard labour for 15 years to life, and 14 were reported to have been acquitted Following the executions on 12 June, Amnesty Intemational informed the authorities of its unconditional opposition to the death penalty and called for any future death sentences to be commuted
Many senior officials in former administrations - the Third Republic (1966-1980), the Comité militaire de redressement pour le progrès national (CMPRN), the Military Committee of Recovery for National Progress, (1980-1982) and the Conseil de salut du peuple (CSP), People's Salvation Council, (1982-1983)-were tried during 1984 for alleged corruption or financial impropriety. Those concerned, at least 126 in all, included two former Presidents, Sangoule Lamizana and Colonel Saye Zerbo, a former Prime Minister, Issoufou Joseph Conombo, and at least 35 former government ministers. They were all tried in Ouagadougou and Bobo-Dioulasso by Revolutionary People's Tribunals which were reportedly made up of 18 judges, three of whom were magistrates and the remainder soldiers and civilians apparently without legal training. Defendants appear to have been allowed to state their defence although neither defence lawyers nor state prosecutors were present Over 50 prison sentences were imposed but some were fully or partly suspended, and some of those serving sentences were released by presidential clemency in early August
