Mauritania
Amnesty International's main concerns were the imprisonment of prisonei^ of conscience, the imprisonment after unfair trials or the detention without trial of political prisoners, and reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners. However, by the end of 1984, all but three of the prisoners whose cases were of concern to Amnesty Intemational had been released. They were freed after Colonel Maaouya Ould Sid'Ahmed Ould Taya replaced Lieutenant Colonel Khouna Ould Haidaila as Head of State in a bloodless coup on 12 December 1984. The new administration promised greater respect for human rights.
Many people were arrested in March and April apparently on suspicion of belonging to a proLibyan movement generally described as "Khadafist" or "Nasserian", opposed to government policy on the conflict in Western Sahara. Some 150 people were detained in Nouakchott, the capital, and held in military barracks and up to 50 others were arrested outside the capital, notably in the northem town of Atar. Shortly after these arrests began the authorities declared that they had foiled a plan to "destabilize" the country which, they claimed, had been organized by a foreign power.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Those detained included El Kory Ould H' Meitty, Secretary General of the Union des travailleurs de Mauritanie (UTM), Union of Mauritanian Workers, and Hamoud Ould Abdi, President of the Union nationale des étudiants et stagiaires de Mauritanie (UNESM), National Union of Students and Trainees of Mauritania. A senior civil servant, Deh Ould Abdel Jelil, and some school pupils were also among those held The detainees were all held incommunicado without access to lawyers and relatives. Many were reportedly tortured shortly after their arrest by being suspended by their hands or feet and beaten with rifle butts and clubs. It was also reported that many detainees were denied food and water for several days and that some were tortured with electric shocks apparently to make them "confess".
In late April Amnesty Intemational learned that one of the detainees, Sidi Mohamed Ould Lebatt, who was employed by Mauritania's oil products marketing company, had died in custody in mid-April. The govemment reportedly stated that his death was due to "heart trouble" which had afflicted him for several years but Amnesty International received allegations that he died as a result of torture. It called on the govemment to establish an independent inquiry into his death and sought assurances of humane treatment for all detainees. However, the authorities did not respond and no formal investigation into the death is known to have been held during 1984.
Amnesty International subsequently received information about the death in custody of another political detainee, Ahmed Ould Ahmed Mahmoud, a school pupil in Atar. His death was not officially disclosed, but he was alleged to have died in late March from internal injuries caused by beatings. On 5 June Amnesty International appealed to the govemment to prevent torture and called for an independent inquiry into both deaths in custody. Shortly afterwards, President Khouna Ould Haidalla reportedly denied that torture was used in Mauritania.
Some of the detainees arrested in March and April were released in June but more than 30 remained in detention without charge or trial until December and were regarded as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty Intemational. El Kory Ould H'Meitty, Hamoud Ould Abdi and four others were released in mid-November pending trial before the Cour spéciale de justice, Special Court of Justice.
There was a new wave of politically motivated arrests in September in the northem town of Zouerate. Fifteen alleged members of a "Ba'athist" or pro-Iraqi political organization were reported to have been arrested after slogans calling for the release of political prisoners were painted on walls in the town. Those detained - who included Mohamed Ahmed Ould Mohamed El Imam, Mohamed Moulaye Ould Abdelkader and Saleck Ould M'Barek - were apparently transferred to Nouakchott in mid-October. Amnesty International called on the
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
authorities to release them and to provide assurances that they were being humanely treated There was no response but the detainees were all reported to have been released following the change of government in December.
Throughout 1984 Amnesty International called forthe release of 11 prisoners of conscience, four of whom had been arrested in August 1981 and the othere in March 1982, for alleged membership of a "Ba'athist" political party in contravention of the ban on all political activity imposed when the army took power in July 1918 {see Amnesty International Report 1984). They had been sentenced to imprisonment with hard labour for 10 to 12 years, after a trial which Amnesty International believed to be seriously deficient in several respects. All 11 were released in December. Also released was Yemhelou Ould Sidy Khattary who had been held under house arrest although he had received a suspended sentence at the same trial in October 1983. He was reportedly unable to attend his trial because of severe injuries resulting from torture, including extensive bums on his back due to the application of hot coals.
Amnesty International took up for investigation the cases of two soldiers and two former government ministers during 1984. Deh Ould El Houssein and Mokhtar Ould Saleck, two army lieutenants, were reportedly arrested in July 1982 on suspicion of sympathizing with a "Ba'athist" party. They were both held under house arrest without charge or trial and although Mokhtar Ould Saleck was freed in December, Deh Ould El Houssein's release had not been confirmed by the end of the year. Mamadou Ly and Silmane Soumare, the former government ministers, were apparently arrested in November 1983 and then banished to their home villages in the south. No official reasons for the restrictions were given but they appeared to be suspected of opposition to the government They too were freed in December.
Amnesty International continued to urge judicial review of the sentences imposed in March 1982 on five prisoners alleged to have conspired to overthrow the government {see Amnesty International Report 1984). Four were sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment with hard labour and the other to five years' imprisonment after a hurried trial before the Special Court of Justice which fell short of international fair trial standards. All but one of the prisoners were released in December. However, the situation of Adjutant Be Ould Bneijara remained unclear at the end of 1984.
Two prisoners of conscience held since 1979, apparently because of their opposition to government policy over the war in the Western Sahara, were also released in December. They were Mohamed Lamine Ould Hormattalah, a former member of the National Assembly who had been detained without trial since October 1979, and Abdarrahmane
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Ould Mouloud Ould Daddah, a businessman and relative of former President Moktar Ould Daddah, who was not tried until March 1984. The Special Court of Justice sentenced him to 18 months' imprisonment but he was released immediately because of the time already spent in pre-trial detention. A few days later, however, he was rearrested and again taken before the court which sentenced him to eight years' imprisonment, apparently on state security charges.
Two other prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty Intemational were released. They were Zeini Ould Moulaye Ould Hassan, a magistrate, who had been rearrested in March 198 3 - after completing a two-year prison sentence - for opposing govemment policy towards Western Sahara He was released in late 1983 or early 1984. Dahane Ould Ahmed Mahmoud, a former Minister of Foreign Affairs and naval lieutenant, had been held without trial since August 1981 and was released in mid-1984.
Harsh conditions of imprisonment were reported both in Jereida, camp and in the Génie militaire, Military Engineers barracks, in Nouakchott At the Génie miltaire, many political detainees were reportedly held in overcrowded, insanitary and very poorly ventilated cells. A number of them apparently suffered from severe gastric illnesses due to the poor quality of the food and medical facilities were reported to be virtually non-existent
In April 1984 Amnesty Intemational submitted information about its concerns in Mauritania under the UN procedure for confidentially reviewing commimications about human rights violations. The submission urged the UN to take all appropriate steps to redress the cited human rights violations.
