Mozambique
Amnesty International's main concems were the long-term detention without trial of suspected government opponents, some of whom had been imprisoned for more than 10 years by the end of 1984; the continued imprisonment of political prisoners convicted at unfair trials between 1979 and 1983; allegations of torture of political detainees and prisoners suspected of committing economic offences; and the widespread use of flogging. In contrast to previous years, no new political trials were reported and no death sentences were known to have been imposed by the courts.
Amnesty Intemational was also concemed by allegations that supporters of the main armed opposition movement, the Resistencia Nacional Moqambicana (RNM or RENAMO), Mozambican National Resistance - which was active in many parts of the country - were responsible for torturing, mutilating and killing prisoners. RNM guerrillas abducted and detained both Mozambicans and foreign nationals working in the country, although a number were freed during the year. Cyril Punyasoma, a Sri Lankan national who had been held longer than any of the others, was set free in November after more than two years in captivity.
Despite a number of diplomatic initiatives aimed at ending the intemal conflict, armed opponents of the government continued throughout 1984 to attack government troops, communal villages and transport networks. In March the government signed a treaty with South Africa, known as the "Nkomati Accord", under which each party agreed not to support opposition organizations active in the other's country. Soon afterwards, RNM bases in South Africa were reportedly closed and the Mozambique authorities expelled members of the African National Congress of South Africa (ANC) based in Maputo. The "Nkomati Accord" did not lead to any reduction in the RNM's activities however, and during the following months intemal armed conflict escalated.
Government spokesmen claimed repeatedly that RNM guerrillas were being caf)tured or were surrendering to government forces in significant numbers. At the beginning of 1984 the government claimed to be holding about 3,500 suspected members of armed opposition groups. By April it was reported that the total had reached 4,000 and by the end of 1984 the government said it was more than 4,500. However, the whereabouts and conditions of imprisonment of most of these detainees were not known and humanitarian organizations, such as the Intemational Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), did not have access
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
to them The government continued its policy of displaying some prisoners at public meetings, where they stated that they had been RNM guerrillas and had committed specific acts of violence against civilians. Witnesses reported that some of them seemed to be drugged and that a number were assaulted by members of the audience. However, none is known to have been tried during 1984.
Amnesty Intemational continued to express its concem to the govemment about the lack of safeguards for untried political detainees. It also called for the urgent review of the cases of a number of detainees held in the main political detention centre, Machava, in the capital Maputo, and elsewhere. The organization received information about uncharged political detainees who had been held incommunicado for several months and in some cases for over a year. A number were reported to have been tortured, badly beaten or flogged. Amnesty Intemational took up for investigation the cases of a number of long-term political detainees. They included Bidimingo Luis Matchabe, a railway worker arrested in December 1982 after writing a letter to á govemment official complaining about arbitrary arrests, and Victor Naitang, an air force pilot arrested in July 1981 after one of his colleagues defected to South Africa Another was Armando Timbe, a former refugee arrested at Maputo airport in March 1983 when he voluntarily retumed to Mozambique, who was released uncharged in November.
Amnesty Intemational also inquired about a number of untried political detainees arrested in the months preceding Mozambique's independence in June 1975 who were among prisoners publicly displayed at Nachingwea camp, in southern Tanzania, in March and April 1975. They included Lazaro Nkavandame and Paulo Gumane, both of whom were beheved to be held in "re-education" camps in the north of the country.
Some releases of long-term detainees were reported At the beginning of September during a visit to Maputo by the Portuguese Prime Minister, Dr Mário Scares, 11 detainees of Portuguese nationality were released They had been arrested in Beira during the first half of 1983 and accused of complicity with the armed opposition but never charged or tried Several foreign nationals arrested at the same time, who were also being held without trial, were freed earlier in the year. Later in September, however, four other Portuguese nationals suspected of supporting the RNM were detained. They were arrested in Tanzania and transferred to Maputo, where they were held in a secret interrogation centre. They were retumed to Tanzania towards the end of the year.
Fifty other long-term untried political detainees were released in late September on the 20th anniversary of the beginning of the insurrection against Portuguese colonial rule. Those freed included 34 people who
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
had been held without trial for nine years or more. Among them were 15 people accused of abandoning the armed opposition to colonial rule and joining the Portuguese security forces, such as Joao Abilio Andrade, and nine soldiers accused of taking part in a mutiny in Maputo in December 1975, including Pio Escola Machaque. Thirteen others had been held since February or March 1981 for allegedly participating in a US spy network. Two - Alcido Chivite and José Massinga - had appeared at a news conference organized by the authorities in Maputo in March 1981 when they admitted spying for the USA. Amnesty Intemational had repeatedly sought information about them from govemment officials as they had not been charged or tried.
Before the releases, in April and May, the govemment relaunched its "Legality Offensive", a campaign initiated in November 1981 to prevent abuses of detainees by the security forces and to ensure greater respect for the law, in particular the length of time suspects could be detained without charge or trial. Senior officials again criticized the detention without charge of suspects for longer than the legally permitted maximum. Although the law stipulates that most suspects may not be held for more than 84 days without being charged detainees suspected of economic sabotage or offences against the security of the state may be detained indefinitely. In May President Samora Machel criticized branches of the security forces under the Ministers of Internal Security and the Interior for allegedly leaving prisoners in detention and forgetting about them. He also criticized the armed forces for operating secret detention centres and for detaining prisoners without authority.
Despite such official criticism, however. Amnesty Intemational continued to receive information that political detainees, particularly those held by the national security service, were being held for long periods without being charged and in some cases without being informed as to the reasons for their detention. Such detainees could neither challenge their detention nor contest any accusations against them. Since November 1974 political detainees have been prevented from filing writs of habeas corpus for their release; nor, since the creation of the national security service in October 1975, have they been able to apply to the courts or to the Procuracy to have their detentions reviewed
In July and again in October, Amnesty Intemational urged the govemment to limit the use of detention without trial and to introduce safeguards to protect political detainees. In particular. Amnesty Intemational recommended that limits be placed on the periods during which suspects could be detained without charge and held incommunicado. The organization also proposed that the law on criminal procedure be amended to provide for all detainees to be brought promptly before an independent judicial officer, such as a judge or procurator.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Amnesty International continued to investigate the cases of a number of political prisoners who were imprisoned after unfair trials and whom it believed might be prisoners of conscience. Those concerned had been tried by the Revolutionary Military Tribunal, a special court established in 1979 with jurisdiction over political cases. They had reportedly been denied legal representation, although this is guaranteed by law and by the constitution, and not allowed to call defence witnesses. They included six students who were sentenced to eight years' imprisonment in April 1983 on charges of "agitation" after being convicted of distributing reactionary propaganda at the Eduardo Mondlane University in Maputo.
Information received by Amnesty International about the use of torture related mainly to detention and interrogation centres in Maputo and Beira However, suspected RNM guerrillas were also reported to have been subjected to torture in the custody of the armed forces, particularly by the use of "cordas", "ropes", where the victim's arms are bound tightly behind the back with wet rope for hours or even days. Amnesty International was informed that one suspected RNM supporter who arrived at Machava detention centre after being held in military custody, had infected open wounds as a result. The organization also received reports that in early 1984 a detainee in Pavilion 9 at Machava was subjected to "cordas" for about two hours and lost consciousness. This apparently led to medical personnel at the prison protesting and demanding an inquiry into the case. Other detainees were also reportedly subjected to severe beatings and prolonged isolatioa
Some untried political detainees were reportedly flogged in front of other prisoners. For example, in May a suspected RNM member held at Machava was reported to have been given 30 lashes on the orders of the detention centre's director, although he had not been tried It appeared that after public flogging was introduced as a judicial punishment which could be imposed by the courts, some prison officials interpreted this as a licence to impose floggings as they wished.
There were reports of court-ordered floggings throughout 1984. They were imposed under Law No. 5/83 enacted in March 1983, which empowers the courts to impose public floggings - up to 90 lashes - in addition to prison sentences and fines. Some prisoners convicted of murder were sentenced to be flogged, as were some accused of "economic sabotage": for example, a man convicted of murder in Tete in December was sentenced to 22 years' imprisonment and 20 lashes.
Amnesty International also received reports that village courts imposed sentences of flogging for a wide variety of minor offences. For example, at Litamanda communal village, in CaboDelgado province, a villager was sentenced to 15 lashes in February for showing a lack of respect towards village authorities, and at M'tamba village a man
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985

convicted of insulting local people while drunk was sentenced early in 1984 to 25 lashes.
In February Amnesty Intemational published a five-page document describing the use of floggings since March 1983, and it continued to appeal against the use of flogging, which it opposes as a cmel, inhuman and degrading form of punishment, throughout the year. The organization was particularly concemed about floggings carried out outside the framework of Law No. 5/83; they were often inflicted on individuals who had either not been tried or who had been convicted on charges for which flogging was not stipulated as a punishment by law. This concem was also raised by officials concemed with the administration of justice, at a conference in Maputo in November.
