Chile
Amnesty Intemational was concerned that the long-standing pattem of human rights violations, including the detention of prisoners of conscience and the torture of detainees, continued throughout 1984. In March, the state of emergency which had beenliftedinSeptemberl983 wasreimposed, and in November President Augusto Pinochet declared the country to be under a state of siege. Politically motivated arrests and short-term detentions, as well as imprisonment after trial, continued throughout 1984, and Amnesty Intemational considered many of those held to be prisoners of conscience. Over 600 people were banished (re/e^ai/o) without trial to remote areas of the country, including at least 200 suspected opponents of the govemment who Amnesty Intemational believed were punished solely on account of their non-violent political activities. The systematic torture of political detainees continued throughout 1984 and at least two people reportedly died as a result Several men and women died in incidents described by the govemment as armed confrontations between terrorists and security forces. However, evidence suggested that some of those killed might have been victims of extrajudicial executions. Although new evidence came to light about the approximately 650 people who had "disappeared" since 1973, no serious efforts appeared to have been made by the authorities either to clarify the fate of the "disappeared" or to bring those responsible to justice. Death sentences were passed on or requested for 17 people, 15 of whom were convicted of politically motivated offences.
Throughout 1984 Amnesty International launched appeals for people believed to be at risk of torture while being held incommunicado by security forces. Many detainees subsequently filed complaints alleging that they had been tortured in custody. For example, Ignacio Vidaurrázaga Marm'quez described being arrested on 23 August by agents of the Central Nacional de Informaciones (CNI), Chilean secret police, who showed neither identification nor arrest warrant, and being tortured with electric shocks in CNI detention centres in Concepción and Santiago. He stated that a doctor had examined him between torture sessions.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
At least two people were reported to have died under torture in 1984. Juan Aguirre Ballesteros was said to have been arrested on 4 September and taken to a police station. A witness testified that he was present while carabineros, uniformed police, interrogated and tortured Juan Aguirre with electricity until he suddenly feU unconscious. However, the authorities denied that Juan Aguirre had been detained and he remained "disappeared" until 24 October, when his headless and mutilated corpse was found in Melipilla An investigation was opened by a military judge but, by the end of 1984, nobody had been arrested and carabineros continued to deny that they had detained Juan Aguirre. The second reported death from torture was that of Mario Fernández López, a member of the Christian Democrat party, who died in hospital on 18 October from intemal injuries after being transferred there fi^om a CNI detention centre. He had been arrested the previous day in Ovalle. An investigation was undertaken by a civilian judge who concluded that there was prima facie evidence to commit two CNI agents for trial and ordered their detentioa However, because CNI agents are considered military personnel, the case was handed over to a military judge who ordered their immediate release on the grounds of insufficient evidence. An appeal against this decision was lodged in the Corte Marcial, military court of appeal, but by the end of 1984 it had not yet ruled
Throughout 1984 opposition leaders, trade unionists, journalists, students, peasants, shanty-town leaders and human rights activists were arrested and detained Among them were a number of prisoners of conscience on whose behalf Amnesty Intemational appealed Detentions increased during 1984 at a time of growing public demonstrations for an early return to civilian rule and democracy. Some of those detained were charged with criminal offences and tried For example, Dr Manuel Almeyda, leader of the Movimiento Democràtico Popular {MDV), a coalition of left-wing political parties and groups, were arrested on 15 January and charged with violating the Ley de Seguridad Interior del Estado ( LSIE), intemal security law. He was eventually given two suspended sentences of two years and 200 days respectively for advocating the fall of the govemment and for inciting strike actioa Amnesty Intemational believed that Dr Almeyda was convicted because of his non-violent political activity. Juan Pablo Cárdenas, editor of Análisis, a magazine critical of President Pinochet, was arrested on 10 April after all copies of the latest issue were impounded from his offices and from street kiosks. He was charged under Article 4A of the LSIE vnth inciting public imrest and the overthrow of the govemment aíiQV Análisis referred to an opinion poll said to have shown that a majority favoured President Pinochet's resignation. He was released on bail in May and acquitted of the charge by an Appeal Court in June. However, by the end of 1984 he faced new charges, this time for
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
alleged libel of the armed forces, arising from another article inAnálisis. In November he was sentenced to one year's imprisonment by a military judge.
When the state of siege was declared in November the Minister of the Interior stated that "it would only affect terrorists". However, in the weeks that followed, thousands of people living in shanty towns were detained in operations which involved the armed forces and all branches of the security forces. Stadiums were used to hold and interrogate them. Most were released shortly afterwards but several hundred were banished {relegado) to remote parts of the country for three months without charge or right to appeal to the courts. They included dozens of community leaders, trade imionists, university teachers and students, peasant leaders, political leaders and human rights activists, among them many considered by Amnesty International to be prisoners of conscience. Among those banished in November and December were agricultural workers' leaders Carlos Opazo Bascuñan, Segundo Cancino Fernández, Hernán Castañeda; Construction Workers' Confederation leader Valentin Osomo Padilla; three doctors known for their treatment and rehabilitation of torture victims and human rights work Dr Fanny Pollarolo, Dr Juan Restelli, and Dr Ricardo Godoy; and several lawyers who specialized in the defence of political prisoners, including Arturo Zegarra Williamson and Raül Iturriaga Rodriguez - both leading members of the Human Rights Commission in Arica
During 1984 dozens of people, including a number of children, died as a result of political violence: among them were people taking part in political demonstrations, and several members of the security forces who were reportedly killed by opposition groups.
There were cor^icting explanations for some deaths, which the authorities said resulted from armed confrontations with members of the security forces, and from people being blown up while planting bombs. Amnesty Intemational believed that some of these deaths might have resulted from extrajudicial executions carried out by the security forces. The CNI claimed in an official statement in May that a woman terrorist had been blown up while planting a bomb under an electricity pylon. The woman was identified later as Maria Loreto Castillo Muñoz. However, on 4 Jime, at a news conference organized by the Vicaria de la Solidaridad, a Roman Catholic himian rights organization, Héctor Muñoz Morales, the husband of the dead woman, stated that he and Maria Loreto had been arrested by CNI agents, tortured, beaten unconscious and left for dead next to a stack of explosive devices. He said that he had regained consciousness in time to get clear of the explosive devices, and had eventually reached a road and assistance. A lawyer working with the Vicaria de la Solidaridad said that when Héctor Muñoz Morales approached the organization for protection he
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
had stitched wounds on his head, his eyes were swollen and his right ear was badly mutilated, apparently as a result of beatings. Amnesty International called for all such incidents to be impartially investigated and the findings made public.
Amnesty International received eye-witness accounts of a number of incidents, in which several people were killed, which conflicted with the authorities' vei^ion of events. The victims included: Héctor Patricio Sobarzo Núñez and Enzo Muñoz Arévalo, both killed by the police on 2 July in Santiago; and Mario Octavio Lagos Rodriguez, Luciano Aedo Arias, and Nelson Herrera Riveros killed in Concepción on 23 August Amnesty International considered that in each of these cases there were grounds for believing that the death might have been an extrajudicial killing.
New information emerged on the fate of some 650 people who "disappeared" after arrest during the rule of President Pinochet Andrés Valenzuela Morales, said to be a former member of the security forces, made specific allegations regarding the way several named individuals were made to "disappear" and named several army officers currently working in the security forces as responsible. He stated that some had been shot and buried in clandestine graves, and that others had been thrown from aircraft into the sea after their stomachs had been cut open so the bodies would not surface. This testimony was handed over in December to the Supreme Court by the Vicaría de la Solidaridad with a request for a special judge to investigate the allegations. Among the cases mentioned were those of several "disappeared" prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International, including Humberto Fuentes, last seen in November 1975, José Weibel Navarrete, arrested in March 1976, and Carlos Contreras Maluje, who "disappeared" in November 1976. The Supreme Court rejected the request for a special investigating judge.
No judicial executions were carried out during 1984. However, Amnesty International was concerned that the death penalty had been recommended for 17 prisoners in the early stages of their trials, 15 of whom were accused of politically motivated crimes such as killing members of the security forces. It was further concerned that five people - Jorge Palma Donoso, Carlos Araneda Miranda, Hugo Marchant Moya, Susana Capriles Rojas and Marta Soto González -were being tried under war time judicial procedures, and that the death penalty had been requested for Üiree of them. The trial was suspended pending a Supreme Court decision on the constitutionality of such proceedings being used in peace time, but if the war tribunal was convoked and passed the death sentence, executions could take place within a few days.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Amnesty Intemational believed that the proceedings followed by miHtary tribunals would not have provided effective guarantees for a fair trial. The proceedings would have been summary, the right to defence would have been limited to reading out a written statement, and there would have been no right of appeal. Sentence would have been confirmed or modified by a military commander. Amnesty Intemational therefore called for this case to be heard under peace time judicial procedures.
During 1984 Amnesty Intemational submitted information on human rights abuses to the UN Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in Chile, the UN Special Rapporteur on Summary or Arbitrary Executions, and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights.

