Morocco
During 1984 Amnesty Intemational continued workmg on behalf of more than 200 actual or possible prisoners of conscience and monitored thousands of arrests arising from countrywide disturbances early in the year. The organization was also concemed about extended periods of incommunicado detention ^^arrfe a vue)\ill-treatment of detainees during interrogation; "disappearances"; and the imposition of death sentences.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
In 1984 Amnesty Intemational worked for the release of 105 prisoners of conscience, and investigated the cases of 124 possible prisoners of conscience. All the adopted prisoners of conscience had been tried and sentenced to long prison terms in 1973 and 1977 for alleged membership of various Marxist-Leninist groups. Six were serving sentences of life imprisonment No charges involving the use or advocacy of violence were ever brought against them In the course of the year 39 of the adopted prisoners were released, some of them upon expiry of their sentences and others under measures of clemency granted by King H assan in August Three others - Mohamed Belmejdoub, Ah Fkir and Driss Ould El Kabla - were assumed to have been released as their prison terms expired.
During 1984 Amnesty Intemational continued to investigate the cases of: four imprisoned members of the Union socialiste des forces populaires (USFP), Socialist Union of Popular Forces, the major opposition party in Morocco (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984y, 31 students arrested and tried in Marrakech in 1984; and over 80 people, believed to be Saharans, who "disappeared" in 1976 after being taken into custody by Moroccan security forces.
In late December 1983 and throughout January 1984 there was serious unrest, including strikes, demonstrations and riots, in many Moroccan cities. The riots apparently arose from secondary school students' dissatisfaction with the imposition of an examination fee and popular discontent with price rises for basic foodstuffs. There were many confrontations between demonstrators and the police in the course of which about 2,000 people were arrested and, according to official figures, 29 demonstrators were killed and hundreds injured. Hundreds of individuals who had not been directly involved in demonstrations, but who held political views opposed to govemment policies, were also reportedly arrested, among them former Amnesty International adopted prisoners of conscience. In Febmary Amnesty International wrote to the Prime Minister expressing concem at the deaths and arrests and asking for elucidation of the circumstances under which they had occurred. The organization also raised a number of legal concerns and requested that the names and whereabouts of all those arrested be made known to their families and access allowed to relatives and lawyers.
Many trials took place in connection with the riots and, according to official figures, over 1,500 individuals had received prison sentences by the end ofthe year, reportedly ranging from a few months to 30 years. At the end of 1984, Amnesty Intemational was still evaluating information on many of these individuals whom it believed might be prisoners of conscience.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
In another trial sentences passed on 71 alleged Muslim fundamentalists by the Criminal Court of Appeal in Casablanca included 13 death sentences - seven in absentia - and 34 of life imprisonment - 13 in absentia. According to some reports several of those sentenced were arrested between June and August 1983 in connection with the distribution of documents considered subversive. They were kept for long periods in incommunicado detention, allegedly ill-treated and kept in solitary confinement The rest were arrested in January, some allegedly in connection with the riots. All were reportedly charged with, inter alia, plotting against the monarchy, planning to set up an Islamic republic and threatening state security.
In May, 31 Moroccans, mostly university or secondary school students, were sentenced by the Criminal Court of Appeal in Marrakesh. They were arrested in January and February also allegedly in connection with the January riots, in Marrakesh, and held for up to two months in incommunicado police detention in Casablanca. Twenty were sentenced to between eight and 15 years' imprisonment on charges including conspiracy to overthrow the govemment The other 11 prisoners, who received sentences of between three and five years' imprisonment, were charged with incitement According to reports received by Amnesty Intemational the charges were based on the prisoners' possession of literature indicating links with a banned Marxist-Leninist organization, Ila-Alamam. The prisoners admitted possessing the literature but claimed that it was already being sold publicly and, in the case of their own writing, contained ideas that were common knowledge and not banned by law. They said that they belonged to the Qa'idiyin Movement, which defended students' interests within the framework of the legal Union nationale des étudiants marocains (UNEM), the National Union of Moroccan Students. At this trial many of the prisoners reportedly challenged the accuracy of the police records of their i nterrogation which they said they had been forcedto sign, and complained thatthey had been tortured and kept blindfolded for most of their detention The court, however, reportedly ignored these complaints. In August Amnesty Intemational took up for investigation the cases of the 31 prisoners as it believed that they might have been imprisoned for the non-violent expression of their beliefs.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the fate of 12 students who had been held in incommunicado detention, without charge ortrial, since January and Febmary 1983. There were fears that they were being ill-treated and their fate remained unknown despite inquiries to the authorities in Casablanca from Amnesty Intemational and from the detainees' families. An appeal was issued by Amnesty International on their behalf in April and at least some were released
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
during the year, but by December Amnesty International was unable to confirm how many.
Throughout 1984 many political prisoners went on hunger-strike in different prisons, protesting about issues such as prison conditions and medical care. Amnesty Intemational was concemed about reports that 27 prisoners imprisoned in Marrakesh for alleged involvement in the January demonstrations had gone on hunger-strike at the be^nning of July over such issues. The cases of 16 of them were being investigated by Amnesty International The hunger-strikers' demands mcluded adequate medical care (many were said to have been suffering from injuries incurred during garde a vue detention) and regular visits from their families. At the end of August two of the hunger-strikers died and the rest were taken to hospital in a critical condition. Earlier, a prisoner allegedly taking part in a hunger-strike in Beni Mellal Prison, died of a heart attack. According to his fellow-prisoners, he had been denied necessary medical treatment. Amnesty Intemational informed King Hassan II and the govemment of its concem about the health of the hunger-strikers, and urged them to provide necessary medical care and to take all appropriate measures to prevent further loss of life.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the refusal ofthe authorities to clarify the fate or whereabouts of approximately 100 military personnel arrested following attempts to assassinate the King in 1971 and 1972. There have been reports that many of these prisoners have died as a result of the conditions in which they were held and that many who had served their sentences had not been released [see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984).
Following the signature of a treaty of union between Morocco and Libya in August, a subsequent agreement on security and freedom of movement was signed between the two countries in September. Under Articles 6 and 8 of this agreement the two parties would have the right, among others, to expel each other's citizens for security reasons, whether intemal or extemal, and to forbid these citizens tocarry out any political activities against the other country. Amnesty Intemational feared that these two articles could be applied in such a way as to lead to the forcible repatriation (refoulement) of opponents of the government living in either country or to their imprisonment as prisoners of conscience in Morocco. Amnesty Intemational sent letters tobothKing Hassan II and to Colonel Mu'ammar Gaddafi outlining this concem. The letter to the King urged him not to use the agreement in such a way as to permit individuals to be arrested or imprisoned for the peaceful exercise of their right to freedom of expression, or to return to Libya individuals with a well-founded fear of being persecuted By the end of 1984, the organization had received no reply from the Moroccan authorities.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Amnesty Intemational did not leam of any executions during 1984, but was concerned about the imposition of the 13 death sentences mentioned above. Amnesty Intemational had appealed urgently for these sentences to be commuted but at the time of writing had received no further information.
