Bahrain
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the detention of political prisoners who may have been prisoners of conscience, some of whom have been detained for long periods without charge or trial. The organization sought information on the reported arrest and incommunicado detention in 1984 of suspected political opponents of the govemment who might also be prisoners of conscience. Allegations of torture and ill-treatment of political detainees were received during the year.
Amnesty Intemational investigated the cases of 17 political prisoners,
11	of them serving sentences ranging between one and seven years' imprisonment for belonging to or forming unlawful organizations. The other six - Abdullah Rashid Mutaiw'a, Ahmed Ibrahim Makki, 'Abd Ali Al-Khayyat, Nader Abdullah Abu Drees, Salman Abdul Aziz Ali and Sayed Hashim Al-Musawi- had been held without charge or trial for between three and eight years, under the Decree Law on State Security Measures oi \ 91 A {sqq Amnesty Intemational Report 1983). On 27 March Amnesty Intemational wrote to the authorities requesting information on their continued detention. In April the Minister of the Interior replied that each of them "...was personally and directly implicated in planning or perpetrating serious acts of violence or sabotage and that each is detained in custody strictly in accordance with the laws of the State". However, he did not explain why six of the prisoners had not been charged and tried. On 7 June Amnesty Intemational wrote again explaining that, irrespective of the accusations against them, detainees should either be tried, in accordance with Articles 10 and 11 (1) of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, or released. The organization again called for the release of Ahmad Ibrahim Makki who, according to its information, had been detained since his trial and acquittal in 1977 and learned later that he and Abdullah Rashid Mutaiw'a had been released.
During 1984 Amnesty Intemational received reports of about 30 arrests on political grounds. Most were thought to be of members of the Jam'iyat At-Taw'iya Al-Islamiya, Islamic Enlightenment Society -reportedly banned in Febmary - and included its head. Sheikh Ibrahim Mansur Al-JufairL The arrests reportedly took place both before and after the ban. Their trial was reportedly scheduled to begin on
12	September, and some defendants were thought to be facing charges which included "membership of an unlawful organization". In September
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Amnesty Intemational asked the Minister of Justice for information on the detainees' whereabouts, the precise charges against them, and which court was trying their case. It also sought assurances that defendants' rights to be defended by a la\^er of their own choice and to appeal would be guaranteed, but had received no information by the end of 1984.
Amnesty Intemational received reports that many of the prisoners arrested in 1984 had been tortured and ill-treated. However, it was not able to substantiate these assertions.
