Canada
A report stating that there were reasonable grounds for believing that prisoners had been tortured or ill-treated by guards after a prison riot in 1982 was published by Amnesty Intemational on 21 March 1984. It was based on a memorandum sent by the organization to the Canadian Government in June 1983 calling for a full inquiry into the charges. The Amnesty Intemational Report on Allegations of Ill-treatment of Prisoners at Archambault Institution, Quebec, Canada, resulted from a factfinding mission in April 1983. It focused on the treatment of prisoners placed in the prison's segregation unit during a five-week period immediately after the riot. Amnesty International received full cooperation from the government and was given access to prison service employees, prisoners and records {sqq Amnesty International Report 1984).
The Correctional Investigator of Canada had been asked by the government to conduct an inquiry into allegations contained in Amnesty Intemational's report, the results of which were made public in July. The inquiry examined all relevant prison records and heard testimonies from inmates, prison guards, administrators and health care officials, prisoners' relatives and lawyers. Although the inquiry found that some inmates had conspired to fabricate or exaggerate some of the allegations, it concluded that there was "reliable corroborative evidence" that ill-treatment had occurred It was unable to judge the extent of ill-treatment or to identify conclusively specific guards as having been responsible. It found that Uiis was largely due to the prison's failure to keep adequate records or to examine adequately complaints from inmates during the period in questioa
In his report the Correctional Investigator made a number of recommendations for improving procedures to prevent future ill-treatment of prisoners, many of which were similar to recommendations made in Aninesty International's report.
The govemment wrote to Aninesty Intemational on 9 July stating that it intended to implement the Correctional Investigator's recommendations, and invited Amnesty Intemational to make representations to an Advisory Committee established for this purpose. Amnesty Intemational sent the Committee the UN Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials and other documents containing intemational standards for the treatment of prisoners. ThQ Report of the Advisory Committee to
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
the Solicitor General of Canada on the Management of Correctional Institutions was presented to the Solicitor General on 30 November, but had not been released publicly by the end of 1984.
