El Salvador
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about massive human rights violations, including arbitrary arrest and prolonged detention without trial, torture, "disappearances", and individual and mass extrajudicial executions. Victims of such abuses by govemment forces, sometimes in uniform, and sometimes in plain clothes in the guise of so-called "death squads", have included people suspected of opposition to the authorities from all sectors of Salvadorian society. Students, university staff, trade unionists, politicians, displaced
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
persons and those assisting them, as well as non-combatant civilians living in contested areas, appeared to have been targets during the year. Human rights workers were also subjected to arrest, short-term detention and harassment, in an apparent effort to obstruct their work and discredit their findings.
Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about the continued apparent inability of the judicial system to investigate and punish violations of human rights. With only two known exceptions (one the case of four US church women killed in December 1980, in which five national guardsmen were eventually convicted in May 1984 after strong intemational pressure), the perpetrators of the many thousands of abuses which have occurred in recent years have not been brought to justice. In September President Napoleón Duarte - who took office in June - was quoted by the intemational press as acknowledging that "5,000 people who have disappeared in El Salvador are most probably dead", and that the murders of 40,000 others would go tmsolved because "the state is incapable of prosecuting the criminals".
In the context of the continuing political strife and the state of emergency maintained in the coimtry in recent years, Amnesty Intemational has received reports of individual execution-style killings by opposition groups. As a matter of principle, the organization condemns the torture and execution of prisoners by anyone. However, after investigating thousands of killings of non-combatant civilians over the past five years. Amnesty Intemational has concluded that most were extrajudicial executions committed by govemment forces.
On 5 January an Amnesty Intemational press statement expressed concern at reports that the closing montiis of 1983 had seen a resurgence in the number of extrajudicial executions and "disappearances" carried out by regular military and security units, as well as by "death squads". Amnesty International believed Üiat in most cases the "death squads" consisted of govemment security agents or members of the armed forces operating in plain clothes but under orders from their superiors. Amnesty International's statement drew special attention to the abuses directed in preceding months against academics. They included Dr José Guillermo Orellana Osorio, secretary of the Law Faculty of the National University, who was kidnapped from his workplace by men in plain clothes on 4 October 1983, and Dr Juan Francisco Aguirre, also of the Law Faculty, who was kidnapped as he left a class at the University on 23 November 1983. The body of Dr Orellana Osorio was found on 23 Octoberl983. He had been tortured and strangled Dr Aguirre remained "disappeared" at the end of 1984. Amnesty International's press statement also reiterated its opposition to military aid which would be used in arbitrary arrests, torture, "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
In April Amnesty Intemational submitted to the authorities its report Extrajudicial Executions in El Salvador: Report of an Amnesty Intemational Mission to Examine Post-mortem and Investigative Procedures in Political Killings. The report was made public in May 1984. It found that many of the estimated 40,000 people killed in political violence in the preceding five years had been murdered by govemment forces who openly dumped mutilated corpses in an apparent effort to terrorize the population. The report included details of a nimiber of reported extrajudicial executions where Amnesty Intemational considered that sufficient information was already available for proceedings to be initiated against military and security force personnel believed to have been implicated, had the authorities the political will to do so. The organization considered that the "blatant failure" of the authorities to investigate these and other killings was one factor that suggested that it was: "the authorities themselves who lie behind the wholesale extrajudicial execution of people fi"om all sectors of Salvadorian society." The report concluded with detailed recommendations regarding govemment responsibility for military, security and paramilitary imits; judicial reform; forensic examinations; protection of independent human rights monitoring groups, and the functioning of the governmental Human Rights Commission. Amnesty Intemational also presented its report and its conclusions to other governments and intergovernmental organizations, and to national and intemational medical and forensic pathology associations. They were asked to consider ways in which funding agencies might help provide facilities and improve the training of Salvadorian medical and forensic experts, to ensure adequate standards in the collection of data and the forensic examination of bodies after violent death.
In view of the May elections which led to a change of govemment in June, and as it had not received any response to its report. Amnesty Intemational resubmitted the report to President Napoleon Duarte in November, together with a letter outlining Amnesty Intemational's concems under the new administration. The letter welcomed the new govemment's announcement that special investigative commissions were to be appointed to investigate human rights abuses in general, as well as a number of the more notorious cases of apparent extrajudicial execution. These included those of Archbishop Oscar Romero in March 1980, US joumalist John Sullivan in December 1980, and 74 peasants reportedly killed by military personnel at Las Hojas, San Antonio del Monte, Sonsonate, in Febmary 1983. However, the organization remained concemed that few details had been made public as to the terms of reference, powers and working methods of the commissions. Nor had information been made public about any findings, either in the specific cases announced by the President, or in
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
those of thousands of Salvadorians who "disappeared" or were apparently executed extrajudicially in recent years, despite assurances by the President to some families that their relatives' cases would be investigated.
Amnesty International's November letter welcomed the disbanding of the intelligence section of the Treasury Police, a unit consistently implicated in reports of the illegal detention, torture and murder of suspected opponents of the govemment However, the organization considered that the mere dismissal or transfer to positions abroad of officers implicated in serious human rights violations was a totally inadequate response and unlikely to prevent further abuses. Abuses should be properly investigated and perpetrators brought to justice. The letter also stated that continued reports of individual "death-squad" style extrajudicial executions and "disappearances", as well as of large-scale killings of non-combatant civilians, clearly indicated that the measures taken to improve the human rights situation had not been adequate. Illustrative cases of this nature listed in Amnesty International's letter included the reported killing in July of approximately 70 civilian residents and displaced persons in small villages in Cabañas and Chalatenango by the Atlacatl Battalion and other army units. Some of the victims, half of whom were children, had allegedly been tortured; others were said to have been bumed alive.
Attacks were also reported in 1984 on the offices of the firm which handles public relations for the Christian Democrat Party, and on displaced persons in conflict zones who had assembled to obtain medical attention from the Intemational Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). Although no casualties were reported in the incident at the offices of the public relations firm - allegedly the work of "death-squads" - a number of non-combatant civilians died in five such attacks on displaced persons reportedly carried out by the armed forces between January and June.
During 1984 Amnesty Intemational called for investigations into numerous reported "disappearances" and apparent extrajudicial executions by the military and security forces. They included Reynaldo Echevarría, a lecturer at the Universidad Católica Salvadoreña, Catholic University of El Salvador, and Reverend David Ernesto Fernández Espino, a Lutheran pastor working with displáced persons. Reynaldo Echevarría was reportedly shot dead as he arrived home on 3 October by a man in plain clothes who emerged from a vehicle of the type frequently used by some Salvadorian security units. Reverend Fernández Espino was allegedly last seen alive in the company of two uniformed men before he was foimd dead on 22 November near San Miguel. Two men - one a former soldier from the third Army Battalion in San Miguel - have reportedly since been detained in connection with
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
the killing. Reverend Fernández Espino's face was reportedly almost unrecognizable, as he appeared to have been mutilated with a machete and shot in the head.
Amnesty Intemational welcomed the release in October of 10 members of the Sindicato de Trabajadores de Empresa Comisión Ejecutiva Hidroeléctrica del Rio Lempa (STECEL), the union of electricity workers at the Rio Lempa power station. Amnesty Intemational had taken up their cases for investigation because the legal time limits for hearing cases involving crimes against the state had been greatly exceeded Although they had been held since 1980, they had never been tried or informed of the charges against them. Anuiesty Intemational called for an investigation of the prisoners' assertions that they had been tortured into making statements and signing confessions used as the basis of their detentioa It also asked for those responsible to be brought to justice if the allegations were found to be tme.
Amnesty Intemational remained concemed at the continued detention of other prisoners without charge or trial under the terms of Decree 507 of December 1980 and Decree 50 of Febmary 1984, both of which created a judicial framework, including a 15-day period of incommunicado detention, which facilitated human rights abuses such as "disappearance" and torture. Among the people held under the decrees for whom Amnesty Intemational issued appeals during 1984 were 14 trade unionists arrested by the National Police at the January congress of a trade union confederation. A Mexican observer who was also arrested testified after her release that she had been blindfolded and subjected to intense psychological pressure during her three-day detention at National Police Headquarters. She said she could hear others being beaten, and that conditions at the unofficial detention centre were deplorable, with some 15 to 20 people packed into cellsjust2mby 3m. Following intemational appeals the Salvadorians were all released by July. They stated that they had been subjected to mental and physical pressure, including torture, to make them confess to being members of an armed opposition group. In response to Amnesty International's initial expressions of concem regarding arrests, the Salvadorian Armed Forces Press Agency issued a news release accusing Amnesty Intemational of conducting a campaign of disinformation against El Salvador. Amnesty Intemational repeated its concems regarding the arrests in a letter on 25 April to the then President Dr Alvaro Magaña, but received no reply.
In 1984 Amnesty Intemational submitted information concerning reported human rights violations to intemational organizations, including the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, the UN Working Group on Disappearances, the UN Special Rapporteur on Summary and Arbitrary Executions, the UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Organization (UNESCO) and to the UN Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR) Special Representative on El Salvador.
In its September 1984 report, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (lACHR) of the Organization of American States (OAS) stated that it had continued to receive complaints since President Duarte took office, although on a lesser scale, and that the Foreign Ministry had categorically rejected allegations that implicated the armed forces.
In his November 1984 report to the UN General Assembly, the UNCHR Special Representative urged the government to" increase its control over the armed and security forces, including the "death-squads", in order to eradicate human rights abuses, and to take all necessary steps to prevent, investigate and punish such abuses.
In December 1984 the UN General Assembly deplored the "patently inadequate" capacity of the Salvadorian judicial system to investigate, prosecute and pimish continuing serious violations of human rights.
