Ethiopia
Amnesty International was concerned about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, some of whom had been held for over 10 years, and the detention without trial of other suspected opponents of the government The fate of 15 political prisoners who"disappeared" in 1979 still remained unclarified by the authorities. Amnesty Intemational also received reports of torture and ill-treatment of political prisoners, and allegations ¿lat some were executed extrajudicially.
A severe famine affected several parts of the country causing thousands of deaths and the displacement of several hundred thousand other people, some of whom fled to neighbouring countries. There was also continued armed opposition to the government in several areas, notably Eritrea, Tigray, Wollega and Hararghe regions. Many civilians in these areas were reportedly arrested by government security forces on suspicion of links with opposition guerrilla organizations and there were also reports of extrajudicial executions of unarmed civilians by the security forces. On 19 October, 23 people - including foreign nationals and a representative of the Intemational Committee of the Red Cross-were abducted by the Tigray People's Liberation Front and Ethiopian People's Democratic Movement However, they were aU released by the end of the following month.
On 5 February the government acknowledged the detention in Addis Ababa two months earlier of 18 alleged members of a clandestine opposition organization, the Ethiopian People's Democratic Alliance. They were accused of distributing anti-govemment leaflets and plotting against the govemment They included Asegahegn Araya, a former senator, Berhe Beyene, an official of the Ethiopian Orthodox Church, andMengesha Gebre-Hiwot a former assistant Minister of Education. By the end of 1984 they were all still detained without charge. Some were reportedly held in the Central Prison in Addis Ababa while others were believed to be held in the Central Revolutionary Investigation Department (known as the "third police station") in Addis Ababa Some had allegedly been tortured after their arrest Amnesty Intemational was investigating their cases as possible prisoners of conscience.
In early 1984 several hundred people were arrestedinTigray region reportedly for seeking greater Tigray an representation in the govemment They included several prominent local govemment officials such as
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Berhane Mamo, mayor of Makalle and Beyene Abraha, governor of Agame district They were believed to be held in a security detention centre in Makalle where torture was allegedly routine and were still detained without charge at the end of the year. Amnesty International was collecting information to assess whether they might be prisoners of conscience.
On 21 April about 40 members of the Ethiopian Evangelical Mekane Yesus Church, an affiliate of the Lutheran World Federation, were arrested in Dembi Dollo in Wollega region after attending a church service. They were reportedly accused of defying an official order which prohibited the service and ordered the closure of churches in the area. More than half were released uncharged after a short time but 17 were still detained without trial at the endof 1984. They included the Reverend UlaFitumaand other pastors, teachers and farmers. They were all adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International.
On 5 September the government announced the release of 96 political prisoners. Although it did not disclose details, they were believed to be former members or supporters of the government or of political organizations which had alone time supportedthegovernment, such as the All-Ethiopia Socialist Movement (Me'isone). They had been held without charge or trial since being detained on various occasions during the previous seven years. Amnesty International welcomed these releases, which were linked to the 10th anniversary of the revolution and the establishment of the Workers Party of Ethiopia (WPE). Amnesty International called for a general amnesty for all political prisoners.
Among those still imprisoned for whom Amnesty Intemational continued to appeal were 10 relatives of the late Emperor Haile Selassie, detained without charge or trial since the overthrow of his govemmentin 1974. Theywere apparently heldbecauseoftheirfamily connection with the overthrown govemment, although all former members of the govemment detained in 1974 had been released uncharged by the end of 1983. The 10 prisoners were Tenagnework Haile-Selassie and her four daughters, Sara Gizaw and her three sons, and Zuriashwork Gebre-Igziabeher. All 10 were held in Addis Ababa's Central Prison
More than 100 prisoners of the Oromo ethnic group arrested in February 1980, mostly in Addis Ababa, continued to be detained throughout 1984 at the Central Prison and the "third police station" in Addis Ababa (see Amnesty International Report 1984). They had apparently been suspected of supporting the Oromo Liberation Front (OLF) and many had reportedly been tortured. Abba-Biyya Abba-Jobbir, a High Court judge, Tsehai Tolessa, the wife of the "disappeared" ReverendGudinaTumsa(seebelow), MarthaKumsa, ajoumalist, and
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Zegeye Asfaw, a former Minister of Law and Justice, were among over 40 of these prisoners whose cases had been taken up by Amnesty International, most of whom were adopted as prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty International continued to call for the release of the Reverend Olana Lemu and others imprisoned in harsh conditions at Nekemte, apparently for their religious activities as members of the Ethiopian Evangelical Mekane Yesus Church. The government had alleged in 1981 that the church supported the OLF - which the church strongly denied Four members of the church from Wollega region who had been detained without trial since 1979 were released in early 1984.
Membei^ of certain other smaller churches were also reportedly detained during 1984, particularly in Wollega region, for alleged opposition to government policies. There were reports that some members of the Beta Israel community (known as Falashas or Ethiopian Jews) were also imprisoned for practising their religion or for attempting to leave the country illegally to emigrate to Israel.
Amnesty International continued to investigate the imprisonment on political grounds of three Ethiopian employees of the UN Economic Commission for Africa, arrested in Addis Ababa at various times since 1979. A fourth local UN staff member, Shimelis Teklu, was arrested in January. All four were still detained without charge at the end of 1984.
Many other political prisoners were reported to be held in 1984, particularly in Addis Ababa and in areas where opposition guerrilla organizations were active. Amnesty International was unable to estimate the number of prisoners of conscience and other political prisoners; it believed that those it knew about were only a small proportion of the several thousand in prison in 1984. There were reportedly over 1,500 political prisoners in the Central Prison in Addis Ababa alone, including many long-term untried detainees. Political prisoners were also held in the "third police station" in Addis Ababa, some for over four years without charge or trial. Torture was reportedly routine in this prison.
In Eritrea, several hundred political prisoners were reportedly detained in Sembel prison and Haz-Haz women's prison in Asmara on suspicion of links with guerrilla organizations. Many had allegedly been tortured in Mariam Gimbi security prison in Asmara. Their cases were reportedly reviewed by a secret security committee which imposed sentences without any formal trial taking place. Some prisoners were reportedly executed in secret outside the prison. Some hundreds of political prisoners were allegedly also detained without trial in Makalle prison in Tigray region, accused of links with the Tigray People's Liberation Front Many had allegedly been tortured in security detention centres.
Some prisoners were reported to have been arrested for refusing or
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
trying to evade compulsory military service. A number were reportedly hield for trying to leave the country illegally, in most cases without being brought to court. Amnesty International was investigating allegations that people who had fled to another country, such as Djibouti, to seek asylum had been returned to Ethiopia against their will and imprisoned there, but was unable to substantiate these allegations.
Amnesty Intemational continued to press the authorities to clarify the fate or whereabouts of 15 political detainees who "disappeared" in July 1979 after being taken from prison in Addis Ababa The govemment denied that they had "disappeared" but by the end of 1984 had failed to provide any evidence that they were still alive. Most were feared to have been secretly executed soon after their "disappearance". It was widely believed that the Reverend Gudina Tumsa, general secretary of the Ethiopian Evangelical Mekane Yesus Church, who "disappeared" after being abducted in July 1979 allegedly by people acting for the govemment, had also been secretly killed.
Torture of people arrested on political grounds was reportedly routine. Amnesty Intemational received allegations of torture in Addis Ababa, Asmara, Makalle, Nekemte and Harar among other places. Torture methods reportedly included beatings on the soles of the feet while the victim was suspended upside down and electric shocks. Detainees under interrogation were reportedly held incommunicado in overcrowded and unhygienic conditions. Several prisoners allegedly died following torture and the denial of medical treatment
Prison conditions in the Central Prison in Addis Ababa and other civil prisons were said to be poor. Although detainees were allowed to receive food and certain other basic necessities from relatives, some correspondence and occasional visits, medical treatment was often inadequate and hygiene poor, due to overcrowding and inadequate facilities.
44
Amnesty International Report 1985
