Nepal
Critics of the government and its policies - largely opposition politicians, political workers and students - continued to face arrest and detention without charge ortrial for organizing or participating in meetings or demonstrations. Although for hundreds of prisoners detention lasted only a few days, dozens of prisoners were held for several months and a small number were reportedly held for between two and three years. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that many of those arrested were prisoners of conscience.
Political parties were officially prohibitedinNepal andmany people engaged in opposition activities were held in preventive detention under the Public Security Act( PSA) by nine-monthly detention orders renewable up to three years. Some were also arrested under the Treason (Crime and Punishment) Act, (known as the Raj Kaj Act), and the Organizations and Associations (Control) AcC Although Amnesty International learned of people charged under these acts during 1984, it received no reports of trials.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
In February Amnesty International inquired about the grounds for detaining nine members of the All Nepal National Free Students Union (ANNF SU), five of whom had reportedly been detained without charge or trial since March 1982. By the end of 1984 no response had been received and no news obtained of the students' release. Dozens of other members of the ANNFSU, as well as of other student groups, were detained under the PSA at different periods during 1984.
Several hundred members of the Nepali Congress Party (NCP) were arrested in different parts of the country during November, when the NCP attempted to hold six regional conferences. Although the vast majority of those arrested were released after one to three days in police custody. Amnesty Intemational received reports that at the end of November a small number of people were still in detention.
One political prisoner, Shiva Prasad Kangal, had been detained under the P SA for over three and a half years without charge or trial by the end of 1984. A political activist unaffiliated to any group, he was reportedly arrested on his retum from a visit to India in mid-1981. Amnesty Intemational regulariy asked about the reasons for his continued detention - which appeared to breach the PSA's maximum three-year detention period - but received no response.
Prisoners charged under the Treason (Crime and Punishment) Act included four members ofthe NCP arrested in late M arch in N awalparasl Tillak Sapkota, Shakti Prasad Giri, Nand Lai Mishra and Indra Raj Jyoti were arrested in possession of leaflets criticizing the police after an attack by villagers on an NCP meeting at Surajpura in which one NCP member died. Amnesty International was investigating their cases. Three were released on bail in September but Indra Raj Jyoti remained in detention.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports of the arrest and prosecution of some members of Christian communities (see Amnesty Intemational Report ¡984). Amnesty Intemational raised with the govemment the cases of 11 Christians arrested in May in D andeldhura while participating in a Bible School, who were accused of having been converted and attempting to convert others. They were released on bail after 11 days in police custody, but by the end of 1984 the outcome of their cases was not known.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about an incident at Piskar on 14 January when police officers reportedly fired indiscriminately and apparently without provocation into a crowd watching a play. The play was said to have been insulting to the Nepalese monarchy. According to some reports between 30 and 40 people died. No official investigation is known to have been held.
	
■ ^ '	
	
	
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
