Hungary
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the imprisonment of conscientious objectors tomilitary service and about short-term arrests and administrative measures such as fines and curfews imposed on people for the non-violent exercise of their right to freedom of expression. Amnesty International also leamed of the imposition of one death sentence and one execution
Under Article 148 of the criminal code people who incite hatred of Hungary's constitutional order or allies, or national, racial or religious hatred, may be imprisoned for one to five years. Amnesty Intemational believes that mostpeople imprisoned forpolitical offences were charged with "incitement" under this article. If they commit the offence before a "large public" or as members of a group, the punishment is two to eight years' imprisonment
Military service is compulsory in Hungary and the law does not provide for alternative civilian service outside the military system. Article 3 36 allows the courts to impose sentences on those who refuse military service of up to five years' imprisonment (five to 15 years in time of war). Since 1977 members of some small Christian sects, including the Nazarenes and the Jehovah's Witnesses, have been allowed to do unarmed military service, but the authorities have refused to extend this to Roman Catholics. According to unofficial reports, there were approximately 130 conscientious objectors in mid-1983 serving sentences in Baracska prison where conscientious objectors are generally sent Most of them were Jehovah's Witnesses who had refused to do any form of military service. Amnesty Intemational could not obtain detaUs on these cases but it worked for the release of five Roman Catholic conscientious objectore, all of whom, according to Amnesty Intemational's information, belonged to small pacifist"basic communities" which advocate strict adherence to the teachings of the Bible. Two were adopted during 1984 - Lâszlo Habos, aged 22 from Erd near Budapest, and Jôzsef Ujvâri, aged 20 from Toko- who were serving sentences of 30 and 33 months' imprisonment respectively for refusing conscription on the grounds of conscience. They were both sentenced under Article 336.
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the continuing practice of arresting people for short periods and imposing administrative penalties on them for the non-violent exercise of their right to freedom of
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
expression. Most of those involved were connected with the publishing and distribution of unofficial publications. On 8 June Gyorgy Krassó, a 5 2-year-old Budapest economist, was detained by the police because of an interview he had given to an unofficial publication about the imprisormient, trial and execution of Imre Nagy and other leaders of the 1956 Hungarian revolution. On 18 October he was again detained by the police who reportedly confiscated large numbers of unofficial publications from his flat He was subsequently fined 10,000 formts (about two months' average wage) under a press law passed in August 1983. This allows for fines of up to 10,000 forints to be levied without trial for possessing or distributing unofficial publications. Five others including Gabor Bouquet, a 35-year-old steel worker, were also fined between 5,000 and 9,000 forints. On 12 November Gyorgy Krassó was placed under curfew by the local district police, reportedly on account of his continued activity in unofficial publishing. He had to report to the police once a week and they could enter and search his flat at any time. He was not allowed to leave his flat between 8pm and 6 am, and to leave Budapest or change his address he had to get police permission. He was told that he could not keep a telephone, although as far as Amnesty International knows, this was not enforced In November Amnesty Intemational learned that Pal Szalai, a political essayist, was detained by the police after planning a visit to Poland His passport was reportedly taken away.
There is no right of appeal to the courts against these restrictions which can reportedly be imposed for up to one year and can then be renewed. To Amnesty Intemational's knowledge there are no Hungarian laws which provide for such restrictions on freedom of movement Amnesty Intemational had not heard of such measures being applied to a resident of Budapest since the 1960s, although they had reportedly been used in other parts of Hungary.
In September Amnesty Intemational appealed to the Hungarian authorities on behalf of Wolde Selassie Kefela, an Ethiopian student who was reportedly due to be sent back to Ethiopia where it was believed he could face imprisonment on account of his political opinions. Amnesty Intemational subsequently leamed that he had been permitted to go to another country of his choice.
Amnesty Intemational learned of the imposition of one death sentence and of one execution; in both cases the accused had been convicted of murder.
272
Amnesty International Report 1985
