Ghana
47
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and the detention without trial of people held on political grounds. It was also concemed about the "disappearance" of one detainee who may have been a prisoner of conscience, about unfair trial procedures, and aboutjudicial executions and extrajudicial executions by the security forces.
The govemment, headed by Flight-Lieutenant Jerry John Rawlings, continued to face armed opposition from members and former members of the armed forces and at least two coup attempts were reported during 1984. A number of people apparently suspected of trying to overthrow the govemment were reportedly executed by the security forces without trial, or after being convicted in their absence.
Amnesty International investigated the cases of over 30 political prisoners or detainees and adopted five of them as prisoners of conscience. All five - a newspaper proprietor, two journalists and two lawyers- were released during 1984. The proprietor, Thomas Quarshie Thompson, was released uncharged in April after having a stroke. He had reportedly been detained because of criticism of the govemment in his newspaper, the Free Press. The two lawyers - Obeng Manu and Sam Okudzeto- were freed in May. They too had been detained since June 1983 for criticizing the government. The two journalists who worked for the Free Press - John Kugblenu and Mike Adjei - were released in July. Other prisoners who might have been prisoners of conscience and whose cases were investigated by Amnesty Intemational included at least six people who had been detained without trial since January 1982. At least three of the six remained in untried detention at the end of 1984. They included Riley Poku and Dr John Nabila, respectively Minister of Defence and Minister of Presidential Affairs in the govemment of Dr Hi 11 a Limann, which was overthrown on 31 December 1981. Fourteen other prisoners whose cases were taken up for investigation by Amnesty Intemational as possible prisoners of conscience were members of the armed forces, apparently held on suspicion of involvement in attempts to overthrow the govemment They included Samson Nyame Bekyere, an army corporal, and Private S. K. Amonsah-Dadzie, both of whom had been acquitted by a Public Tribunal in August 1983 of attempting to overthrow the government but were detained again immediately afterwards. Also being investigated by Amnesty International was the case of Andrews Asare Kwame Pianim, an economist convicted on 2 August 1983 of preparing to
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
overthrow the govemment and sentenced to 18 years' imprisonment A member of the five-person panel which had heard his case later stated that the panel had been directed by the authorities to convict him. Several other political detainees whose cases had been taken up for investigation by Amnesty International were released during the year. For example, George Garbrah, a former deputy minister of defence, was released in February, after being held without trial since January
1982.
In May the govemment stated that David Akwasi Aboagye, a Ghanaian who had sought political asylum in the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG) in September 1980, had been deported by the FRG authorities in November 1983 and by mid-1984 was living m Ghana. However, some FRG newspapers had claimed that David Akwasi Aboagye had been summarily executed after retuming to Ghana, and the Ghanaian Govemment statement said that David Akwasi Aboagye's death had been reported by Amnesty Intemational. On 26 June Amnesty Intemational informed the authorities that neither the International Secretariat of Amnesty Intemational nor its section in the FRG had initiated any action on his behalf or reported his death.
In its letter of 26 June Amnesty Intemational sought information about Manny Asiedu, a businessman who was reported to have "disappeared" after being detained by soldiers at his home in Accra on 17 June. The soldiers were reportedly trying to find an army officer wanted for plotting to overthrow the govemment. On 30 October Amnesty Intemational was informed that the government had no record of Manny Asiedu's arrest or imprisonment, and that his current whereabouts were unknown. In view of the fact that it had received eye-witness reports of Manny Asiedu's arrest by uniformed soldiers. Amnesty Intemational subsequently asked the govemment whether there had been any police investigation into Manny Asiedu's "disappearance", and if so to make the findings public. The organization had received no reply by the end of 1984.
In July Amnesty Intemational made public a memorandum conceming the Public Tribunals which it had sent to the govemment in October
1983.	This referred to the findings of an Amnesty Intemational observer who had attended sessions of the Public Tribunals in August 1983 and had discussed their procedures with officials and members of the govemment. In the memorandum Amnesty Intemational expressed the view that trials before the Public Tribunals were unfair in certain respects, notably because the burden of proof was placed upon the defendant in some cases, and because the right of appeal to a higher court was denied. The organization recommended 10 changes to the structure and procedures of the Public Tribunals in order to bring them into line with intemationally accepted legal standards. They included:
Amnesty Intemational Report 1985	49
introducing the right of appeal to a higher court with a composition different from that of the Public Tribunals and including at least one legally trained officer, that at least one qualified and experienced lawyer should sit on each Public Tribunal and be responsible for deciding questions of law; and that the standard of proof to be applied should be clarified.
The govemment had announced in 1983 that it intended to establish an appeals procedure for people convicted by Public Tribunals, but this was not established until August, when the government introduced the Public Tribunals Law 1984, Provisional National Defence Council (PNDC) Law 78. However, Amnesty Intemational noted that PNDC Law 78 contained no safeguards to ensure that the composition of the National Public Tribunal - the body empowered to hear appeals - was different from that of the tribunal of first instance. Moreover, it remained unclear which court had jurisdiction over which offences. Other concerns described in the October 1983 memorandum on the Public Tribunals also remained.
Although some prisoners held in civilian prisons reportedly received inadequate medical care, all the cases of ill-treatment reported to Amnesty Intemational concerned people held in military custody. For example, Victor Agbewali, a civilian, was reported to have suffered serious damage to his eyesight as a result of being beaten when he was detained at Gondar barracks in May, reportedly on suspicion of illegally possessing a firearm. He was subsequently released but required hospital treatment In the same month a political detainee. Corporal George Namale, was reported to have been threatened with summary execution during interrogation by a senior member of the govemment He was apparently suspected of involvement in a coup attempt and had been extradited from Burkina Faso (formerly Upper Volta) in late 1983. Amnesty Intemational urgently appealed to the authorities to respect his fundamental right to life. He was not known to have been tried or released by the end of 1984.
At least 25 people were executed by firing-squad during 1984. Sixteen had been sentenced to death by Public Tribunals for offences including murder, armed robbery, attempting to overthrow the govemment and smuggling. Those executed included at least three members of the security forces convicted of murder. At least 14 other people were sentenced to death by Public Tribunals, or by military tribunals which heard cases against military defendants only, but were not known to have been executed. They included nine soldiers convicted of offences against state security who had apparently left the country and were sentenced to death in their absence in April. In September Amnesty Intemational noted broadcasts by the Secretary of the Interior stating that the death penalty might henceforth be imposed by Public Tribunals
vili
Amnesty International Report 1985
on people convicted of "all major forms of economic crimes". It continued to appear that the Public Tribunals could impose death penalties at their discretion.
Among the 25 people known to have been executed during 1984 three had been sentenced to death by Public Tribunals in their absence. Lance Corporal Halidu Giwa, Sergeant Abdul Malik and Corporal Martin Adjumba were convicted in August 1983 of attempting to overthrow the govemment They were detained on 23 March, after entering Ghana illegally, and executed the next day. At least nine other people were also detained on 23 March, apparently on suspicion of attempting to overthrow the govemment They too were executed the next day - without any known trial. They included Lance Corporal Djabaa, Warrant Officer Frimpong, and Lance Corporal Sarkodie. All were reported to have been executed while being held in military custody in or near Accra. A civilian businessman, John Ofori Wilson, was reported to have been extrajudicially executed by the security forces also on 24 March. He was arrested in Accra and was apparently unarmed at the time.
