Nigeria
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience. It was also concemed that political prisoners were tried by tribunals using procedures which apparently fell short of internationally recognized standards of faimess. The organization was also concemed about the use of the death penalty, the application of which was extended to 19 offences. Many of the 111 or more people executed during the year had been convicted by tribunals which did not permit any judicial appeal.
The Supreme Military Council (SMC), which took power in a military coup on 31 December 1983, suspended some sections of the 1979 constitution and issued a series of decrees. The government's power to detain people without trial was extended, special tribunals were established to try people accused of crimes which the government regarded as particularly serious, and the number of capital offences was increased
In January the government detained over 500 former politicians and traders associated with the govemment of former President Shehu Shagari, who was himself detained throughout 1984. In Febmary the govemment promulgated SMC Decree No. 2 - the State Security (Detention of Persons) Decree 1984-which empowered the authorities to detain indefinitely anyone suspected of being "concemed in acts prejudicial to state security" or of having "contributed to the economic
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
adversity of the nation". It was made retroactive to 31 Decemberl983, and was invoked in the cases of those detained in January. At least 150 more people were reported to have been detained under SMC Decree No. 2 during 1984. Most of those held under the decree were reportedly suspected of common law offences such as corruption and embezzlement. Some 30 former officials detained in January were convicted of common law offences during 1984. However, Amnesty Intemational believed that at least one person held under the decree was a prisoner of conscience and called for his release. Dr Tai Solarin, a teacher and joumalist, was detained by the security forces on 12 March reportedly because he had written a newspaper article criticizing the govemment On 19 April a Lagos High Court ordered his release, but he was immediately rearrested and was still held without trial in Jos prison at the end of 1984.
The organization also adopted as prisoners of conscience Nduka Irabor and Tunde Thompson, two joumalists detained on 11 April and accused of writing an inaccurate article in the Lagos Guardian newspaper. In June both were sentenced to a year's imprisonment Amnesty Intemational considered them to have been imprisoned for exercising their right to freedom of expression. The organization investigated the cases of six other people who it thought might be prisoners of conscience.
In October, 250 people detained since January under SMC Decree No. 2 were released uncharged, among them Chief Chukuemeka Odumegwu Ojukwu, whose case was being investigated by Amnesty Intemational. It considered that he might have been detained on account of his former political activities as leader of the secessionist state of Biafra, in spite of an official amnesty. At least four joumalists who had been detained reportedly for writing stories which criticized or embarrassed the govemment were also released during 1984, including two who were being investigated by Amnesty International as possible prisoners of conscience. On 31 December it was announced that a further 144 people detained under SMC Decree No. 2 would be released to mark the first anniversary of the SMC.
The govemment established at least five categories of special tribunal, each presided over by a qualified judge, with members of the armed forces acting as assessors. Although special tribunals were used principally to try people accused of criminal offences, some were used to hear political cases. For example, the journalists Nduka Irabor and Tunde Thompson were both tried by a special tribunal established under SMC Decree No. 4, The Public Officers (Protection Against False Accusation) Decree. Furthermore, Amnesty Intemational leamed of one person charged with a criminal offence whose trial was transferred from an ordinary court to a special tribunal apparently for political
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
reasons: Fela Anikulapo Kuti, a musician known for tiie political content of his songs, was detained on4 September on suspicion of attempting to export currency unlawfully. His case was transferred from the High Court to a special tribunal established under SMC Decree No. 7, the Exchange Control (Anti-Sabotage) Decree of April 1984. Amnesty Intemational received allegations that the authorities had indicated their wish to secure a conviction while the case was still subjudice, and that defence witnesses were prevented from testifying. Amnesty Intemational called for his release or retrial before a court whose procedures met internationally recognized standards. One special tribunal, established under SMC Decree No. 3, The Recovery of Public Property (Special Military Tribunals) Decree 1984, was explicitly created to try former holders of public office and their associates accused of criminal offences.
In April and May Amnesty Intemational informed the authorities of its wish to send an observer to sessions of the special tribunals, and requested a visa However, no reply was received by the end of 1984.
At least 111 people were publicly executed during the year, some 68 of them after being convicted by special tribunals with no right of appeal. However, all sentences imposed by special tribunals were subject to confirmation by the political authorities. Death sentences passed by special tribunals under SMC Decree No. 5, The Robbery and Firearms (Special Provisions) Decree, had to be confirmed by the appropriate state military governor, but such confirmation was sometimes so swift as to cast doubt upon the thoroughness of review. For example, in Kwara State, six people convicted of stealing cars on 17 July had their sentences confirmed by the state governor the next day and were executed the day after that. Amnesty Intemational repeatedly appealed to the authorities to commute all death sentences, and it expressed particular concem about executions after conviction by tribunals with no right of appeal.
In July the govemment promulgated SMC Decree No. 20, The Special Tribunal (Miscellaneous Offences) Decree, and No. 22, The Counterfeit Currency (Special Provisions) Decree which extended the death penalty to 17 more offences. Moreover, the extension was imposed retrospectively: between 6 and 11 December, five people were sentenced to death under SMC Decree No. 20 for offences which had not been capital offences when they were committed. Amnesty Intemational publicly appealed for the sentences to be commuted, and expressed concern at the retroactive imposition of death penalties. One of the five, José Luis Pecina, was subsequently pardoned by the SMC.
Over 120 people were reported to have been sentenced to death during 1984, by both Federal High Courts and special tribunals. Moreover, in May, over 820 prisoners were reported to be under sentence of
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
death some of whom had been sentenced more than 14 years earlier. On 13 November Amnesty International asked the authorities about a newspaper report that the Chief of Staff, Supreme Headquarters, had ordered the execution of any prisoner under sentence of death who had no right of appeal or whose appeals had been rejected On 22 November, the authorities replied that the Chief of Staff had no authority to issue such orders. Amnesty Intemational subsequenttly received reports that governors in at least two states had ordered the execution of all such prisoners. For example, 55 condemned prisoners were allegedly executed in Enugu on 15 November, a govemment official was alleged to have stated that nine people were shot and 46 hanged to "decongest" the prison.
Amnesty Intemational also received reports that orders had been given to some sections of the security forces to execute summarily suspected criminals. On 29 December the News Agency of Nigeria reported that the military governor of Sokoto state had ordered border guards in the state to shoot on sight anyone suspected of smuggling.
