China
Amnesty Intemational's principal concems were the extensive use erf" the death penalty and the continued imprisonment of prisoners of conscience. The organization was also investigating the imprisonment of other possible prisoners of conscience.
On 26 September Amnesty International published a report, China: Violations of Human Rights, and launched a campaign to publicize its concems. The report contained detailed profiles of prisoners of conscience, an analysis of current death penalty legislation and its implementation, and the text of a memorandum sent by Amnesty Intemational to the govemment on 28 Febmary 1983. The govemment had been invited to respond to the memorandum but by the report
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
publication date no response had been received Subsequently, on 10 October, a spokesperson of the information department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs announced that the Chinese Govemment would respond to the report "at an appropriate time".
Amnesty Intemational opposes the death penalty in all cases. During 1984 it documented 292 executions, 21 death sentences (some of which might have been carried out) and 13 cases in which the death sentence was suspended for two years. The majority of executions about which Amnesty Intemational received information took place in urban areas, and it believed the total nationwide to be significantly higher. Throughout 1984 the government's declared campaign against crime continued, implementing decisions taken by the National People's Congress in 1983 to extend to 44 the offences carrying the death penalty and also to punish defendants in accordance with the "Decision on Severely Punishmg Criminals who Gravely Endanger Public Security". People were sentenced to death in 1984 for a wide variety of offences includingrape, theft, "counter-revolutionary sabotage", printing pornographic pictures, "hooliganism" and organizing a secret society.
Of concem to Amnesty Intemational was the increased incidence of summary executions carried out on the same day as sentencing It recorded 13 such cases during the year. For example, on the morning of 16 August Cheng Shenglan, a 42-year-old former purchasing agent for the civil engineering constmction corporation in Dandong, Liaoning province, was found guilty of graft, fraud and bribery involving the sale oftimber. She was executed laterthe same day. Many prosecutions for economic crimes not involving violence resulted in the death sentence and were given prominence in official newspapers as exemplary cases in the fight against corruption in the state bureaucracy.
On 28 December at a public rally in Beian, Heilongjiang province, 32 people - many of them sons of Communist Party officials - were sentenced. Five "main culprits" were sentenced to death and executed immediately afterwards, four others were given suspended death sentences. Commenting on the charges brought against the 32, the People's Daily reported th at B eian had been terrorized by three gangs of "rapists and hoodlums" who had threatened "the mental and physical well-being of women, jeopardized social order and aroused the strong indignation of the people". The party committee of the province was reported to have paid special attention to the c ase and to have demanded severe punishment
In accordance with Article 44 of the Criminal Law the death sentence continued to be imposed with a two-year suspension of sentence on defendants aged between 16 and 18 convicted of "particularly serious" offences. XuFandi, amiddle-schoolpupil from Changsha, the provincial capital of Hunan, was sentenced to death suspended for
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
two years on 8 May for stealing 31 historical relics from a museum, and for striking a guard with an iron bar during a robbery.
Amnesty International also recorded a numberof cases in which the death sentence was imposed for acts of violence against people implementing the governments recent economic reforms. Yao Jianjun, an apprentice printer in Shaoyang, Hunan province, was executed on 7 July after judgment by the Shaoyang Intermediate People's Court He had been criticized by his factory authorities for breaches of labour discipline for which he was finally dismissed. Angry at the decision, he reportedly broke into the factory offices, stabbing and seriously wounding three factory leaders and a security guard. In an official commentary, the Hunan provincial radio service warned that: "If someonedarestodefy thelawandwilfully attack(economic) reformers, we will use our weapon of the law to punish the evildoer severely and promptly. Only thus can we... ensure the smooth development of the reforms". Under a decree adopted by the National People's Congress Standing Committee in June 1981 the Supreme Court no longer automatically reviewed all death sentences imposed by lower courts except in certain cases, including those involving "counter-revolutionary" offences.
On 14 November the Ministry of Public Security held an unprecedented press conference for Chinese and foreign joumaUsts to discuss the effectiveness of the campaign against crime. In an interview published in the Guangming Daily on 7 August, the Minister of Public Security had said that the campaign would continue with "the objective of a fundamental improvement in public order towards the end of 1986". At the press conference in November a ministry spokesperson justified the extensive use ofthe death penalty during the campaign, and produced statistics to show a marked decrease in the level of crime. However, the spokesperson refused to give figures for the number of people arrested or executed, and added that it was "good to have some people executed so as to educate others". The spokesperson stated also thatthere were"no political prisoners or'so-called' political dissidents in China".
Amnesty International continued to press for the unconditional release of prisoners of conscience. It received little new information on individual cases during the year and believed that the prisoners of conscience of whom it was aware represented only a small proportion of the total. The organization was concemed about new reports on the mental health of prisoner of conscience Wei Jingsheng, former editor of an unofficial joumal, who had been sentenced in October 1979 to 15 years' imprisonmentfor"counter-revolutionary crimes". It was reported in May that Wei Jingsheng had twice been admitted to the prison wing of Fuxing Hospital in Beijing for psychiatric treatment, although the
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
precise dates were not given. According to Amnesty International's information, when admitted to hospital for the first time he was in poor condition, stared blankly and was unable to recognize people. By the time of his second admission a close friend reported that he believed Wei Jingsheng had had a nervous breakdown. Amnesty Intemational appealed on his behalf, expressing fear that his reported continuous solitary confinement since 1979 in Beijing Prison No. 1 with exercise only once a month had produced the deterioration in his health. Amnesty Intemational subsequently received unconfirmed reports that Wei Jingsheng had been transferred to a labour camp.
The continued detention and state of health of several elderly Roman Catholic priests and adopted prisoners of conscience who had remained loyal to the Vatican and refused to co-operate with the official Patriotic Catholic Association was of concem to Amnesty Intemational. Following an official inquiry on religious policy in Beijing since 1978, the authorities announced in Octoberthatall prominentreligious figures in the capital persecuted during the Cultural Revolution had been rehabilitated and arrangements made for compensation. This greater tolerance did not extend to those Christians whodid not adhere either to the official Patriotic Catholic Association or to the Protestant Three-Self Patriotic Movement. Officials in the province of Henan, in particular, reportedly reacted strongly to unofficial religious activity which they referred to as "Christianity fever" andAmnesty International received reports of harassment, and sometimes arrest, of Protestants practising religion in "house-churches". There were also reports of the imprisonment of "house-church pastors" and "itinerant preachers".
Although new "flexible policies" towards the Tibet Autonomous Region were referred to by the Vice-Chairperson of the National People's Congress, himself a Tibetan, Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the detention of Tibetans in the Tibet Autonomous Region. The organization believed that they might be prisoners of conscience detained for their non-violent advocacy of Tibetan nationalism or the practice of their religiion. One case of concem was that of Geshe Lobsang Wangchuk, an eminent Buddhist scholar, who was arrested in 1982 and was reported to have been tried and sentenced to 18 years' imprisonment, accused of "nurturing ideas to separate Tibet from the motherland". It was reported that, when first detained in Drapchi prison, Lhasa, Geshe Lobsang Wangchuk had beenill-treatedandkept in solitary confinement, shackled hand and foot Amnesty Intemational received information that he was transferred to a labour camp at Kongpo Nyitri, south of Lhasa, during 1984.
Amnesty Intemational was investigating the cases of Tibetans detained in and around Lhasa following a series of apparently related arrests in August and September 1983. On 26 August 1983 Lobsang
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Choephal was arrested at his office in the Department of Agriculture in Lhasa and reportedly charged with being a "counter-revolutionary element". He is reported to have had a recording of a sermon by the Dalai Lama and a Tibetan national flag confiscated during a search of his house. He was detained in Sangyip prison, Lhasa Other Tibetans are reported to have been detained on the same day on similar charges.
Thirty-two people were reportedly arrested in September 1983 while rebuilding the Ganden monastery which had been destroyed during the Cultural Revolution. The monastery was a major religious institution established by the founder of the Gelugpa tradition of Tibetan Buddhism to which the Dalai Lama belongs. One of the 32, Tsering Drakpa, a monk, was reportedly accused of forming a "rebel group", and subsequently detained in Takse Dzong prison.
Fu Yuehua, a prisoner of conscience featured in the report China: Violations of Human Rights, was reported to have been released She had been sentenced in December 1979 to two years' imprisonment for "disrupting public order" by participating in demonstrations by poor peasants in Beijing. Fu Yuehua had been released from Beijing Prison No. 1 in February 1981, but was later reported to be undergoing' 'reeducation-through-labour" in a camp at Liang Xiang outside Beijing. According to information made available to Amnesty Intemational after publication of its report, Fu Yuehua had been allowed to return to Beijing but was still required to report every week to the Public Security Bureau.
In August Amnesty International received information that another individual about whom it had been concemed- Liu Er'an- had notbeen arrested but was "employed and living well", according to a letter to an Amnesty Intemational member from the office of the Provincial People's Procuratorate of Henan. Liu Er'an had been a chemical worker in Anyang and had edited the unofficial joumalM/nz Am Zhuan (Bricks of Democracy). He was named in a document published in Hong Kong in 1981, which is believed to be the text of the court judgment against another "democracy movement" activist, Xu Wenli, as one of several people involved in a "plot" to set up a "counterrevolutionary" organizatioa It was originally reported that Liu Er'an had been arrested in April 1981 along with theeditors of otherunofiicial journals. Amnesty Intemational was unable toobtain further information about his reported arrest and presumed detention.
		
		
		
		, A
209	Amnesty International Report 19S5
