Switzerland
Amnesty Intemational remained concemed about the imprisonment of conscientious objectors to military service and the lack of any altemative civilian service.
Under Article 81 of the military penal code all conscientious objectors were sentenced to imprisonment, even when the military tribunal recognized a "severe conflict of conscience" on religious or ethical grounds. If the objection to military service was considered to be primarily political, a longer prison sentence was imposed. Any major alteration to this would require an amendment to Article 18 of the Swiss Consiitution{seeArnnesty International Report 1984). In a public referendum on 26 Febmary 1984 a large majority voted against introducing a civilian altemative to military service. Before the referendum Amnesty Intemational distributed literature explaining its position on conscientious objection, the history of efforts to introduce a civilian service and the situation in Switzerland and other West European countries.
In letters to Aranesty Intemational the govemment stated that the Swiss Parliament had asked the Federal Council to find "a solution on the legal level which would allow for the decriminalization of conscientious objection". A study commission appointed in January completed a preliminary report in June which proposed, inter alia, changes to the Military Penal Code (rather than the constitution) to allow those objecting to military service on religious or ethical grounds an altemative service one and a half times as long as military service. A new commission was then appointed which was to submit final detailed proposals by the end of May 1985.
Amnesty Intemational worked on the cases of six imprisoned conscientious objectors during the year. Two - Stéphane Bender and Jean-Luc Ferrière - objected to military service on the grounds of their avowed belief in non-violence.
Stéphane Bender, a philosophy student, entered Crételongue prison (Sion) on 16 July 1984 to begin an eight-month sentence, passed by a military tribunal at Martigny and confirmed by a military tribunal of appeal at Cully on 31 January 1984. Jean Luc Ferrière, also a student, was ordered to enter Bellechasse prison on 2 April 1985. He was originally sentenced to eight months' imprisonment by a military tribunal at La Tour de Peilz but on 1 September 1983 this was reduced by one month by a military tribimal of appeal at Aubonne. The tribunals in both cases referred to the fact that they had called for the introduction of an
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
alternative civilian service, which meant that they had objected to military service in moral terms not recognized by the law and had expressed political aims.
