Jamaica
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the continued use of the death penalty. During 1984 eight prisoners were hanged, bringing the number of executions since 1980 to 29. An Amnesty Intemational report, Jamaica, the Death Penalty (Report of an Amnesty Intemational Mission to Jamaica), was published on 21 November.
The report contained the text of a memorandum which was sent to the govemment on 24 July, based on the findings of an Amnesty Intemational mission to Jamaica in November 1983. The main reason for sending the mission had been the increase in executions after 1980, after more than four years in which executions had been suspended while parliament considered whether to abolish the death penalty (see Amnesty International Report 1984). The report described parliamentary debates and inquiries into the death penalty in Jamaica in recent years. Despite a narrow vote in the House of Representatives to retain capital punishment in January 1979 many members of parliament and others favoured abolition or restrictions in its use. The report described also two other committees of inquiry into the death penalty in Jamaica, both of which had criticized its application. In 1975 the Bamett Commission had questioned the effectiveness of hanging as a deterrent to violent crime and criticized conditions on death row. The Fraser Committee, which submitted its report to the govemment in December 1981, recommended restricting the use of the death penalty and the commutation of all death sentences passed before 31 March 1981.
Amnesty Intemational's report included studies of death row prisoners, who came overwhelmingly from the lower socio-economic classes; the majority had little or no education, most were first offenders and many may not have had adequate legal counsel. The report addressed questions of deterrence, mandatory sentences and executive clemency. Most of the prisoners hanged between August 1980 and July 1984 (the period covered by the report) had been sentenced to death before or during the time in which executions had been suspended. Most had consequently spent long periods - up to nine years - on death row, and were executed despite recommendations by various official or judicial bodies that their sentences be reviewed or commuted.
Amnesty Intemational recommended that no further executions take place, that all existing death sentences be commuted and that the govemment introduce legislation abolishing the death penalty. No reply had been received from the govemment by the end of 1984.
Meanwhile, executions continued and Amnesty Intemational
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
appealed for clemency in individual cases. Six of the eight prisoners executed during the year had been sentenced to death before 31 March 1981. More than 160 prisoners were under sentence of death at the end of the year.
