Colombia
Amnesty Intemational's concems included continued extrajudicial executions and "disappearances" by some sectors of the Colombian army and National Police, although the organization received substantially fewer reports of such abuses than in previous years. Over 300 "disappearance" cases from before 1984 remained unresolved Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about reports of torture and ill-treatment, and about short-term detention of prisoners of conscience, primarily Indian peasant farmers detained during land disputes.
A tmce negotiated by President Belisario Betancur with most of the country's guerrilla groups led to a reduction in both guerrilla actions and army counter-insurgency operations affecting the civilian populatioa Measures were also taken by some officials — including the Attomey General — to investigate torture, "disappearances", and extrajudicial executions, and to bring to justice those responsible.
In early March a state of siege was imposed in Cauca, Caqueta, Huila and Meta departments following a series of major guerrilla actions there. It was extended throughout the country on 1 May after the assassination of the Justice Minister, which was attributed to dmg-dealing criminals. The state of siege — which remained in force at the end of 1984 — established the military courts' jurisdiction over civilians for certain crimes, but did not lead to the large-scale detention of civilians characteristic of previous states of siege. Secret talks between the govemment and guerrilla leaders which were initiated in 1983
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
continued, despite guerrilla actions and the state of siege, and the govemment agreed cease-fires with most groups by 30 August. Only the Ejército de Liberación Nacional (ELN), National Liberation Army, refused to participate.
Reports of extrajudicial executions and "disappearances" by army and police counter-insurgency forces continued during 1984. The victims were primarily peasant farmers associated with lawful left-wing labour organizations and civic leaders belonging to mral community organizations or left-wing opposition parties.
On 6 Febmary' Amnesty Intemational called for an inquiry into reports that an army patrol, accompanied by local civilian irregulars, had detained and killed eight people on 12 January 1984 at Vuelta Acuña, on the Magdalena River near Barrancabermeja, Santander department Colonel Famk Yanine Diaz, Commander of the XlVth Brigade, subsequently acknowledged army responsibility for the killings, but alleged that the eight were guerrillas who had attacked an army patrol. However, all the dead were apparently residents of the farm where they were shot Farm owner Oscar Yepes, his employees Jesús Muños and Carlos Tobón, and Beatriz Urrego, aged 15, were reported to have been shot dead when they were detained. The other four victims, who included Beatriz Urrego's mother, were reportedly detained there ovemight their mutilated bodies were found the next day, after the troops left. Fifteen houses in and around the Yepes' farm were reportedly bumed at the time of the külings.
Several civilians serving as irregular auxiliaries to the army patrol in the incident were named by witnesses as people locally known as members of the "death squad" Muerte a Secuestradores (MAS), Death to Kidnappers. Since 1982 army spokesmen had often attributed killings of alleged subversives to MAS, although an investigation by the Attomey General's office in 1983 concluded that MAS existed only as a "state of mind" among some sectors of the army and police. In numerous cases in 1982 and 1983 Amnesty Intemational concluded that the attribution of killings to MAS had obscured army and police responsibility for extrajudicial executions. Some 800 extrajudicial executions, many of them attributed to MAS, had been reported from the Magdalena River area in 1983.
A special commission from the Attomey General's office, accompanied by a civil court judge, went to Vuelta Acuña, exhumed and examined four of the bodies, and found discarded army field rations. Forensic evidence revealed torture and execution-style killings. Detention orders on a charge of murder were subsequently issued against six civilian irregulars, three of whom were arrested in April and were still in detention at the end of 1984. Although the civil court did not attempt to serve detention orders on regular army personnel, the XlVth Brigade
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
challenged the court's jurisdiction over the civilian irregulars charged On 10 August the Tribunal Disciplinario, the high court that rules on conflicts between the military and civil courts, decided that the civilians would be tried by civil courts.
Amnesty Intemational also called for inquiries into reported killings by army and police forces in Punta de Piedra, in the Urabá region (Antioquia department) part of which was under military control for much of 1983 and 1984. The headquarters of the army's Voltigeros Battalion directed counter-insurgency operations against the guerrilla forces of the Ejército Popular de Liberación (EPL), Popular Liberation Army, as well as directing special anti-narcotics units of the National Police. On 24 March a leader of the Asociación Nacional de Usuarios Campesinos (ANUC), National Association of Peasants, 54-year-old Isabel Caicedo, and her two sons, David and Gilfredo Palacios, were reportedly detained and killed by police. Witnesses maintained that her captors had accused Isabel Caicedo of being "a courier" for the EPL. Punta de Piedra residents occupied the municipal building in the neighbouring town of Turbo, demanding an inquiry into the killings, and told officials from the Attomey General's office that the anti-narcotics police were responsible. On 14 April, 11 peasant farmers were killed and seven injured during a raid on Punta de Piedra. Army spokesmen stated that tiie killings had been carried out by the EPL. Evidence available to Amnesty Intemational however, indicated that about 30 men in narcotics police uniform passed through army check-points in three army tmcks, entered the village by night and shot residents in cold blood with automatic weapons.
Reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees were received from areas of intensive counter-insurgency activity, and from rural areas where detentions occurred during conflicts over land rights. Amnesty Intemational called for inquiries into reports that 14 members of the Indian commimity i^ej^arrfo Indígena Lomas deHilarco, in Coyaima Tolima, who were detained on 9 and 10 November were systematically ill-treated; it also asked the reason for their arrests. Three community leaders — Maximiliano Yara, the elected governor, Luis Loaiza, the senior mayor of the community council and Adolfo Poloche — remained in detention on a charge of land invasion at the end of 1984. The arrests occurred in the context of claims by private cattle ranchers to land worked by the Lomas de Hilarco community. They took place during a series of raids by police and civilian gurunen who reportedly bumed houses, destroyed fences, drove cattle through crops, took away private and community property, shot and wounded residents and threatened to assassinate community leaders. Indian residents maintained that the land was part of the region's Indian reserve lanás{resguardos) to which the community held title, and that arbitrary arrests and ill-
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
treatment were used to expel the community without due process of law.
While not taking any position on land disputes as such, Amnesty Intemational was concemed that in this and other disputes over Indian land rights, Indian community members who were lawfully contesting what they maintained to be their land rights appeared to be arbitrarily arrested and ill-treated by security forces acting outside the law. Community members frequently faced violent eviction from land they occupied and imprisonment on charges of land invasion before the courts had mled on rival property claims. In some cases, measures to force Indian comrhunities from land they occupied involved killings that may have been extrajudicial executions.
A large force of National Police moved in on 25 January to evict some 300 members of the Paez Indian resguardo of Corinto, Cauca, from land on the "López Adentro" estate which they maintained was resguardo property. When they refused to leave, the police opened fire; four were reportedly killed and 18 wounded. Fourteen were later arrested on a charge of land invasion, although a civil court judge ordered them to be released on 2 Febmary. Amnesty Intemational afpealed on 15 February to the authorities for a full investigation and received detailed replies from the office of President Betancur in ensuing months, including copies of records of disciplinary hearings for abuse of authority. The Lieutenant Colonel who led the action was fined eight days' pay for directing the eviction without the required order from the civil or judicial authorities. The disciplinary hearing ruled that the arrests and evictions had been arbitrary: the "eviction of indigenous people from lands they, by tradition, consider their own" could not be ordered on a mere presumption of "land invasion" as "... the presentation of the denunciation or complaint is not enough to justify the intervention of the police forces". The records also traced a paradlel inquiry within the military court system into whether the police officers should prosecuted for homicide and wounding but indicated that the court responsible had failed seriously to pursue the investigation because of "a lack of staff".
Further killings in the same area, also subject to the military courts' jurisdiction, were met with similar inaction by these courts, despite efforts by civilian authorities to ensure their investigation. On 8 July Misael Conda, son of the elected governor of the Corinto resguardo, was reportedly seized by members of the army's Third Brigade, although military spokesmen denied that army personnel were involved. About a week later his body was found, reportedly with a bullet wound in the head, in cane fields near Corinto. The findings of the Cauca District Attomey's investigation into Misael Conda's killing, also made available to Amnesty Intemational, showed that the civil court responsible for the case made every effort to ensure proper post mortem procedures were followed and to seek evidence of civilian criminal responsibility
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
for the crime. However, there was no indication that allegations of army responsibility had been examined and no progress in identifying Misael Conda's killers was shown. Similar killings of Indian leaders in the same area continued to be reported during 1984. The victims included Páez leader Father Alvaro Ulcué, a Catholic priest who had been closely associated with the Corinto resguardo in its claim to part of the "López Adentro" estate. On 9 November over 100 Indian families who had returned to "López Adentro" after the 25 January incident and had been farming there for 10 months were driven off the land by National Police from Corinto and Santander Quilichao. During the operation homes were burned and crops destroyed. On 10 November Father Ulcué was assassinated in the street in Santander Quilichao.
The Attorney General publicly criticized the legal doctrine by which the military courts retained exclusive jurisdiction over abuses by military and police personnel on the grounds that abuses were committed in the line of duty. In a press statement on 11 December, he stated that none of the officers against whom charges had been brought in 1983 and 1984 by the Attorney General's office in relation to extrajudicial executions and "disappearances" had been prosecuted. Citing the most recent cases, he said that 16 officers and men of National PoHce Intelligence (F-2) had been charged with the "disaf> pearance" of 11 people in 1982, but that on 21 November all proceedings had been suspended when the cases were transferred to the military courts. The Attorney General concluded that "the country has not taken seriously the policy of defending human rights".
