Iran
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about continuing large-scale executions, often after summary trials. The organization leamed of 661 executions during the year, but believed the actual figure to be considerably higher. Thousands of political prisoners remained in prison, in many cases untried, or following summary trials, or even after their sentences had expired They included many who were imprisoned for the non-violent exercise of their conscientiously-held beliefs. Allegations of torture and ill-treatment of detainees continued to be received and some victims of such treatment were examined by Amnesty Intemational doctors.
During 1984 Amnesty Intemational continued to raise its concems with the authorities and, in September, renewed its proposal to send a delegation to Iran for talks.
In 1984 Amnesty Intemational leamed of 661 executions. This brought the number of executions of which it was aware to 6,108 since the 1979 revolutioa Amnesty Intemational believed the tme figures were much higher, as former prisoners and relatives of prisoner consistently testified that large numbers of political prisoners were executed in secret Amnesty International continued to receive reports of executions after summary trials, with no right of appeal It also leamed of cases in which prisoners were executed after being sentenced to relatively short terms of imprisonment, when both the prisoner and the family had been given to believe that release was imminent Families were generally not informed until after the executions.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Amnesty Intemational leamed of the execution of members of various political movements, such as Rah-e Kargar, Worker's Way, the Kurdish Democratic Party, the Tudeh (Communist) Party, the Veo'iAt'sMojahedine Organization, and the People's J^eiia;^«« Organization, as well as members of the Baha'i faith. There were also many executions reported for dmg related offences.
Amnesty Intemational repeatedly called on the authorities to end the large number of executions and urged that all defendants be granted the right to a fair trial, as guaranteed by Article 14 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, ratified by Iran in 1975.
Amnesty International continued to receive reports of political arrests in 1984, but it remained impossible for it to estimate the number of prisoners of conscience among the thousands of political prisoners held in Iran, because of the difficulty in obtaining and checking information. In particular, the fear of reprisals by the authorities prevented relatives and friends of prisoners from seeking publicity. Amnesty Intemational knew of imprisoned members of various political opposition groups as well as members of the Baha'i faith. Amnesty Intemational also learned of cases in which relatives were imprisoned as hostages when a political suspect could not be found
The unpredictable and often arbitrary nature ofjudicial proceedings continued to be manifested throughout 1984. Some political detainees were released afterseveral weeks ormonths, others held without charge or trial for prolonged periods with no opportunity to challenge their detention in a court of law. Some were sentenced to long terms of imprisonment after summary trials, but were reportedly released before the expiry of their sentence; others, sentenced to relatively short prison terms, were executed or kept in prison aftertheir sentence had expired
Amnesty Intemational remained concerned about the conduct of political trials which itbelievedfellfarshortofinternationally accepted standards for fair trial. Former prisoners have consistently testified that they were not informed ofthe precise charges against them, or that the charges were vaguely worded, that they were denied access to a defence lawyer, and that their trial - usually conducted by a religious judge in the presence of guards - lasted a matter of minutes with no right of appeal. Some former prisoners were not officially informed of the outcome of their trial for some time, while others were told by their families. The majority of political trials were held in secret, with no opportunity for the defendants' relatives to attend, and judgments were not made public. However, in Febmary it was officially announced that 10 leading members of the military wing of the banned Tudeh Party had been executed, and that 87 others had received prison sentences of between several months and life, after trial by the Revolutionary Military Tribunal. Four were reportedly acquitted The charges against them
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
were reported to include espionage, "misappropriation of arms and ammunition" and "storing them to confront the Islamic Govemment of Iran."
According to official reports the trial of some eight members of the Central Committee of the Tudeh Party was scheduled to begin on 12 November. However the trial was postponed and no new date had been decided by the end of December. Amnesty Intemational asked the authorities when the trial would take place, and urged that all defendants be granted a fair trial, including the right to be defended by a lawyer of their choice and the right to appeal
The official Iranian press announced several amnesties and reductions of sentence during the year, apparently conditional on the prisoner repenting. On 13 June Amnesty Intemational wrote to the authorities about two such clemency measures, asking for further details including the names of those who had benefited No response was received.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive numerous and consistent allegations of torture and ill-treatment of detainees, despite constitutional provisions forbidding the use of torture to extract confessions or information. In a document entitled Evidence of Torture in Iran, issued on 17 August, Amnesty Intemational summarized four testimonies of torture and ill-treatment, two of which related to periods of imprisonment between late 1983 and early 1984. The testimonies were representative of many collected by Amnesty International. Some of those interviewed by the organization were also examined by Amnesty Intemational doctors in Europe who concluded that the physical scars and symptoms were consistent with both the kind of torture alleged and the reported date when it took place. The method of torture most commonly reported by former prisoners was beating with whips and cables, sometimes all overthe body, but frequently concentrating on the soles of the feet, the back, or other particularly sensitive parts of the body, for prolonged periods. Prisoners were usually blindfolded, with hands and somethnes ankles bound. Physical torture was frequently accompanied by mental torture such as mock executions and threats to relatives.
During 1984 Amnesty Intemational also expressed concem at the use of flogging and amputation as forms of judicial punishment, which Amnesty Intemational considered to constitute cruel, inhuman and degrading punishment. In December, following reports that a machine had been produced in Tehran for carrying out amputations. Amnesty Intemational expressed its concem to the authorities, and explained its opposition to such sentences.
On 3 December the Iranian representative introduced a draft resolution to the Third Committee of the UN General Assembly. The draft resolution reaffirmed the importance of the UN Declaration
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Against Torture, recognized that new techniques and machinery for torture "are detrimental to the fate of the individual and of the society as a whole", and condemned all acts of torture. This draft resolution was subsequently withdrawn, but Amnesty International hoped that the initiative indicated the government's reaffirmation of its intemational legal obligation to prevent torture, and that this would be reflected in practical steps to end its use.
In January Amnesty International submitted a statement to the UN Commission on Human Rights describing its concern about large-scale human rights violations in Iran, in particular the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience; unfair trial procedures or lack of trials for political prisoners; the imposition and infliction of death sentences and other cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment of prisoners. On 14 March the UN Commission on Human Rights adopted a resolution expressing"deepconcem atthe continuing serious violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms" in Iran and regret at the IranianGovernment's refusal to receive a mission arranged by the UN Secretary-General with the government's agreement The resolution urged the Iranian Govemment as a State Party to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to ensure the rights recognized in the Covenant and asked the Chairman of the Commission"to appoint... a special representative of the Commission, whose mandate will be to establish contacts with the Govemment ofthe Islamic Republic of Iran and to make a thorough study of the human rights situation in that country". Andrés Aguilar, a Venezuelan jurist was appointed as the special representative for Iran in October 1984.
