German Democratic Republic
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the large number of prisoners of conscience, the majority of them imprisoned either for leaving the country without permission or for persisting in their efforts to obtain permission. Other prisoners of conscience included conscientious objectors to military service, peace campaigners and dissenting Marxist. Most were convicted under laws directly restricting the exercise of human rights. Amnesty Intemational was further concemed that prisoners of conscience and other political prisoners were tried in camera, thus denying them one of the guarantees of a fair trial. During 1984 Amnesty Intemational worked on behalf of over 250 prisoners of conscience or probable prisoners of conscience, but believed the actual number to be far higher.
Any comprehensive assessment of the number of cases of potential concem to Amnesty Intemational was made impossible by the secrecy surrounding political imprisonment The public, including in most instances close relatives of the accused, was excluded from all the political trials investigated by Amnestylntemational during 1984, most of which did not concem information classified as secret. International law requires that judgments be made public even when the trial has been held in camera. However, the laws of the German Democratic Republic (GDR) permit the public to be excluded when the reasoning for the judgment is read out and judgments are not otherwise made public. This often made it difficult to establish the precise activity for which a prisoner had been convicted.
Amnesty Intemational considers that the systematic exclusion of the public from political trials violates Article 14 of the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to which the GDR is a party. It makes any assessment of whether such trials conform in other respects to intemationally recognized standards for a fair trial very difficult
The information that did reach Amnesty Intemational about prisoners of conscience was fijrther restricted by the fact that people sending such information out of the country could be prosecuted on charges such as "treasonable passing on of information" (Article 99 of the penal code). The organization worked on behalf of two prisoners of conscience whom it believed were imprisoned for this reason. Many families of prisoners of conscience also reported that they had been harassed or threatened by the authorities in this connection. Amnesty
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
International therefore believes that many cases of political imprisonment did hot come to its attention and that the information received about individual prisoners was incomplete.
The majority of prisoners of conscience about whom the organization was informed during 1984 were would-be emigrants. Although more people were permitted to emigrate than in previous years. Amnesty Intemational also learned of more arrests. However, the sentences imposed tended to be shorter. Those arrested for attempting to leave the country without permission were prosecuted for "illegal crossing of the border" (Article 213 of the penal code). Those who applied unsuccessfully for permission to leave and tried to persuade the authorities to change theirdecisionwereprosecutedon charges such as "impeding the activity of public bodies" (Article 214). Those who sent information about their efforts to foreigners, in the hope that support or publicity abroad would improve their chances of emigration, were prosecuted under a variety of articles of the penal code which restrict the right to freedom of expression and information.
Large numbers of would-be emigrants visited embassies, in particular those of the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG) in Warsaw Pact countries, to make known their wish to emigrate. While some were granted exit visas, others were prosecuted for this activity under Articles 99,100and219. These articles proscribe contacting orpassing information to foreign powers or organizations ortheir representatives if such activity is damaging to the interests of the GDR They do not concern the transmission of information classified as secret, which is proscribed separately by Article 97 ("espionage"). Amnesty Intemational considers that the texts of Articles 99, 100 and 219 are incompatible with the freedom "to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds regardless of frontiers" (Article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights). It adopted people imprisoned under these articles as prisoners of conscience.
One would-be emigrant- RolfSchaelicke, a physicist from Dresden-received a seven-year sentence on 3 December for "incitement hostile to the state" (Article 106) and "public vilification" (Article 220). The latter charge was apparently brought because he was held to have "vilified" the GDR in stating his reasons for wishing to emigrate. Reportedly the charge of incitement was based partly on the factthat he had lent to friends books considered "hostile to the state", including works by Alexander Solzhenitsyn and Heinrich Boll.
Other would-be emigrants were prosecuted for "association for the pursuit of aims contrary to the law" (Article 218 of the penal code), apparently for gathering in groups to discuss joint initiatives. Any form of association requires state recognition in the GDR and one condition is that associations "correspond to the principles of the socialist order of
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
society in their character and aims". Even informal gatherings risk prosecution under Article 218.
An example was Ramona Philipp, the wife of an imprisoned conscientious objectorto military service who had himself been adopted by Amnesty Intemational as a prisoner of conscience. On 8 March she and five friends, all of whom are understood to have submitted applications to emigrate, metinacafeinBerlin. They went in tum to the Permanent Mission of the FRG, which was close by. Two were arrested that day, and the remaining four shortly afterwards. They were subsequently sentenced to prison terms ranging from 16 to 20 months under Article 218.
Article 218 was also applied to a number of peace activists one of whom was Tim Petersdorf, from Jena, who was arrested at the beginning of the year. He was sentenced in May to 20 months' imprisonment under Articles 218 and 220 ("public vilification"). The charges were apparently brought because he and a number of others had distributed leaflets through letter-boxes criticizing official policies.
The Human Rights Committee in Geneva, set up to monitor compliance with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, considered in July the second periodic report by the GDR on its observance of the Covenant Questions were asked by members of the Committee on a number of issues of concem to Amnesty Intemational including the holding of trials in camera and the practice of imprisoning people for the peaceful exercise of their rights to freedom of expression and to leave their country. With very few exceptions the GDR delegation did not respond to questions on these issues.
Prisoners ofconsciencereleasedduringthe year complained abouta number of aspects of their imprisonment in particular overcrowding in cells and pressure to achieve high work norms with old-fashioned machinery in unhealthy conditions. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed at a number of reports during the year of prisoners being chained to beds orbars in special punishment cells. One former prisoner of conscience reported being punished in this way for 72 hours after disrupting a lecture on current affairs.
As in previous years, political prisoners - including many prisoners of conscience - were released to the FRG in exchange for payment by the FRG Govemment Press reports indicated that in 1984 the number exceeded 2,000, considerably more than in previous years. While welcoming the release of prisoners of conscience Amnesty Intemational sought to remind the GDR of its obligations under intemational law to release such prisoners without conditions.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
