Lebanon
During 1984 Amnesty Intemational was concemed about continuing reports of arbitrary arrests, Auctions, detention without charge or trial, prolonged periods of incommunicado detention, the ill-treatment and torture of detainees, and executions of prisoners. Amnesty Intemational was concemed about reports of such violations committed by govemments, and by certain independent militias linked with govemments and exercising effective control in certain regions of Lebanon.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about human rights violations carried out by the Lebanese Govemment and by the three main independent militias whose leaders were included in the Lebanese
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Govemment of National Unity set up in June 1984: Amal (which is Shi'a based), the Popular SocialistParty(Druzebased) and the Lebanese Forces (a coalition of mainly Maronite Christian militias of which the Phalangists are the largest). Followingapprovalby the LebaneseGovem-ment of National Unity of a Syrian-mediated security plan for extending govemment authority in the country, the Lebanese (govemment) Army succeeded in deploying its forces throughout Beirut in November, and in the northem city of Tripoli in December. However, effective control of East Beirut largely remained with the Phalangists, and that of West Beimt with Amal. At the end of 1984 the Lebanese authorities were still seeking agreement from Christian and Muslim militias on deploying the Lebanese Army along the coastal roads north and south of Beimt The Popular Socialist Party continued to control the Shuf mountains, having set up its own civilian administration there in September 1983.
Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about violations of human rights by the Israeli Defence Forces (IDF) who occupied south Lebanon, from the Awali river south to the Israeli border, and east across the Beka'a valley towards Syria; and about violations by the South Lebanon Army (predominantly Christian but including some Shi'a and Dmze recmits) which was armed, trained and partly financed by the Israeli authorities. By the end of1984 the Israeli and Lebanese authorities were still negotiating terms for an Israeli withdrawal from the south. The rest of the country, from the Beka'a valley and the ' Akkar plain to the north, continued to be under Syria's sphere of mfluence.
Owing to the continuing complex military and political situation in Lebanon and to continued sectarian fighting. Amnesty Intemational was unable to investigate many of its concems in Lebanon,
On 12 August, for the first time, a list of those held by the Lebanese authorities was made public. The list of 764 names was published in the press by a special committee set up by the Lebanese Govemment of National Unity in July to look into the question of "disappeared" people and to determine which were still alive. Most ofthe 764 were reported to be Muslim, and 183 non-Lebanese. Although no charges were published, the press reported that some were accused of violent criminal offences such as murder. Amnesty Intemational believed that there might be political prisoners among them, but did not have information about numbers. The organization was concemed about such prisoners being held for longperiods without charge or trial, in incommunicadodetention in some cases, since no visits by the Intemational Committee ofthe Red Cross (ICRC) had taken place since February 1984 and visits by lawyers and families were not often permitted. A number of releases were reported to have taken place by the end of the year.
Most arrests in Beirut were carried out by the Phalangists and Amal, who in mid-1984 admitted to holding 150 prisoners between them
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
( although there were reports that the true figure was higher). It was reported that these included prisoners taken as hostages, people accused of criminal offences and some of their own members held for disciplinary reasons. Amnesty International was concemed that some of them were political prisoners held outside any legal framework who may have been held for prolonged periods in incommunicado detentioa During 1984 the ICRC was permitted to visit prisoners held by Amal and the Phalangists, although Amnesty Intemational does not know whether all such prisoners were seea The Druze have stated that they hold no political prisoners, but unconfirmed reports dispute this.
In south Lebanon Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed that detainees held by the IDF were still being denied the protection accoided them under internationally accepted standards. In A1 Ansar detention camp up to a thousand Lebanese and Palestinian detainees were deniedthe right to refute any evidence against them; in a numberof interrogation centres run by the Shin Beth (Israeli security forces) detainees were held incommunicado for up to a month; and 121 detainees arrested in south Lebanon, but transferred to Atlit military prison in Israel in November 1983, were subjected to extended incommunicado detentioa (See also entry on Israel and the Occupied Territories.) Amnesty Intemationalwas also concemed aboutreports that the Israeli-supported South Lebanon Army ( SLA) held political detainees in incommunicado detention for long periods.
Amnesty Intemational receivedsome reports of prisoners held by the Syrian forces in Lebanon, but was unable to obtain details.
Amnesty Intemational viewed with concem the widespread practice of prolonged incommunicado detention: in its experience this facilitates ill-treatment Amnesty Intemational received a number of allegations of ill-treatment and torture, but in many cases found it difficult to confirm these. (See also entry on Israel and the Occupied Territories.)
Abductions by rival mOitias continuedthroughout 1984, butit was not always clear who was responsible for an abduction, or whether it was politically motivated Nor were precise figures known for the number of abductions and releases during the year; internal and external sources estimated that between four and six thousand had been abducted since civil war broke out in 1975 and between two and three thousand since June 1982. Muslim militias listed 2,111 abductions by the Phalangists and Lebanese Army since 1982, including 860 Palestinians, and the Lebanese Army named 1,500 abducted by Muslims In the same period.
Relatives of missing abduction victims continued to press the Lebanese authorities for information, although there was growing concem that manyofthe"disappeared" might no longer be alive. The special committee set up by the Lebanese Govemment of National Unity in July to determine the fate of the "disappeared" tried, as a first step, to arrange for the
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
release of hostages held by rival militias. The committee - which included representatives of the Druze, Amal and Lebanese Forces and the Ministers of the Interior and of Education- was assisted by the army and police. Although the militias agreed to exchange the 150 or so hostages they admitted to holding, only about 80, held mostiy by the Phalangists, and some by Amal, had been released by the end of 1984.
During 1984 Amnesty Intemational received reports of executions by non-govemmental forces. Amnesty International, as a matter of principle, condemns the execution of prisoners by anyone, including opposition groups. The Dmze Popular SocialistParty announced in July that it had executed by firing-squad two men for murder, and two men for embezzling party funds and for participating in the Sabra and Chatilla massacres. These verdicts were reportedly passed by special tribunals, and the death warrants signed by the party leader, Walid JumblatL Details of the tribunals and their procedures were not knowa In October the Arab Democratic Party (a pro-Syrian party of Lebanese Alawites based in Tripoli) publicly executed by firing-squad two members of its own party accused of murdering six people. The Amal party executed at least one of its own members who disobeyed orders in 1984. There were also unsubstantiated reports that the Hizballah party (a fundamentalist Shi'a party based in Baalbek in the Beka'a valley) was responsible for executing by hanging 15 people accused of planting a car bomb in the town.
In south Lebanon there were many reports that gunmen beEeved to belong to the Israeli-supported SLA or the National Guard (a small Palestinian militia) executed dozens of suspected leading members of the National Resistance Front (a general term for several groups carrying out armed attacks on the IDF and the SLA). Amnesty Intemational received similar reports oftheNationalResistanceFrontexecutingdozens of Palestinians and Lebanese suspected of collaborating with the Israeli forces.
On 1 October Amnesty Intemational sent a cable to Lebanese President Amin Gemayel expressing concem that on 2 September the Council of Supreme Justice had ratified the death sentences passed on Nazih Sami Shaya and Joseph George Kazazian. They had been sentenced to death on 26 November 1983 on charges of murder and attempted murder. The Amnesty Intemational Report 1984 reported thatthey had beenexecuted in November 1983 buttheorganization later leamed that this was incorrect The Office ofthe Presidentreplied on 13 November that "the President will reach the decision that combines justice and charity and that best serves the interest of the Lebanese people." No information was available regarding their fate at the end of 1984.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
