Cuba
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about long-term political prisoners who were held after expiry of their sentences, and about the treatment which some allegedly received. The organization was also concemed about the imprisonment of actual or possible prisoners of conscience, including individuals reportedly detained for attempting to exercise their right to leave the country. It continued to investigate reports on the imposition of the death penalty.
In January Amnesty Intemational wrote to Vice-President Carlos Rafael Rodriguez about the continuing detention of 19 long-term prisoners who had completed their sentences, in some cases two years previously, but who had not been released Amnesty Intemational was not aware of any new charges or any judicial action to justify their continued detention. The organization also expressed concern at reports of several executions in 1982 and 1983, and sought confirmation of them, but received no response.
The 19 prisoners held after expiry of their sentences were among a group of long-term political prisoners known as plantados, approximately 140 of whom Amnesty Intemational believed to be held at the end of 1984. The plantados are known for their uncompromising opposition to the government, and refusal on political grounds to accept certain prison regulations, such as wearing prison uniforms wom by ordinary criminals. As a result the plantados were reportedly subjected to harsh prison conditions, particularly in Boniato prison in the east of the country. After a hunger-strike in 1982 in Boniato prison, it was alleged that the majority of plantados were refused visitors and correspondence (some had reportedly been denied these privileges since 1979); exercise and recreation periods were suspended; prisoners were confined most of the
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
day to their cells, and a high wall was said to have been constructed close to the maximum security wing where the plantados were being held, cutting out the light from their cells. This regime was reportedly eased towards the end of 1984 when some plantados were said to have been granted limited rights to visits and correspondence. Information from recendy released prisoners was consistent with previous reports received by the organization in indicating a long-term pattern of harassment and ill-treatment of the plantados. This included occasional arbitrary denial of food and/or water for several days at a time and frequent searches. The extent of medical care seemed to vary with the conduct of the prisoners.
On 28 June, 26 plantados, including 17 of the 19 mentioned in the organization's January letter, were released during a visit by a US politician, the Reverend Jesse Jackson, and allowed to leave Cuba with him. Another plantado, Jorge Vails, who had completed his sentence on 8 May, was released on 21 June. Amnesty Intemational had asked the govemment on 25 May for clarification of his situatioa
On 3 July Amnesty Intemational welcomed the releases but expressed concem that two long-term prisoners - Santos Mirabal Rodriguez and Femando Villalón Moreira - had not been released despite having served their sentences. The organization later leamed that Femando Villalón was free, but, at the end of 1984, Santos Mirabal Rodriguez was believed to be still held in Boniato prison. He was said to have been arrested in 1966 when still in his early teens, and accused of anti-govemment activities. He was sentenced to imprisonment until his mayoría de edad (age of majority) but by the end of 1984 had spent approximately 18 years in prison. Several prisoners released on 28 June said that Santos Mirabal Rodriguez had been told he was to be freed with the others, but just before they were transported from Boniato to the airport the prison authorities recalled him, and the bus left without him.
Amnesty Intemational believed that at least two other plantados, whose 20-year sentences expired during 1984, remained in detention at the end of the year. The two were: José Soca Domínguez, held in Combinado del Este prison in Havana, and Pastor Macurán González, held in Boniato prisoiL There continued to be concem for three plantados - Silvino Rodriguez Barrientos, Guillermo Casasús Toledo and Ramón Güín Díaz - who, according to former prisoners, had not been seen since being taken from their cells in 1983. By the end of 1984 no news of them had been obtained by the organization.
Amnesty Intemational continued to work for the release of prisoner of conscience Dr Ricardo Bofill Pagés, who continued to be held in Combinado del Este prisca The organization believed that he was detained in September 1983 because of his contacts with foreign joumalists and because of his known opposition to the govemment It
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
was concemed by reports from former prisoners that he had been confined to a punishment cell for several weeks.
Amnesty Intemational continued to investigate the case of Gustavo Arcos Bergnes. A former Cuban Ambassador to Belgium, Gustavo Arcos was reportedly arrested in 1981 and sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment for trying to leave Cuba illegally. He had apparently made repeated attempts to obtain permission to leave the country tojoin his family. One of these attempts was reportedly in 1981 when his son, then living in the USA, was in a coma after an accident
Amnesty Intemational was seeking confirmation of allegations that several other people were in prison after being convicted of trying to leave Cuba illegally.
The organization was investigating the cases of Elizardo Sánchez Santa Cmz, Edmigio López Castillo, Luis Ruiz and Orestes Bautista González, who were all reportedly imprisoned for voicing opposition to the govemment
Amnesty Intemational was imable to confirm reports of executions in 1984, and was concerned by the lack of response from the govemment to inquiries about the imposition of the death penalty in previous years.
