Libya
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about renewed official calls for "physical liquidation of enemies of the revolution" and the subsequent killings of 10 Libyan citizens, eight in Libya and two abroad (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1980 to 1984). It was also concemed about the continued imprisonment of 79 prisoners of conscience; the detention without trial of political suspects; proceedings in trials before Basic People's Congresses which lacked fundamental legal safeguards and which resulted in executions; the systematic torture and ill-treatment of political and other suspects by the intelligence services and by revolutionary committees during interrogation; and the death penalty. These concems were detailed in the document Violations of Human Rights in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya published in November.
After a reported attack on the headquarters of Colonel Mu'ammar Gaddafi at Bab A1 Azizya Barracks in Tripoli on 8 May, official calls for the physical liquidation of "enemies of the revolution" were renewed These calls, by Colonel Gaddafi and popular bodies including Revolutionary People's Committees and Basic People's Congresses, were relayed by Tripoli radio and the Libyan news agency, JANA, and were published in the official newspaper, Al ZahafAl Akhdar (The Green March). Following the 8 May attack hundreds of people were arrested on suspicion of opposition to the government, and eight people were publicly hanged between 3 and 10 June. They were found guilty of being members of the Muslim Brotherhood and "agents of America". Several were shown making confessions and then being hanged on Libyan television. Two prisoners - al-Assadeq Hamed Shuweihdi and Othman Ali al-Zarti - were alleged to have been executed within an hour of their arrest
Amnesty International was concemed about the proceedings of the Basic People's Congresses which condemned the eight prisoners to death and carried out their executions. Although the circumstances of sentencing remained unclear, it appeared that, in at least some cases during emergency sessions of the Basic People's Congresses, a confession was read out, the death sentence confirmed, and execution carried out immediately. Amnesty International was concerned at the summary nature of the proceedings; that, as far as was known, the tribunals were composed of members of the revolutionary committees rather than the judiciary; that defendants were not represented by
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
defence lawyers; and that there was no possibility of appeal. On 13 June Amnesty Intemational expressed its concem to Colonel Gaddafi about the summary executions and the apparent implementation of a policy of political killings. No reply was received
The program of physical liquidation extended beyond Libya itself. On 13 June a Libyan-born shopkeeper, Manolis Hiladakis, was shot and wounded in Athens, reportedly by a Libyan. Manolis Hiladakis had left Libya in 1970 and was apparently seen distributing copies of an anti-Gaddafi magazine before the attempt on his life. On 4 July two Libyan students alleged to be opponents of Colonel Gadaffi were found murdered in their apartment in Athens. The body of Abdul Moneim al-Zawi, aged 21, was reported to have been found with bullet wounds and strangulation marks. The other student, Attia al-Fartas, aged 20, had been shot in the chest On 16 November Tripoli radio announced that the former Libyan Prime Minister, Abdul-Hamid al-Bakkush, who had been living in exile in Egypt and who led an opposition group, had been killed The broadcast reportedly stated that "in implementation of the resolution of the Basic Peoples' Congresses which formed suicide squads to liquidate the enemies of the revolution... internally and extemally, the revolutionary force has carried out the sentence of execution...". However, the next day the Egyptian authorities announced that the planned execution had been foiled and that four men had been detained in connection with the incident Abdul-Hamid al-Bakkush subsequendy appeared at a news conference.
During 1984 Amnesty International continued to work for the release of 79 adopted prisoners of conscience and learned of the release of two of them. Dr Muhammad al-Mufti, who was released from prison in February, had been arrested in 1973 and sentenced to life imprisonment in 1977 for belonging to an illegal political party. Amnesty International also learned, in August, of the release of Muhammad al-Ghandur, who was one of 11 Libyans arrested in Febmary 1973 following demonstrations in Benghazi. He had been released on bail three months later but rearrested in April 1976.
Many adopted prisoners of conscience were under sentence of death or servinglife sentences, and many were said tobe suffering from ill health and severe depression. They included people charged with membership of illegal political parties {the Islamic Liberation Party, the Marxist Party and the Muslim Brotherhood), as well as 17 writers and journalists accused of participating in illegal political activities under Law 71 of 1972.
Amnesty International received reports of hundreds of arrests in a clampdown on government opponents after the reported attack of 8 May on the Bab al-Aziziya Barracks. Although many were reportedly
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
released, by the end of 1984 the organization had the names of 150 people arrested in the wake of the attack who were said to be still held Amnesty International was unable to obtain detailed information about the grounds for their detention, but many were held because of their alleged connections with "enemies of the revolution". Amnesty Intemational received reports that some ofthese prisoners were tried in November and was seeking further information.
As in previous years Amnesty Intemational received frequent and consistent allegations of torture and ill-treatment Reported methods of torture included beating and assaults on all parts of the body - in particular^a/a^a, beating on the soles of the feet- electric shocks and suspension from the ceiling by hands or feet Torture was said to be inflicted mainly to obtain confessions and information from political detainees. However, Amnesty International also received allegations that prisoners charged with ordinary criminal offences had been tortured Reports frequently referred to torture during incommunicado detention; this often lasted for long periods in centres administered by the revolutionary committees and the intelligence services in Tripoli and Benghazi.
Amnesty International received information that many of those arrested after the reported attack in M ay were tortured during interrogation. Several were said to have beenshown on Libyan televisionmaking confessions, their faces and hands bearing marks of torture, including Abdulmoneim Qasim al-Najjar from Tripoli. He reportedly died under torture in the last week of May and his body was said to have been returned to his family. He had recentiy completed a doctorate in the USA before retuming to Libya in January 1984.
A 52-year-old Norwegian seafarer, Bjom Pedersen, was also said to have died under torture in the custody of a revolutionary committee between 13 and 16 May. He had been taken to a Tripoli customs house for interrogation while the Norwegian cargo ship was held in Tripoli harbour on suspicion that crew members were spying and dmg-trafficking. The ship was only allowed to leave on 17 July after a representative of the shipping company signed a document saying that Bjom Pedersen had committed suicide and that the company had paid costs of about US $277,000. According to crew members of the ship who were interviewed by Amnesty Intemational in Norway in December 1984, and to statements made by them to a Norwegian court of inquiry in August, Bjom Pedersen had been beaten to death. On 16 May tlte ship's captain was informed by Libyan authorities that he had died from injuries sustained afterjumping from a carbutfive days later the captain was told by a Libyan official that he had died after jumping into the ship's hold. The ship's first mate said that he had also been severely beaten about the head stomach and kidneys during interrogation, and
vili
Amnesty International Report 1985
was threatened with the same treatment as Bjom Pedersen unless he cooperated
Libya signed a treaty of federation with Morocco on 13 August and a subsequent agreement on security and free movement. Amnesty Intemational wrote to both governments expressing concern about two provisions of the agreement In the letter to Colonel Gaddafi on 29 October, Amnesty Intemational noted that under Article 6 the Moroccans in Libya could be forcibly repatriated to Morocco, where they could be persecuted for their political beliefs, and Article 8 banned all political activity "against the other side". Amnesty International expressed the fear that both articles might lead to the persecution of individuals for legitimate and non-violent political activity. No reply had been received from the Libyan authorities by the end of the year.
Libya retained the death penalty for numerous offences, many of a political nature not involving the use or advocacy of violence. During the last 10 years, the number of offences punishable by death has increased dramatically.
In addition to the eight executions in June, Amnesty International leamed of two further executions. On 16 April two students in their twenties, Salim al-Madani and Rashid Mansur al-Ka'abar, were reportedly hanged in public at al-Fatah University before thousands of students. The exact nature of the charges against them, and whether or not they were tried before they were executed, was not known.
In April Amnesty Intemational submitted information about its concerns under the UN procedure for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations. Amnesty International stated that the evidence revealed "a consistent pattem of gross violations of human rights" warranting UN investigation.
