Namibia
Amnesty International was concerned about the detention without trial of suspected opponents of the continued South African administration of Namibia - including prisoners of conscience, and about allegations of torture and ill-treatment of political detainees. More than 120 detainees, most of whom had been held without charge or trial since 1978, were released as were at least 15 political prisoners sentenced to long prison terms in 1968 after a trial which did not meet internationally recognized standards. However, there were many new politically motivated arrests and several people arrested in 1983 were held wittat charge or trial throughout 1984. Some former uncharged detainees continued to have their freedom of movement and association limited by administrative restriction orders originally imposed when they were released years earlier. Amnesty Intemational also remained concemed about the use of the death penalty and about allegations of extrajudicial killings of civilians.
There was continued conflict between South African security forces and nationalist guerrillas belonging to the South West Africa People's Organisation (SWAPO) and both sides accused the other of killing civilians. There were also renewed intemational negotiations for a settlement on Namibia but there was still no agreement by the end of 1984.
Amnesty Intemational received reports of new politically motivated detentions throughout the year. These occurred particularly in the northern districts of Ovamboland and Kavango, where more than half
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
the population lives and where SWAPO guerrillas were most active, but suspected opponents of continued South African administration were also arrested in Windhoek, the capital, and elsewhere. Those detained included Asser Lihongo, Dean of the Evangelical Lutheran Ovambo-Kavango Church (ELOK) in Kavango, who was arrested in early May with his wife and daughter, and other church ministers and evangelists. He was held incommunicado and without charge for about four weeks. His wife and daughter were held uncharged for more than two weeks.
Proclamation AG.9 of 1977 constituted the legal basis for most detentions. This administrative decree empowers all members of the security forces within designated " security districts" (which encompass most of the northern half of Namibia) to arrest any person suspected of either committing or having knowledge of an offence or an intended offence. Those arrested may be detained incommunicado and without charge in any place'' deemed suitable" by those making the arrest for up to 30 days. Further indefinite incommunicado detention without charge or trial may then be authorized by the Administrator-General, the senior representative of the South African Government in Namibia. No official statistics were released relating to the number of such detentions: indeed, it appeared that security force personnel were not required to keep records of those they detained. In a court ruling delivered in April, it was confirmed that there were no regulations governing the treatment and conditions of imprisonment of detainees held under Proclamation AG.9.
This court ruling followed a legal application brought in November 1983 by relatives of Reverend Heikki Ausiku, an ELOK pastor, Gideon Nestor and Severinus Siteketa following their detention under Proclamation AG.9. Their relatives sought an urgent court order restraining members of the security police or of Koevoet (Crowhaf), a special police counter-insurgency unit, from assaulting or ill-treatingthe three men. In support of the application a number of sworn statements by former detainees were laid before the court alleging prolonged solitary confinement, electric shock torture and beatings, and indicating the existence of at least one secret interrogation camp to which detainees had been taken and tortured. The judgment was significant, although it was delayed until some months after the release of the three detainees on whose behalf the application had been made. It declared that detainees held under Proclamation AG.9 should not be held in solitary confinement and should be permitted adequate exercise in the open air.
Severinus Siteketa was subsequently redetained in late April and held incommunicado, reportedly in solitary confinement, until mid-August when he was again released uncharged.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Another legal action on behalf of detainees held under Proclamation AG. 9 was brought before the Windhoek Supreme Court in March. The action, which was similar to a habeas corpus application, was brought by the bishops of the Anglican, Roman Catholic and ELOK churches and 20 relatives of detainees held in a special military camp in the Mariental district It was brought on behalf of some of the 120 or more detainees at the camp, many whose cases had been taken up for investigation by Amnesty Intemational. Most of the detainees had been held without trial since May 1978 when they were forcibly abducted from Angola by South African forces (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1983 and 1984). It was alleged in court that the abduction of the detainees from Angola had breached intemational law and that they had been held unlawfully for almost six years.
The South African authorities' response to the action was unprecedented. On 27 April the Minister of Justice, acting with the approval of the State President, issued a certificate under a provision of the Defence Actwhich effectively removedthe Windhoek Supreme Court's jurisdiction over the case. This stated that it would not be "in the national interest" for the proceedings to continue because, in the opinion of the Minister of Justice, they concerned acts carried out "in good faith" in connection with "the prevention or suppression of terrorism in an operational area". The authorities' action was widely condemned in legal circles but upheld by the Windhoek Supreme Court at a hearing in June. However, in late May more than 50 of the Mariental detainees were released unconditionally, including all but five of the 3 7 on whose behalf legal action had been taken. Amnesty Intemational welcomed their release and called for the remaining detainees to be freed as well. In October all but one of those still held were released unconditionally.
Earlier, the South African authorities released some 17 long-term political prisoners sentenced after an unfair political trial in 1968, all of whom had been held in the maximum security prison on Robben Island. Herman Toivo ja Toivo, one of the founders of S WAPO, was one of two prisoners freed in March. The other 15 were freed in May.
Amnesty International remained concerned about allegations of torture and ill-treatment of political detainees and by the South African authorities' failure to take action against those allegedly responsible. In response to its appeals for an impartial inquiry into torture allegations, the organization was informed by the Administrator-General that existing mechanisms ofinquiry operated by the military andpolicewere sufficient in his view. He said that all security force personnel were required to acknowledge in writing the illegality of assaulting or mistreating civilians and the possibility that such action could lead to prosecution. A very different picture, however, was given in a memorandum submitted by the local South West A frica B ar Council in M ay to a
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
commission of inquiry into security legislation headed by a Supreme Court judge. The Bar Council drew attention to a series of court cases concerning allegations of torture, assault and killing of civiUans by members of the security forces and asserted that there were others which had been prevented from going to court because they concerned acts which the authorities considered to have been committed "in good faith''. Both the Defence Act and Proclamation AG. 9 of 1977 contain provisions guaranteeing immunity against civil or criminal prosecution for such acts.
During 1984 no action was taken to prosecute a security police officer who, in June 1983, was found by the Windhoek Supreme Court to have been responsible both for the death from torture of a political detainee in 1980 and for attempting to cover it up. Indeed, the officer concerned was reported still to be active in the security police and to have been promoted. In another case, an inquest in October 1983 attributed the death of Jona Hamukwaya, a political detainee, to unlawful assault by Koevoet personnel, but by the end of 1984 the authorities had apparently still not identified and brought to justice those responsible. However, they did bring charges under the South African Police Act against Roman Catholic Archbishop Denis Hurley who had publicly criticized Jona Hamukwaya's death and accused the Koevoet unit of atrocities. He was remanded in October for trial in 1985.
In February Hans Röhr, the leader of the Namibian Christian Democratic Party, publicized developments in the case of Ndara Kapitango, whose arm had to be amputated after he was severely burnt by two soldiers	Amnesty International Report 1984).
He stated that those responsible had merely been fined 50 Rand (approximately US $24) by a military tribunal and that Ndara Kapitango himself had received no compensation. Hans Röhr also made new allegations of beatings and killings of civilians in Kavango by security forces.
There was continued concern about reports of extrajudicial executions but Amnesty Intemational was not able to attribute responsibility in individual cases. The Bar Council, in its submission to the commission of inquiry into security legislation, cited evidence that Koevoet and other personnel were indoctrinated to be "programmed killers" and were paid kopgeld, "bounty money", for every suspected SWAPO guerrilla killed. Such practices apparently resulted in a number of extrajudicial executions of civilians. For example, in January it was reported at an inquest that Leonard Kamati, an 18-year-old school student, hadbeenfounddeadfrombulletwounds inDecember 1982 six days after he was detained by-K'o^voe/personnel. They said he had been released the day before his death and must have been killed by SWAPO
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
guerrillas. In late August Hans Röhr called for an urgent inquiry into alleged extrajudicial killings of civilians by security forces in Kavango. He alleged that in one incident five adults and a child were killed when security forces destroyed their home near Nepara The authorities stated that the allegations would be investigated by a military board of inquiry butno outcome was knowntoAmnesty International by the end of 1984.
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about the death penalty. The sentence imposed in 1983 on Jonas Paulus, a member of Koevoet, for a series of murders (see Amnesty International Report 1984) was confirmed by the South African Appeal Court in September but it was not known if he or anyone else was executed
In August Amnesty Intemational submitted information on its concems in Namibia to the UN Ad Hoc Working Group of Experts on Southern Africa and in November the organization also submitted information to the Fourth Committee of the UN General Assembly.
