Gabon
Amnesty International was concerned about the continuing imprisonment of 18 prisoners of conscience and three other political prisoners who may have been prisoners of conscience. However, by the end of the year 10 of the prisoners of conscience had been released as a result of presidential acts of clemency, and one other was due for release on expiry of sentence. Amnesty International was also concerned about reports of unfair trials and ill-treatment of prisoners.
President El-Hadj Omar Bongo announced three measures of clemency to mark political anniversaries. In March he reduced the prison terms of 17 prisoners of conscience by three years and as a result Louis-Marie Aubame was released. All 17 had been convicted of threatening state security in 1982 after a trial which Amnesty Intemational considered to be unfair (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984). In December two further presidential decrees led to the release of nine others, including Luc Bengono-Nsi and Moubamba Nziengui, who were both suffering from psychological disorders which were apparently not treated in prison. However, some of the nine continued to be restricted after their release. Among the remaining prisoners of conscience at the end of 1984 were Michel Ovono, a mining engineer, and Jean-Pierre Nzoghe-Nguema, a former rector of Omar Bongo University, who were serving sentences of up to 12 years' hard labour. Another prisoner of conscience - Serge Edouard Etsine - was due for release after serving a three-year sentence imposed in December 1981, but Amnesty Intemational was unable to confirm that he had been freed. He had reportedly been convicted by the tribunal correctionnel de Libreville, Libreville Criminal Court, for writing a document criticizing a government minister.
Amnesty Intemational continued to investigate the cases of three other prisoners who may have been prisoners of conscience. It asked the authorities for further information about Bonaventure Bidza, reportedly sentenced to eight years' imprisonment by the State Security Court in 1981, but received no substantive reply. Amnesty International had received reports that he was convicted because he had written a magazine article considered subversive by the government
In April Amnesty Intemational published a document on its concerns in Gaboa These included the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience; reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners; and unfair trials. The document contained detailed notes by an Amnesty Intemational
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
observer on the November 1982 trial before the Cour de siirete de I'Etat, State iSicurity Court, of 37 people accused of threatening state security. The 37 were alleged to have belonged to an illegal group which criticized the government and sought to change Gabon's constitution. Amnesty Intemational considered that the proceedings fell short of internationally recognized standards for a fair trial, particularly because little or no relevant evidence was produced by the prosecution. For example, in the case of Jean-Marc Ekoh, who was still imprisoned at the end of 1984, no evidence was produced to support the charge of threatening state security. Amnesty International believed that the people convicted in this trial were prisoners of conscience imprisoned for exercising their right to freedom of expression, irrespective of whether or not proceedings at their trial met internationally accepted standards. However, Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to review the structure and functioning of the State Security Court, and to review the case of any other prisoners convicted by the court in previous years. It also continued to call for the release of all remaining prisoners of conscience convicted inNovember 1982. Amnesty International urged the authorities to investigate reports that prisoners had been ill-treated or tortured. It also urged the abolition of the death penalty.
In April Amnesty Intemational submitted information about its concerns in Gabon under the UN procedure for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations. The submission urged the UN to take all appropriate steps to redress the cited violations.
Gambia
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the detention without charge or trial of suspected opponents of the government, some of whom were believed to be prisoners of conscience, and about the continued passing of death sentences.
Amnesty Intemational continued to appeal for the release of seven people who had been arrested in late October 1983, apparently on suspicion of having published or distributed a political pamphlet criticizing govem-ment policies. This anonymous pamphlet, titled The Voice of the Future, was reported to have appeared first in the late 1970s and thereafter to have circulated periodically until an abortive attempt to overthrow
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
the government by force in July 1981. The seven detainees included Samuel Sarr, a teacher, Amie Sillah, a health inspector, and Halifa Sallah, a sociologist. In early April six of the detainees were charged under the Societies Act of 1970 with having "managed or assisted in managing" an unlawful society and with publishing and circulating The Voice of the Future. These offences, upon conviction, would have incurred up to five years' imprisonment. However on 25 April, after brief legal proceedings, the charges were withdrawn and the six defendants were reported to have been released on 12 May.
Momodou Saho, the one person arrested in October 1983 who was not charged in April, continued to be detained without charge and was considered by Amnesty International to be a prisoner of conscience. The organization made renewed appeals for his release. He was freed on 27 July, apparently on the orders of President Dawda Jawara
Earlier, on 3 July, the authorities released six other uncharged detainees who had been held since November 1983. They were all members of the security forces and were reportedly arrested as a resuh of continuing investigations into offences committed during the coup attempt of July 1981. They included two gendarmerie officers - Chief Inspector Baha Shylon and Inspector Seydou Juwara - a police sergeant, Lang Kinteh, and three members of the Pioneer Unit in Farafenni. Amnesty International had called on the authorities to bring them to trial promptly or release them.
In May Amnesty International received information that over 25 people had been arrested in the preceding weeks for allegedly distributing leaflets which criticized government restrictions on trade union activity. They were all believed to have been subsequently released uncharged, in some cases after some weeks in detention. They included several students, clerical workers and agricultural technicians.
There were further trials during 1984 before the Special Division of the Supreme Court in connection with offences allegedly committed during the failed coup attempt in July 1981. All those on trial were defended by lawyers and no procedural irregularities were reported to Amnesty International. In all, 26 death sentences were imposed between January and the end of April 1984, bringing the total since the trials began in late 1981 to 63. In February, 27 death sentences which had earlier been confirmed on appeal were commuted to terms of imprisonment on presidential order. During the year, the Court of Appeal confirmed the death sentences imposed on 25 prisoners, but quashed eight others commuting three to prison terms and ordering the release of five prisoners. By the end of 1984 none of the prisoners sentenced to death by the Special Division of the Supreme Court had been executed but the presidential decision as to whether to commute the remaining 25 death sentences confirmed on appeal was still awaited.
Amnesty International Report 1985
