The Philippines
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about continuing reports of human rights violations by members of the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) and paramilitary units under their command. The govemment rarely initiated impartial investigations into such alleged violations which included extrajudicial executions, torture and ill-treatment of detainees, and "disappearances". Amnesty Intemational was also concerned about long delays in trial proceedings and about the use of orders issued by the President under emergency powers to arrest and detain people - including prisoners of conscience - on political grounds without reference to the judiciary. It was also concemed by the continued imposition of death sentences.
During 1984 Amnesty Intemational worked on behalf of about 50 prisoners whose cases it had taken up for adoption as prisoners of conscience or for investigation, including trade unionists, church workers and rural organizers. Among the adopted prisoners of conscience were several organizers for the independent trade union confederation Kilusang Mayo Uno (KMU), First of May Movement who had been arrested with othertradeunionistsin August and September 1982. On 1 January 1984, 14 of these prisoners were released. Amnesty Intemational called for the release of Crispin Beltran, Simplicio Anino, Jose Británico, Lauro Pabit and Milleth Soriano who all remained in detention throughout 1984 except Crispin Beltran, who escaped on 21 November. Amnesty Intemational took upfor investigation the cases of nine other trade unionists arrested in 1984.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the continued detention of a number of church workers. Cari Gaspar, a lay church worker arrested in March 1Amnesty Intemational Reportl984), was still in detention in Davao City at the end of 1984. His trial had opened in July 1983 but proceeded only slowly. He was charged with incitement to rebellion and accused of having taught rebel groups. Bishops, members of religious orders, and church workers testified that he had been engaged in church work on the dates in question.
On I Febmary, Amnesty Intemational appealed for the release of
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
three priests-Fathers Brian Gore, NiallO'Brian, and Vicente Dangan - and six lay workers from Kabankalan, Negros Occidental. All had been held in Bacolod City Jail charged with murdering the former mayor of Kabankalan and other offences. The detainees had been active in Basic Christian Communities {Kristianong Katilingban), Catholic community organizations. The trial of the "Negros Nine", as the defendants came to be known, opened on 7 February. On 24 May, defence lawyers submitted affidavits which included testimonies that all nine were elsewhere at the time of the murder and on 3 July the charges were dismissed and the prisoners released.
On several occasions Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to initiate independent and impartial investigations into allegations of human rights abuses, particularly reports of extrajudicial executions of civilians by members of the armed forces and by paramilitary units reportedly under their command in areas where insurgent forces were active. In one incident on 17 March seven young farmers "disappeared" in Tungao, near Butuan City in northern Mindanao. Witnesses said they saw them in the custody of soldiers of the 36th Infantry Battalion, but relatives were unable to obtain any information. After the detachment moved camp some weeks later, seven headless bodies were exhumed from a shallow grave in the camp. Although the mutilation of the bodies made identification difficult, one of the "disappeared" was identified by his clothes. On 15 May Amnesty International appealed to the government to initiate an inquiry.
Conflict between the armed forces and the insurgent New People's Army (NPA) intensified in the period around the elections to the National V?iv\\2Ss\Qnt{Batasang Pambansa) on 14 May. On election day 11 people from the hamlet of Langoni, Negros Occidental, were stopped by members of the Philippine Constabulary (PC) a few hours after voting, apparently on suspicion of being NPA members. They were marched, their hands bound, through the village of Inayawan to the headquarters of the 338th Company of the PC, where an eyewitness said they were beaten and kicked by officers. They were all reportedly then taken to a nearby field where nine of them were shot dead. The following day, the nine bodies were returned to Langoni by truck; several reportedly bore marks of torture. The fate of the two others arrested that day was still unknown at the end of 1984. On 31 May, one day after local residents testified before a military commission investigating the case, the eye-witness was charged with murder. Residents subsequently became unwilling to testify so that, although criminal proceedings were started, charges against the PC officers were later dropped because of lack of evidence.
In October 1983 Amnesty Intemational set forth criteria for investigations of alleged human rights violations after the assassination
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
of opposition leader Benigno Aquino on 21 August 1983 (seeA/nnesiy Intemational Report 1984). An official commission of inquiry into his death led by former appellate judge Corazon Agrava finished in October 1984, with two separate reports leading to the indictment of 25 military personnel and one civiliaa In a letter of 20 November Amnesty Intemational welcomed the conclusion of this inquiry, which appeared to meet the criteria for impartiality and effectiveness, and urged the govemment to establish similar inquiries into other, less well-publicized, cases. The organization drew attention to several alleged extrajudicial executions in the province of Misamis Occidental. In one case a church worker from Lopez Jaena, Julian Bonane, his wife and three children were killed on 17 March, allegedly by a member of the PC and four members of a paramilitary organization known to have links with the AFP, the Integrated Civilian Home Defence Forces. A parish priest attempting to investigate the killings was reported to have been charged with interfering with witnesses.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports of people accused of subversive political activity being arrested and detained under emergency powers retained by President Marcos after the lifting of martial law in 1981. These arrests and detentions were usually validated either by a Presidential Committee Order (PCO) or by a Preventive Detention Action(PDA). PDAs replaced PCOs in August 1983. The PDA allows the detention without trial of alleged subversives for indefinitely renewable one-year periods. Some prisoners were detained under such orders after being acquitted, orgainingcourtorders allowing their release. One such case, which was taken up by Amnesty International for investigation, was that of Aristides Sarmiento, a researcher whose work was aimed at helping coconut farmers. He was arrested in October 1982 and on 15 March 1984 was acquitted of subversion. ThejudgedruledthatAristides Sarmiento andhis wife, who had also been detained briefly, had been exercising their constitutional right of freedom of expression to criticize government policies. Nevertheless, Aristides Sarmiento continued to be detained under a PCO. A petition for habeas corpus was submitted on his behalf on 14 May, and he was released only on 11 July.
Fidel Agcaoili, detained since 12 May 1974 on charges of rebellion, was sentenced on 5 July 1984 by Special Military CommissionNo. 1 to a prison term of between eight and 10 years. The Commission decided that the time already spent in detention was to be deducted from his sentence, so he became eligible for release. However, he was not released and on 31 August Amnesty Intemational asked the authorities to make public the reasons. Two days after a petition for habeas corpus was filed on Fidel Agcaoili's behatf on22 October, President Marcos ordered his release.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Amnesty International received regular reports of the torture and ill-treatment of detainees who had been arrested on charges of subversion. Many detainees were reported to have been taken to undisclosed and unauthorized interrogation centres known as "safehouses" where interrogation by members of the armed forces intelligence agencies was reportedly accompanied by torture. In December Amnesty International called on the govemment to investigate a number of such allegations, among them the case of five trade unionists - Cesar Bristol, Romeo Castillo, DaniloGarcia, MsHerminialbarraandFernandoReyes. All organizers with the KMU or its affiliates, they were arrested early on 22 July, theday before a planned mass rally in Manila. They weretakento the Military Intelligence and Security Group (MISG) headquarters in CampBagongDiwa, Taguig, Metro Manila, where they were reported to have been held incommunicado for interrogatioa They later alleged that they were tortured there with beatings, cigarette bums and electric shocks. Evidence of injuries suffered during their detention was reportedly submitted at a subsequent court hearing.
Allegations of torture have most commonly involved suspected members of the NPA, the armed wing of the Communist Party of the Philippines. One such case was that of Ruben Alegre who was arrested on 26 August A police statement accused him of being a commander of an NPA Uquidation squad and responsible for the killing in May of Brigadier-General Tomas Karingal, commander of the Quezon City police. He was reportedly held incommunicado for several days at the MISG headquarters in Camp Bagong Diwa He later alleged that during this time he was given electric shocks to his genitals, suspended by his arms and beaten and nearly drowned. A medical report submitted to the Supreme Court noted multiple healed cuts and bruises on his body.
Although judicial executions have been rare in recent years, death sentences continue to be reported Several hundred prisoners remained under sentence of death pending a review of their sentences. On 4 December Eduardo Olaguer, Reynaldo Maclang, and Esther and Othoniel Jimenez, allegedly involved in a plot to assassinate members of the govemment in 1979, were sentenced to death by a military court. In appealing on 7 December for a commutation of these and all other outstanding death sentences, Amnesty Intemational called on President Marcos to support a bill before the National Assembly to abolish the death penalty.
In April Amnesty Intemational submitted information about its concerns in the Philippines to the UN underthe procedure for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations. Amnesty International stated that the evidence revealed a "consistent pattem of gross violations" of human rights warranting UN investigation.
	hi
	
: ^ ■ 1	
	
	
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
