Burundi
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the arrest and detention without charge or trial of suspected opponents of the govemment and about the imprisonment of people suspected of infringing new regulations restricting religious freedom and activities.
In July, President Jean-Baptiste Bagaza announced an amnesty for convicted prisoners, which was extended to some political detainees whose long-term detention without charge or trial had been of concem to Amnesty Intemational. They included prisoner of conscience Gaspard Karenzo, a former govemment minister detained since November 1982, who was arrested shortly before elections for the national assembly, in which he had been expected to stand, and detained without charge on orders of the security police. He was apparently never told the reason for his detention.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
The organization was concerned also about the detention without charge of a number of students and teachers whose cases were taken up for investigation. They were arrested in February when the authorities apparently suspected that they were organizing a strike for higher student grants. They are believed to have been released in July.
In March the Minister of the Interior, Lieutenant Colonel Charles Kazatsa, issued a document regulating meetings and religious activities to the country's 15 provincial governors. It banned religious instruction and activity during the working week and ordered all public religious services to be confined to Saturday afternoons, Sundays and public holidays. Prayer meetings in private houses were banned The Minister also directed certain religious symbols, such as crucifixes, to be removed from public places. Restrictions were placed on how religious groups could use their funds and on how far they could become involved in social and economic issues. For example, the Christian churches had to obtain govemment authorization before participating in rural development projects.
Between April and July at least 30 people were detained or placed under house arrest for opposing or infi-inging these restrictions. They included clergy and lay members ofChristian churches. Most were held for a few days only, but some were detained without charge or trial for almost two months.
In April lay members ofvariouschurcheswere arrestedfor allegedly attending religious services during the week. Then several Roman Catholic priests were arrested after making statements which the authorities interpreted as criticism of the new regulations. Among them was Abbé Edouard Kirombo, a Roman Catholic priest in Ruyigi province. He was placed under house arrestformorethan a month after delivering a sermon which the authorities regarded as subversive during a service at which a crucifix was moved, in accordance with the new regulations, fi"om outside the church to within it.
Abbé Pierre-Claver Niyorugira, Vicar General of the diocese of Ngozi, was arrested on 11 June and detained uncharged for seven weeks. He had tried to arrange financial assistance for the wife of a common law prisoner, an action which was apparently considered an infringement of the ban on unauthorized participation in social and economic affairs. He was released at the end of July during the ruling party's congress.
After the July releases Amnesty International learned of no further arrests in connection with the restrictions on religious activities. However, in September it issued a six-page document summarizing its concerns about the recent arrests and urged the govemment not to establish restrictions on religious activities which could lead to imprisonment for the non-violent exercise of human rights.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
