Iraq
The main concerns of Amnesty Intemational continued to be the widespread arbitrary arrests of suspected opponents ofthe govemment some of whom might have been prisoners of conscience, and their prolonged detention without charge or trial in the custody of the security forces; the routine torture and ill-treatment of detainees; the increase in the number of offences punishable by death, and the large number of executions, including executions for political offences.
Amnesty Intemational did not have sufficient information to gauge the full extent of political imprisonment in Iraq. However, reports
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
received during 1984 indicated that at least several hundred people were detained for political reasons. They included members of the Kurdish Democratic Party, the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan and al-Da'wa al-Islamiyya, Islamic Call; other critics of the government; conscientious objectors to military service; relatives of army deserters allegedly taken as hostages; and individuals refusing to collaborate with the secret service, among whom were said to be a number of foreign workers and refugees.
In one case, over 150 Assyrians were reportedtohave been arrested in mid-August by security forces and detained in prisons in Baghdad They were allegedly arrested for demanduig"national and equal rights'' and for urging the govemment to cease "its policy of wiping out the Assyrian community in Iraq". At the end of October Amnesty International received the names of 48 individuals said to be among those arrested, including soldiers, engineers, university students and technicians. None had reportedly been charged or tried by the end of 1984 and Amnesty Intemational was seeking further information.
In 1984, as in previous years, Amnesty Intemational was concerned about allegations of torture and ill-treatment of detainees by the security forces. Political suspects were alleged to be tortured routinely, most often immediately after arrest and during interrogation in the pre-trial period, when they were held incommunicado. Many detainees were appare ntly tortured to extract confe ssions and information, others were tortured to force them to renounce their political affiliations.
Amnesty International repeatedly expressed its concem to the authorities about the torture and ill-treatment of detainees, and drew attention to the recommendations in its May 1983 memorandum (see Amnesty International Report 1984). To Amnesty Intemational's knowledge, none of these recommendations was implemented In June it received a letter from the President ofthe Revolutionary C ourt stating: "The Constitution and Iraqi legislation contain provisions and guarantees ensuring the dignity and freedom of man and preventing all kinds of torture. Legal application and established practice confirm the observation of these principles." Despite these assurances, however, Amnesty International continued to receive testimonies from former torture victims.
In February the organization sent urgent appeals on behalf of a Tunisian national, Neji Bennour, and in March reiterated its concems about him to the Ministers of the Interior and Foreign Affairs, after receiving reports that his health had deteriorated as a result of torture. Neji Bennour was arrested on 2 June 1983 by a plain-clothes security agent outside the Novotel hotel in Baghdad, where he worked He was held at the security forces headquarters in Baghdad and interrogated about the activities of three colleagues at the hotel. He was arrested
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
without warrant and denied access to a lawyer, his family, consular officials and a doctor. According to his subsequent testimony, he was interrogated on several occasions in an effort to force him to denounce his colleagues and to collaborate with the secret service. During interrogation he was reportedly beaten with fists and rubber truncheons, flogged with electric cables and kicked and trampled on. He was also reportedly hit on the spine with the edge of the hand for prolonged periods, was beaten on the soles of the feet and given electric shocks. He was released on 2 April after being held without charge or trial for 10 months, having reportedly been forced to sign a "confession" admitting espionage and rape. The conclusions of a medical examination carried out in France 17 days after his release read: "The clinical examination of Mr Neji Bennour and the radiological and biological examinations made by the doctor consulted and the various specialists lead to a very high degree of accord between the symptoms described and the torture alleged" Amnesty Intemational received no response to its call for an impartial inquiry into these allegations and for the results to be made public.
A former prisoner who had been held in Baghdad's Abu Ghraib and Central prisons between May 1982 and March 1984 submitted a testimony to Amnesty Intemational in July. He was one of 114 people who "disappeared" after reportedly being arrested by Iraqi security forces between 1979 and 1982. When approached by Amnesty Intemational the govemment claimed that the names submitted were fictitious. However, this former prisoner said he had been arrested after refiising to collaborate with the secret service, and the report he submitted to Amnesty Intemational detailing places of detention, conditions of imprisonment and torture was consistent with previous reports received by the organization. Part of his testimony read' 'At the entrance to the torture chamber (in the Central prison] there is a doormat with'Welcome' written onitinEnglish. Torturetakestheform of electric shocks; gas and cigarette bums; electric hot plates; hanging from the ceiling- handcuffed; being stretched on a special machine with hands and feet bound; beatings with a heavy cable or high pressure hose .... Medicaltreatmentis very poor. Sickprisonersonly receivemedical treatment when they have reached a critical point I have heard of many cases of death as a result of torture or of appalling living conditions. In the large cell No. 62 where I spent several months, we actually saw a man die in front of our eyes."
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the large number of executions reported in 1984. It did not have sufficient information to ascertain the exact number, but believed there were hundreds of executions during the year. A large number of those executed were said to be military personnel: army deserters, soldiers refusingtofightinthe
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
war against Iran and officers accused of plotting against the govemment. Others reportedly executed included school and university students, Kurds - some of whom were said to be members of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan - alleged mernbers of al-Da'wa al-Islamiyya and individuals convicted of criminal offences.
In June and July Amnesty Intemational sent urgent appeals on behalf of seven people sentenced to death whose sentences had been ratified by President Hussain. Amnesty Intemational urged the govemment to commute the death sentences. In response, the organization received in early November a letter from the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs. Referring to five people found guilty of burglary and thefl, and one convicted of desertion, it stated that "the exigencies of protecting the security and safety of our society do not permit the abolition or commutation of these sentences". The seventh person, who had been convicted of murder, "was sentenced to death in accordance with the laws in force in Iraq for murdering with premeditation ... in compliance with Article 406/1/C of the Penal Code." Amnesty International reiterated its unconditional opposition to the death penalty in its reply at the end of December. It expressed its continuing concern about the long list of criminal and political offences carrying the death penalty in Iraq, and about the continued enactment of legislation increasing the number ofcapitaloffences. This included Law No. 32 of 1984 (Penal Code of the Popular Army), which made several offences by soldiers volunteering for military service punishable by death. The organization also noted with concern Revolutionary Com-mandCouncilResolutionNo. 1370, whichreaffirmedthe death penalty for various offences, including fleeing or defaulting from military service, conspiring against the state, espionage and joining al-Da'wa al-Islamiya.
