Nicaragua
Amnesty Intemational's concems included the detention of prisoners of conscience, primarily trade union and political party activists; unfair trials of political prisoners; and incommunicado detention before political prisoners were brought before the courts. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about some reports of ill-treatment or torture, arbitrary killings and unacknowledged detention by govemment forces in the context of armed conflict in remote areas, although most such reported abuses led to the public trial and conviction of military personnel found responsible. A further concem was the frequently reported torture and execution-style killing of individuals captured by irregular forces opposing the Nicaraguan Government
A state of emergency decreed in March 1982 which suspended some basic civil rights remained in force, with some modifications, throughout 1984. As justification for the continued state of emergency the govemment cited foreign armed aggression, including military operations by United States govemment personnel in border areas and against Nicaraguan harbour facilities. Decrees of 19 July and 6 August, in
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
preparation for elections for the legislature and the presidency on 4 November, restored the right to hold political assemblies and demonstrations and certain other rights. However the rights to habeas corpus and not to be arbitrarily detained remained suspended in cases involving slate security, as defined in Articles 1 and 2 of the Law for the Maintenance of Public Order and Security (the Public Order Law), imder which most political prisoners were held.
Under the state of emergency all cases under Articles 1 and 2 of Üie Public Order Law were heard by the Tribunales Populares Anti-Somocistas (TPA), Popular Anti-Somocist Tribunals. Special summary trial procedures limit the time for preparing a defence to two days after charging, and appeals against sentence are confined to the TPA system itself, which consists of one lower court and one appeal court in the capital, Managua. Members of the courts are appointed and may be removed at the discretion of the executive. There is one lawyer on each panel - in practice chosen from Ministry of Justice personnel - and two lay members nominated by organizations affiliated to the governing party, Frente Sandinista de Liberación Nacional (FSLN), Sandinista National Liberation Front
Leaders and members of some political opposition parties and their trade union affiliates continued to be subjected to frequent short-term detention without charge by the Dirección General de Seguridad del Estado (DGSE), the State Security Service. Most were released after questioning, although some were charged and tried under the Public Order Law. Those convicted of offences who Amnesty Intemational believed were prisoners of conscience were, with few exceptions, released through pardons not long after sentencing. However, some trade union and political party leaders believed to be prisoners of conscience have been detained repeatedly, sometimes for a year or more. They reported that their interrogators had threatened them with further imprisonment if they continued their trade union or political party activities. Amnesty Intemational acted on behalf of six prisoners of conscience or possible prisoners of conscience, three of whom were released during 1984 when charges were dropped or pardons granted.
Members of the Central de Trabajadores de Nicaragua (CTN), Nicaraguan Workers Confederation, were particular targets of arrest. CTN officials Benito Gómez Centeno and Numán Calderón Arauz were arrested at their homes on 2 June and held incommunicado for eight days at the DSGE headquarters and interrogation centre known as El Chipote, in Managua. DGSE officials stated that they had been involved in "counter-revolutionary" activities, but Amnesty Intemational believed they were prisoners of conscience. Both were released, with 26 others, under a Council of State pardon in August
Several journalists were detained during the year in circumstances
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
indicating that they might be prisoners of conscience. On 28 April Luis Mora was arrested and accused in a Ministry of Interior communique of disseminating " anti-national information" prejudicial to national security. His arrest followed a speech on 14 April by Daniel Ortega, then a junta member, denoimcing Luis Mora's work as a correspondent for Radio Impacto, a Costa Rican station which he said was linked to the US Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA). Luis Mora was also a journalist on the opposition newspaper La Prensa and head of its trade union. On 2 May Amnesty Intemational informed the govemment of its concem that his arrest might have been motivated solely by his work as a journalist Luis Mora was held incommunicado for 25 days in El Chipote, during which time he was shown in a video broadcast "confessing" to a series of offences, and implicating La Prensa photographer Jorge Ortega Rayo, who was subsequently detained. Amnesty Intemational was concemed that Luis Mora may have been compelled to confess to offences and implicate others falsely. In June he and Jorge Ortega Rayo were convicted of Public Order Law violations by the lower court of the TPA and sentenced to nine and to five years' imprisonment respectively. The two men were pardoned in September.
Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about reports of the DGSE fabricating evidence to denigrate and detain political opponents. One such case was that of Father Amado Peña, a priest known for criticizing the government who was interviewed by Amnesty Intemational delegates in July 1984 while under house arrest On 22 June DGSE authorities had broadcast a video film which showed Father Peña leaving a car holding a bag, which, when opened by police officers, revealed a "terrorist kit" implicating the church in armed violence: several hand grenades, dynamite, and a white and yellow Vatican flag on which the letters FDN had been sewn {Fuerza Democràtica Nicaragüense, Democratic Nicaraguan Force, the Honduras-based armed force opposing the Nicaraguan Govemment). According to Father Peña, however, after celebrating mass on 22 June, he had accepted a lift from a man at the service and, when the driver pulled up behind a parked car, was asked to hand a bag to a man in the other car. The video was recorded by the DGSE as he stepped out of the car holding the bag. The drivers of the two cars were apparently neither questioned, detained, nor publicly identified by the DGSE, and Father Peña was told he could go home. However, four days later, after the govemment news media denoimced him as a terrorist accomplice, he was placed under house arrest Although charges were brou^it before the TPA the case never went to trial, and proceedings were suspended by a legislative act in September.
In addition to the estimated 500 short-term detainees said to be held without charge at any one time in DGSE facilities, about 1,200 political
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
prisoners charged or sentenced under the Public Order Law were held at the end of 1984. About 800 were held in the "Héroes y Mártires de Nueva Guinea" Rehabilitation Centre in Managua (theZona Francajail), about 200 in provincial jails and some 200 with sentences of 10 years or more in the top security prison near Managua, the "Jorge Navarro" Rehabilitation Centre (formerly the Cárcel Modelo de Tipitapa).
Some 2,200 prisoners sentenced for crimes committed under the authority of the previous government, most of them former National Guards, were also held in the "Jorge Navarro" prison at the end of 1984. Amnesty Intemational repeatedly expressed concem about procedures used in their trials in 1980 and 1981, and urged a review of their cases, but had not identified individuals as prisoners of conscience.
Most political detentions and interrogations other than in frontier war zones were carried out by the DGSE. Incommunicado detention was the norm underthe state of emergency, with many prisoners held for 15 to 30 days and some for up to six months or more.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about allegations that convictions were sometimes based on confessions obtained by prolonged ill-treatment One such case was that of optometrist Alejandro Pereira who was detained on 6 June 1983 andtakentoElChipote where he was held incommunicado for 70 days. He was taken before a court and charged under the Public Order Law only in January 1984, after he had "confessed" to providing information to the FDN and CIA. The DGSE had refused to comply with Supreme Court habeas corpus orders in 1983 to establish the state of his health- he had previously had several operations for a duodenal ulcer. After a seven-year sentence was imposed by the TPA on 23 Febmary, based exclusively on his signed "confession", Alejandro Pereira claimed on appeal that he had been both psychologically and physically tortured in El Chipote. The appeal court rejected his allegations and increased his sentence to 15 years. In October, however, he was released on health grounds by the Council of State.
Although there were few allegations of physical torture in urban detention centres. Amnesty Intemational received allegations of torture, unacknowledged detention and arbitrary killing by the army in late 1983 in the Fantasma area in Jinotega department, following a series of attacks by the Honduran-based FDN. In January 1984 a special prosecutor was appointed to investigate the reports and 41 military personnel were detained In March a widely publicized court martial sentenced the region's army commander to 44 years' imprisonment on two counts of murder, and for the torture of four captives; 12 subordinates received sentences of up to 14 years.
Allegations of ill-treatment, made after an army raid in March on the Miskito Indian hamlet of Lapán, near Puerto Cabezas on the Atlantic
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Coast, also led to a court martial. A junior lieutenant was sentenced to 18 years' imprisonment for rape. Amnesty Intemational did not leam, however, of any investigation by the authorities into allegations by Atlantic coast farmer Pmdencio Baltodano that he had been detained in Febmary by a unit of the Ministry of Interior's "Pablo Ubeda" Battalion, and that he had been tortured, had his ears cut off and had been left for dead.
Although most recent allegations of abuse of authority were investigated, some past reports of unacknowledged detention in the Atlantic Coast area remained unresolved A list made public by Moravian church authorities late in 1983 named 71 Miskitos reportedly arrested between July and October 1982 in communities around Puerto Cabezas who they believed had never been accounted for. Of these, 27 were identified only by name, with no date or place of arrest given, but detailed information was provided in 44 cases, which included seven men reportedly detained by troops on 19 July 1982 in the hamlets Cm-Warvan and Yulo, and 12 detained six days later at Klingna Landing on the Karata lagooa The authorities responded to inquiries by the Inter-American Commission on Human Ri^its on 28 cases. They stated that three men were killed in armed confrontations between 15 and 20 April 1982, that 11 were "not in jail", that eight prisoners had been released and that six were being held in Managua's Zona Franca prison (registered imder slightly different names). To Amnesty International's knowledge no similar cases have been reported on the Atlantic Coast since October 1982, but the organization continued to seek information on the imresolved cases.
Reports were received throughout 1984 of detentions, torture and summary executions by armed opposition groups. Reported victims of the FDN included a Miskito Indian, José Comejo, a former political prisoner released by the Nicaraguan authorities with some 340 others in a December 1983 amnesty who was later accused of collaboration with the authorities. He and his wife were reportedly captured and summarily executed in late January 1984 near Yulo.
Some prisoners were reportedly taken by opposition force to bases outside Nicaragua but FDN forces were more frequently reported to have killed captives on the spot or after brief field interrogations, sometimes in ^e presence of assembled local inhabitants. Amnesty Intemational received a copy of a field manual issued to FDN forces which recommended the public " neutralization" of civilians believed to be collaborating with the Nicaraguan Govemment as well as the selective assassination of local govemment officials, police, and military personnel, as a model "use of violence for propagandistic effects". The US Govemment acknowledged that its CIA had issued the "Psychological Operations in Guerrilla Warfare" manual to FDN
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
forces, in order to exert greater control over irregular forces receiving US assistance in combating the Nicaraguan Govemment It said the manual would be recalled and reissued without reference to "neutralizations". Amnesty Intemational condemns the torture or killing of captives in all cases, whether by govemment forces in their own or other countries, or by non-govemmental entities.
An Amnesty Intemational delegation visited Nicaragua from 23 to 30 July, travelling to Managua and Puerto Cabezas and its environs. It met the President of the Supreme Court the Vice Minister of Justice and the President of the TPA appeal court, who made available trial records for examination by the delegates. The delegates also discussed Amnesty Intemational's concems with other members of government with former prisoners and with human rights organizations.
