Senegal
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the prolonged pre-trial detention of people arrested in connection with an autonomist movement in Casamance, the southemmost part of the country. A number were alleged to have been tortured after arrest
Violent disturbances broke out in the Casamance area after the trial in December 1983 of sohie 40 advocates of Casamance autonomy, 19 of whom were sentenced to prison terms for prejudicing national integrity and the remainder acquitted or given suspended prison sentences. A number of people were killed - including at least three police officers - and more than 250 people arrested. None had been tried by the end of 1984 but about 120 of them were provisionally released in March and April. The remainder were reportedly detained in Dakar, the capital, and its suburb, Rufisque, at the end of 1984. Late in the year. Amnesty Intemational received information suggesting that a number of those arrested had been subjected to torture, including severe beatings and electric shocks, following their arrest.
In addition to those arrested in Casamance, three students at the Ecole polytechnique. Polytechnic Institute, at Thiès were also in custody at the beginning of 1984. Saliou Niang, who was allegedly beaten and given electric shocks after his arrest, Oumar Ba and Ibrahim Ka had all been arrested in December 1983. They were accused of "inciting popular revolt" and, as students at the Polytechnic Institute are officially under a paramilitary regime, of"undermining army morale". They were suspected of distributing leaflets signedF^meni, "The Spark", which criticized the administration of the Polytechnic Institute and advocated violence in support of Casamance autonomy. On 2 May El Hadj Momar Samb, a teacher, was arrested in Dakar, apparentiy for distributing Ferhent leaflets and other documents to dockworkers.
In July Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Minister of Justice and called for El Hadj Momar Samb and the three students to be brought to trial or released. The Minister replied in September that the govemment did not consider the four to be prisoners of conscience as the Ferhent leaflets had advocated violence. He stated also that they would be tried before the State Security Court and thus were not eligible for release pending trial. In the event, however. El Hadj Momar Samb was tried in early November before the Magistrate's Court in Dakar and convicted of spreading false news. He was fined and given a three-month suspended
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
sentence. His trial was attended by an Amnesty International observer who reported that the proceedings were fair, but criticized the governments initial decision to have him tried on serious state security charges. The three Thies students were also released in November by the magistrate investigating their cases to await trial in January 1985.
