India
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the detention of prisoners of conscience and about large numbers of other political detainees who were held without trial under preventive detention legislation or who were awaiting trial under special legislation permitting trial in camera. It was also concemed about allegations of torture, in several cases reportedly resulting in death in custody; and about reports that alleged extremists were shot dead by security forces personnel after capture. It was also concemed about a number of judicial executions.
Many of Amnesty International's concems related to the state of Punjab which, since 6 October 1983, had been under direct(President's) rule by the central government Members of the Akali Dal, Army of Immortals, the largest Sikh political party, continued to demand official recognition of the Sikh faith and identity and greater political autonomy. Other Sikh groups advocated a separate state and resorted increasingly to violence. Unarmed members of both the Hindu and Sikh communities as well as some police personnel were reportedly killed by Sikh extremists, and several Sikhs were also reportedly killed by members of the Hindu community in the neighbouring state of Haryana Suspected Sikh extremists were reportedly killed by security forces personnel in fighting or "encounters". According to the government's 10 July 1984 "White Paper On The Punjab Agitation", there were 775 violent incidents in the Punjab between 1 January and 3 June, in which 298 people were killed On 10 April and 27 June Amnesty Intemational wrote to Prime Minister Indira Gandhi about two amendments to the National Security Act(NSA), which could facilitate detention of peaceftil opponents of the govemment The first permitted individuals in the Punjab and in Chandigarh to be detained without trial for up to two years for acts alleged to be prejudicial to the defence or security of the state. During this time they can be held for six months without their detention being reviewed by the Advisory Board established under the NSA. The second amendment applicable throughout India, provided that when releasing a detainee, courts must rule that all grounds for detention are invalid, rather than specific individual grounds, as previously. Italsopermittedfreshdetention orders to be issued when a previous detention order had expired or been revoked, providing the basis for indefinite detention without trial
Hundreds of individuals, including many prisoners of conscience, were arrested under the NSA during the first five months of 1984. According to official figures 398 were detained between 5 April and
vili	 July, and a total of 35 5 were in detention in mid-August. Earlier in the year, about 200 members of the Akali Dal were detained for up to two months for burning the constitution to draw attention to their demand that Article 25, which describes the Sikh religion as part ofthe Hindu religion, be amended
Many others w ere arrested on suspicion of involvement in the violence in the Punjab. At least 100 members of the All India Sikh Students Federation (AISSF) were arrested in the two days after it was banned on 19 March 1984, and some 300 membere of a militant Hindu group, the Punjab Hindu Suraksha Samiti, Hindu Safety Organization, were arrested in early February. Most were reportedly released the same month.
On 27 May iht Akali Dal announced a program of civil disobedience to start on 3 June. On 2 June the army was called into the Punjab and a curfew imposed On 5 June,the army moved into the Golden Temple at Amritsar, the main Sikh shrine, and heavy fighting ensued between the army and the followers of Sant Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale, the Sikh fundamentalist leader who had taken refuge in the temple and who the govemment blamed for directing much of the violence in the Punjab in recent years. The govemment stated on 10 July that 493 civilians or terrorists and 93 army personnel were killed in the confrontation. But on 27 October official sources quoted in the Indian press put the number of dead, including soldiers, at 1,000. There were reports that a number of Sikhs were killed by the army after capture: a deputy police superintendent reportedly said that 13 Sikhs had their hands tied and were shot by soldiers. On 25 Septemberareleaseddetaineeclaimedto have witnessed such killings.
On 14 June Amnesty Intemational telexed the Prime Minister, acknowledgingthatthe govemmenthad faced serious problemsofinternal security in the Punjab and asking whether the 6,500 people reportedly arrested would be charged with specific criminal offences or released It urged the release of four Akali Dal leaders arrested under the NSA during or after the army action in the Golden Temple - including the party's president- who had apparendy not been involved in violence. It also asked for the findings of inquests which the Home Secretary had announced would be held, especially those into the deaths of the 13 young Sikhs.
On 27 June Amnesty Intemational welcomed reports that 800 detainees had been released but expressed concern that two Akali Dal leaders had been immediately rearrested on 22 June underthe amended provisions of the NSA. On 30 June Amnesty Intemational received a reply from the Foreign Secretary which emphasized that innocent people had been killed by terrorists in the Punjab and stated that these killings hadnotprovokedany concern from Amnesty International. The
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
government's reply did not answer any of the specific queries put by Amnesty International in its communications of 14 and 27 June.
On 11 October Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Prime Minister explaining that Amnesty Intemational, as a matter of principle, condemns the killing or torture of individuals detained by anyone, including opposition groups, and recognizes that the goverrmient has a responsibility to bring to justice those responsible for violence. It expressed concern about reports of renewed arrests of peaceful political activists, welcoming the release of some and urging the early release of the others. It was concerned about reports that 28 children aged between four and 12, who had been arrested atthe time of the June army action, were being detained in Ludhiana Jail. On 21 September the Supreme Court ordered the immediate release of four women and 22 children aged between one and 16, reportedly stating that it was obvious that the women and children must be devotees and pilgrims visiting the Golden Temple who had been caught in the action that took place on 5 June. Amnesty Intemational said these reports confirmed its fears that innocent people, whom it considered to be prisoners of conscience, were among those arrested at the Golden Temple.
Amnesty Intemational also asked for clarification of the 14 July 1984 Terrorist Affected Areas (Special Courts) Ordinance, (replaced in August by an Act of the same name). Amnesty International said it understood that the legislation aimed to provide speedy trials but noted that it suspended important legal safeguards normally applicable during trials, which might result in procedures incompatible with intemational standards. Under the Act, trials were to be held in camera, the burden of proof was shifted to the accused upon certain minimal findings and appeals were only possible to the Supreme Court within a reduced 30-day period. By the end of 1984 several thousand people were reportedly awaiting trial before three special courts. The govemment announced that 433 faced trial on charges of "waging war" against the state. According to reports lawyers encountered obstacles in establishing what charges had been laid, andrelatives haddifficulty in finding out the whereabouts of detainees.
Press reports alleged that people arrested in the Punjab onsuspicion of extremist activities had been torturedby the army and police by being beaten, burned or having their fingemails tom out A person arrested in December claimed he was hung upside-down for several hours and beaten. There were also press reports alleging that arrested persons were killed in staged "encounters" with the police, but Amnesty Intemational did not receive details of individual cases.
On 31 October the Prime Minister was assassinated by two of her security guards, who were reportedly Sikhs. During subsequent rioting 2,987 Sikhs were officially stated to have been killed Although the
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
newly appointed Prime Minister, Rajiv Gandhi, immediately called for a halt to the anti-Sikh violence and ordered the army to be deployed, a number of police officers allegedly failedtooppose the killings and even encouraged them. Several members of the rulmg party allegedly instigated or fiirthered the violence. No information was available by the end of 1984 as to whether the govemment would investigate these allegations.
Amnesty Intemational also received reports that people in other parts of India were detained without trial for expressing non-violently their views, mostly for short periods. These arrests were made both under criminal statutes and under the NSA. For example, two joumalists - Itwari Lai and Bashir Mohammad - were reportedly arrested in Raipur on 20 Febmary, under sections of the code of criminal procedure relating to measures for keeping the peace, immediately aflertheirnewspaperhad carried a report on alleged police torture of tribal people in Bala^iat district InanoUiercase, the Supreme Court of India heard a petition on 20 March brought by two tribal lawyers from Bihar. They had been detained without trial since October 1981 on charges of sedition and criminal conspiracy and claimed that they were arrested for their involvement with tribal people whom they alleged were frequently arrested on false charges by the police.
In the state of Jammu and Kashmir many political activists were detained without trial under the Jammu and Kashmir Public Safety Act while Dr Farooq Abdullah was Chief Minister and, after his dismissal on 2 July, under his successor G.M. Shah. Members of the Jamaat-e-Islami,the Jamaat-e-Tulba,the People's League and the Mahaz-e-azadi, and several hundred National Conference supporters of the former Chief Minister were reportedly detained for several months without trial. Members of the Congress Party of India were also briefly detained in January in connection with violent demonstrations.
Amnesty Intemational continued to receive reports from nearly all Indian states that criminal suspects andpolitical prisoners were tortured especially in Andhra Pradesh and Punjab. Reports of deaths in police custody as a result of torture were frequent Amnesty International wrote to the Chief Ministers of West Bengal, Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu calling for judicial inquiries into such cases. (The West Bengal Govemment set up a judicial inquiry in one case and in Tamil Nadu a judicial commission found that a Harijan girl had not committed suicide as the police had alleged, but that she was killed by officers at the police station.)
On 23 April the Supreme C ourt ruled that the State Govemment of Manipur had "misled the court by presenting a distorted version of facts" regarding two Naga civilians in Manipur who were reportedly taken away by the Sikh regiment on 10 March 1982 but who had not
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985

been seen since. Army officials claimed that the two men were not in their custody but the Supreme Court ruled that they had not met "their tragic end in an encounter as is usually claimed" and appearedto have been murdered It ordered compensation and police investigations. In a letter of 7 November to the Chief Minister of Manipur, Amnesty Intemational expressed concem at the "disappearance" of four people who had reportedly been arrested in the state between 1981 and 1983 and called for an independent inquiry, and for the outcome of police inquiries into the two cases on which the Supreme Court had ruled tobe made public.
On 11 Febmary Maqbool Ahmed Butt, a former journalist and President of the Jammu and Kashmir National Liberation Front, was executed for murder. Amnesty Intemational appealed for commutation on 9 Febmary and reiterated its unconditional opposition to the death penalty.
On 9 April Amnesty International informed the Foreign Minister that it planned to send a delegate to India to meet professionals involved with the protection of human rights. In late May Amnesty International was informed that a visa had been refused but no reason was given.
