Kenya
Five prisoners of conscience were released during the year. Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the continued imprisonment of other political prisoners held without trial since 1982. There were disturbing reports of large-scale killings of civilians in February during security force operations in the northeast and at least 20 death sentences were imposed and six executions carried out.
At the beginning of 1984 eight people arrested in 1982 were still detained without charge or trial under the Preservation of Public Security Act (PPSA). Five of them, who were adopted as prisoners of conscience, were released in 1984. David Mukam Ng'ang'a, a university lecturer, was freed in April. The other four - Koigi wa Wamwere, a member of parliament, George Anyona, a former member of parliament, and two university lecturers, Edward Oyugi and Kamoji Wachiira- brought a habeas corpus application before the High Court in April alleging that their detention was illegal. It was rejected by the Chief Justice, who ordered the detainees to pay the costs of the hearing, but they were eventually released on 12 December on the 21st anniversary of Kenya's independence. No reasons for their detentions were ever given by the government The three other PPSA detainees remained in detention throughout 1984. They were Stephen Muriithi, a former deputy director of the police Special Branch, Raila Odinga, deputy director of the Kenya Bureau of Standards, and Otieno Mak'Onyango, a newspaper editor. The last two were initially charged with treason in connection with a coup attempt in August 1982 but in March 1983 the treason charges were dropped Amnesty Intemational continued to press the authorities to bring them to trial or release them.
In January, 11 people, including prominent local politicians, were arrested in North-Eastem province and held without charge for several weeks under long-standing local emergency regulations.
Amnesty Intemational continued to investigate the cases of Wang'ondu
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
wa Kariuki, a journalist, and Maina wa Kinyatti, a univereity lecturer, who were convicted in 1982 of possessing seditious documents and sentenced to four and a half and six years' imprisonment respectively. They appeared to have been imprisoned for their opinions and criticisms of the government, which did not involve violence. An appeal by Maina wa Kinyatti was rejected by the Court of Appeal in November.
The organization continued its inquiries into the cases of 10 university students also convicted of sedition in 1982 and 1983, who were sentenced to prison terms ranging from five to 10 years. Amnesty Intemational urged the authorities to review their cases to ensure they had not been imprisoned solely for their opinions.
Amnesty Intemational was also investigating the detention of up to 16 people who fled to Tanzania in 1982 and were returned to Kenya against their will by the Tanzanian authorities on 7 November 1983, although several of them had been granted asylum in Tanzania. They were held in secret and apparently illegal custody in Kenya for several months before some - including a former member of parliament, James Orengo - were released In March, three former members of the air force who were in this group were charged with leading a coup attempt on 1 August 1982, convicted of treason by court-martial and sentenced to death.
The conditions under which political prisoners were held gave cause for concem. Uncharged detainees were in some cases reportedly held in solitary confinement for long periods, and were allowed little contact with their families. Although convicted political prisoners were allowed more regular family visits and correspondence there were reports of delays in prisoners' medical treatment, and the prison diet was inadequate. Amnesty Intemational urged the government to investigate and improve these conditions.
In February Amnesty Intemational received disturbing reports of the arrest, torture and killing of a large number of people of Somali ethnic origin in northeast Kenya Unofficial estimates of the number of deaths ranged from several hundred to over 1,400. On 10 Febmary govemment forces launched a security operation in Wajir district, following conflicts between two Somali clans, to confiscate illegally-held weapons and to discover those responsible for six recent murders. About 1,400 members of the Degodia clan were arrested and taken to Wagalla airstrip, near Wajir towa They included civil servants, teachers, traders and nomads. They were reported to have been beaten repeatedly, tortured, and held for three days without food, water or medical treatment, as a result of which many died A number were reported to have been shot dead, killed with machetes, or bumt alive at the airstrip. Others were reportedly taken away in lorries and summarily executed
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
or abandoned in remote areas. After three days the remaining prisoners at Wagalla airstrip were released
Amnesty Intemational expressed concem about these reports to the govemment on 1 March and asked what steps the authorities were taking to investigate them. On 12 April the Minister of State in the President's Office stated in Parliament that 381 people had been arrested on 10 February and that 57 had died - 28 when the security forces met resistance, and a further 29 from gunshot wounds or being trampled to death in the confusion following a meeting addressed by the District Commissioner. No mention was made of the alleged torture or ill-treatment of those detained In view of the contradiction between the government's account of the incident and the unofficial reports which it had received, Amnesty Intemational urged the authorities to establish an independent inquiry. By the end of 1984, however, the govemment had neither responded nor announced any inquiry.
On 30 April Amnesty Intemational expressed concem to President Moi about reports that six condemned prisoners had been executed at Kamiti prison in Nairobi and called for a halt to executions as a further 120 prisoners there were believed to be under sentence of death. During the year at least 20 death sentences were imposed, mostly for robbery with violence. The three former members of the air force court-martialled in March - Hezekiah Ochuka, Pancras Oteyo Okumu and Robert Odhiambo Ndege - were sentenced to death for treason. Hezekiah Ochuka alleged that he had been tortured but this was rejected by the court-martial. All three lodged appeals which had not been heard by the end of 1984. Nine other former air force personnel convicted of treason in 1983 also remained under sentence of death. Amnesty Intemational appealed for the commutation of these and all other death sentences.
