Niger
Amnesty International was concerned about the detention without trial of suspected opponents of the govemment However, all those adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty Intemational or whose cases had been taken up for investigation were released during 1984.
Fourteen students held without trial since May 1983 were the first to be freed. They had been detained after a nationwide strike by university students and school pupils (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984). At the time of their release the authorities stated that the students were being "put at the disposal of the administration", and they were apparently told that they would not be allowed to resume their studies unless they performed satisfactorily in new jobs allocated by the govemment. Amnesty Intemational had called several times for the students to be brought to trial or released.
Two students and several teachers arrested in June 1983 about whom little had become known by the end of 198 3 were reported during 1984 to have been released within a few months of their arrest
On 15 April President Seyni Kountche released some 40 political prisoners to mark the 10th anniversary of the army's accession to power. Those freed included former President Hamani Diori and Djibo Bakary, former leader of the Sawaba (Freedom) Party, both of whom had been
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
held under house arrest since 1980, after several years' detention without trial. Both had been adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty Intemational. Two of the former President's brothers -Boubacar Moussa Diori and Ganda Diori - were also released, as were Abdou Gaoh and Ibrahim Issa, two former officials. They had all been held without charge or trial since the coup in April 1974 and their cases had been taken up for investigation by Amnesty Intemational. Among the other long-term political detainees freed were several arrested at the time of an alleged coup attempt in August 1975.
Despite these releases between 10 and 25 people were believed to have remained in detention without trial throughout 1984. They were arrested after an unsuccessful coup attempt in October 1983 and included Mamane Sidikou, former head of the presidential cabinet
