Lesotho
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the detention without trial of suspected opponents of the government, one of whom was reported to have died in custody, and about the findings of two inquests. One related to the death of a political detainee in 1983 and the other to the killing in 1981 of a prominent newspaper editor and two other people who were alleged to have been victims of extrajudicial executions. The organization was also concerned about the use of the death penalty.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
The government continued to face armed opposition from guerrillas belonging to the Lesotho Liberation Army (LLA), the military wing of an exiled faction of the opposition Basutoland Congress Party, and alleged that the LLA received South African support In late March the Minister of Information accused the South African Government of planning to overthrow the Lesotho Government in favour of a new political grouping, the Democratic Alliance, whose leaders had visited Pretoria in January. This was denied by the South African authorities.
The Human Rights Act which had received parliamentary approval in 1983, came into effect on 18 July. It recognizes certain fundamental human rights including the rights to life, liberty, freedom of opinion and respect for the integrity and security of the individual. However, these rights and others, such as the right not to be subjected to arbitrary arrest or detention, are guaranteed only insofar as they do not conflict with existing laws. Hence the Act affords no protection, for example, against arbitrary arrests and detentions under the Internal Security (General) Act which empowers the authorities to hold political suspects without charge or trial for up to 42 days and to hold them incommunicado for part of that time. Similarly, the requirement in the Human Rights Act that "No person shall be subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading punishment or other treatment" would appear to be undermined by a clause in the legislation concerning internal security which grants immunity from civil or criminal prosecution to police and other officials who commit offences in order to preserve "good order" or "public safety" and to prevent "internal disorder". The right to life recognized in the Human ^ghts Act is also qualified by the existence of legislation permitting the death penalty.
In January an Amnesty International observer attended an inquest into the deaths of Edgar Motuba, the editor of a church newspaper and well-known critic of the government and Lechesa Koeshe and Oriele Muhale, two friends who accompanied him when he was taken from his home by armed men in September 1981. All three were later found shot allegedly by a pro-government "death squad" known as Koeeoko. The inquest failed to attribute responsibility for the killings but it was disclosed that the three were shot with weapons of a type normally available only to police and military personnel and that there was only a cursory police investigation at the time. The presiding magistrate reportedly called for a more thorough investigation at the end of the inquest but no further action was known to have been takea
There were disturbing disclosures too at the resumed inquest into the death in detention in April 1983 ofHenry Khahlanyetso Masheane, an oil company employee. He was said by security police to have committed suicide by hanging himself with his belt but medical evidence was produced which disproved this and indicated that after he died he
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
was hanged in his cell to suggest suicide. The inquest concluded that he had been killed in detention but failed to attribute individual responsibility either for his death or for the attempted cover-up. The magistrate directed that the inquest record be sent to the Director of Public Prosecutions but Amnesty Intemational leamed of no further developments by the end of 1984. Some 20 other political detainees were held in cells adjacent to the deceased at the time of his death, but none were called at the inquest.
A third inquest due to open in December was postponed until 1985. It concerned the death in custody in 19 81 of Setipa Mathaba, a poHtical detainee. Amnesty Intemational repeatedly expressed concem over the authorities' failure to hold an inquest, in view of evidence of torture and ill-treatment of other political detainees which it had obtained at the time.
There were further political detentions in 1984 and one detainee, Daniel Moeketsi, was reported to have died in custody. Following a bomb explosion on 13 April, security police detained several members of the Lesotho Evangelical Church including Daniel Moeketsi. He was arrested on 23 April, when his house was searched for arms but nothing found The next day, he was reportedly taken back to his home and then to some cliffs nearby from which he apparently fell, Jumped or was thrown while still handcuffed. In May Amnesty International appealed on behalf of those detained and called for them to be charged or released. Several detainees, including a joumalist, Thabo L^sehe, were released uncharged but four others were charged with offences against state security and remanded for trial in 1985. The government told Amnesty Intemational of these developments and stated that any action over David Moeketsi's death would be determined by the Director of Public Prosecutions.
Two women were sentenced to prison in January for assisting LLA guerrillas and in Febmary another woman and 11 men appeared in the Maseru High Court on charges of treason. All 12 were either discharged or acquitted but one, Soledata Malefani, was reportedly shot dead by armed men several months later. At least one state witness who testified at this trial reportedly said he had been blindfolded and severely beaten during interrogation by police until he "confessed" to membership of the LLA.
At least one person was sentenced to death for murder but it was not known whether any executions were carried out
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
