Benin
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and about other political prisoners detained without trial orimprisoned after unfair trials. All the prisoners whose cases had been taken up by Amnesty Intemational were released on 1 August in a presidential amnesty but further political arrests were reported later in 1984. Amnesty Intemational was also concerned about reports of ill-treatment of prisoners, some of whom died apparently because they were denied appropriate medical treatment
During the first part of the year Amnesty Intemational was working on behalf of 35 prisoners of conscience, most of whom had been detained without trial for more than four years for alleged involvement in non-violent protests against govemment policies. Most had been arrested following school and university protests which began in 1979 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984).
In mid-1984 Amnesty Intemational also adopted as prisoners of conscience 38 other untried political detainees, mostofwhomhadbeen arrested between June and August 1983 for suspected membership of an unofficial trade union, the Centrale syndicale des travailleurs du Bénin (CSTB), the Benin Workers' Trade Union Federatioa
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
In mid-February eight of the student prisoners of conscience detained since 1979 and held in Cotonou's Central Prison were transferred to Abomey and Ouidah prisons following protests about their continued detention and demands for their release. On 3 March, 10 of the 11 students held in Porto Novo prison escaped and went into hiding. Three of them - Léon Adjakpa, Malehossou Bouraima and Léon Yelome - were recaptured several days later and a fourth person, Cyriaque Faton, was arrested on suspicion of assisting their escape. They were reportedly punished by being detained for three weeks in a disused transport container exposed to the sun. They were then moved to Cotonou' s main military camp, CampGhezo, and detained in its high security detention wing, known as the Poste de commandement opérationnel (PCO). However, in June the four detainees and one other, Emmanuel Alamou, escaped from the PCO and went into hiding.
Until August Amnesty Intemational continued to appeal for the release of five prisoners of conscience, two of whom were under sentence of death, and for a review of the cases of eight other political prisoners, all of whom were arrested in 1975 when the government claimed to have foiled two attempts to overthrow it. The trials they received fell short of intemational standards of fairness (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984). Amnesty Intemational was also investigating the cases of Claude Midahuen, Léonard Maboudou and André Oke Assogba The three, all former senior government officials, had been arrested in 1975 and 1976 apparently in connection with the s ame alleged coup attempts but were never brought to trial. Similarly, the organization continued to investigate the cases of Colonel Alphonse Alley, a former head of state, and Major Jean-Baptiste Hácheme, who were arrested in early 1973 following the alleged discovery of a plot to overthrow the government They were both sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment in early 1973 after a trial which fell short of intemational standards.
On 1 August 1984 President Mathieu Kerekou declared an amnesty following his re-election for a s econd term as head of state. All prisoners of conscience and other political prisoners of concern to Amnesty Intemational were released and the police stopped searching for the detainees who had escaped from Porto Novo prison and the PCO. The releaseswerewelcomedby Amnesty Intemational However, at le ast four of those released were reported to have been again detained without charge by the endofl984. In late September Hébert Offiki, one of the students who had escaped from Porto Novo prison in March, was arrested and detained at Natitingou. A month later, Emmanuel Alamou, a student who had escaped from the PCO in June 1984, was arrested in Cotonou. In early November, two other former political detainees, DrAfolabiBiaou andDidierD'Ahneida, were alsodetained
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
in Cotonou. Both had apparently been active in an unofficial association of former political detainees formed after the amnesty in August It had protested about the rearrest of Hébert Offiki and Emmanuel Alamou and called on the authorities to reinstate former political detainees in their previous jobs. Amnesty International expressed its concern to the authorities over these new arrests and called for the trial or release of the four detainees. However, they were still held at the end of 1984.
Amnesty International remained concerned about the conditions in which political detainees were held in view of reports of severe overcrowding, poor lighting and ventilation, inadequate sanitation and washing facilities, and grossly deficient medical care in all the main political detention centres. Conditions at the Commissariat central, central police station, and in a number of smaller police stations in Cotonou were reported to be particularly harsh with prisoners being subjected to extreme overcrowding in punishment cells, known as "violons". As many as 12 detainees were reportedly held at a time in the cells although they apparently measured no more than Im by 2.5m, making it impossible for detainees even to lie down. The authorities continued to refuse food to most political detainees, forcingthemtorely on the generosity of their families or fellow prisoners.
In April Amnesty International received reports that certain prisoners who had become seriously ill in Cotonou's Central Prison had been refused hospital treatment by prison authorities or permitted it after unnecessary delays. As a result, at least seven non-political prisoners had apparently died since mid-1983, two of them reportedly in 1984. On 1 January Joe Akplogan was reported to have died after being refused hospital treatment; he was apparently threatened with removal to a punishment cell after becoming ill. In February a woman prisoner was also reportedly refusedhospitaltreatmentuntil an injury to her foot became gangrenous. She was then treated but allegedly died after her foot was amputated. Amnesty Intemational appealed to the government in April and July to institute an independent inquiry into these deaths, and to ensure that all prisoners received adequate medical care. However, there was no response.
In April 1984 Amnesty Intemational submitted information about its concems in Benin under the UN procedure for confidenrially reviewing communications about human rights violations. The submission urged the UN to take all appropriate steps to redress the cited human rights violations.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
