Chad
Amnesty International was concerned about the "disappearance" or extrajudicial execution of hundreds of people detained by forces loyal to the government of President Hissein Habré. Many of the victims may have been prisoners of conscience. The organization was also concerned about the detention without trial of suspected opponents of the government, some of whom may have been prisoners of conscience. Amnesty International also received reports of the detention without trial of political opponents by the Gouvemement d'union nationale de transition ( GUNT}. Transitional Government of National Unit, which claimed to be the legitimate government of Chad and which controlled territory in the north of the country.
Armed clashes continued between government troops and armed forces loyal to the GUNT under ex-President Goukouni Oueddei, although apparently on a lesser scale than in 1983. The government also faced armed insurrection in parts of southern Chad from groups which it alleged received support from both Libya and the GUNT. Foreign involvement in the internal conflict continued: the GUNT was supported by Libyan armed forces, and the government received help from French and Zairian military forces. However, in September the French Government announced that it had reached an agreement with the Libyan Government to withdraw their respective armed forces from Chad. The Zairian authorities subsequently announced their intention to withdraw too. By the end of 1984 several thousand foreign troops had withdrawn, however, French military advisers remained in Ndjamena, and there were reports that over 1,000 Libyan troops remained in northern Chad.
Most reports of "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions were received from southern Chad, between September and November, when government troops moved through the southern prefectures of Moyen Chari, Logone Oriental, Logone Occidental and Tandjile, apparently to counter attacks on government forces by armed opponents called commandos or "codos". At least 80 former commandos were reportedly executed at Dèli in Logone Occidental on 27 September after surrendering to government forces. However, not all the victims of "disappearance" and extrajudicial execution were armed opponents of the government Some were apparently suspected only of sympathizing with armed opponents of the government. Still others were penalized because of acts attributed to members of their families or to residents
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
of areas where they had administrative responsibility. For example, following the arrest in September of more than 50 officials and community leaders at Sarh, apparently in reprisal for attacks on govemment forces in Moyen Chari, some were reported to have "disappeared". In one such case El Hadj Baba Traoré, a town councillor, was reported to have "disappeared" after being detained on 25 September.
Other people were reportedly killed by govemment forces in apparently random attacks intended to intimidate the local population. Witnesses said that a number of villages were bumed and residents killed in the Moïssalla district of Moyen Chari in early September, apparently in reprisal for the killing of a local administrator. Among the dead were Dai-Assei, a former soldier, at Moïsalla, and Jean Sou at Békourou, killed on 9 September. Amnesty Intemational obtained the names of over 200 individuals reported to have been executed or to have "disappeared" after being detained by govemment forces.
On 8 November Amnesty Intemational publicly appealed to the govemment of President Habré to halt all such political killings and to ensure that all detainees were protected from ill-treatment In response, govemment ministers denied that the political killings and "disappearances" described had taken place and said that the organization could send a delegation to Chad. Amnesty Intemational informed the authorities on 16 November that it would send a mission to Chad in December to investigate its concerns and to discuss them with govemment representatives. However, on 23 November the govemment told Amnesty Intemational that its mission proposal was being considered and a suitable date would be proposed shortly.
Amnesty Intemational also investigated the cases of political detainees who may have been prisoners of conscience. Among these were over 50 people reportedly detained at Abéché in July 1983, apparently on suspicion of being GUNT sympathizers. They included El-Hadj All Mohamed, the Imam of the Cheikh el Fakhara mosque; members of the family of the Sultan of Abéché; and farmers, traders, administrators and artisans. At least two were released in 1984 - the religious leader El-Hadj Ali Mohamed, and Youssouf Assad, the director of a transport company - however, the fate of others remained unclear.
Another prisoner whose case was under investigation by Amnesty Intemational was reported to have "disappeared". Pierre Ousmane Touadé, a lawyer and joumalist and former leader of the Parti national pour le développement du Tchad (PNDT), National Party for the Development of Chad, was reportedly detained at Moundou in August 1982 because of his political opposition to the govemment. No information about him was received from the authorities but Amnesty
36
Amnesty International Report 1965
International received reports from former prisoners that he had been killed in late 1982 or early 1983 in a detention centre controlled by the Département de la documentation et de la sécurité (DDS), Documentation and Security Department, a security service.
Over 150 political detainees were released uncharged during the year. For example, Georges Sylvestre, a post office official detained at Ndjamena in August 1983 apparently on suspicion of being involved with the GUNT, whose case was being investigated by Amnesty International, was released in May. The authorities announced the release on 7 June of 150 prisoners in an amnesty to mark the second anniversary of the occupation of Ndjamena by forces loyal to Hissein Habré. Amnesty International asked the authorities for the names of those released but was unable to ascertain their identities.
Amnesty International also received reports that at least 10 people were held on political grounds by forces loyal to the GUNT in northern Chad who might be prisoners of conscience. They included Acheikh Ibn Oumar, the Secretary General of the Conseil démocratique révolutionnaire {CD^, the Revolutionary Democratic Council, which had previously supported the GUNT. He was detained on 4 November, apparently because of his opinions on relations between the GUNT and Libya
