Federal Republic of Germany
Amnesty Intemational's main concerns were the imprisonment of conscientious objectors to military service, the prosecution of people in violation of their rightto freedom of expression and alleged ill-treatment of prisoners held in special security cells in Nuremberg. Amnesty Intemational also wrote to the authorities about a proposed amendment to the criminal code regarding the offence of breach of the public peace.
Amnesty Intemational appealed for the release of eight people imprisoned for refusing on conscientious grounds to perform military service. Among them was Hubert Kappelhof who had previously been sentenced in 1982 to eight months' imprisonment, reduced to six months on appeal, on charges of "desertion" and "insubordination" after the rejection of his application for conscientious objector status on moral and political grounds {see A mnesty Intemational Report 1984). At a second trial in 1983 on another charge of "desertion" he was sentenced to nine months' imprisonment, increased on appeal to one year without probatioa He appealed against this sentence, but the appeal was rejected on 8 May 1984. At the end of the year Hubert Kappelhof had still not begun serving his 12-month sentence.
On 25 July an Amnesty Intemational observer attended the appeal hearing at the Bundesgerichtshof{ Federal Supreme Court) in Karlsruhe of Hildegard Haag, Amulf Müller and Annette Schiffman who were
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
among 10 people charged with supporting a terrorist organization after spraying slogans on motorway signs. They had been acquitted by the Oberlandesgericht (regional supreme court) in Stuttgart on 14 October 1983 on charges of making propaganda for and supporting a terrorist organization (Article 129a of the criminal code) {sQQAmnesty Intemational Report 1984), and were only fined for damaging property. The appeal, which had been lodged on points of law by the Prosecutor General, was rejected and the original verdict confirmed Amnesty International's concem in this case was that the interpretation of Article 129a by judicial and prosecuting authorities might have resulted in the defendants being imprisoned for exercising their right to freedom of expression, without having used or advocated violence.
During 1984 Amnesty Intemational corresponded with the authorities about a proposed amendment to the criminal code regarding the offence of Landfiiedensbruch, breach of the public peace (Article 125, paragraphs 1-2). Amnesty Intemational was concemed that the proposed law could result in individuals legitimately engaged in a peacefiil assembly being imprisoned because of their non-violent activities.
In June 1984 Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Minister of Justice of the State of Bavaria about security cells {^o-QdX\Qd.Beruhigungszelle) in a Nuremberg prison. Reportedly prisoners in investigative detention were sometimes kept naked for up to three days in solitary confinement in temperatures of up to 35°C. The Minister replied that the situation had changed since April 1984 when Amnesty Intemational first received such reports. Dangerous prisoners or those who were likely to injure themselves were no longer kept naked but were dressed in clothing which could not be torn. The Minister said that the cell temperature had been set at 30°C for prisoners whose clothes had been removed However, he justified solitary confinement, the removal of clothing and other forms of restraint by referring to national prison regulations. Amnesty Intemational then wrote to the Federal Minister of Justice on 6 August to ask for the full text of the regulations, particularly regarding special security measures, solitary confinement, restraints and the removal of clothing. A copy of the current regulations was sent on 10 September and was being reviewed by the organizatioa
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
