Spain
Torture and ill-treatment of detainees continued to be Amnesty International's major concern The organization was also concemed about the imprisonment of a joumalist whom it considered to be a prisoner of conscience.
There were important legislative changes in 1984; in particular, the passing of a new anti-terrorist law and the introduction of habeas corpus as a safeguard for detainees. The introduction of habeas corpus and the law on legal assistance of December 1983 offered an improvement in the situation of ordinary criminal offenders but largely failed to protect the rights of detainees held incommunicado under the anti-terrorist law. Incommunicado detention continued to be widely used and Amnesty Intemational concluded that, even with the new safeguards, it facilitated torture and ill-treatment The year saw significant developments in legal proceedings against police officers and Civil Guards for torture and ill-treatment In May 1984 Amnesty Intemational sent a Memorandum on Allegations of Torture and Ill-treatment in Spain to the Prime Minister, Felipe González. This included, as examples, allegations of torture and ill-treatment in nine different cases in Barcelona, Madrid and the Basque country, involving 11 detainees. Seven of the detainees were held under the anti-terrorist law and four on suspicion of ordinary criminal offences. There were, therefore, significant differences between the two types of case as to the laws regulating their detention, the legal assistance available while in custody, and overall judicial supervision of the cases. The memorandum concluded that in all these cases judicial supervision had failed, whether it was exercised centrally through the National Court in Madrid or through the judges in the regions where the detainees were held It concluded also that the 1981 regulations of the Ministry of the Interior on medical treatment for detainees were widely ignored by the police and Civil Guard It noted that the law on access to legal assistance differentiated between detainees held incommunicado under the anti-terrorist law and others. This meant that ordinary criminal suspects were released or brought before a court within 72 hours and had, in theory, reasonable access to legal assistance. However, detainees held under the anti-terrorist law could be held incommimicado for up to 10 days before release or appearance in court and effectively received no legal assistance while in police custody. The memorandum further concluded that the laws passed to safeguard the rights of detainees in accordance with the 1978 Constitution were, in
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
practice, of only limited value in preventing abuses, especially for detainees held incommunicado under the anti-terrorist law. Their position was significantly worse than that of ordinary criminal suspects, because of the discriminatory provisions in the laws on detention allowing the continued use of prolonged incommunicado detention. The new anti-terrorist law (Organic Law 8/1984 of 26 December) made no changes to this. The new law of habeas corpus {Orgomc Law 6/1984 of 24 May) perpetuated discrimination by stipulating that petitions on behalf of detainees held imder the anti-terrorist law should be heard by judges of the National Court in Madrid, and not judges in the area where they were detained. Amnesty Intemational considered this an important limitation on the applicability of the new law and a reduction injudicial supervision of these detainees. Incommunicado detainees' rights to choose and communicate with a lawyer continued to be restricted, which also significantly reduced the effectiveness of legal assistance as a safeguard against torture or ill-treatment
On 31 October 1984 Amnesty Intemational's Secretary General and two staff members visited Madrid at the invitation of the Spanish Govemment to discuss the concems in its memorandum. Lengthy and detailed talks were held individually with the Prime Minister, the Minister of the Interior and the Minister of Justice. The govemment did not deny that there were occasional breaches of the regulations, but maintained that the legislative changes introduced over the previous two years would serve to safeguard the rights of all detainees. Special emphasis was placed by the govemment on the beneficial and, in the continental European context innovatory nature of the law of habeas corpus. The govemment stressed as well the need for states to protect themselves from terrorism through the adoption of special measures, provided these were administered within a framework of legal safeguards.
A written reply to Amnesty International's concems from the Minister of the ¿iterior was received in December 1984. It focused exclusively on the situation of detainees under the anti-terrorist law and made no reference to the other cases raised in the memorandum. The Minister pointed out that the police had a different version of events in two of the cases cited and that the decision lay with the courts. Both cases were sub judice at the end of 1984. The govemment rejected Amnesty International's conclusion that incommunicado detention, even with safeguards, facilitates the use of torture and ill-treatment It referred to the constitutional endorsement of special powers and to the existence of such powers in other comparable legal systems.
The govemment stated in its reply that since taking office in December 1982 it had received 111 allegations of torture or ill-treatment involving 327 members of the state security forces. Eighty-eight of these cases were still at the stage of preliminary investigatioa
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
The latest statistics available to Amnesty Intemational showed that 673 people were detained in 1984 under the anti-terrorist law up to 13 November. There were 691 such detentions in 1983.
One of the cases referred to in the memorandum was the subject of Amnesty Intemational action during 1984. Joaquin Olano Balda was arrested in July 1983 and was taken to the Red Cross Hospital in San Sebastián after scarcely 24 hours in custody. According to the Civil Guards, his injuries - concussion, cuts on the head, multiple grazes and bruising of the back, abdomen and arms - were sustained "purely as a result of his resisting arrest and because of his violent behaviour while being arrested". A preliminary judicial investigation into his allegations of torture had not been completed by the court in San Sebastián by the end of 1984.
The Territorial Court of Bilbao committed three police officers for trial in July 1984 after investigating allegations of torture and ill-treatment made by Angel Bengoechea Cuéllar and Jesús Antonio de Blas Lana. They were arrested in April 1979 and their cases were described in Amnesty Intemational's Report of a Mission to Spain in October 1979.
In October 1984 four Civil Guards were committed for trial after investigation of allegations of torture and ill-treatment in October 1983 made by José Maria, Lucio and Victor Olarra, on whose behalf Amnesty Intemational had made inquiries during 1984 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984).
Xavier Vinader, a well-known investigative journalist on the best-selling magazine Interviú, was arrested on 8 Febmary at Madrid airport He had been living abroad for a year pending appeals to the Supreme Court and Constitutional Tribunal against a sentence of seven years' imprisonment for "professional negligence". This related to an article he wrote describing the activities of extreme right-wing groups in the Basque country. Both appeals were rejected Amnesty Intemational considered Xavier Vinader to be a prisoner of conscience and his imprisonment a violation of his right to freedom of expression. It appealed for his release. This was granted on 21 March.
286
Amnesty International Report 1985
