Rwanda
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the continued imprisonment of prisoners of conscience. Although a significant number of prisoners of conscience convicted in 1981 and 1983 were released during 1984, at least one prisoner of conscience was convicted at a trial in August The August trial also highlighted Amnesty Intemational's concerns that trials of alleged govemment opponents appeared to fall short of intemational standards and that political prisoners continued to allege that they had been tortured in custody. Amnesty International was also concemed about the long-term detention without charge or trial of a number of political prisoners.
Amnesty Intemational continued to appeal for the release of prisoners convicted by the State Security Court in November 1981 and April 1983 on charges of distributing seditious documents in early 1980. At the beginning of 1984, there were 27 of these prisoners serving sentences of between three and 12 years. However, 13 of them were among 16 political prisoners released in June and October, while 14 remained in prison at the end of 1984. No official explanation was given when four prisoners were freed in June, but in October, when 12 more
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
were released, the Minister of Justice said those concemed had been given remission for good behaviour. Amnesty International was also concerned that three other political prisoners convicted in November 1981, who had not been adopted as prisoners of conscience, were unfairly convicted on the basis of statements apparently made under torture.
Seven people were tried in August by the State Security Court in Kigali for political offences. The court convicted three, deferred judgment on two, and referred two for trial by an ordinary court on the grounds that their alleged offences were not political. Of the three who were convicted, two were found guilty of passing confidential information to representatives of a foreign power and sentenced to 10 and 15 years' imprisonment The third, Alphonse Utagirake, was convicted of writing seditious documents and sentenced to three years' imprisonment He was accused of criticizing the presidenrial election in 1983 in which President Juvénal Habyarimana was the only candidate- and of arguing that obligatory communal work should be abolished. Amnesty International adopted him as a prisoner of conscience.
The organization was concemed about allegations of torture made in court by two of the seven defendants. François Habimana claimed that he had made a false confession after being tortured by members of the national security service; his case was considered by the court to be non-political and he was sent for trial by an ordinary court. Aloys Ngurumbe claimed that he had been given electric shocks during his interrogation and forced to "confess" to involvement in a plot against the government Formerly recognized as a refugee in Uganda, Aloys Ngurumbe had reportedly been forcibly repatriated to Rwanda in 1982 while on a visit to Zaire and was detained for more than two years at Ruhengeri prison before being brought to trial. He was charged with participating in attacks on his country in the 1960s and committing murder, and with participating in a conspiracy in 1981 to kill govemment officiais and overthrow the government. He reportedly admitted taking part in armed raids in the 1960s, but denied being part of a conspiracy and claimed that he had only admitted to this during interrogation because he had been tortured. The prosecution asked for him to be sentenced to death, but at the end of August the court deferred judgment on him and one other defendant accused of spying. According to unofficial sources the court reconvened later in 1984 and sentenced him to life imprisonment
Amnesty Intemational was concerned that none of the defendants tried in August was assisted by a defence lawyer, although under the law all defendants have a right to legal counsel and that there was no right of appeal. The organization was particularly concemed that the court did not conduct any serious investigation into the allegations of torture.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Amnesty Intemational was also concerned about the long-temi detention without charge or trial of political prisoners. The law requires that detainees should be referred to the procuracy within a few days of arrest, but this procedure is widely ignored In January President Habyarimana ordered the release of all suspects held for more than one year without being referred to the procuracy. However, this order was apparently not applied to political detainees, whose cases appeared to be investigated by the national security service instead of the procuracy.
During the August trial before the State Security Court, two detainees in security service custody who were not on trial appealed to the court to review their cases and order their release. Eustache Kabalira had previously been tried and acquitted by the same court in November 1981 on charges of organizing a campaign to destabilize the government In August 1984 he told the court that he had been rearrested in February 1983 and held by the security service for 19 months without charge. He asked to be released from prison while investigations into his case continued This was refused but the court said it would look into his case. Eustache Kabalira's action in bringing his own case to court to complain about his long-term detention without charge or trial was the first known legal action of its kind by an untried political detainee in Rwanda. The other detainee, Jacques Hategikamana, brought a similar action before the court in August but was also told he had to remain in security service custody.
In May the Minister of Justice announced that prison guards and members of the security and police forces found to have ill-treated prisoners were to be punished He pointed out that all prisoners had the right to receive visits from relatives and instructed prison officials to respect this right. The Minister's statement appeared to be the result of an investigation ordered by the President in June 1983 into allegations of ill-treatment of prisoners. It was apparently carried out by the Minister of Justice and the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Kigali. Amnesty Intemational welcomed the statement and asked how the authorities intended to investigate allegations of torture or ill-treatment However, it remained concerned that when allegations of torture were made in the State Security Court in August, no investigation appeared to have been carried out then. The organization also welcomed the Minister's public confirmation that political prisoners could receive visits: however, both before and after the Minister's statement some political prisoners in Ruhengeri prison were reportedly prevented from seeing visitors.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
