Sudan
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, the detention witiiout trial of other suspected opponents of the govemment and the imprisonment of political prisoners after unfair trials. The organization was also concemed about allegations of torture and ill-treatment of political detainees, the continuing use of the death penalty and the use of amputations and floggings as judicial punishments. Over 65 people were sentenced to amputation and several hundred to flogging.
Armed conflict persisted in the south during 1984 between the govemment and an opposition guerrilla organization - the Sudan People's Liberation Army ( SPLA). Abuses were reported to have been perpetrated by both sides, although accounts were difficult to verify. Eleven civilians, mostly foreigners, were abducted by the SPLA and held for periods ranging from some weeks to several months. Six were still held at the end of the year.
More than 400 suspected opponents of the government, including many prisoners of conscience, were believed by Amnesty Intemational
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
to be detained without charge or trial under the State Security Act at the beginning of 1984. Further political arrests occurred in February when at least 15 army officers were arrested for allegedly plotting against the govemment However, none had been charged or tried by the end of 1984. Also in Febmary, Sirr Anai Kelueljang, a joumalist and poet, was arrested near Rumbek and held in Juba prison without charge until he was released in September.
On 29 April President Gaafar Mohamed Nimeiri declared a state of emergency on the grounds that "opponents of the govemment were planning to disturb the process of Islamization and benefit from the armed conflict in the south". Certain articles of the constitution were suspended - for example that guaranteeing the right to freedom of opinioa The state of emergency remained in force until 29 September and for its duration, cases involving offences against Islamic (or Shari'a) law and certain political and economic offences were tried by newly established emergency courts. The majority of the judges in these courts were members of the security forces and defendants were denied legal representation and the right of appeal. Proceedings were conducted summarily and sentences - including amputation and flogging - were carried out with little delay. On 8 May Amnesty Intemational appealed to the govemment to ensure that no one was detained under emergency regulations solely for the peaceful expression of their opinions, and called for the restoration of the right to legal representation and appeal.
During the emergency numerous alleged govemment opponents were arrested, particularly suspected members of the banned Arab Ba'athist Socialist Party. Most were detained without trial under the State Security Act, although some were tried by emergency courts. On 15 May, Osman el-Sheikh el-Zein, a pharmacist, was arrested in Khartoum with three others and accused of printing and distributing Ba'athist leaflets criticizing the government They were brought to trial in November before an ordinary criminal court on charges of membership of an illegal political organization and inciting hatred against the government Their trial was continuing at the end of 1984. Other alleged Ba'athists were tried before emergency courts and sentenced to prison terms, mostly of one or two years, for membership of an illegal political organization.
Several people were arrested in Juba in June reportedly for opposing the government's policy of redividing the formerly semi-autonomous southem region. Charles Adura and other members of the Equatoria regional parliament were among those arrested All, however, were released uncharged after a short time except Charles Adura, who was reportedly still detained without charge at the end of 1984.
On 8 July the govemment announced that defendants before the Emergency Courts, which it renamed "Decisive Justice Courts", would
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
henceforth be allowed legal representation and the right to appeal to a newly-created "Decisive Justice Court of Appeal". On 3 August, Salaheddin el-Musbah el-Mahdi, a businessman, was sentenced by a Decisive Justice Court to five years' imprisonment for insulting the head of state. Speaking in a Khartoum mosque in President Nimeiri's presence, he had criticized the state of emergency and called for the release of political prisoners. The sentence was reduced on appeal to two years' imprisonment and 80 lashes, which were inflicted immediately. He was still imprisoned at the end of 1984 and was regarded by Amnesty Intemational as a prisoner of conscience.
The Decisive Justice Courts were abolished when the emergency was lifted on 29 September and their jurisdiction was retumed to civil courts. Political arrests, however, continued. In October over200 people were arrested and accused of involvement in a conspiracy to undermine security and "prepare for a scheduled foreign intervention". They included the Reverend Philip Abbas Gabboush, a former member of parliament; Mursi Mursal, a member of the Bar Association's council, and several army officers. By the end of 1984 they had not been tried and Amnesty Intemational was investigating their cases.
In December at least eight local govemment officials and university lecturers were arrested in Juba following an attack by the SPLA near Juba apparently for political reasons. They were all reported to have been released without charge by the end of the month.
In the latter part of 1984 Amnesty Intemational was working on behalf of over 100 prisoners of conscience and investigating the cases of several other political prisoners. They included members of banned political parties such as the Sudan Communist Party and the Arab Ba' athist Socialist Party, as well as members of the Republican Brothers movement, an Islamic organization, and supporters of the detained former Prime Minister, Sadiq el-Mahdi. Some of the detained prisoners of conscience had been held for several years, such as Youssif Hussein el-Amin, a trade union leader arrested in 1979; Mohamed Murad el-Hag, a university lecturer arrested in 1979; El-Tigani el-Tayeeb Babikir, a Communist Party leader arrested in 1980 and Mohamed Sidahmed Attiq, a journalist and alleged Ba'athist arrested in 1980. President Nimeiri was reported on 15 December to have stated that there were only about 300 political prisoners in Sudaa He said that the Communists and Ba'athists would soon be brought to trial but gave no details. However, Amnesty Intemational believed that the number of untried political detainees and convicted political prisoners was in fact higher than this.
Several prisoners of conscience were released during 1984. In January a number of prominent southem politicians detained in 1982 and 1983 were released. Among them were Dhol Achuil Aleu who had
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
been vice-president of the High Executive Council for the South (the former southern regional government), and Bona Malwal, a former Minister of Informatioa Also freed during 1984 were Mokhtar Abdallah Ahmed, a trade unionist detained in 1979 and Abdu Hashim Hamdallah, a businessman arrested in 1980. On 18 December former Prime Minister Sadiq el-Mahdi was released together with 16 of his supporters from the banned Umma Party, which is linked to the Ansar sect of Muslims. On 19 December President Nimeiri also released Mahmoud Mohamed Taha, leader of the Republican Brothers movement, and about 50 of his supporters, who had been detained without trial under the State Security Act since June for criticizing the Vice-President
Political prisoners were mostly held in civil prisons, such as Kober Prison in Khartoum North, and various regional prisons. Conditions were poor and several detainees reportedly suffered long delays before receiving medical treatment
Amnesty International received allegations of ill-treatment or torture of some political prisoners while they were held incommunicado by the State Security Service. In July Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to investigate reports that Osman el-Sheikh el-Zein and three other alleged Ba'athists had been tortured while under interrogation by the State Security Service in Khartoum. On 21 December Amnesty International appealed to the government to investigate the alleged torture of Nabil Nashid Abdallah, a geologist, and over 30 other alleged Ba'athists detained incommunicado in State Security Service custody in Khartoum.
Amnesty International appealed for the penalty of amputation to be abolished, as it is a cruel, inhuman and degrading punishment and as such, prohibited by international law. Under the new Islamic laws introduced in September 1983 the penalty for the theft of goods valued at over 100 Sudanese pounds (about US $80) is amputation of the right hand, and the penalty for armed robbery or persistent theft is amputation of the right hand an^ of the left foot ("cross-limb amputation"). At least 65 amputations were carried out during 1984, including 45 right hand amputations and 20 cross-limb amputations, mostly before a public audience in Kober Prison and under the supervision of a doctor. At the end of the year, at least 23 sentences of amputation were awaiting the result of judicial appeals or the infliction of the penalty. Many of the victims had been tried without legal representation or the right of appeal.
In August 1984 Amnesty International presented information on amputations in Sudan to the UN Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities. On 29 August the Sub-Commission adopted a resolution recommending that the UN Commission on Human Rights urge governments which had legislation or practices allowing amputation to provide alternative punishments in
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
conformity with the prohibition of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment in Article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Amnesty Intemational was also concerned about the judicial penalty of flogging, also introduced in September 1983 and widely used. Between 25 and 100 lashes were inflicted, in court, immediately after sentencing, or after an appeal ruling upholding the sentence. Several hundred men and women were flogged during 1984, many of them after being tried without rights to legal representation or appeal.
Amnesty Intemational appealed to President Nimeiri on a number of occasions to commute death penalties. At least 10 people convicted of murder or persistent armed robbery were publicly executed during 1984. On 15 June Al-Wathig Sabah al-Khair was hanged in Kober prison two days after being convicted of persistent armed robbery by an emergency court. He was also sentenced to cmcifixion after death, but this was not carried out as "the machinery was not available", according to the prison director.
