Grenada
Amnesty International was concerned about the detention without charge of former members of the New Jewel Movement (NJM), the political party forming the People's Revolutionary Government (PRG) which governed the country from March 1979 until October 1983. Amnesty International also investigated the fairness of proceedings against 20 former PRG ministers and army officers charged with the murder of Prime Minister Maurice Bishop and others in October 1983. Some of the defendants alleged that they had been ill-treated in custody.
Maurice Bishop and five other PRG members were killed by members of the armed forces on 19 October 1983, following a dispute within the leadership of the NJM. The PRG was dissolved and a Revolutionary Military Council briefly assumed control of the government This was overthrown after troops from the USA and six other Caribbean countries invaded Grenada on 25 October 1983 (see Amnesty International Report 1984).
By the end of December 1983 all foreign combat troops had been withdrawn from Grenada although some 300 US military personnel, including 150 military police, remained on the island. A Caribbean Peacekeeping Force (CPF) also remained with responsibility for
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
security and policing. The CPF was composed of some 400 soldiers and police from Jamaica and Barbados, with smaller contingents from Antigua, Dominica, St Vincent, St Kitts and St Lucia. The Advisory Coimcil of Grenada, an interim civilian govemment appointed by the Governor-General in November 1983, stayed in office until elections were held on 3 December 1984. These were won by the New National Party, a coalition of three centre parties led by Herbert Blaize, who had formed a govemment by the end of the year.
On 6 Febmary Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Chairman of the Advisory Council about the continued detention without charge of some 30 people. The detainees were former NJM members, most of whom had been arrested by US troops shortly after the October 1983 invasion. They were held at Richmond Hill prison under a Preventive Detention Ordinance of November 1983 which gave the Advisory Council the power to detain without charge any person who appeared likely to act in a manner adverse to the interests of public safety, public order or defence. Amnesty Intemational asked if Ùieir cases had been considered by the Advisory Tribunal established under the Preventive Detention Ordinance to review cases within one month of detentioa This tribunal was empowered to make recommendations only, and its decisions were not binding on the govemment; in Amnestylnterna-tional's view this did not meet the standards for an independent review of the lawfulness of a detention required under Article 7 of the American Convention on Human Rights. Amnesty Intemational urged the govemment to ensure that all those in preventive detention were promptly charged with specific offences and brought before the courts, or released.
Amnesty Intemational referred also in its letter to reports that three detainees had lodged an official complaint alleging that they had been beaten by members of the Barbadian police force during interrogation in November 1983; one of the three alleged that he had signed a confession under duress as a result of ill-treatment.
No reply to Amnesty Intemational's letter was received However, 20 of the detainees were later brought before a court to be charged ( see below).
In April Amnesty Intemational appealed on behalf of 18 people still held in preventive detention, calling for them to be promptly charged or released The detainees included the former manager of Radio Free Grenada, the PRG Commissioner of Prisons and the former PRG Health Minister. Amnesty Intemational expressed concem that their cases had not been reviewed by the Advisory Tribunal, that they reportedly had difficulty gaining access to lawyers and that applications for habeas corpus brought on their behalf had been repeatedly
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
adjourned. All diose held in preventive detention in April, at the time of this appeal, had been released or charged by June 1984. Some had been held for more than seven and a half months before their release.
Twenty people were charged in February and March with the murder of former Prime Minister Maurice Bishop and seven others on 19 October 1983. The charges carried mandatory death sentences on conviction. On 6 June an Amnesty Intemational observer attended a preliminary inquiry hearing.
Maurice Bishop was placed under house arrest on 13 October 1983 after a dispute widiin the NJM. On 19 October 1983 he was freed by several thousand supporters who accompanied him to the army headquarters at Fort Rupert He and the seven other named victims were allegedly shot dead after entering the fort A number of the accused were former officers in the People's Revolutionary Army (PRA) and the Revolutionary Military Council (RMC). Others were former PRG govemment ministers and leading NJM members. They included Bernard Coard, deputy leader of the PRG; his wife Phyllis Coard, head of the NJM National Women's Organization; Leon Comwall, former PRG Ambassador to Cuba; John Ventour, Secretary of the Grenada Trades Union Council, and General Hudson Austin, former Commander-in-Chief of the PRA and head of the RMC.
Most of the accused had been held for several months in preventive detention before being charged on 22 Febmary. Eleven were originally charged with conspiracy under the Terrorism (Prevention) Law, an emergency law providing for trial in a non-jury court introduced by the PRG. However, all the accused were later jointly charged with murder, and the conspiracy charges (which had not carried a death sentence) were shelved
Amnesty International's concerns in the case arose from: the circumstances of the pre-trial detention of the accused, who were first brought before a court more than three months after their arrest; allegations that some of the accused had signed confessions as a result of ill-treatment during interrogation by police; and reports that they had been denied adequate access to legal counsel, both before and after they had been charged
The single lawyer defending the accused when they first appeared in court on 22 February later reported that she had been denied access to the prisoners for the next two weeks. When she visited the prison on 8 March three of the defendants had complained that they had been taken for further interrogation after their court appearance, and had been beaten or otherwise ill-treated The lawyer said that she saw bmising and other signs of ill-treatment on two of them on 8 March, and that a doctor had earlier been called to the prison to examine three of the
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
defendants. The Chairman of the Advisory Council then stated that he had ordered an official inquiry into these allegations.
The preliminary inquiry, scheduled to begin on 6 June, was adjourned to allow the defendants more time to instruct a defence team. When the proceedings resumed on 27 June the defendants (by then represented by seven lawyers) went on hunger-strike in protest at their prison conditions, including continued restrictions on access to their lawyers. The defence lawyers complained to the court that they had been allowed only half an hour's consultation with each of their clients before the hearing, and that this had been in the presence of armed guards. Increased access was subsequently granted, and the preliminary inquiry lasted for six weeks. The defendants either refused to plead, or submitted pleas of" no case to answer", and witnesses only appeared for the prosecution. At the same time the defendants challenged the legality of the court, arguing that the independent court system established by the PRG (after it had suspended the 1974 Constitution and removed Grenada from the West Indies Associated Court System) was no longer constitutionally valid, since the 1974 Constitution had again come into effect after the US-led invasioa
While the motion challenging the legality of the court was still before the High Court, 19 of the defendants were committed to trial on the murder charges. Ian St Bernard, former Commissioner of Police under the PRG, was discharged on the grounds of insufficient evidence. However, he was remanded in custody on the original conspiracy charge. This charge was dismissed on 21 August and Ian St Bernard was released on bail, after being charged with another offence under common law.
The murder trial began on 16 October but was adjourned after the defendants told the court that they had insufficient funds to retain counsel. Legal aid was granted and the trial resumed in November. On 20 November it was adjourned indefinitely and had not recommenced by the end of the year.
On 17 October Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Chairman of the Advisory Council about reports that Phyllis Coard had for several weeks been denied visits from relatives and friends and was being held in isolation, with no association with other prisoners or outdoor exercise. Shortly after the ending of the preliminary inquiry, all reading and writing materials had reportedly been removed from her cell, including notes she had taken in court to prepare her defence. Phyllis Coard reportedly went on hunger-strike on 27 August in protest and Amnesty Intemational expressed concem that she had not received adequate medical treatment in prison and had been denied visits by a doctor of her choice. Amnesty Intemational told the Chairman of the Advisory Council that her alleged treatment violated the UN Standard Minimum
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. The Chairman replied on 29 October that an investigation of Phyllis Coard's treatment in prison had been undertaken by his office and that she was now receiving medical treatment, visits and access to reading and writing materials. He also stated that an order made by the court on 16 October for her to be visited by a doctor of her choice had been complied with (she had reportedly fainted during her appearance in court). He told Amnesty Intemational that the prisoners were being treated in accordance with the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners.
