Malaysia
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concemed about the long-term detention without trial of about 160 people under the Intemal Security Act(ISA) 1960, including a number of prisoners of conscience, and the use of the death penalty.
On 13 September the Minister of Home Affairs announced that 168 people were then detained underthe ISA, which allows for the detention without charge or trial of people who the government considers a threat to national security for renewable two-year periods. Some of these detainees had been held for over 10 years. According to another govemment statement in November 1984,52 people had been arrested underthe I SA in the previous year, but Amnesty Intemational was not able to obtain full details of these arrests.
Amnesty Intemational was working on behalf of about 50 prisoners whose cases it had taken up either for adoption as prisoners of conscience or for investigation. Many had been imprisoned without trial under the ISA for many years, such as Ma Hong Wan, formerly of the opposition Labour Party, whowasarrestedin August 1971 shortly after finishing his high school education, and Loo Ming Leong, a former rubber tapper, detained since October 1972. Both had been adopted by Amnesty Intemational as prisoners of conscience, and were believed to be held at the Taiping detention camp in Perak state. Amnesty Intemational also worked for the release of Wong Yong Huat, a former college student imprisoned since April 1972. His arrest was reportedly motivated by suspicion that he might engage in pro-Communist agitation because he had given up full-time studies to become a worker on a mbber plantation while studying Chinese in the evenings. He was reported to have been taken on a number of occasions from detention in Taipingto undisclosed police interrogation centres for up to a year at a time. Amnesty International took up for investigation the case of another detainee at Taiping - Ng Swee Khwan - detained without charge or trial since January 1976 after participating in a strike in the shoe factory where he worked.
All ISA detainees were transferred ft^om Batu Gajah Special Detention Camp in March 1983, and most were believed to be held either at the Taiping detention camp or at police stations or "rehabilitation" centres throughout the country. Conditions in Taiping were reported to be poor, with detainees being confined to extremely hot and poorly ventilated cells. Prisoners were reportedly allowed few books and correspondence was restricted to immediate family members.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Medical care was also reported to be inadequate. According to reports received by Amnesty International some prisoners did not see their families when they visited because the prisoners were not told why they had been summoned to the prison office and, after frequent summonses for interrogation, many prisoners refused to leave their cells without knowing the reason. Amnesty International took upfor investigation the cases of 31 prisoners held inKawasan 10, a. special section of the camp.
Amnesty International received reports over several years of prisoners being transferred from regular detention camps to interrogation centres including police stations and so-called "rehabilitation" centres. Most detainees in such centres were reportedly held in long-term solitary confinement and denied regular exercise and books. Sanitary facilities were reported to be inadequate and food meagre, in some cases leading to ill-health. The length of time spent in the centres varied, but some detainees were reported to have beenheld in solitary confinement for up to three years. Some were subsequently released - often with no explanation - while others were sent back to their original detention camps.
Among those detained in an interrogation centre during 1984 was Ng TeoHuan. A former shopkeeper, he had been detained without trial since 1972 and adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience. Ng Teo Huan was transferred from Batu Gajah to the Johore Special Branch headquarters in September 1982, after which he was reportedly held continuously in solitary confinement He had had tuberculosis in Batu Gajah and was reportedly still in poor health. On 18 June Amnesty International appealed for all necessary medical treatment and for his immediate release. On 11 October Ng Teo Huan was released, although like other released prisoners he had restrictions placed on his freedom of movement and association (see Amnesty International Report 1984).
On 10 July tiiree leading members of the Pas {Partai Islam se Malaysia), a fundamentalist Muslim opposition party which appeared to be winning renewed support in the northern states of Malaysia, were arrested At the time of their arrest an official alleged that their activities had been a threat to the nation and thatthey had been"incitingpeople to violence and other crimes". Mohamad Sabu and Buniyamin Haji Yaakob were released in September, but Amnesty International was concemed about the continued detention without charge or trial of Abu Bakar bin Chik, particularly as the accusations against him published by the government in November appeared to amount to no more than that he had criticized govemment policy.
The use of the death penalty remained a major concera At least 13 people were executed and 24 sentenced to death in 1984. Five of those executed had been convicted of illegal possession of firearms under
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985

Section 57(1) of the ISA, for which the death penahy is mandatory. People charged under the ISA were usually tried under special trial procedures known as the Essential (Security Cases) Amendment Regulations, which - contrary to ordinary procedures - place the burden of proof on the defence, allow prosecution witnesses to give evidence in camera and provide for trials without juries. Most of the death sentences imposed during 1984 followed convictions for drug trafficking Amnesty Intemational was concerned that large numbers of prisoners awaiting trial faced the imposition of death sentences if convicted. According to a statement in August by the Deputy Minister of Home Affairs, 458 people had been charged between April and July with dmg trafficking, which carries a mandatory death sentence, under Section 3 9(B) of the Dangerous D mgs Act 1952. Amnesty International leamed of only one case in which a death sentence was commuted: Datuk Mokhtar Hashim, a former govemment minister and member of parliament, whohadbeen convictedofmurderinga"politicalrival" and sentenced to death in March 1983, had his sentence commuted to life imprisonment on 2 March after review by a Pardons Board chaired by the King.
