Seychelles
Amnesty Intemational was concerned because suspected opponents of the govemment, including prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience, were held under legislation providing indefinite detention without trial. It was also con-cemed about the "disappearance" of two people who were reportedly abducted and killed by members of the security services.
Four people - a businessman, a taxi driver and two former soldiers -were detained during the night of 29/30 September, apparently on suspicion of organizing an anti-govemment demonstration for the following day. They were reportedly held under the Preservation of Public Security (Detention) Regulations, which provide for the indefinite detention, on tiie order of the President, of anyone considered dangerous to public security. Three were released untried in November. The remaining prisoner, the businessman Jean Dingwall, was investigated by Amnesty Intemational as a possible prisoner of conscience. He had been detained at least twice before for political reasons.
Amnesty Intemational received allegations that two people were abducted and killed by govemment security agents. "Expedit" Jean Guillaume, a labourer, was reported to have been abducted on 9 August when he was apparently mistaken for another person regarded as a govemment opponent On 23 August the authorities announced that he was missing and appealed for information as to his whereabouts. On 13 September Alton Ah-Time "disappeared" and was also subsequently reported to have been abducted and killed by security officials. On 21 September the authorities announced his "disappearance" and appealed to the public for informatioa Alton Ah-Time's mother published an open letter in the press, in which she alleged that her son had been under surveillance by govemment agents for several months. She also alleged that he had been accused of opposing the government in particular for suspected contact with an illegal opposition group, the Mouvementpour
vili
Amnesty International Report 1985
la résistance (MPR), the Resistance Movement Other reports received by Amnesty Intemational stated that Alton Ah-Time was abducted by four named govemment security officials and later killed
Amnesty Intemational wrote to President France Albert René on 7 November about Jean Guillaume and Alton Ah-Time, asking for information on any official inquiries into their "disappearance". The organization noted that in at least five other cases since 1977 in which people had "disappeared" or died in apparent accidents, subsequent reports had suggested that they had been abducted and killed by agents of the government with or without official sanctioa By the end of 1984 Amnesty Intemational had received no reply. However, on 30 November President René denied in a radio interview that Jean Guillaume and Alton Ah-Time had been abducted and killed by agents of the security forces or the govemment
