Korea (Republic of)
Amnesty Intemational remained concemed about the imprisonment of people for the peaceful expression of their views. It welcomed the release, in the first five months of the year, of over 200 students serving prison terms of eight months to three years. Amnesty Intemational was concemed, however, about an increase in the use of short-term detention, validated by the courts, of people participating in public protests, particularly in the second half of the year, and about several well-known critics of the govemment being placed under house arrest. Amnesty Intemational received fewer reports of torture during interrogation than in previous years but there were numerous reports of police violence against demonstrators both before and after arrest. It had few details about the application of the death penalty.
An Amnesty International research mission visited South Korea from 3 to 14 October 1984. The delegates met a wide range of people, including former prisoners of conscience, relatives and friends of political prisoners, human rights activists, lawyers and members of various non-governmental organizations, and had talks with officials of the Ministries of Justice and Foreign Affairs. The mission enabled Amnesty Intemational to obtain more detailed information on human rights violations and to explain its concems to the authorities.
At the end of 1984 Amnesty Intemational was working for the releaseof24 adopted prisoners of conscience. They had been convicted of anti-state activities under the National Security Law (NSL) and two of them continued to be held in preventive detention under the Public Security Law after their sentences had expired. Among them were several Koreans normally resident in J apan, whom Amnesty Intemational believed were falsely accused of carrying out espionage and anti-state activities under instructions from North Korea.
Amnesty Intemational continued to appeal for the release d six prisoners serving sentences of two and a half to seven years who had been arrested in early November 1982 and convicted under the N SL of forming an anti-state organization, the "Five Pines Society", with the intent of establishing a pro-communist system (see^ mnesty Intemational Report 1984). All had been detained illegally for more than a month before a detention order was issued against them. At their trial in January 1983 they each alleged that they had been forced to sign false confessions under torture which included beatings, sleep deprivation.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
watertorture and electric shocks. They admitted holding views critical of the govemment but denied forming an organization to overthrow it Amnesty Intemational adopted as a prisoner of conscience Kim Hyon-jang who was serving a sentence of life imprisonment for alleged involvement in a March 1982 arson attack on the USCulturalCentre in Pusan. At the time of the attack Kim Hyon-jang had been hiding in a Catholic Education Centre in Wonju for almost two years to avoid arrest for circulating documents on the Kwangju disturbances of May 1980. After the attack, those responsible sought refuge at the centre where they were encouraged to surrender to the authorities. Kim Hyon-jang also surrendered He was charged under the NSL with planning the arson attack and with carryingout other pro-communist activities. Kim Hyon-jang testified at his trial that he had been forced to make a false confession undertorture. Amnesty Intemational believedthathewasin fact detained for his non-violent criticism of the govemment
Amnesty Intemational continued to appeal for the release of Soh Joon-shik and Kang Jong-kon who had been held under successive preventive detention orders issued under the Public Security Law (PSL) since their sentences for violation of the NSL expired in 1978 and 1981 respectively. Under the PSL, the Minister of Justice may order prisoners previously convicted of certain offences to be held in preventive custody after expiry of sentence if the Minister believes they may commit a similar offence again. Both prisoners appealed to the High Court against their detention orders. In May the preventive custody order against Soh Joon-shik was renewedfor the third time. On 20 December a Seoul High Court invalidated the detention order on Kang Jong-kon but he was not released
Amnesty Intemational appealed for the release of Professor Kang Man-kil, Professor Lee Yong-hee and Reverend Cho Seung-hyuk who were taken into custody by the Anti-Communist Section ofthe National Police on 30 and 31 December 1983. They were reportedly interrogated about a research project sponsored by the Christian Institute for the Study of Justice and Development (of which Reverend Cho was the Director) on the presentation of the issue of Korean reunification in govemment text books. Amnesty Intemational believed that they were detained for expressing non-violent political views and was concemed that detention orders were issued only after 11 days in detention when they were transferred to a regular police station. Amnesty I ntemational received reports that sleep deprivation and threats were used to obtain self-incriminating statements. They were released on 14 Febmary with suspension of prosecution for two years. One of the conditions of their release was that they had to appear on television to admit mistakes and promise not to discuss Korean reunificatioa
Three prisoners of conscience held under the NSL were released.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
They were: Lee Sun-keun, detained for alleged involvement in the National Federation of Democratic Students case of 1981, who was released in a presidential amnesty on 2 March; Kim Oh-ja, detained since 1975 for allegedly infiltrating student groups on behalf of North Korea, who was released in an amnesty on 15 August; and Choi Sok-jin, sentenced to life imprisonment as an alleged member of the South Korea National Liberation Frontin 1979, who was released for medical treatment on 20 November. During 1984 Amnesty Intemational had repeatedly appealed for their release and had called for Choi Sok-jin to be given adequate medical care for a chronic kidney disease.
In four amnesties between 8 February and 8 May the authorities released 229 students. Most had been sentenced under the Law on Assemblies and Demonstrations for participating in anti-govemment demonstrations or distributing anti-govemment leaflets; the others had been given short sentences under the NSL. Many of those released had been regarded as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International
From August onwards, as the number of protests by students, workers, farmers and other groups grew, the number of arrests increased On many occasions violence empted on both sides as police tried to contain demonstrations. There were allegations that the government used provocateurs to instigate violence. The majority of those taken into police custody were released without charge; others were given summary trials, usually under the Minor Offences Law, and sentenced to a maximum of 29 days in police detention, as provided by the Summary Proceedings Act
Summary procedures were used to try a number of people who protested against the visit of President Chun Doo-hwan to Japan in early September. On 7 August the Secretary General of Ecumenical Youth Council (E YC), Kim Chol-ki, and E YC staff member Hwang In-ha were arrested after police seized an EYC leaflet opposing the visit. They were sentenced to 15 days' imprisonment but were released after lodging an appeal. On 15 August 90 participants in a peacefiil demonstration organized by the National Youth Alliance for Democracy to protest against the presidential visit were taken into police custody. Fifteen were subsequently sentenced to 10 to 15 days' detention. Among them was Kim Keun-tae, the Chairman of the Alliance, who was detained several times during 1984 for non-violent political activities. In mid-March he was held for three days in a police station in connection with the Alliance's journal and reportedly beatea In early November a summary court sentenced him to three days' detention for preparing and distributing leaflets.
Throughout 1984 workers and supporters of the banned Peace Market (Chonggye) Garment Workers' Union in Seoul were held for short periods. On 12Aprilthreeunionofficials-KimYoung-dae,Park
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Kye-hyun and Ka Jung-oo- were detained and interrogated for two days about a document they had issued. Park Kye-hyun was again detained briefly at the end of October for distributing leaflets claiming that the union was legal
On 2 September the Chairman of the C hristian Farmers' Movement, Pae Chong-ril, and the Chunnam district secretary of the Catholic Farmers' Association, Noh Kum-no, were arrested together with 43 others after a farmers' protestinHampyong, nearKwangju, against tax levels. While the others were released within a day, Pae Chong-ril and Noh Kum-no were sentenced to 25 days' detention.
Several well-known critics of the govemment were placed under house arrest to prevent them expressing their views publicly. Among them was Lee Soh-son, a supporter of the banned Peace Market Garment Workers' Union, who was held under house arrest on at least four occasions for one or two days. Paik Ki-wan, Director of the Unification Issue Study Centre, whom Amnesty Intemational adopted as a prisoner of conscience during his detention in 1979, was also prevented by police from leaving his home at least four times between September and November 1984. On three of these occasions he was due to give public lectures.
The Amnesty Intemational mission which visited South Korea in October interviewed several people who had been interrogated for periods ranging from a few days to several weeks in 1984 by the Anti-Communist Section of the National Police or by the National Security Planning Agency. From these and other reports received it appeared that few detainees had been physically ill-treated, but that several had agreed to make statements underpressure, threats or sleep deprivation. The Amnesty Intemational mission also interviewed several people who testified to having been beaten in police custody after a demonstration. Eight taxi drivers who were tried after a mass demonstration over working conditions in Taeguon25 May testified in court that they had been forced to sign false confessions by electric shocks and beatings. Investigations by church groups and the opposition Korea Democratic Party supported their allegations. In three separate incidents between September and November, female students in Seoul complained of ill-treatment by police who they said forced them to strip to the waist, humiliated them and in some cases beat them.
Amnestylntemational appealed for the commutation ofsevendeath sentences imposed in criminal cases, but did not know whether they were later commuted or carried out
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Laos
Amnesty International's main concem remained the continued restriction in remote parts of northeast and southeast Laos of large numbers of people detained without trial since 1975 becauseoftheirallegedpoliti-cal positions or activities under the pre-1975 government. Amnesty Intemational believed that as many as 6,000 such people remained in some form of intemal exile in these areas, and that among them were many who could be considered prisoners of conscience. It was also concerned about the lack of legal safeguards for people arrested and tried on political grounds.
Amnesty Intemational received reports that the system of "reeducation" for alleged former civil servants, military personnel and political adherents of the pre-1975 govemment in the northeastern provinces of HouaPhan and XiengKhouang had been restmctured. In earlier years, detainees had been confined under strict surveillance in large camps - 03,04,05, 06-for "re-education" through an intensive program of what were officially termed seminars. Officials emphasized during 1984 that the old system of restriction in Houa Phan and Xieng Khouang had been abolished However, they seemed to confirm the institutionalization of a new one. Statements reportedly made in the latter part of the year by a Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs and another official indicated that most of the people detained under the old system were performing some kind of govemment service, but could not leave the northeast, while a few were still held in the original "re-education" centres, some of which had not been dismantled.
Amnesty I nteraational w as informed that a number of the detainees previously held in camps in Houa Phan and Xieng Khouang had been sent to work on heavy labour projects at sites in the northeast They were organized into groups of five to 60 and were under the surveillance of military personnel some or all of the time. Other detainees were said to have been setded in specified villages and towns in Houa Phan and Xieng Khouang and were often joined by their families. Some were reportedly allowed to take up jobs in local government but most were said to be under surveillance. They were reportedly informed that the intensive phase of their political re-education was considered essentially completed. Towards the end of 1984 Amnesty International received indications that some of this latter group were again being subjected to more stringent restrictions. According to information received by Amnesty Intemational, some were sent to join heavy labour work
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
groups for no apparent reason, while others, who had expressed dissatisfaction at not being allowed to return to their original homes, were once again detained in "re-education" camps, which had been renamed.
Amnesty Intemational received estimates from several sources of the number of such people still restricted in various parts of northeast Laos during 1984. On the basis oftheseestimates Amnesty Intemational believed the total was more than 2,000.
Amnesty Intemational received only limited information conceming the restriction of people associated with the pre-1975 government in remote areas of the southeastem provinces of Attopeu, Savannakhet, and Xekong during 1984. Indications were, however, that conditions may have generally been more severe than in the northeast, and that more than 3,500 people may have been restricted in these areas.
A number of reports were receivedof releases from restriction in the northeast About 50 people were reportedly retumed to Vientiane from Houa Phan during February and March, and further releases were reported during June and July. In the latter part of 1984 relatively few people seem to have been retumed to Vientiane. This slow rate of release - following official remarks promising an acceleration -reportedly ledto the manifestations of discontent among those restricted there for which some were retumed to detention camps.
Among those released from restriction in the northeast were several political detainees who had been adopted as prisoners of conscience or whose cases had been under investigation by Amnesty International. These included Tiao Silolot Na Champassak, a former provincial govemor; Boun Thanh and Phak Savanh, former ministerial officials; and Phouphet Phommachanh, Manh Opha, and Tiao Sinthanavong Kingdavong, former military officials.
Amnesty Intemational continued to work on behalf of more than 40 political detainees who were adopted as prisoners of conscience or whose cases were being investigated. They included Tiao Souk Bouavong, a former Vice-President of the National Assembly; Khamphan Pradith, a former civfl servant; Tiao Sisoumang Sisaleumsak, a doctor, and Khamking Souvanlasy, the former Secretary General of the Laos National Commission for UNESCO, all of whom were arrested in 1975 and were believed to be still under restriction in the northeast
Amnesty Intemational received no reports of releases from restriction in southeast Laos.
Amnesty Intemational also remained concerned about the continuing absence of any published legal safeguards for people detained or restricted on political or other grounds. Despite reports in 1983 that the drafting of a constitution had neared completion, Laos remained
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
without a constitution, or any published penal code or procedural code throughout 1984. The only known guidelines for trial and sentencing were certain interim rules and regulations circulated on a limited basis in 1978.
The lack of normal legal safeguards heightened Amnesty International's concem about a number of people arrested and accused of cormption. They included civil servants andjunior ministers: in April a number of people working in the Ministry of A griculture, Irrigation and Cooperatives were arrested; in late November and early December so were a Vice Minister of Finance, OudonPhonsena, anda ViceMinister of Commerce, Chanpheng Bounnaphon. Most of these govemment officials were reportedly accused of various forms of cormption, as were at least 40, and perhaps as many as 70, ministerial personnel, junior ministers and other govemment figures arrested in early 1983. Amnesty Intemational was informed that at least some of those arrested in 198 3 and 1984 and accused of cormption had been arrested for political reasons as a result of disagreements over socio-economic issues within the govemment leadership.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed that those arrested in 1984, like some of those arrested in 1983, might never be charged or tried. It was also concemed that if they were tried, their trials might not be fair at hearings convened in September 1983 to judge 42 people accused of cormption defence counsel were not allowed. On 19 December Amnesty Intemational asked the head of state, Souphanouvong, for information on the charges against Oudon Phonsena and Chanpheng Bounnaphon and sought assurances that any trials would conform to intemationally recognized norms.
Amnesty Intemational welcomed reports that at least seven people sentenced by the September 1983 hearings to prison terms of several years were informally allowed to appeal against their convictions, and that they were released during the latter part of 1984. However, reports that the decision to release them was based on the emergence of evidence that govemment officials had conspired to denounce them reinforced Amnesty Intemational's concem about the fairness of trials in Laos.
Amnesty Intemational Report 1965	229
