Thailand
Amnesty Intemational was concemed that people were imprisoned for expressing, non-violently, opinions deemed to be defamatory of or insulting to members of the royal family. Italso investigated the reasons for the detention without charge or trial of more than 20 alleged members or supporters of the banned Communist Party of Thailand (CPT). Amnesty International was concemed that such detainees could be held incommunicado without charge for up to 480 days under the Royal Act on the Prevention of Communistic Activities (RAPCA), and could be tried by military tribunals using judicial procedures that did not conform to internationally recognized standards. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed about the use of the death penalty.
Amnesty Intemational continued to be concerned about the use of the charge of lese majesty (defaming or insulting members of the royal family or the regent) to imprison prisoners of conscience. Amnesty Intemational continued to urge the release of prisoners of conscience Anan Seenaakhan and Samaan Khongsuphon, who had been convicted of lese majesty in 1983 {see Amnesty International Report 1984). It also adopted as prisoners of conscience Thawan Saeaengkanchon and Phongtheep ManoophiphaQihong, who had been sentenced in 1983 to four years' imprisonment for helping Samaan Khongsuphon to publish a booklet deemed to constitute lese majesty, and Rattana Utthaphan, who had been sentenced to sue years' imprisonment in 1983 for writing to the King asking him to abdicate in order to participate directly in governing the country. Amnesty Intemational was also investigating the cases of two students arrested inChiangMaiinJuly after being accused of possessing the booklet mentioned above.
In late July and early August police arrested SulakSiwarak, a well-known social commentator andBuddhistscholar, Kitti Sitthichindachook, the owner of a printing firm; and Chitrakom Tangkaseemsuk, a university lecturer. They were subsequently charged with lese majesty and released on bail. Amnesty International believed that the three
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
would, if convicted, be imprisoned for expressing non-violently their political opinions and appealed for all charges against them to be dropped Following preliminary hearings, all charges were withdrawn on 30 November.
Amnesty Intemational was also concemed that people charged with lese majesty, communist activities or offences against intemal security were tried by military law courts or military tribunals that did not guarantee the right of appeal and that restricted the defendants' rights to cross-examine and call witnesses.
In a series of raids between 3 and 17 July, officers of the Santibaan (political police) and of the Internal Security Operations Command arrested 22 people and accused them of being members or supporters of the banned CPT. Among them wereChatcharin Chaiwat, editor of the daily newspaper Afflaiwp^uwm; Priichaa Piemphongsaan, a university lecturer, Phirun Chatwanitkun, a former student leader, and his wife Chonthiraa Sattayaawathanaa, a literary critic. The last two were among six of the arrested alleged to be members of the Central Committee of the CPT. All 22 were taken into custody under RAPCA provisions allowing up to 480 days' incommunicado detention without trial Amnesty International appealed to the govemment to bring the detainees to open trial or release them At the end of the year none had been formally charged, although four had been granted police bail and eight had been exempted from prosecution after agreeing to accept governmental political "instmction" and to report regularly to the authorities.
Since 1980 the govemment had implemented a program of general clemency for alleged CPT members or sympathizers who gave themselves up to the authorities and pledged loyalty to the monarchy, religion, and the Thai nation. This program, known as Policy 66/23 after a prime ministerial decree, promised those who surrendered and made the required pledges immunity from persecution for their "communistic activities". Amnesty Intemational was concemed about reports that some people promised immunity had later been detained withoutcharge, andaboutallegationsthatothershadbeenthreatenedor killed by govemment paramilitary forces. Withit Chandawcmg, who had surrendered in 1983 and then stood for election to parliament, was reportedly detained in July 1984 and accused of politically-motivated crimes committed in 1982. He was reportedly held incommunicado and without formal charge at a military base together with five others accused of involvement in the same offence. Amnesty Intemational urged that all six be transferred to the custody of the proper authorities and be charged or released After reports that Withit Chandawong had been moved to "protective custody". Amnesty International continued to monitor his case. It was also investigating allegations that Thawatchai
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
Chanlharadet, who had surrendered in 1982, was killed by local defence forces in October 1984.
Amnesty Intemational received information that 76 people were sentenced to death during 1984, but wasunable to obtain a complete list of executions. It leamed that at least one person was executed, butthat the death sentences on Chirawat Khienpanyaa (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984) and Lek Sukhen, another person on whose behalf Amnesty International had appealed in 1983, were commuted to life imprisonment
