Mexico
Amnesty International's concems included reports that members of rural communities and indigenous groups ^ ■	involved in land conflicts with local
authorities or landowners had been killed by armed civilians, who appeared in a number of cases to have acted in collaboration with official security forces, or with the tacit acquiescence of local authorities. The organization continued to be concemed about cases of unacknowledged detention, particularly of members of opposition political groups, and about reports of the use of torture or ill-treatment to obtain "confessions". Amnesty Intemational believed that some prisoners were held because of non-violent political activities rather than because of the criminal charges on which they were arrested or convicted, and considered them to be prisoners of conscience.
In March an Amnesty Intemational delegation visited the southem Mexican states of Chiapas and Oaxaca to investigate alleged human rights violations connected with land disputes and the growth of local opposition movements in mral areas. Meetings were held with local officials, academic researchers, lawyers and members of the church, rural trade unions, peasant organizations and political parties. The delegation also coUected testimony fix>m peasants, members of indigenous communities and political prisoners and their families. In October Amnesty Intemational addressed a 45-page memorandum to President Miguel de la Madrid Hurtado summarizing the findings of the mission. It expressed concern about consistent reports of unjustified violence by the security forces against peasants engaged in land disputes. It also drew attention to the apparent acquiescence, and in some cases alleged complicity, of local authorities in killings of members of opposition peasant organizations by armed civilians. The memorandum referred also to unacknowledged arrests and allegations of torture in both states.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
and detailed the cases of eight prisoners who Amnesty Intemational believed to be prisoners of conscience. Amnesty Intemational called for the release of prisoners of conscience, prompt and thorough investigations of reported political killings in mral areas, and effective measures against torture and unconstitutional detention practices. It also called for a review of the effectiveness of the existing legal and procedural guarantees available to prisoners in rural or indigenous areas. The govemment responded in December, inviting the organization to send a delegation to discuss its findings, and a mission was arranged for January 1985.
Amnesty Intemational received reports of abuses — including politically motivated killings and torture — in rural areas in the states of Chiapas, Oaxaca, Puebla, and the Huasteca region of Hidalgo, Veracmz and San Luis Potosí. Most of the victims were peasants and members of indigenous communities. Many belonged to independent regional peasant or Indian organizations formed in opposition to the bodies established under the auspices of the mling party, the Partido Revolucionario Institucional (PRI), the Institutional Revolutionary Party.
In January Amnesty Intemational appealed to the state authorities of Oaxaca for an investigation into the reported killing of seven Triqui Indians from the district of San Juan Cópala in separate incidents from September to November 1983. The victims were members of the Movimiento de Unificación y Lucha Triqui {MXHSl), Triqui Movement for Unity and Stmggle, which since its formation in 1981 had campaigned for communal lands. Some of the killings were reportedly carried out by civilians but Amnesty Intemational was concerned about repeated allegations that they had acted with the acquiescence of local authorities and with impimity from the law. In April Amnesty Intemational asked the state auüiorities of Chiapas to investigate the deaths of Juan López Hemández and Femando Sánchez Gutiérrez from the Simojovel region who were reported to have been shot on 11 April by stale security police. A fluther 30 peasants were rep>ortedly wounded. In May Amnesty Intemational sent urgent appeals to the state authorities of Hidalgo following reports that an 11-year-old boy, Benito Juárez Bautista, and one other peasant, Victor Bautista Hemández, had been killed on 22 April by civilian gunmen accompanied by army troops, in the village of Techimal, Huasteca region. The gunmen allegedly opened fire when the villagers refused to identify leaders of their organization, the Campesinos Unidos de la Sierra Oriental (CUSO), United Peasants of the Easlem Sierra, an independent peasant organization pressing for recognition of communal lands. Since October 1983 Amnesty Intemational had documented 12 cases in which peasants from the region were killed by armed civilians in politically motivated
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
attacks, in some of which official security forces were said to have participated.
In June Amnesty International wrote to the state authorities of Veracruz asking what had happened to 20 peasants from the village of Texomaxochitl, in the district of Chicontepec. They were reportedly abducted by state police on 16 May during an eviction in which their homes and possessions were destroyed Later reports stated that they had been tortured in secret custody in Papantla. A detailed reply from a state government official stated that the lands had been illegally invaded, and the arrests made in accordance with the law. He denied that the peasants had been ill-treated or tortured, and stated that all of them had been freed under an official amnesty and that negotiations had started to find a solution to the dispute.
Of eight people whose whereabouts were unknown at the end of 1983 following their reported abduction by police agents during 1982 and 1983, three were released from police custody early in 1984, one was remanded to await trial and four remained "disappeared". In October 1984, the Mexican Government submitted information to the UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances on two of these cases. Candelario Campos Ramirez, a student, was reported to have been abducted in Mexico City by men presumed to be police agents on 20 August 1983 (see Amnesty International Report 1984). The government denied that he had "disappeared", stating that he had been seen m perfect health in the neighbourhood of San José Ticoman. Amnesty International continued to investigate the case. During 1984 the organization took up for investigation the cases of a further 19 "disappeared" prisoners including those of 10 students and young people from the state of Sinaloa believed to have been detained by police in the late 1970s. The Mexican Government had replied to the Working Group with information on eight of these cases, but Amnesty International continued to investigate them in view of the discrepancies between the government information and details provided by the families. No new "disappearance" cases were reported during 1984.
Amnesty International remained concemed, however, about recurring instances of arrest without warrant and secret detention of political suspects. Rafael Ramirez Villanueva, amemberofthe Organización Regional Campesina del Occidente {OKCO), Westem Regional Peasant Organization, was reportedly detained by judicial police in Guadalajara, Jalisco, onl5 Septemberl983, and at tiie end of 1983 he was one of those listed by Amnesty International as "disappeared". His detention was eventually acknowledged officially on 13 February 1984, after he had spent five months in secret detention, during which he alleged he was tortured
Frequent allegations of torture and ill-treatment of detainees were received during 1984. Beatings were reportedly common at the time of
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
arrest, particularly in rural areas, and a number of prisoners under police interrogation were allegedly tortured On 12 July Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Governor of the state of Sinaloa, calling for an investigation into reports of the torture by state police of a 21-year-old youth, José Antonio Núñez Villarreal. He was arrested on 18 June without warrant at his home in Culiacán, blindfolded, and held incommunicado in a secret detention centre for three days. He alleged that he was tortured with repeated beatings, electric shocks, and by having mineral water forced up his nose. He was subsequently hospitalized with severe intemal injuries and his life was reportedly saved only by immediate surgery. Although an investigation by the Public Prosecutor's Office was apparently started Amnesty Intemational did not know what progress had been made and had received no reply to its letter by the end of 1984.
During 1984 Amnesty Intemational adopted six prisoners as prisoners of conscience. Although criminal charges had been brought against the prisoners. Amnesty Intemational believed that their political activities, which the organization believed to have been non-violent, were the real basis for their imprisonment A further 29 cases were taken up for investigation. One of those adopted was Gustavo Zárate Vargas, a former economics lecturer at the Autonomous University of Chiapas, who was arrested without warrant on 24 July 1983 in San Cristóbal de las Casas (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984). In December 1983 he was sentenced to eight years' imprisonment for possession of arms and marijuana, reduced on appeal to seven years three months, and further reduced by the Supreme Court of Justice to two yeare. Amnesty Intemational also adopted as prisoners of conscience Jesus Vicente Vásquez, Carlos Sánchez López, Leopoldo de Gyves Pineda and Manuel Vásquez Nicolás, all leaders of the Coalición Obrero Campesina Estudiantil del Istmo (COCEI), Coalition of Workers, Peasants and Students of the Isthmus, a left-wing opposition movement The last three were arrested on 13 December 1983 during protests over the disputed results of municipal elections the previous month (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1984). They were charged with plunder, criminal association, obstmction, attacking officials and carrying prohibited weapons. At the end of 1984 they were still awaiting trial in a prison in Salina Cmz, Oaxaca. The sixth adopted prisoner of conscience was José Manuel Hemández Martinez, a Tzotzil Indian peasant from the village of Venustiano Carranza, Chiapas. A member of the Coordinadora Nacional Plan de Ayala (CNPA), National Coordinating Committee of the Ayala Plan, and a community leader, he was arrested in March 1984 on charges of involvement in a murder in June 1980. At the end of 1984 he was still awaiting trial in the prison of Venustiano Carranza.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
In May 1984 an Amnesty Intemational delegation collected testimonies from Guatemalan refugees in southem Mexico about the human rights violations which had led them to flee Guatemala. Evidence was also collected regarding alleged incursions by the Guatemalan army and paramilitaries into refugee camps during which Guatemalan and Mexican citizens were killed The Amnesty Intemational delegation also discussed with Mexican officials its concem that no individuals should be forcibly repatriated to their country of origin if they faced danger to their lives and liberty there. Amnesty Intemational later informed Mexican officials of its concem at reports that Guatemalan refugees and those assisting them had been arbitrarily arrested and tortured during relocation to states further from the Guatemalan border. It also raised concems about the procedures by which individual Central Americans' claims for political exile were considered, and urged Mexico to become party to the UN Convention and Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees. Mexican officials replied that Mexico intended to provide its traditional protection and relief to refugees, and that international norms were being adhered to in all repatriations.
Information was submitted by Amnesty Intemational to the UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances.
