Liberia
Amnesty International was concerned about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, and about the detention -usually without trial- of other individuals apparently suspected by the authorities of criticizing or opposing the government. The organization was also concerned about death sentences passed on 13 political prisoners after a trial which appeared to fall short of intemational standards of fairness. Ten of those sentenced to death were subsequently pardoned and released The organization was also disturbed by the continuing use of the death penalty in other cases and by the harsh conditions reported at Bellah Yallah prison where some political prisoners were held during the year.
In April the military govemment announced that a retum to civilian mle would be delayed until January 1986 but the ban on political activity in force since 1980 was lifted in July, allowing registration of political parties.
A number of people suspected of criticizing or opposing the govemment were arrested in 1984. They included four joumalists, detained apparently because the authorities disapproved of their work, who Amnesty International regarded as prisoners of conscience. Willis Knuckles, a correspondent for the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), was detained without charge from early Febmary to 2 April and was reportedly badly beaten. In June Rufus Darpoh, a freelance journalist and former editor of the government-controlled A'eivL/Zjenaw newspaper, was arrested and taken to Bellah Yallah, where conditions have in the past been reported as very harsh. He was not charged and was eventually released on 17 November. Two joumalists employed by the Footprints newspaper - Sackor Sirleaf and Klon Hinneh - were arrested in early August and held uncharged for almost two months.
Amnesty Intemational investigated the case of Toye Bemard, a lawyer, who was detained without charge from 2 May until mid-August apparently because he had criticized the confiscation of property belonging to the families of 13 former senior officials publicly executed in April 1980.
On 20 August the Head of State, Colonel-in-Chief Samuel Kanyon Doe, announced the discovery of a "socialist" plot to overthrow the government, and 10 alleged ringleaders were arrested They included Dr Amos Sawyer, Chairman of the newly-formed Liberia People's Party (LPP), Major-General Nicholas Podier, who had been Co-Chairman of the ruling People's Redemption Council (PRC) until its
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
dissolution in late July when he became Speaker of the Interim National Assembly, and two other members of the Assembly. Although Head of State Doe reportedly announced that the detainees would be tried without delay, no charges were brought against them. On 22 August security forces opened fire on university students demonstrating against the arrests, wounding at least 70. Unofficial sources claimed that some students were killed and afterwards secretly buried but this was denied by the government. The university was closed and the entire teaching staff dismissed. Amnesty Intemational urged the authorities to bring the 10 detainees to trial or release them without delay.
Following Dr Sawyer's arrest Dusty Wolokollie became acting Chairman of the LPP. He was arrested on 28 August. However, on 8 October Dr Sawyer and all the other detainees except Dusty Wolokollie were released unconditionally. Dusty Wolokollie was charged with " spreading rumours, lies and disinformation", apparently in connection with a leaflet he had published calling for Dr Sawyer's release. His trial had not taken place by the end of 1984. He was considered by Amnesty Intemational to be a prisoner of conscience.
There were further arrests in early December. Two members of the Liberia National Students Union (LINSU), including its president, Ezekiel Pajibo, were arrested with four members of the LPP. They were reportedly accused of writing leaflets critical of the government but they were not known to have been charged by the end of 1984. Amnesty Intemational considered that they were prisoners of conscience.
In January 1984, 19 people were tried before the Special Military Tribunal on charges of hi^ treason, conspiracy to undermine the security and economic stability of the state and the murder of six people, including an army general. They had all been arrested in November 1983 when the authorities annoimced the discovery of a coup plot The alleged leader of the conspiracy was Brigadier-General Thomas Quiwonkpa, former commander of the armed forces and a senior member of the PRC. However, he was said by the authorities to have escaped arrest and left Liberia. Shortly after ¿le trial opened, three of the defendants were granted immunity and become prosecution witnesses. Three other alleged conspirators were reportedly abducted from Guinea, retumed to Liberia and added to the list of defendants.
Amnesty Intemational urged the government to ensure that the trial would conform to intemationally recognized standards of faimess and indicated its wish to send an observer to the trial. The authorities did not confirm until late March that an Amnesty Intemational trial observer could attend the proceedings, which were by then virtually complete. In the event Amnesty Intemational did not attend the trial. However, according to reports, the defendants were not permitted defence counsel of their choice or the opportunity to cross-examine witnesses fully.
vili	Amnesty International Report 1985
There is no right of appeal against verdicts of the Special Military Tribunal, which is composed entirely of military officers.
On 5 April, 13 of the accused, including Kalonko Luo, a former deputy minister. Captain Johnny Herring and Harry Yuan, managing director of the Liberian Electricity Corporation, were convicted and sentenced to death. The six other defendants were acquitted and released.
Amnesty International immediately appealed for clemency for the 13 prisoners sentenced to death as their executions were due to take place on 6 April. A stay of execution was granted and on 7 April Head of State Doe announced that he had granted clemency to 10 of the 13 prisoners, commuted their death sentences and ordered their release. However, the death sentences imposed on the three remaining prisoners - Captain Acquah Dolo, Lieutenant Arthur Suah and Private Wilfred Sanei - were confirmed. According to the authorities, they were due to be executed immediately but Amnesty Intemational had not been able to confirm that the executions had taken place by the end of 1984.
In addition to those sentenced to death in April, five members of the security forces were reported to have been sentenced to death during 1984 after being convicted of murder. At least one was believed to have been executed.
