Venezuela
Amnesty Intemational's concerns centred on the prolonged detention — for up to eight years — without judgment of civilian political prisoners under the military court systenL
In 1984 over 80 political prisoners were held under rmlitary jurisdiction, most of them in the military prison of Cuartel San Carlos, in the capital, Caracas, and in the top security La Pica Prison (formerly the Penitenciaria General del Oriente), in La Pica, Monagas State. To Amnesty International's knowledge none had been tried and sentenced, although most had been held for two to eight years. The majority had been indicted by military courts, but their trials were as a rule postponed indefinitely, rarely proceeding beyond the initial investigative stage.
All political prisoners known to Amnesty International during 1984 were held on charges of military rebellion under the jurisdiction of the military courts; military rebellion is defined in Article 476 of the military code of justice to include any involvement in armed movements "in order to alter the internal peace of the Republic or to impede or obstruct the exercise of Government". Article 486 specifies the circumstances in which civilians are prosecuted by military courts, a provision frequently applied in the 1960s to combat guerrilla groups then active in Venezuela. In the 1980s it has been applied in a range of cases involving both violent and non-violent political activity.
At the end of 1984, President Jaime Lusinchi suspended some proceedings before military courts, which resulted in the release of 28 political prisoners on 21 December. However, 5 5 prisoners remained in custody on charges of military rebellion, none of whom had been sentenced to Amnesty International's knowledge. For example, Antonio Arias, detained at La Pica, had been in custody without judgment since 1978, and last appeared before the court responsible for his case, the Consejo de Guerra de Maturin (Court Martial), in 1979. Amnesty International was investigating the legal status of the remaining political prisoners in military custody.
