Taiwan
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the release of 90 prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience, and for the retrial of prisoners convicted of sedition after trials which fell short of international standards. One adopted prisoner of conscience held for more than 30 years was released, and the 21 other prisoners convicted of sedition in the early 1950s were to have their cases reviewed. Amnesty International was also concerned about allegations of torture and by the imposition of at least 43 death sentences and five executions.
In April 1982 Wu Yueh-ming, a 62-year-old former pharmacist and an Amnesty International adopted prisoner of conscience, was released on parole on medical grounds after more than 30 years in prison for alleged 'pro-communist activities" (see Amnesty International Report 1982). On 20 October 1982 Defence Minister Soong Chang-chih announced that the government was reviewing the cases of 21 other prisoners also detained on charges of sedition for more than 30 years with a view to releasing them on humanitarian grounds. The 21 prisoners had been specifically excluded from the previous amnesty-the 1975 Commutation Act - because they had been convicted of being communists. They had all been sentenced to life imprisonment and most were said'to be in poor health. Amnesty International had adopted 16 of them as prisoners of conscience after years of investigation which produced no evidence that their political activities had involved the use or advocacy of violence. In all cases about which information was available they had been tried by summary military tribunals in closed courts without proper rights of defence. Amnesty International had little information on the six prisoners whom h had not adopted. On 11 November 1982 Amnesty International wrote to Prime Minister Sun Yun-suan welcoming the review and expressing the hope that it would lead to the unconditional release of all the prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty International also welcomed the amendments to the Code of Criminal Procedure adopted in July 1982 by the Legislative Yuan (Assembly) and subsequently promulgated by the government
235
under which suspects in custody were given the right to retain a defence lawyer immediately after arrest. Amnesty International wrote that this legal change, if applicable to suspects under military trial law, would be a significant step towards protecting suspects from ill-treatment during interrogation and towards bringing detention procedures into line with international standards. However, it was later learned that it was not applicable under military law. It was believed that this revision of interrogation procedures was hastened by the case of Dr Chen Wen-cheng, found dead on 3 July 1981, the day after he was questioned by the authorities about his political activities {sqq Amnesty International Report 1982) and by the death in police custody in May 1982 of Wang Ying-hsien, a suspect in a robbery case. An official inquiry into Wang Ying-hsien's death led to the prosecution of five police officers. On 23 November 1982 they were sentenced to prison terms ranging from one year and four months to four years and six months on charges of involuntary manslaughter, assault and illegal detention. As far as Amnesty International knew, this was the first judicial investigation into claims that torture or ill-treatment had been used by interrogating officers.
In early March 1982 Minister of Interior Lin Yang-kang announced that there would be a review of the Public Officials Election and Recall Law promulgated in May 1980. On 8 March 1982 Amnesty International wrote to the Minister, expressing its concern about the imprisonment under this law of Chang Chun-nan and Liu Feng-sung. They were both candidates in the elections of December 1980 and were convicted of making seditious speeches or using seditious slogans and leaflets during their campaigns. Amnesty International adopted both men as prisoners of conscience {sqq Amnesty International Report 1982). In its letter Amnesty International recommended that all provisions be removed from the law which enable people to be imprisoned for the non-violent exercise of their right to freedom of expression.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of Chang Hua-min, historian and journalist arrested in September 1979 and sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment for alleged pro-communist propaganda (see Amnesty International Report 1980). Amnesty International considered him a prisoner of conscience detained for his writings and his support for opposition politicians.
Amnesty International also appealed for the release of Wen Juian and Fang E-chen, both writers, arrested in October or November 1980 and sentenced to three years' "ideological reform", reportedly for discussing communism at meetings of a literary society and for expressing the view that Taiwan should be reunified with communist China.
236
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the release of prisoners of conscience detained after the Kaohsiung incident in December 1979 and for the Reverend Kao Chun-ming and his co-defendants, convicted of harbouring Shih Ming-teh, a suspect in the Kaohsiung incident {see Amnesty International Reports 1981 and 1982). It appealed for medical care for Lu Hsiu-lien, a lawyer and executive member of Formosa magazine arrested after the Kaohsiung incident who was reported to be suifering from a recurrence of cancer of the thyroid. She was later reported to be receiving medical treatment. Amnesty International was concerned about the two-year delay in providing adequate medical care to Shih Ming-teh for a spinal injury. A team of doctors was reportedly sent to examine him in early November 1982.
In a letter of 11 November 1982 Amnesty International appealed to Prime Minister Sun Yun-suan to investigate all cases where claims of torture or ill-treatment were made and to refer them to a court for inquiry or retrial. Amnesty International cited several cases including those of Yang Chin-hai and Yen Ming-sheng, arrested in May 1976. Yen Ming-sheng was an independent candidate in the December 1975 elections to the Legislative Yuan (Assembly). He had openly criticized the government's goal of recovering the China mainland and objected to the predominant role in government of people bom on the China mainland. Yang Chin-hai, a businessman and the president of the Kaohsiung County Chamber of Commerce, was the election manager of Yen Ming-sheng. At his trial Yang Chin-hai presented a written statement to the court claiming that he had confessed to charges of planning sabotage because of torture and death threats. Amnesty Intemational also raised the cases of Chen Ming-chong and Chen Chin-huo, who were arrested in July or August 1976. Both had previously been imprisoned on charges of pro-communist activities. They were tried in camera and not allowed to be defended by a lawyer of their choice. They were reportedly ill-treated to make them confess to planning an armed rebellion to prepare for a communist invasion.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed that at least 43 death sentences were reportedly imposed by civil or military courts for criminal offences such as murder, robbery and drug offences. Five executions were reported. One prisoner was tried by military court and executed four days after conviction. Another, also tried by military court, was executed less than two weeks after conviction. One person sentenced to death in 1973 for murder was acquitted after a series of retrials. On 1 June 1982 Amnesty International reiterated its appeal to President Chiang Ching-kuo to commute all death sentences.
237
