Korea (Democratic People's Republic of)
Amnesty International's work on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) was seriously hampered by the fact that the authorities did not divulge information regarding human rights in the country. No news on arrests, trials or death sentences was published in the international press or in the North Korean news media.
In December 1982 Amnesty International wrote to President Kim Il-sung seeking information on legislation in the DPRK and on the use of the death penalty. Amnesty International expressed concern about reports that a number of former prominent political figures had been imprisoned for up to 12 years. Pak Kum-chol, former Secretary General of the Korean Workers Party Central Committee Secretariat, was reportedly detained in 1969; Kim Chang-bong, former Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Defence, was also reportedly detained in 1969; Ryu Chang-shik, former alternate member of the Politburo and Secretary of the Central Committee of the Korean Workers Party, was reportedly arrested in October 1975; and Li Yong-mu, formeriy a member of the Politburo of the Korean Workers Party, was reportedly arrested in October 1977. Amnesty International asked the President for information regarding these reports.
It is most unusual for citizens of the DPRK to leave the country legally or illegally. Since September 1970 only 11 have arrived in South Korea (the Republic of Korea) after leaving the DPRK illegally, and there are few reports of their reaching other countries. Two people who had recently fled to South Korea appeared at a news conference in Seoul in April 1982 and alleged that more than 100,000 people were held in "re-education" camps in the DPRK. Few precise details were given and Amnesty International was not in a position to verify these allegations.
Reports continued to reach Amnesty International in 1982 from sources in Japan of arrests of people opposed to the growing political influence of President Kim Il-sung's son, Kim Chong-il, but again it proved impossible to obtain detailed information of these arrests or about the individuals involved.
207
