Peru
Amnesty International's concerns included the arbitrary detention of prisoners of conscience, most of them leaders of peasant organizations and communities; consistent reports of torture; poor prison conditions; and several deliberate killings of prisoners by security personnel. Amnesty International was working on behalf of 37 adopted or possible prisoners of conscience.
Most actual or possible prisoners of conscience were detained under Decree 046, a March 1981 law which defines and punishes a broad range of crimes as terrorism. Decree 046 provided a basis for widespread arrests in the Andean highlands, where the guerrilla group Sendero Luminoso, Shining Path, was active, and in major coastal cities. The charge of terrorism was applied not only to individuals who might have been involved in guerrilla violence, but also to non-violent
167
leaders of lawful opposition parties, trade unions, and peasant groups and organizations. Although no known prisoners of conscience were convicted of terrorism, some adopted prisoners were held for over 18 months before courts determined that tiiey had been wrongly charged. Isidro Quiroz, a barber, local leader of an affihate of the Izquierda Unida, United Left, opposition coalition and a city councillor in the Lima district of Carabayllo, was detained on a charge of terrorism in March 1981. It was only in August 1982, however, that a Lima court concluded that the charges were false and he was released. Amnesty International had adopted him as a prisoner of conscience.
Trade unionists were detained under Decree 046 during labour conflicts, particularly leaders of unions at small and isolated mines in the Andes. Some were systematically beaten and ill-treated under interrogation. Amnesty International appealed to the authorities for medical attention for Delfín Cuba Taquiri, a union leader at the Canarias Mine in Ayacucho who was detained on 11 September by the Civil Guard under Decree 046 during a miners' protest march. Taken to Ayacucho City, he was reportedly interrogated under torture by the Civil Guard, and received severe internal injuries when a gun barrel was inserted into his rectum. One week later he was hospitalized and underwent surgery; the charge of terrorism was dropped in mid-November. A total of 32 members of the Canarias Mine union were accused of terrorism by mineowners in February 1982 after strike action, and were detained for short periods during 1982.
Most of the prisoners charged under Decree 046 adopted as prisoners of conscience were leaders of peasant regional federations and community councils. In a typical case. Pastor Anaya Cuadros, a leader of the peasant community of Jicamarca, Lima department, was detained on 10 February 1982 accused of having "incited the occupation of privately owned land", having engaged in "political propaganda"; and of conducting "training for subversive actions". Although he was held under Decree 046, no reference to specific acts of violence was made. He was held in the island prison of El Frontón, six miles from Lima's port of C allao, for 10 months awaiting trial. He was released on 4 December when a Lima criminal court dismissed the terrorism charge, citing the Lima/'iyca/Superiores, state's attorney's, conclusion that no crime of terrorism had been committed, and that charges had stemmed from false accusations by land speculators seeking control over community lands. The public report of the state's attorney expressed "disquiet" at the Civil Guard's decision to carry out the arrest and press for prosecution. The report found that the alleged evidence of "terrorism" produced by the Civil Guard consisted largely of confiscated newspapers, books and magazines
168
that circulated freely, and that to consider such material proof of terrorism "would put at risk the security of anyone who had in their library works by socialist writers", and violate "the precept that it is not a crime to hold an opinion".
In Cusco department three leaders of the Acomayo provincial peasant federation adopted as prisoners of conscience were detained for leading a provincial strike in October 1981 but charged with "terrorism". One of them, union official Florencio Torobeo, 60, was arrested on a "terrorism" charge on 17 January 1982, eightdays after Lima newspapers published his open letter denouncing the earlier detention and torture of his colleagues. The Acomayo prisoners were still held without trial at El Frontón in December 1982; Florencio Torobeo was seriously ill with stomach ulcers and kidney disease.
Amnesty International was also working on behalf of leaders of peasant communities detained before the March 1981 terrorism decree and charged with criminal offences in the course of land conflicts. Nine leaders of the peasant community of Uramaza in the mountains of northeastern Lima department were detained in February
1981.	They were held in the provincial jail atCajatambo on the basis of accusations by the family of a local landowner in dispute with the community over land rights. In a clash with private guards on 22 February 1981 one Uramaza peasant was shot by a guard, who was subsequently drowned in a gorge, together with community member Telésforo Léon. Nine commimity leaders, including the president and treasurer of the administrative council, were subsequently detained and charged with murdering the guard, and attempted murder of the landowner. Amnesty International believed they were detained because of their positions on the governing council of the Uramaza community and not because of personal involvement in any criminal violence. Although they were all subsequently acquitted, in November
1982,	the effects of their detention were exacerbated by poverty; the two children of prisoner Teófilo Espinoza died during his 20-month imprisonment; other children had to leave school.
Amnesty International found considerable evidence that prisoners charged under Decree 046 were tortured, including statements by prisoners interrogated by Seguridad del Estado, State Security, officers in the city of Chimbóte in August and September 1982. F ormer prisoners said they were stripped naked and then systematically kicked and beaten with leather implements filled with sand. They were subjected to what was called "lapita": their hands were bound behind their backs and pulled upwards by a rope thrown over a beam while their heads were bound in damp cloths obstructing breathing. In some cases "lapita" also involved electric shocks from wall outlets conducted through wet cloths on prisoners' bodies. Testimonies from
169
prisoners in the city of Ayacucho described identical practices, also termed "la pita". Amnesty International repeatedly called on the government to investigate reports of torture but was unaware of any such government initiatives.
Amnesty International appealed to the government to initiate independent inquiries into several cases in 1982 in which prisoners were apparently deliberately killed by members of security forces or died of gunshot wounds in unexplained circumstances in prison. On the night of 28 February five prisoners charged with terrorism were removed from their cells in Ayacucho prison by members of the Republican Guard - the uniformed paramilitary force that guards prisons and government buildings - and reportedly interrogated under torture regarding an escape plot According to reports from other prisoners, four of them were later taken from the prison, shot by their guards and left for dead; Republican Guard officers maintained the four were shot trying to escape. Prisoners Amilcar Urbay Ovalle and Eucadio Najarro Jauregui were not killed outright, however, and were taken, badly wounded, to the Ayacucho hospital by a passing.patrol of the Civil Guard. The fifth prisoner, William E squivel, was found dead in the early hours of the morning inside the prison with his throat deeply cut on both sides. His death was attributed by prison authorities to suicide while attempting to escape "when he saw himself surrounded by guards". A Civil Guard medical examiner reported, however, that this was impossible given the nature of the wounds and the lack of blood on his hands, and recorded severe bruising on the body.
On 2 March guerrillas attacked Ayacucho prison, killing several guards and freeing an estimated 300 prisoners, including political prisoners and over 100 narcotics offenders. Several hours afterwards, a uniformed patrol of the Republican Guard entered the Ayacucho hospital where the two survivors of the 28 F ebruary incident and three other prisoners were under police guard on terrorism charges. Despite the resistance of hospital staff. Republican Guards shot dead Amilcar Urbay in his bed, and shot and almost strangled to death Eucadio Najarro, leaving him for dead with a blood-transfusion tube ripped from his arm and knotted around his neck. Prisoners Carlos Alcántara and Russell Wensjoe were shot outside the hospital. Eucadio Najarro was revived by hospital staff, although in critical condition.
Amnesty International called for an independent inquiry into the killings on 28 February and 2 March and urged special protection for Eucadio Najarro, the only survivor of the five prisoners reportedly tortured in Ayacucho prison before the assault and mass escape. A joint commission of the Interior and Justice Ministries recommended
170
that the Republican Guards named in public accounts of the killings should be prosecuted; however, the authorities have declared that the Republican Guards involved "can not be located".
Amnesty International als® made inquiries into the shootings of prisoners by Republican Guards guarding prisons. Some killings resulted from guards firing at cell block windows, apparently indiscriminately. Others appeared to be deliberate killings of specific prisoners. AtL ima's principal prison, Lurigancho, which holds some 5,500 prisoners, 10 prisoners were killed by bullet wounds during 1982, and at least 14 others received bullet wounds in the back, legs or stomach.
Prisoners charged under Decree 046 were shot during transfers in unexplained circumstances; Donato Méndez was shot by guards during the transfer of prisoners charged with terrorism to El Frontón prison on 10 April 1982, and subsequéntlydiedon 21 April in hospital.
An Amnesty International delegation visited Peru in May and met government officials, jurists and domestic?himian rights organizations. The delegation also met some political prisoners and prisoners of conscience, including the threepeasant union leaders from Acomayo then held in an isolation cell in Cusco's.Q'uencorro prison. One objective of the mission was to examine the situation of rural peasant and indigenous peoples subjected to political imprisonment or persecution. Meetings were held in Lima, and the Andean departments of Junln, Huancavelica, Cusco and Puno, with national and local peasant organizations and with human rights groups. Several isolated peasant communities whose leaders were adopted as prisoners of conscience were visited.
In a meeting with Minister of Justice-Enrique Elias Larosa Amnesty International's delegates discussed its concerns, including the Minister's decision to transfer all prisoners charged under t)ecree 046 from provincial prisons to Lima following the guerrilla assault on Ayacucho prison on 2 March. Male prisoners were subsequently transferred to El Frontón, and women, first to the Chorrillos women's prison and then to the small Cárcel de Callao. These transfers led to long delays in trials, obstructed prisoners' defence, and made visits from the families of many prisoners impossible.
The delegates were informed by members of the judiciary that the transfers had not been legal, as cases opened in provincial courts could not be shifted to a different district. Legislation legalizing the transfers was introduced later in the year. However, by the end of 1982 none of the estimated 250 prisoners transferred to Lima on Decree 046 charges had been tried, and visits to El Frontón by defence lawyers were restricted and irregular.
Through the assistance of the Minister of Justice, the Amnesty
171
International delegation visited El Frontón prison and spoke privately with some prisoners of conscience. The delegates also met a representative of another group of prisoners who had publicly declared their allegiance to the Sendero Luminoso guerrilla group, and who refused to permit other individuals associated with the group to meet the delegation.
Since early 1982 the guerrilla group Sendero Luminoso had carried out scores of public "executions" in areas over which it had established temporary control. At least 70 Peruvians were believed to have been "executed" by Sendero Luminoso in 1982 in mountain villages, often before assembled villagers, after having been designated enemies of the group in mock trials. They included police and local government officers, supporters of the governing party and of left-wing opposition parties which opposed the use of terrorism, and leaders of peasant communities, cooperatives and labour organizations who refused to collaborate with the guerrillas. In areas described as "liberated territories" guerrilla leaders circulated lists of" informants, traitors and class enemies", who were to be captured and "executed", and also announced their intention to "execute" petty criminals. Amnesty Intemational expressed to the Peruvian authorities and news media its position that it considers unacceptable the killing of prisoners, whether by govemments or by any other organization.
