Tunisia
Amnesty International was concerned about the continuing imprisonment of 46 prisoners of conscience, some serving sentences of 10 years' imprisonment. Torture of political detainees remained a major concern, as well as the lack of basic legal safeguards to protect detainees from such treatment.
Amnesty International continued to work for the release of 46 alleged members of the Mouvementde la tendance islamique (MTI), Islamic Tendency Movement, sentenced to imprisonment in September 1981 on charges including membership of an unauthorized organization, defamation of the head of state, and disseminating false information {stQ Amnesty International Report 1982). Additional trials of MTI members took place during early 1982 resulting in sentences ranging from six months to four years' imprisonment. Among those sentenced in September 1981 was Habib Ben Rihane who had been a teacher at secondary schools in Ain Draham and Bizerte. Aged 35, married with three young children, he was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment on charges of participation in an unauthorized organization, and defamation of the head of state. Neither he nor the other defendants were charged with any violent act. Like several otherprisoners of conscience he was reported to have suffered ill-health in Bouij Er-Roumi Prison (Nadhour Prison II) as a result of poor conditions. In June 1982 he was hospitalized for several days because of food poisoning. He complained, as did many prisoners of conscience, of eye troubles and
332
rheumatism, aggravated by the cold and damp prison conditions during winter. Respiratory and digestive ailments were also frequently reported.
Another prisoner of conscience, Rached El Ghannouchi, the leader of the MTI, was held in solitary confinement at Bourj Er-Roumi Prison for approximately six months from 19 January 1982. Amnesty International wrote to the authorities in May 1982 expressing concern at reports that he was suffering from depression and mental strain as a result of the prolonged isolation and urging that he be granted immediate access to a competent medical officer. Amnesty International also sought assurances that he would not be held in conditions detrimental to his psychological health.
In April the Administrative Court ruled that the October 1978 trial of trade union leaders arrested in connection with the strike of 26 January 1978 was void. It ruled that the composition of the State Security Court which heard the case was contrary to Law 68-17 of 2 July 1968, which established the court. This was reported to be the first time that a judgment in a political trial had been declared void. All the trade union leaders had, in the meantime, been released through presidential amnesties. ( Sqq Amnesty International Report 1980 and 1981.)
Appeals were sent to President Habib Bourguiba on the occasion of his 79th birthday on 3 August 1982, urging a presidential amnesty for all prisoners of conscience. To Amnesty International's knowledge no measures of clemency were declared on that date affecting prisoners of conscience.
In November the authorities announced the arrest in Tunis of a group of people alleged to be members of a "terrorist organization". Amnesty International was concerned about reports that members of this group were tortured, held in small, separate underground cells, kept in incommunicado detention for between 40 and 45 days, during which time they were tortured, and that medical treatment had been refused. Amnesty International appealed to the authorities for all those detained to be granted immediate medical treatment as required, including hospitalization if necessary, and sought further information on these cases. It also requested assurances that they had been granted access to lawyers of their own choosing and to members of their families. Amnesty International called on the authorities to initiate an independent impartial investigation into all allegations of torture and ill-treatment, and to introduce administrative and legal safeguards against torture of detainees.
333
