Hungary
Amnesty Intemational was concemed about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience; these included three imprisoned conscientious objectors to military service and several foreign citizens imprisoned for assisting friends or relatives to exercise their right to freedom of movement. In December Amnesty Intemational leamed that Tibor Pakh, a former prisoner of conscience who was in 1981 forcibly confined for over two weeks in a psychiatric hospital, had once more been confined for a similar period, again for protesting to the authorities about infringements of basic human rights. Amnesty Intemational was also concemed by three executions.
In Febmary 1983 the Procurator General stated that in 1982 there had been 57 cases of offences against the state, in comparison with 79 the previous year. According to official statistics of recent years, the majority of people accused of such offences were charged with "incitement" for verbal statements they had made, often under the influence of alcohol. Under Article 148 of the criminal code people who incite others to hatred of Hungary's constitutional order or allies, as well as those who incite to national, racial or religious hatred, may be imprisoned for one to five years. Two to eight years' imprisonment is prescribed in certain circumstances. It has been alleged that this article has in some cases been used to penalize people who did not incite to hatred or violence but who simply expressed views and beliefs disapproved of by the authorities.
Military service is compulsory in Hungary and the law does not allow any exemption or alternative service to those who refuse conscription for reasons of conscience. Refusing conscription is an offence punishable under Article 336 of the criminal code with up to five years' imprisonment (five to 15 years intime of war). In practice.
260
however, it appears that since 1977 conscientious objectors of the small Nazarene (Christian) sect have been allowed to do alternative service. To Amnesty International's knowledge no official figures were published for people imprisoned for conscientious objection to military service. One unofficial source alleged in August that at any one time there were more than 100 conscientious objectors serving prison sentences. However, in May an article in the unofficial periodical Beszelo, which advocated alternative unarmed service for conscientious objectors, estijnated that only a few dozen young people would be affected.
The only imprisoned conscientious objectors known to Amnesty International were members of Roman Catholic communities, of whom four were reported to be serving sentences in May. Amnesty International had details of and had adopted three as prisoners of conscience, two of whom were tried in 1982. Gabor Csizmadia, aged 24 from Budapest, received a sentence of two years and eight months' imprisonment which on 2 April was confirmed on appeal by the Military Council of the Supreme Court. In April Bela Simonyi, a forestry engineer from Szekesfehervar, was sentenced to 14 months' imprisonment for refusing to serve the remaining six months of his military service (six years eariier, before becoming a pacifist, he had completed one year of service). Both men had asked to do alternative unarmed service.
A ccording to official figures 818 people, two thirds of them foreign citizens, attempted in 1982 to cross the Hungarian border without authorization, an offence punishable under Article 217 of the criminal code by up to three years' imprisonment. Amnesty International learned of several citizens of the Federal RepubHc of Germany (FRG) who were reported to have been imprisoned in Hungary for attempting to assist citizens of the German Democratic Republic (GDR) to cross without authorization the border from Hungary into Austria. GDR citizens below retiring age are rarely permitted to travel to Western Europe but are generally allowed to visit Hungary and other Warsaw Pact countries. Cases known to Amnesty International included Jeno Voss, aged 36 from West Berlin, who was in June sentenced to three months' imprisonment by a Hungarian court for aiding his fiancée, a GDR citizen, in an attempt to cross the border into Austria without authorization. On 2 November 1982 Hans Erhard Hauer, also fix)m West Berlin, was sentenced to five months' imprisonment for trying to smuggle his fiancée and her brother (GDR citizens) from Hungary into Austria in his minibus. Amnesty International considered both these men to be prisoners of conscience.
During the year there were signs that official attitudes towards dissenting circles in Budapest had hardened. On a number of occasions
261
members of these circles were arrested and held for short periods in connection with activities such as publishing or selling unofficial uncensored publications or distributing leaflets critical of Hungary's military policies at an official peace demonstration.
On 31 August Gabor Demszky, Miklos Haraszti, Balint Nagy, Laszlo Rajk and Tibor Pakh were held for questioning by police after a demonstration by some 100 people in Budapest in support of the suspended Polish trade union Solidarity. On 13 October Tibor Pakh, a graduate in law, began a hunger-strike in protest against harassment to which he and certain other demonstrators had been subjected by officials. As a result Dr Pakh was forcibly confined from 26 November to 15 December in a psychiatric hospital where he was said to have been forcibly fed and drugged with haloperidol. In April Professor Charles Durand, a doctor from Switzerland associated with the Swiss Association Against the Abuse of Psychiatry for Political Ends, had examined Dr Pakh and had declared him to be completely sane.
Five death sentences were imposed in 1982. Amnesty International learned of three executions for murder. Ferenc Kohanyi was executed on 5 February; Istvan Juhasz on 6 April; Janos Vajda on 3 September. The death penalty was imposed on Janos Vajda by the Supreme Court which changed a sentence of life imprisonment passed by a lower court.
