Lebanon
Following the massacre of hundreds of civihans, primarily Palestinians, at the Sabra and Chatila refugee camps in West Beirut Amnesty International appealed on 22 September 1982 to the United Nations to set up an investigation into the events. At the same time Amnesty International asked the Lebanese President E lias Sarkis and Prime Minister Shafiq al-Wazzan, as well as Prime Minister Begin of Israel, for their governments' full cooperation with such an international inquiry.
Shortly afterwards the newly elected President Amin Gemayel initiated an inquiry into the massacre. It was reported that this inquiry, led by Prosecutor General Assad Germanos, was being carried out in the strictest secrecy, without even the procedures followed being made public. In a letter sent to President Amin Gemayel on 22 December 1982 Amnesty International stressed its view that "for such an inquiry to be effective, and for its conclusions to be considered impartial and reliable, it must be open to public scrutiny in a manner that is compatible both with the needs of the investigation and with the need to assess publicly its conclusions."
In the same letter Amnesty International noted its concern at reports that more than 1,000 individuals, mostly Palestinians but also
317
Lebanese and other nationals, were being held in custody by the Lebanese army and security forces and had not been permitted visits by lawyers, relatives or outside observers. Many had been held in incommunicado detention for over 10 weeks. Amnesty Intemational referred to reports that some of these prisoners had been ill-treated. A number of individuals were also said to be held by Phalangist militia, outside the normal legal process, allegedly in connection with the assassination on 14 September 1982 of President-Elect Bachir Gemayel. Amnesty Intemational urged President Amin Gemayel to investigate these reports, to make public the names and number of those detained, to ensure that all detainees be allowed their full legal rights, including the right to be visited by lawyers and relatives. Amnesty Intemational also appealed to the President to allow outside observers, such as the Intemational Committee of the Red Cross, access to the prisoners.
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the detention by the Israeli Defence Forces (IDF) of thousands of people of Palestinian, Lebanese and other nationalities that they had captured in the Lebanon after their invasion in June 1982; about the lack of legal rights of the detainees and about allegations of ill-treatment. As well as combatants many civilians - including medical staff - were arrested. At first they were held in temporary detention and interrogation centres in southem Lebanon and in prisons and prison camps in Israel. From the second week in July most of these detainees were transferred to a prison camp constructed at Al Ansar in southern Lebanon. Official Israeli figures stated that by mid-November 9,040 detainees had been held at Al Ansar camp, and that of these 3,000 had been released. However, these figures excluded many detainees held incommunicado by the IDF in both Lebanon and Israel who were later released and never transferred to Al Ansar camp.
Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Israeli Govemment on 1 July 1982 expressing concem that the prisoners detained in Lebanon were held incommunicado and that their treatment failed to conform to internationally recognized standards. Amnesty International called on the authorities to grant the detainees access to intemational humanitarian organizations and to relatives and lawyers, and to publish full details of the prisoners.
Amnesty International repeated its concerns on 22 October, pointing out that detainees were still not allowed access to relatives or lawyers, that the International Committee of the Red Cross had only been allowed to visit after 18 July, as much as 35 days after the detentions began, and that Palestinians arrested in Lebanon and transferred to Israel were in incommunicado detention. Amnesty International urged the govemment to release the remaining detainees
318
or to allow them the right to confront and refute evidence against them. A committee was established in November 1982 to review the cases of detainees who had appealed against their detention, consisting of three officers of the IDF. It was not known by the end of 1982 what results this had produced. The families of some detainees gave power of attorney to Israeli lawyers, but by the end of the year none of these lawyers had been allowed to visit their clients at Al Ansar camp.
Amnesty Intemational received allegations, including eye-witness reports, of ill-treatment of detainees arrested during the Israeli invasion of Lebanon and held in temporary detention centres. It was alleged that at least until the third or fourth week of June, detainees were indiscriminately and, in many cases, badly beaten, deprived of food and water, in some cases for periods of several days, exposed to the sun, threatened and intimidated. It was reported that detainees had suffered serious injuries and illness, and that several detainees had died as a result. On 1 July and on 22 October Amnesty International urged the Israeli Government to establish a full and public inquiry into these allegations of ill-treatment.
