Philippines
Following its mission in November 1981 Amnesty International published the Report of an Amnesty International Mission to the Republic of the Philippines and launched a worldwide campaign focusing on illegal arrest and detention, torture and extrajudicial executions. During 1982 Amnesty International continued to receive reports of such violations, including arrests of people believed to have been engaged in non-violent political activity.
224
The report, published on 22 September 1982, presented detailed evidence that members of the armed forces and paramilitary groups acting with official sanction had committed human rights violations of concem to Amnesty Intemational, contrary to international law and national legislation. The report, which had been submitted to the govemment before publication, made a number of recommendations. Among them were that the government should institute immediate inquiries into 49 cases involving allegations of serious human rights violations which had been presented to the Amnesty Intemational delegation in November 1981. The report noted that: "Amnesty Intemational believes that the cases presented to the delegation are in themselves of such a serious nature as to arouse grave concern. However, there is also concem that these cases may have to be regarded as merely representative of the much larger number of reported but unexamined cases involving allegations of a similar nature." Of the 49 cases examined by the mission, 26 were cases of arbitrary killing in which govemment agents were allegedly implicated and 32 involved allegations of torture. The report noted that the number of political detainees held by the govemment had decreased substantially since the years immediately after the declaration of martial law, although unofficial estimates of the number of prisoners indicated that it was still as high as 900 at any time. However, there was evidence that human rights violations of the utmost gravity, including "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions, were becoming increasingly common while torture remained prevalent. The govemment had frequently asserted that alleged cases of extrajudicial execution were, in fact, killings in armed combat between government forces and members of insurgent groups. In a number of cases where this had been asserted the Amnesty Intemational mission found evidence that the victim had actually been killed in the custody of govemment agents. Torture in detention most commonly occurred in unauthorized places of detention, which included secret holding centres known as "safehouses", and military barracks not designated for holding prisoners.
The report recommended stricter enforcement of existing safeguards to protect people in custody and the abandonment of the use of " safehouses". The report noted that the government had instituted an extensive array of safeguards and had repeatedly pledged that it would investigate and act on complaints of violations by its agents. However, it found that prescribed procedure was routinely ignored with impunity. It noted: "in those rare cases where complaints have led to some form of prosecution, the charges tend to have been dismissed after hearings that were not public or else the punishment has often been incommensurate with the gravity of the offence." The
225
report recommended that the government review procedures for investigation, prosecution and punishment of violations of human rights by government agents.
During a visit to the USA in September 1982 President Marcos criticized Amnesty International's findings and methods, accusing the organization of having entered the Philippines "surreptitiously" and dismissing the report as exaggerated. On 24 September Amnesty Intemational issued apublic statement recounting Amnesty International's efforts over a 10-month period to reach agreement with the government on a date for the mission. It pointed out that the mission delegates had met government officials and that after the mission a letter had been sent to the Minister of National Defense stating Amnesty International's concerns in the Philippines and asking for clarification of certain matters that had arisen during the mission.
In a speech in San Francisco, California, on 26 September 1982 President Marcos said: "We can answer, and will answer, the [Amnesty Intemational] report word by word." On 26 October Amnesty Intemational wrote to President Marcos welcoming his announcement of an investigation into Amnesty International's findings and asking about its terms of reference and methods. By the end of 1982 Amnesty Intemational had received no direct response to the report from the govemment. The govemment had, however, taken steps said to be intended to curb abuses by police and armed forces personnel. Reported measures included: the dismissal of 113 members of the armed forces, new procedures for investigating and prosecuting cases involving offences against civilians, and the institution of a "rehabilitation battalion" for personnel found guilty of such abuses. A request by Amnesty Intemational on 11 November 1982 for further information on these measures had received no reply by the end of 1982.
During the year the pattern persisted of people purportedly arrested on national security grounds being detained incommunicado in unauthorized places of detention where they were reportedly tortured. The report noted: "this practice . . . appears to be so prevalent as to amount to standard operating procedure for security and intelligence units."
Despite the lifting of martial law in January 1981 emergency provisions restricting the rights of people held on national security grounds remained in force (see	Intemational Report 1982).
The right to habeas corpus remained suspended in security cases. The President retained the right to issue Presidential Commitment Orders (PCOs) to arrest people accused of security related offences. Under Letter of Instruction (LOI) 1211 of 9 March 1982 military commanders were granted wider discretion to make arrests without reference to the
226
judiciary: they could apply directly to the President for a PCO without prior reference to the judiciary "when resort to judicial process is not possible or expedient without endangering public order and safety". Amnesty International regards these provisions as facilitating the ill-treatment of political detainees and recommended in the report full restoration of habeas corpus and revocation of LOI 1211. PCOs were often issued only after the detainee had been held incommunicado for several days or even weeks. Between 26 and 28 February 1982 at least 23 people were arrested without warrant by armed forces intelligence units in Manila during what were officially described as "joint operations against communist houses". Seventeen of them subsequently complained that they had been tortured or ill-treated while being held incommunicado. These complaints were submitted to the Supreme Court which, for the first time when presented with such allegations, ordered medical examinations. These examinations, although undertaken more than two weeks after the arrests, revealed injuries consistent with the alleged torture. On 30 March 1982 Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of National Defense, Juan Ponce Enrile, urging him to investigate the allegations. The results of any such investigations have not been made known.
Amnesty International appealed to the government on 27 April 1982 after it learned that six people allegedly associated with the banned Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP) were being held in incommunicado detention following their arrest in Manila on 22 to 24 April 1982. It was feared that they might be tortured. The six included Father Edicio de la Torre, who had previously been detained for more than five years until April 1980, and Horacio Morales, allegedly spokesman for the National Democratic Front, a coalition of groups whose program includes support for the New People's Army. Several of the detainees subsequently alleged that they had been tortured. Two - Antonio Moncupa and Horacio Morales - complained to the Supreme Court that they had been subjected to electric shocks, denied their right to legal counsel and made to sign statements under duress. In July the Supreme Court ordered a commission chaired by a government prosecutor to investigate the allegations.
The Amnesty International report noted that the mission had found convincing evidence that many victims of military abuses who were alleged to be engaged in " subversive" activities had, in fact, been involved in non-violent activities such as trade union organization, participation in church-sponsored social action groups and opposition to particular government projects. During 1982 Amnesty International continued to learn of PCOs issued against people engaged in nonviolent opposition to the government including church workers, trade unionists, journalists and lawyers.
227
On 16 January 1982 seven people subsequently adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International were arrested by the Philippine Constabulary (PC) at a meeting of the Davao Ecumenical Movement for Justice and Peace in the home of Purificación and Rolieto Trinidad in Tagum, Davao del Norte, Mindanao. Rolieto Trinidad and Hermenegildo Florida were taken to a safehouse where they were reportedly tortured under interrogation. After two days they were taken to the PC regional headquarters in Davao City where the others, four of them women, were being held. The women were reported to have been sexually humiliated while being interrogated. Despite requests the military commander did not allow lawyers to visit the detainees until six days after the arrests and only after a writ of habeas corpus had been issued by the Supreme Court.
In a speech on 8 August 1982 President Marcos said that a plot had been uncovered involving assassinations, bombings and strikes timed to coincide with his forthcoming visit to the USA in September. The President said that he had a list of those involved in the plot which included members of the pre-martial law opposition, the communist party, Muslim separatists, trade unionists, priests and journalists.
Between mid-August and early September 1982 about 50 trade unionists were arrested in the Manila area. They were leaders and organizers of unions and federations affiliated to the Pagkakaisa ng Manggagawang Pilipino (PMP), a confederation whose largest component comprised unions affiliated to the Kilusan Mayo Uno (KMU), May 1st Movement. Thirty-five of those arrested were still detained at the end of 1982 and had been charged with conspiracy to commit rebellion. The charges against at least 27 of the detainees were brought on the grounds that the accused were members of the KMU and the PMP which were alleged to be "under the umbrella of the CPP whose objective . . . was to overthrow the government by armed struggle". Amnesty International took up the cases of 32 of the detained trade unionists, including those of the 79-year-old chairman of the KMU and co-chairman of the PMP, Felixberto Olalia, and the executive vice-president of the KMU, Crispin Beltran, who was adopted as a prisoner of conscience.
On 10 December 1982 Amnesty International appealed on behalf of 10 people who worked on the only Manila opposition newspaper. We Forum. They had been arrested under PCOs on 7 December by armed forces intelligence units. They were charged with subversion on 13 December and released into house arrest on 15 December. Amnesty International was concerned that the 10 had been held in the Maximum Security Unit (MSU) at Fort Bonifacio in Manila where detainees were frequendy held incommunicado in poor conditions and were often reportedly tortured and ill-treated. The Amnesty
228
International report had recommended dissolution of the MSU. Two detainees held in the MSU of particular concern to Amnesty International were Milagros Lumabi-Echanis and Juliet Delima-Sison (see Amnesty International Report 1982). Milagros Lumabi-Echanis, who had been held incommunicado in the MSU for seven months after her arrest in August 1980, was granted a "temporary release" (provisional release) in February 1982. Juliet Delima-Sison, the wife of the alleged chairman of the CPP, on whose behalf Amnesty International had appealed for medical care on learning that she was pregnant, was released in March 1982. Amnesty International had been concerned that inadequate medical attention and poor prison conditions were endangering her health.
Amnesty International believed that more than 800 people were under sentence of death, most in the National Penitentiary, Muntinlupa. At least 24 crimes were punishable by death. Most of those under sentence of death had been awaiting review of their sentence for several years, including some who had been convicted in the 1950s. Since 1972, only one person has been executed. However, the courts continued to pass death sentences in 1982 and several prisoners had dates for their execution set, only to be postponed.
