Chad
Amnesty International was concerned by reports of extrajudicial executions carried out by soldiers of the Forces armées du nord (FAN), Armed Forces of the North, led by Hissène Habré, who took control of most of the country by September. The victims were reported to include civilians and unarmed former soldiers of the Forces armées tchadiennes (FAT), Chadian Armed Forces, led by Colonel Abdelkader Kamougué, who was ousted from southern Chad by FAN forces between June and September. Before their defeat, the FAT were responsible for the detention of more than 30 civilians and military supportera of the Rassemblement pour l'unité et la démocratie au Tchad (RUDT), Movement for Unity and Democracy in Chad.
Fighting between a number of rival political and military factions continued throughout the first half of 1982 and prevented effective central control. In June the FAN captured N'Djamena, the capital, forcing out President Goukouni Oueddeï and the Forces armées populaires (FAP), Popular Armed Forces. FAN forces then moved into areas of southern Chad which had been occupied by Colonel Kamougué's FAT and by September had taken control of virtually the whole country except an area in the extreme north still held by troops loyal to Goukouni Oueddeï. Hissène Habré was sworn in as the new President on 21 October.
In September Amnesty International appealed to Hissène Habré to seek the release of the RUDT members held hostage by FAT forces since June. They were released during September. The FAN occupation of the south was accompanied by reports of extrajudicial executions allegedly committed by troops loyal to Hissène Habré. The victims were reported to include prominent civilians alleged to have collaborated with Colonel Kamougué's administration and unarmed former members of FAT. Those killed included Karhyom Ningayo, prefect of Moundou, who was reportedly shot dead by FAN soldiers in front of his family. Amnesty International expressed its concern about these killings to President Habré on 22 October and called on him to confirm or deny the deaths. No reply was received. Reports of further extrajudicial executions reportedly carried out by the FAN were received by the end of the year, including the execution of Lieutenant-Colonel Kouldoumngar Ngolombaye Allafi, a former chief of the general staff in Goukouni Oueddeï's army.
27
