El Salvador
Amnesty International believed that $	«l^^ta-; ■. all branches of the security forces,
including paramilitary civilian defence groups under military control and newly trained counter-insurgency bataillons, were involved in a systematic and widespread program of torture, abduction and individual and mass killings of men, women and children. The victims of government violence included people suspected of opposition to the authorities from all sectors of society. They also included residents in areas targeted for security operations whose killing or mutilation appeared to have been completely arbitrary. Amnesty International was also investigating the reasons for arrest of the several hundred political prisoners held in El Salvador, and their conditions of imprisonment.
These human rights violations occurred at a time of civil conflict and reports were received of violent crimes against individuals by opposition forces. I n appeals to the govemmentA mnesty International emphasized that even in time of war governments may not arbitrarily deprive people of life or torture them.
In March there were elections for a constituent assembly to replace the series of civilian-militaryywMiai which had governed since 1979. The cabinetposts were subsequently shared between the major parties which had been permitted to participate. Roberto D'Aubuisson was named as the President of the Constituent Assembly. He was formerly a major in the National Guard who many sources, including the former US Ambassador to El Salvador, had linked to the "death squads" and to the unsolved murder of the Archbishop of San Salvador in March 1980.
In March 1982 Amnesty International published a report on human rights violations described by civilians interviewed by Amnesty International during a mission to refugee camps outside El Salvador. They told of decapitation and mutilation of unarmed civilians by the security forces and the machine-gunning of women and children from military helicopters. The report described the mounting violence since the October 1979 coup which overthrew the government of President Carlos Humberto Romero.
133
Amnesty International's report described instances of patients being abducted from hospital sickbeds by security agents and then killed or made to "disappear". One man told Amnesty International in August 1982 of being hidden under bedsheets by nurses when the military came to look for him at Rosales Hospital. He had been found by the side of a road in October 1981 with a bulletin his head, next to two dead bodies.In response to Amnesty International's inquiries at the time officials stated that they had interviewed the man in hospital, and that he had said he had mistaken the hour and been shot as a curfew violator. However, interviewed abroad later by an Amnesty International doctor, he stated that he had been abducted in the presence of witnesses from his home at 10 p.m., by heavily armed men in civilian clothes. After two electrk: shock torture sessions, he was taken blindfold and handcuffed at midnight from what he believed to be the headquarters of the Policía de Hacienda, Treasury Police, and was shot in the back of the head and left for dead.
Following the killings in disputed circumstances of four Dutch journalists in March, Amnesty International called on the Government of El Salvador to permit independent investigations into human rights violations directed at Salvadorian and foreign journalists. No response was received.
In June it was reported that during a combined military operation along the Salvadorian-Honduran border, peasants attempting to flee were killed as they tried to cross the Sumpul River into Honduras. Amnesty International had previously asked for investigations into similar incidents in 1980 and 1981. Once again, official sources reported that the victims were combatants who died in a clash between government and opposition forces, but soldiers from both armies as well as civilian eye-witnesses reported that the victims were not combatants and included women and children.
A mnesty International continued to receive reports that S alvadorian refugees, and Salvadorian andHonduran relief workers, were attacked and killed by Salvadorian military and paramilitary troops on Honduran soil or after being forcibly returned to El Salvador. The available information indicated that this sometimes happened with the tacit or overt complicity of Honduran military or paramilitary personnel.
People attempting to publicize such violations continued to be victimized. At least nine women working with the Comité de Madres de Presos, Desaparecidos y Asesinados Políticos, Committee of Mothers and Relatives of Political Prisoners, the Disappeared and Victims of Political Killings, were themselves reported to have "disappeared". In June a volunteer of the Green Cross, a Salvadorian humanitarian medical aid agency, was arrested on suspicion of providing supplies to guerrillas. He later told US Embassy officials
134
that he had been tortured in the custody of the National Police. The Commander of the unit responsible, Colonel Reynaldo López Nuila ofthe National Police, was named in August to the new governmental human rights commission. He had personally defended his methods of arrest, including sending non-uniformed agents on midnight raids without stating the charges or identifying themselves as police, as "necessary to surprise subversives", in anApril 1982 interview with the Washington Post.
Patricia Cuéllar, a US citizen, formerly with the church-linked Socorro Jurídico, Legal Aid office (now called Socorro Jurídico Cristiano - Christian Legal Aid office), "disappeared" in July together with her father and his maid. Following US Embassy inquiries, the Salvadorian authorities denied that security forces were involved in her abduction. H owever, a petition of habeas corpus filed on her behalf stated that eye-witnesses had seen her arrested by men in olive green uniform while security force personnel stood guard.
In August América Fernanda Perdomo of the non-governmental Comisión de Derechos Humanos de El Salvador (CDHES), the Salvadorian Human Rights Commission, was arrested in San Salvador along with Saúl Villalta ofthe Frente Democràtico Revolucionario (FDR), Democratic Revolutionary Front, a coalition of opposition parties formed in April 1980, and Mana Adela Cornejo of the Comité de Madres and her 13-year-old daughter Ana Yanira. They were reportedly held at the headquarters of the Treasury Police in San Salvador, although their arrests were not acknowledged.
Politkîians were also a target of human rights violations throughout 1982. In October Amnesty International approached Christian Democrat parties and other political groups and politicians throughout the world, asking them to press for investigations into the cases of 13 Salvadorian Christian Democrat leaders who had been shot and killed since the March elections. The Salvadorian Christian Democrat Party said that the official security forces, aided by clandestine paramilitary civilian defence squads, were using violence against Christian Democrat elected representatives and activists in reprisal after disagreements which occurred during the elections and to settle personal scores.
In October Amnesty International appealed for information on the whereabouts of 12 politrcal and trade union leaders arrested on 18 October along with a number of others. Several were later acknowledged to be in detention. An armed forces news release accused the acknowledged detainees of" generating chaos" and "seeking dialogue and negotiations as a strategic manoeuvre". Some of them had been seeking negotiations between the military authorities and the armed opposition in an effort to end the civil strife. They were held under
135
Decree 507 of December 1980, which established military courts with jurisdiction over offences including crimes against security and the state. None had been tried by the end of 1982. Among them was Mauricio Domenech, a leader of a legal political party.
A mnesty International continued to follow the cases of a number of people interviewed in March 1981 by a foreign journalistatSanta Tecla prison. La Libertad department. They were among the few prisoners then known to have survived arrest by Salvadorian security forces. They told of being given electric shocks, beatings and hallucinogenic drugs since their arrests in 1980 and 1981. They were transferred in 1982 to La Esperanza prison in the department of San Salvador. Amnesty International continued to receive reports of torture from this prison.
In April 1982 Amnesty International appealed to the government for information on the health ofHector Bernabé Recinos and Antonio Morales Carbonell. Bamabé Recinos, a trade union leader, had been arrested in August 1980 after participating in a strike. Morales Carbonell, the son ofChristianDemocrat politicianDr José Morales Ehrlich, was arrested in June 1980. Both had reportedly been tortured by National Guard and Treasury Police personnel on 18 March 1982 when a combined force of units of these agencies forcibly entered the prison. Morales Carbonell was eventually transferred to a clinic for medical treatment and was subsequently released into exile. He testified to Amnesty International that he and others had been tortured in custody in El Salvador. Amnesty International's April appeal also requested information as to the whereabouts of Manuel Enrique Terrero Sánchez and Julio Talavera, who had been removed from La Esperanza prison to Treasury Police headquarters some months earlier, where they were reportedly tortured.
Amnesty International took up for investigation the cases of 48 women held at Ilopango prison where women political prisoners are detained. The organization was concerned at reports that the women had been arrested because they had expressed even the most minimal opposition to the government, because they were related to people opposed to the government, or because they belonged to groups, such as teachers and the young, which the government identified with the opposition and had therefore marked out for repression.
In all, Amnesty International knew of several hundred political prisoners, although still others might have been held in military installations or secret detention centres. During 1982 Amnesty International received testimonies from women prisoners who stated that before their transfer to Ilopango they had been held in military installations, and had been hidden by their jailors during visits by the International Committee of the Red Cross. Amnesty International
136
pressed for political prisoners to be brought to trial within the time limits established by Decree 507, an end to torture in the prisons, and protection to prevent detainees from "disappearing" from prisons.
A mnesty International was also concerned that prison conditions, particularly for the male prisoners, were said by eye-witnesses to be cramped and the prison diet inadequate. Prisoners complained that their families were intimidated when they came for visits.
Amnesty International's concern at the possible impact of foreign military assistance on the human rights situation in El Salvador continued. Amnesty International had raised this issue previously with the United States D epartment of State. In J anuary and July 1982 US President Ronald Reagan certified that "The Government of El Salvador is making concerted and significant effort to comply with internationally recognized human rights" and had "achieved substantial control over all elements of its own armed forces, so as to bring to an end the indiscriminate torture and murder of Salvadorian citizens". Amnesty International informed selected US policy makers of the organization's assessment thathuman rights violations continued on a massive scale. The conditions setby the US Congress for the continuation of US military assistance also required that El Salvador make serious efforts to investigate the murders and "disappearances" in E1 Salvador of several US citizens. However, cases involving US citizens, including Michael Kline, killed in disputed circumstances by security forces in October 1982, remained unresolved.
Amnesty International also approached the US Government about Salvadorians seeking political asylum in the USA, who faced possible danger to their lives if returned to El Salvador. Similar approaches were made during the year to the Governments of Mexico and Honduras, where Salvadorians faced forctole repatriation. Individual cases were also raised with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
In 1981 Amnesty International had written to the US Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) to express its concern that the INS appeared to be pressing Salvadorians to opt for "voluntary return" to their country in spite of the danger. Amnesty International suggested that Salvadorians be accorded "extended voluntary departure" - a concessionary status granted to nationals of a number of countries permitting them to remain in the USA until danger to their lives no longer existed in their country of origin. The INS response, received by Amnesty International on 5 February 1982, described the procedures followed in individual asylum applications, but did not address the issue of extended voluntary departure nor other general concerns raised in Amnesty International's letter.
Amnesty International submitted information on El Salvador to
137
regional and international organizations. In January andNovember 1982 the special rapporteur on El Salvador, appointed by the United Nations Commission on Human Rights, reported that the executive and judicial organs of the Republic ofEI Salvador had adopted a widespread attitude of "passivity and inactivity" with regard to violations of civil, political and human rights, most of which, he concluded, were perpetrated by members of the "state apparatus" and the "extreme right". InDecember the UN General Assembly expressed concern at the continued violations of human rights and called on El Salvador to ensure respect for human rights from all its agencies.
In both March and November Amnesty International submitted to the United Nations Educational, Scientific andCultural Organization (UNESCO) approximately 60 cases of teachers and other education workers who had "disappeared" or been killed in El Salvador. In August Amnesty International received news of the detention of another 27 teachers, including the teachers' union leadership. Among the detainees was Walter Roberto Zuleta Osorio. In October the Salvadorian High C ommand summoned the S alvadorian Episcopal Conference to view a video tape in which Zuleta accused the Church of being involved in subversion. Responding to the accusations Monsignor Arturo Rivera y Damas concluded on October 10 that one "had to doubt the extrajudicial confession of a prisoner being held incommunicado in the jails of one of the security forces". Interviewed later by foreign investigators Zuleta told them that he had been tortured while held for 75 days by the Treasury Police. Amnesty International also submitted information to the UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances.
In an open letter to the General Assembly of the Organization of American States in December, Amnesty International stated that extrajudicial executions were still being carried out routinely by all sections of El Salvador's security services, and that the practice appeared to be an established part of military and law enforcement policy.
