Cape Verde
Amnesty International was concerned by the trial before a military court of 18 civihans accused of offences against the security of the state and by allegations that some of them were assaulted in pretrial custody. The 18 prisoners were among 23 people arrested on Santo Antao island on 1 September 1981 following a demonstration the previous day during which one person was shot dead by soldiers. The demonstrators had been calling for the release of two recently arrested detainees and protesting against a proposed law on agrarian reform. Five of those arrested were subsequently released uncharged but the remainder were detained for several months by the security police, the Direcqao Nacional de Seguranza e Ordem Pública (DNSOP), National Directorate of Security and Public Order, and then brought to trial. Most of them were charged under Article 168 of the criminal code with attempting to change the government by unconstitutional means and with being in league with an illegal opposition political party, the Uniao Caboverdiana Independerse e Democrática (UCID), Cape Verdean Independent and Democratic Union. During their detention, they were held incommunicado and some were alleged to have been brutally assaulted.
Although the defendants were civilians, they were tried before the Tribunal Militar deinstáncia, Military Tribunal of the first Instance, as military courts have jurisdiction over all cases concerning state
23
whom was a civilian. The defendants were legally represented but were apparently prevented from giving evidence about their alleged ill-treatment in pre-trial detention. At the end of the trial on 18 March all 18 defendants were convicted of offences against the security of the state and with one exception sentenced to prison terms ranging from one to 10 years' imprisonment. These sentences were believed to have been confirmed by the Supreme Military Tribunal. Although Amnesty International did not adopt any of the defendants as prisoners of conscience, the organization believed that this trial fell short of internationally recognized standards. In particular, the evidence against them was insufficient to prove that they intended to overthrow the government by force.
Central African Republic
Amnesty International was concerned by the incommunicado detention without trial of suspected opponents of the government. Those detained included more than 100 people alleged to have been involved in an attempt to overthrow the government in March 1982. A number were adopted as prisoners of conscience. They also included some 10 children of alleged government opponents. Amnesty International was also concerned about harsh conditions for political detainees held at Kassai" military camp in Bangui and about death sentences imposed on three political prisoners.
In early January 1982 atleastl5 suspected members of the main opposition party, the Mouvementée libération du peuple centrafricain (MLPC), Central African People's Liberation Movement, led by Ange Patasse, were arrested in Bangui. They included three members of the MLPC's Political Bureau and a number of students and lycéens (school students) who were said to have attended an illegal political meeting and distributed MLPC documents. After a few weeks one of the detainees, Simplice Moholo, was brought before a judge of the Tribunal de grande instance, High Court, in Bangui. The authorities asked for his detention to be extended and for his case to be referred to a Special Tribunal for political offences set up in July 1981. However, the judge, Gaston M'B ai'koum, decided that it was unnecessary for the case to go before the Special Tribunal. At a subsequent hearing
24
another judge ordered Simplice Moholo's provisional release when two prosecution witnesses failed to appear. The authorities protested at these decisions but both judges were supported by Marc Passet, the acting Procureur général. Procurator General, at the court. He and the two judges were then arrested on or about 12 March 1982. Marc Passet and the two judges were adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International. They were released uncharged in July. Simplice Moholo and nine others arrested in January had been freed in March. Five others, however, were still held incommunicado and uncharged at the end of 1982. They were adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience.
On 4 March 1982 the military government of General André Kolingba, which took power in September 1981, announced that a conspiracy to overthrow the government had been uncovered. It was alleged that two leading members of the government - General François Bozize, the Information Minister, and General Alphonse M'Baikoua, the Minister of Justice - and the MLPC had been involved. The MLPC was banned and MLPC membership was made a criminal offence. From September 1981 to March 1982 party political activities had been forbidden, but membership of a political party as such had not been an offence. Prominent members of the party were arrested in March 1982 but Ange Patasse and the two ministers evaded arrest. Ange Patasse obtained asylum in the French Embassy in Bangui and was later allowed to leave for Togo. The two ministers also took refuge abroad, although General M'B aikoua was subsequently detained in Chad. However, a number of close relatives of these three, including the wives of two of them and 10 children, were arrested and detained incommunicado at Kassai' military camp. Those of the children still at school or studying were released in late November 1982, after more than eight months' imprisonment, but both wives and the older children remained in detention at the end of 1982.
Several people living along the route which Alphonse M'Baikoua had used to escape were also arrested for allegedly assisting him. However, no specific charges were brought against them. They too were detained incommunicado at Kassaï military camp.
At the end of 1982 more than 100 of those arrested in March in connection with the alleged conspiracy remained in detention without charge or trial. In addition to leading members of the MLPC they included several doctors, civil servants and former government officials. More than 30 were adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International. There were two more arrests in June - the Minister of Telecommunications, Michel-Paulin Bondeboli, and the Secretary of State for Commerce, Jérôme Alame.
25
A number of people held in connection with the conspiracy were released during the year, some within a few days of their arrest in March. The President of the National Medical Association, Simon Bedaya-Ngaro, and another doctor were freed in July.
In August 1982 the President of the opposition party, the Front patriotique oubanguien - Parti du travail (FPO-PT), Oubangui Patriotic Front - Labour Party, Dr Abel Goumba, was arrested with another senior member of the party, Patrice Endjimoungou. The Minister of Interior claimed that Patrice Endjimoungou had been in possession of subversive letters written by Dr Goumba. However, after investigating the cases. Amnesty International concluded that there was no evidence that the two men had been planning to use violence, and adopted them as prisoners of conscience. The two men were still detained without trial at the end of 1982.
The cases of all political detainees are believed to have been referred to the Special Tribunal established in July 1981 to try political cases in the aftermath of a bomb "attack on a Bangui cinema. In May 1982 five people detained shortly after that attack and accused of being in possession of explosives were tried before the Tribunal. Three were convicted and sentenced to death, one was acquitted and no verdict was announced on the fifth. The court also convicted and sentenced to death in absentia two leaders of the political party which had claimed responsibility for the July 1981 bomb attack.
There is no right of appeal after conviction by the Special Tribunal. Amnesty International appealed to President Kolingba to exercise his right of presidential clemency, but at the end of 1982 the three condemned prisoners were believed to be still under sentence of death.
No other political detainees are known to have been tried by the Special Tribunal during the year, although at least one other person arrested after the July 1981 bomb attack, David Berberati, was reported to be still in detention in late 1982.
The detainees held at Kassai military camp were reportedly locked up both day and night in cramped and unhygienic conditions, received insufficient food and water, and were denied adequate exercise or medical attention. They were also apparently deprived of all rights to receive visits or correspondence from their relatives and were permanently held incommunicado. Amnesty International repeatedly appealed to the authorities to improve these conditions and at the end of the year it was reported that detainees were being allowed out of their cells during the daytime.
