Uruguay
Amnesty International's concerns were the large number of prisoners of conscience, many of whom were arrested during 1982; the continuing practice of unacknowledged detention and the lack of legal guarantees for detainees; the administrative detention of prisoners who had completed their sentences; torture and ill-treatment of prisoners; deaths in custody; and new trials of political prisoners before military courts with deficient procedures.
In May a government official stated that there were 992 political prisoners in Uruguay, 85 8 men and 134 women. At the close of 1982 Amnesty International was working on behalf of 264 adopted prisoners of conscience, and a further 100 prisoners whose cases were being investigated. During 1982 Amnesty International learned of the release of 43 prisoners for whom it had worked.
On 3 June the Council of State approved a statute on political parties which allowed three political parties: the Partido Colorado, Colorado Party, the Partido Nacional, National Party (also referred to as the Blancos), and the Unión cívica, Civic Union. The political parties in the opposition coalition, Frente Amplio, Broad Front, which included the Christian Democrat, Communist and Socialist parties, together with smaller left-wing groups, remained banned. Many members of these parties were imprisoned during the 1970s and adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience.
Ill
Seventeen members of the legal political parties were arrested in October in connection with internal party elections which were held on 28 November 1982. In the period preceding these elections political bans imposed on a number of politicians of the Colorado and Blanco parties remained in force, although some had their bans lifted. All 17 were later released, but four Blanco candidates and one Colorado candidate still faced charges before military courts of disrespect for the armed forces after making electoral speeches critical of the government.
Between January and May Amnesty International learned of the arrest of 30 trade unionists. According to official statements in January and March, 21 were indicted before military courts with offences under the Ley de Seguridad del Estado y el Orden Interno, Law of State Security and Internal Order ( 1972). They were accused of membership of the banned Uruguayan CommunistParty. Amnesty International adopted 27 of them as prisoners of conscience.
People arrested continued to be held for prolonged periods in unacknowledged detention without trial and denied legal guarantees such as access to a lawyer and their families. In May Amnesty International appealed for Darwinson Abel Caballero Brandi, a worker in a shirt factory, following reports that he had "disappeared" after leaving his work place in Montevideo on 22 March. Attempts by relatives to trace him proved fruitless. No fiirther information on his fate or whereabouts was received until November, when it was officially acknowledged that he was being held awaiting trial in the Penal de Libertad, Libertad prison.
Amnesty International remained concerned about Miguel Angel Mato Fagiani, Félix Ortiz Piazoli, Américo Gastón Roballo Tardaguila and Omar Antonio Paita Cardozo, all of whom were the subject of urgent appeals. Miguel Angel Mato Fagiani was reported to have "disappeared" on his way to work at a tyre factory in Montevideo on 29 January. His family was unable to gain any information on his whereabouts despite the presentation of a habeas corpus petition. In May the Uruguayan authorities, in a note addressed to tíie Human Rights Commission of the Organization of American States, stated that there was no record of his detention. Omar Antonio Paita Cardozo, previously a leader of the port workers' trade union, "disappeared" on 21 September 1981. No further news was received of him until April 1982 when another trade unionist, Victoriano González Camargo, who had been arrested on 28 September 1981 and held for three weeks, claimed to have seen him and heard his cries in a military barracks in Montevideo. Victoriano González, who left the country in the face of threats that he would be rearrested, claimed that he himself was kept hooded and tortured with beatings, electric
178
shocks, hanging and prolonged periods of standing {plantón) while under interrogation. He alleged that doctors were present during these sessions. By the end of 1982 no news of the whereabouts of these four men had been divulged.
During 1982 Amnesty International received information about 22 political prisoners who were detained without charge or trial after completing their prison sentences. It was believed that they were being held in continued custody under Article 168, paragraph 17, of the constitution, which suspends certain individual guarantees in "grave and unforeseen cases of foreign attack or internal turmoil". This has been used repeatedly as a basis for detention without trial and the government continued to maintain that habeas corpus writs were not applicable in such cases. Amnesty International urged that the prisoners be released if there were no new charges against them, F ive women prisoners who had been held in a military barracks after completing their sentences, in some cases for more than a year, were released. They were obliged to leave the country.
On 13 July Amnesty International appealed to PresidentGregorio Alvarez for an inquiry into the deaths in custody of two prisoners -Edgar Sosa Cabrera and Juan Alfredo Pino Garin - who died in detention after the expiry of their sentences. In both cases this date had been confirmed by a military court. Edgar Sosa Cabrera had completed an eight-year sentence in June 1981. He was believed to have died during the last week ofApril 1982 after being transferred to an empty out-building at Libertad prison. The prison authorities claimed that he had committed suicide. Juan Alfredo Pino Garin had completed a 10-year sentence in April. It was reported that around 10 June he was moved from Libertad prison to a military barracks in the provincial town of Florida, the Batallón de Ingenieros de Combate No. 2, where he was allowed a visit from his family. He died a few days later. The authorities claimed that he had hanged himself. Other reports suggested that shortly before his death he was in good health and spirits, and expected to be released shortly into exile. In its appeal Amnesty International urged the President to guarantee the safety of prisoners in military prisons. The organization also expressed concern for Jorge Selves Lawlor, who had completed a seven-and-a-half-year sentence inFebruary 1981. Concern was aroused by reports that he had been moved into the same out-building in Libertad prison where Edgar Sosa had died, that he had been severely beaten there, and had subsequently been transferred with Juan Alfredo Pino Garin to the Florida barracks. Another prisoner, Washington Guinovart Tonelli, was allegedly moved to the same barracks in July. His nine-year sentence had expired in June 1981 and his release date had also been confirmed by a military tribunal.
179
Concern persisted at reports of harsh treatment and inadequate medical attention in the two principal military prisons for political prisoners: the Penal de Libertad for men, officially known as Establecimiento Militar de Reclusión No. 1, and the Penal de Punta de Rieles for women, officially known as Establecimiento Militar de Reclusión No. 2. During 1982 Amnesty International appealed for urgent medical treatment for 13 prisoners following reports of deterioration in their health. The organization was concerned about the alleged slowness of diagnoses and treatment in a number of cases and irregularities in the supply of medicines to prisoners. In April and September Amnesty International appealed on behalf of Professor Dr José Luis Massera Lerena, an internationally known mathematician, former member of parliament, and adopted prisoner of conscience, following reports of a deterioration in his condition - hypertension -allegedly exacerbated by irregularity in his supply of medicines. On 9 July adopted prisoner of conscience Alberto Altesor González, a 68-year-old ex-trade unionist and member of parliament, who had been seriously ill with a heart condition, was operated on successfully. Permission had been granted for a surgeon appointed by the family to operate. Amnesty International welcomed this decision and appealed for his early release to ensure proper post-operative care. In December Amnesty International appealed to the President for the early release of both Alberto Altesor and Dr Massera.
Amnesty International remained concerned about conditions in the women's prison, de Punta de Rieles. Following an incident reported in February, in which three prisoners were allegedly beaten with sticks by officers, there were reports that solitary confinement was being used indiscriminately and on an increasing scale.
Amnesty International was investigating the cases of 15 prisoners who had completed their sentences but were facing new trials for political offences allegedly committed in prison. The majority had been accused of belonging to a faction of the urban guerrilla movement Movimiento de Liberación Nacional - Tupamaros, known as the Seispuntistas, Six Point Group. They were charged under the military penal code with "subversive association". Amnesty International believed that the procedures followed in these cases did not conform to international standards. It was known that several of the prisoners had been removed for interrogation from Libertad prison to military barracks where for several months they were held incommunicado. It was alleged in a number of cases that torture and threats were used to force them to sign confessions. Amnesty International urged that the prisoners be released immediately or tried in accordance with internationally recognized legal standards.
In June Amnesty International submitted information under the
180
United Nations procedure set up to examine a "consistent pattern of gross and reliably attested violations of human rights". During 1982 Amnesty International also submitted information to the UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances.
In April the Human Rights Committee established under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights discussed the Uruguayan Government's report. During the year the committee published its views on 10 Uruguayan cases. In all 10 cases the Uruguayan Government was found responsible for violations of the covenant The committee gave its views in April on the case of Mario Teti Izquierdo, who was facing a new trial following his removal from Libertad prison for several months in 1980 and 1981. It found the government responsible for ill-treating him and depriving him of a fair trial. In a decision in July on the cases of Carmen Amándola Massiotti and Graciela Baritussio, the committee expressed the view that their continued detention after completing their prison sentences constituted arbitrary detention. The committee considered the case of Hugo Haroldo Dermit, who died in custody in a military barracks in December 1980, having completed his sentence the previous June, and stated its view that the Uruguayan Government had violated Article 6 on the right to life.
Venezuela
Amnesty International's concerns included the trials by military tribunals of civilians charged with political offences, and extreme delays in these trials; allegations of torture and the "disappearance" of two prisoners; and an incident in which 23 alleged guerrillas were killed in uncertain circumstances.
A long-standing concern was the exclusive jurisdiction of the military courts over political offences defined in the Military Code of Justice as rebelión militar (military rebellion). In 1979 an amnesty had released over 100 political prisoners held under military jurisdiction. Many had been held without trial for over six years. Amnesty International was concerned that by 1982 over 80 political prisoners faced charges of military rebellion in the military courts. Under military trial procedures civilians charged with military rebellion may be held indefinitely without judgment, and without redress before the ordinary courts. At least five prisoners detained in 1976 and 1977, who were excluded from the 1979 amnesty, had not yet been judged.
181
Amnesty International followed the case of army Lieutenant Colonel Luis Alfonso Godoy, who was detained on 26 August 1982 after publicizing allegations charging a superior officer - since retired - with corrupt practices during an army road-building project in 1972. He was apparently detained without charge on the order of the Minister of Defence pending a procedural ruling by the military high court.
Amnesty International received information on a case of alleged torture by the detective corps, the Policía Tècnica Judicial (PTJ), and the "disappearance" of two prisoners. Rogelio C astillo Gamarra and Andrés Avelino Colina were detained by the PTJ on 29 and 30 April respectively in Coro, Falcon state, after a bank robbery. They "disappeared" on 2 May; PTJ spokesmen claimed the two had escaped. The families of the two men publicly demanded to know where their bodies were, and distributed a photograph of Rogelio Gamarra taken in custody and showing signs of torture. PTJ officials subsequently confirmed that the photograph had been taken during interrogation by police officers and unofficially released to the family. Several Coro residents and other prisoners subsequently claimed to have witnessed the interrogation under torture of the two men by PTJ agents at an isolated beach near Coro on 2 May. They said that the two men were handcuffed, held by their hands and feet and submerged repeatedly. A prisoner told investigators in June 1982 that he, Gamarra and Colina had been interrogated atC oro police station and had been systematically beaten, nearly suffocated with plastic bags, and given electric shocks. He said that he and Rogelio Gamarra had been taken to a beach on 30 April and submerged repeatedly; that Rogelio Gamarra had then required artificial respiration; and that Rogelio Gamarra had been taken again to the beach with Avelino Colina on 2 May where he drowned during interrogation. Avelino Colina's situation was not known.
A special investigator was assigned to the case in May 1982 by the office of the Attorney General. State's attorney Dr Pablo González subsequently recommended prosecution of 11 PTJ officers: a charge of aggravated homicide was brought against four of them. Dr González subsequently called for investigations into death threats he had received after deciding to press charges against Coro police officers. Trial proceedings against the 11 accused police officers were in progress at the end of 1982.
On 17 December Amnesty International inquired about an incident on 4 October 1982 in which 23 alleged members of the guerrilla Bandera Roja were killed in a combined operation by the army and the civilian political police. Dirección de los Servicios de Inteligencia y Prevención (DISIP). Their camp was surrounded
182
and attacked with machine-guns from low-flying aircraft. The incident in Cantaura, Anzoategui state, prompted commissions of inquiry by the Congress as well as the Attorney General's office when it was learned that there were no survivors, and that the victims had immediately been buried in a mass grave without autopsies. The army initially refused to allow the bodies to be returned to families, or to permit autopsies by the civilian medical examiner. Although families were permitted to recover the bodies 10 days later, the army reportedly continued to refuse autopsies. The officiai commissioned by the Attorney General to observe the exhumations on 14 October was forcibly excluded from the cemetery on the grounds that investigation of the affair was exclusively within the jurisdiction of the military courts. Amnesty International expressed concern at the army's claim of exclusive jurisdiction and welcomed the statement from the office of the Attorney General that its own investigation remained open.
