Madagascar
55
Amnesty International adopted one prisoner of conscience during 1982. It continued to seek the trial of three detainees held without trial since 1977 and investigated the cases of several people detained on suspicion of involvement in political violence. In November President Didier Ratsiraka was re-elected to a second seven-year term of office. He was opposed in the presidential election by Monja Jaona, the leader of an opposition party. MonjaJaonawas detained on 15 December and the organization was investigating his case. Amnesty International also received reports of the ill-treatment of detainees by the security forces.
Amnesty International adopted as a prisoner of conscience Manana Bosthène Ratsimandresy, a medical student arrested at Ivato airport on 11 August when he was overheard criticizing President Ratsiraka. The following day he was sentenced to a year's close confinement in prison.
Throughout 1982 Amnesty International continued to seek the trial or release of three detainees arrested in October 1977 and subsequently charged with endangering or plotting against state security. The three were Richard Andriamaholison and Jean-Astier Rakoto-Abel, former senior police officers, and Marson Rakotonirina, a former army officer. Amnesty International's repeated appeals for them to be tried or released met with no response, although it was reported that the instruction (judicial inquiry) into their cases had been completed.
The organization investigated a number of other cases during 1982. In January about 20 people were arrested on suspicion of plotting a coup against the President. Although some were released within a few weeks, by the end of 1982 about 10 remained in detention. They included Rajaozandry, a government official; Julien Radanoara, a law student; Colonel Rasolofo, an army officer; and Father Joseph Noël Randrianoelisoa, a Catholic priest. The exact charges against them were not known. By the end of the year all the remaining detainees were held in Manjakandriana prison except Ramino, who was reported to be in Antanimora prison. Amnesty International investigated the cases of four members oiûit Mpitolana ho amin' ny Fanjakan' ny Madinika (MFM), the Party for Proletarian Power. They were arrested in March 1982 after a demonstration on the island of Nossi-be during which police opened fire on demonstrators. Yves Dzaozara, Gilles Lejamble, Paul André and
56
Rajoanesa were sentenced to four years' hard labour by the criminal court of Nossi-be for threatening state security. At the end of the year the four were still awaiting a date for their appeal hearing.
Amnesty International expressed its concern over the detention on 15 December of Monja Jaona, leader of the Madagasikara Otronin' ny Malagasy (MONIMA), Madagascar for the Malagasy Party. He was held under house arrest near Ihosy. He was not charged, but he is reported to have been detained after calling for a general strike in protest against alleged irregularities during the presidential election. Monja Jaona had previously been adopted as a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty International in 1980.
The organization also expressed its concern to the authorities about reports of the ill-treatment of political detainees to obtain confessions by officers of the security police, Direction générale de l'information et de la documentation (DGID), in their headquarters at Ambohibao, near Antananarivo.
