Singapore
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the release or prompt trial of political prisoners held in preventive detention under the Internal Security Act(ISA) 1963. In February the Home Affairs Minister stated that 17 people were held without trial under the ISA. Two prisoners of conscience were released during 1982. There were arrests in January 1982 leading to the first known trial under the ISA. Amnesty International appealed for the commutation of all death sentences.
On 9 and 10 January 1982,10 people were arrested under the ISA on suspicion of belonging to a Muslim group, the Singapore People's Liberation Organization (SPLO), which the Ministry of Home Affairs said "aimed to overthrow the government through the use of arms". Two of the suspects were arrested reportedly while planning to distribute pamphlets during celebrations of the birthday of the Prophet Mohammad. They were all Indians or Malays, members of minority groups in Singapore. Six were members of opposition
229
parties, three had been candidates in parliamentary elections, and two were members of Malay cultural organizations. The arrests were criticized by a number of opposition politicians as aimed at discrediting the opposition by linking it to extremist causes. On 13 January Amnesty International cabled Minister of Home Affairs Chua Sian Chin urging that the prisoners be charged and given a public and fair trial within a reasonable time, or else that they be released. On 15 January 1982, five of the prisoners pleaded guilty before a magistrate to charges under Article 27(1) of the ISA relating to the writing, printing, attempted distribution and possession of subversive documents. The prosecution argued that the pamphlets had "a tendency to excite organized violence against members of the Singapore Government" and that the ultimate aim of the SPLO was to overthrow the government by violent means. The pamphlets were said to accuse the authorities of oppressing the Malay language and culture and Islam. Charges that the five defendants had planned arson and planting bombs in pubUc buildings were supported only by statements made by the defendants during interrogation. They were tried on 21 January 1982 and sentenced to terms of imprisonment ranging from two to four years. On 8 February 1982 the five other suspects were released without trial. According to the Home Affairs Ministry "they admitted they were misled by their leaders and expressed repentance in handwritten statements."
On 26 August 1982, the prisoner of conscience Dr Poh Soo-kai was given a conditional release after a total of 16 years' imprisonment without trial. On 27 August 1982 Amnesty International welcomed the release and urged that it be made unconditional. Dr Poh Soo-kai was first arrested under the ISA in February 1963 in a round-up of people opposed to Singapore's subsequent short-lived merger with Malaysia. He was then Assistant Secretary-General of the opposition party ¿flnjan Sosialis. He was released in 1973 and rearrested in 1976, again under Section 8( 1) of the ISA, for being a member of a pro-communist organization, an allegation which he denied. Amnesty International had adopted him as a prisoner of conscience as it believed he was detained for criticizing the government's detention of political prisoners.
On 6 September 1982 the restriction order which confined adopted prisoner of conscience Dr Lim Hock Siew to a small island off Singapore was hfted. Dr Lim Hock Siew, former Secretary-General of the Barisan Sosialis, was arrested in 1963 and detained without trial for 15 years. In 1978 he was released from prison and restricted to one of Singapore's surrounding islands.
Under the terms of their release, both Dr Poh Soo-kai and Dr Lim Hock Siew were prohibited from taking part in politics or addressing
230
trade union meetings; they were also under travel and residence restrictions. In a cable of 10 September 1982 to Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew Amnesty International noted that the releases of Dr Poh Soo-kai and Dr Lim Hock Siew were important initiatives in resolving the problem of long-term detainees in Singapore.
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the release of Chia Thye Poh, a former member of parliament for the Barisan Sosialis, editor of the party's newspaper and assistant lecturer at Nanyang University, detained since 1966, and of Chng Min Oh, former chairman of the Singapore Gold and Silversmiths Union and a member of Party Rakyat, a small opposition party, detained since 1970.
In early March 1982, in a written reply to a member of parliament, Home Affairs Minister Chua Sian Chin stated that as of 15 February 1982 there were 17 people held without trial under the ISA and that of these, 11 hadbeendetainedforuptoriveyears,fourforupto lOyears and two for up to 15 years. Three such prisoners were known to have been subsequently released: Dr Poh Soo-kai and two prisoners arrested in April 1981 for allegedly belonging to a pro-communist group, the Malayan National Liberation Front, released in September 1982 after renouncing their alleged communist connections.
Members of religious groups which had been refused official registration on the grounds that their activities were detrimental to the public interest were arrested in two separate cases. In June 1982 the police detained 18 members of the "Divine Light Mission", a group which follows the teachings of Guru Maharaj Ji, who lives in the USA. They were later released on bail and some were fined. In July 1982 police arrested and fined a number of Jehovah's Witnesses who were holding a meeting.
Amnesty International received no reports of executions in 1982. At least nine prisoners, had their sentences of death finalized by Singapore courts. They had been convicted of criminal offences, such as murder, drug trafiicking or offences under the Arms Offences Act. Amnesty International appealed to President C. V. Devan Nair to commute all the death sentences.
