Algeria
During 1982 Amnesty International learned of the release of two individuals - Rabah Benkhellat and Abdel-malek Kendour - whose cases Amnesty International had been investigating. Both were tried by the Military Tribunal in Blida in December 1980 and sentenced to six years' imprisonment for forming a local cell of the International Communist Party and plotting against state security. They had been held in the prison of Tazoult-Lambese and were the last remaining prisoners of the six originally sentenced in the same trial.
Amnesty Intemational also received unofficial reports that advocates of Berber cultural expression arrested in 1980 and 1981 had been released, but by the end of 1982 had not received official confirmation.
In November 1982 clashes broke out between various groups of students at the University of Ben-Aknoun outside Algiers, after a group armed with knives and axes had entered the university restaurant and attacked students there. The clashes resulted in one student death and a number of injuries. In early December, after several weeks of tension, many members of self-styled Islamic groups were arrested, allegedly in connection with these events. In further arrests that month, 23 leading members of Islamic movements were taken into custody and then brought before the Cour de Surete de I'Etat, State Security Court, and charged with "forming and participating in a subversive organization with intent to disrupt the state, preparation and distribution of tracts of a character harmful to national interest, incitement to riotous assembly". Some of those arrested, including two well-known religious figures, the Imams
298
Ahmed Sahnoun and Abdellatif Suhani, were released pending trial, but others remained in detention. On 18 and 19 December the authorities arrested another 30 people. A number of them were reported to have been in possession of arms that had been stolen a month earUer. The official Algerian press described them as supporters of the Iranian leader, Ayatollah Khomeini, seeking the establishment of an "Algerian Islamic RepubUc". As 1982 ended Amnesty International was attempting to estabhsh whether those arrested in December had used or advocated violence.
Amnesty International continued to receive reports of ill-treatment in Algerian prisons, but was unable to verify them.
		
		
		
		9
