Dominican Republic
Amnesty International's main concern was the fear of forcible repatriation of Haitian refugees. Several cases of unacknowledged arrest or repatriation of Haitian refugees resident in the Dominican Republic had been reported to the organization between 1979 and 1981, and there was concern for a Haitian national who "disappeared" following his arrest in the Dominican Republic in June. Amnesty International also continued investigating the case of a Dominican national who "disappeared" in 1974.
On 16 August a new President, Salvador Jorge Blanco, took office. I nNovember Amnesty International wrote to him to introduce the organization and its concerns. The letter called for an immediate inquiry into the case of Luis Samuel Roche, a Haitian national who had been living in the Dominican Republic since 1963 under the protection of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. On 4 June Luis Samuel Roche was arrested, allegedly by Dommican national police. A petition of habeas corpus was presented on his behalf and the Santo Domingo Fifth Penal Chamber ruled that he would be released; nevertheless, he was not released. Amnesty International issued urgent appeals on his behalf since there were fears that he would be forcibly returned to Haiti where he risked imprisonment and possible ill-treatmentbecause of his political activities in the Dominican Republic as an opponent of the government of President Jean-Claude Duvalier.
The organization raised also the case of Pablo Liberato Rodríguez under investigation by Amnesty International since 1974. Pablo Liberato "disappeared" following his arrest on 9 August 1974 in the town of San Francisco de Macon's. In early 1981 Amnesty Intemational had been informed that the Attorney General's office would reopen an inquiry into the case. The responses received since then had been apparently contradictory. A letter received in December 1981 from Manuel Tavares, then Secretary of State for Foreign Afi"airs, stated that Pablo Liberato Rodríguez disappeared in 1974 from the police station in San Francisco de Macorís. A further letter from the sub-secretary of the same department dated 30 December 1981 stated that he was not registered on lists as detained in that town during 1974. Amnesty International's information was that Pablo Liberato Rodriguez' family had been authorized to take food to him in the police station and that on 11 August 1974 they had been told that he had
132
escaped. Since then nothing had been heard of him. Amnesty International said that the responsible authorities should account for the fate of Pablo Liberato Rodríguez.
