India
Amnesty International's concerns were the use of preventive detention to detain critics of the government, persistent reports of widespread police brutality, torture and deaths in police custody and prisons, continued killings in staged "encounters" of political activists by police and the use of the death penalty.
Amnesty International learned of no official statements on the numbers of people detained in 1982 under the National Security Act (NSA), but received reports that the NSA was being used to detain non-violent critics of the government in several Indian states. Under the NSA wide powers of arrest and detention without trial are given to both the central and state government (see Amnesty International Report 1981). The main cause of the increase in detentions was the upsurge in Sikh agitation for autonomy of Punjab state in the second half of 1982. Most of those arrested were held for short periods, usually a few weeks or days. Sikh leaders were detained for organizing what they claimed were peaceful demonstrations for Punjab autonomy before a Sikh campaign of civil disobedience which began on 4 August 1982. Led by ih^AkaliDal party this resulted in a reported 36, 737 arrests in 88 days of protests. Police stated that over 1,100 Sikhs were detained in Punjab and Haryana states in the 10 days before 19 November 1982, and in ail some 2,500 Sikhs were placed in
196
preventive detention under the NSA in November and December 1982 by the central. Punjab and Haryana governments. They were released after the Asian Games held in New Delhi from 19 November to 4 December 1982.
The civil disobedience movement against immigrants continued in Assam, with many hundreds of arrests during protests and strikes. Many deaths were reported. President's rule, that is central government administration, was imposed in Assam in March 1982. initially for six months, later extended to one year. At the end of 1982 many Assamese leaders were in detention without charge or trial under the NSA, including Joynath Sarma, arrested on 28 November 1982. It was alleged that Joynath Sarma. Chief Convenor of the All-Assam Students Union Volunteer Force, sustained a fracture to his right hand and other injuries as a result of being beaten by police in detention on 3 December 1982.
In Jammu and Kashmir dozens of people were arrested and charged with making "anti-national" speeches or of belonging to what the Chief Minister Farooq Abdullah termed "communal" and "secessionist" organizations. Detainees were held under the state's Public Safety Act.
Amnesty International was concerned about the use of the Essential Services Maintenance Act 1981, which allows the dismissal and arrest of strikers in a wide range of sectors declared to be "essential services" (see Amnesty International Report 1981). In November 1982. at the opening of the Asian Games, the government banned strikes in state-owned TV and radio, and briefly detained over 700 striking TV and radio employees.
On 31 July 1982 the Press Bill (amendments to Section 292 ofthe Indian Penal Code) was passed in the Bihar Assembly. After a peaceful and silent procession of journalists in Patna on 21 August which had planned to present the Governor of Bihar with a memorandum against the Press Bill, 185 journalists were arrested. Fifteen people were arrested in Tamil Nadu on 31 October 1982 after police broke up a silent march against police excesses by supporters of the People's Union for Civil Liberties (PUCL).
On 15 May 1982 the government replied to Amnesty International's letter of 4 November 1980 which reiterated the concerns expressed in an aide-mémoire submitted in April 1980, and urged the government to implement the recommendations of the aide-mémoire. Amnesty International specifically asked the government to remove the provisions allowing preventive detention from the constitution. It also expressed concern that the National Security Ordinance (predecessor of the NSA) contravened the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which India had ratified, by allowing prolonged detention
197
without trial (see Amnesty International Report 1981). The reply from the Ministry of External Affairs stated: "In the interests of the security of India, and of certain aspects of essential public interest" the constitution allowed preventive detention.
The government's reply also stated that its policy was "not to tolerate any inhuman treatment of persons under arrest or detention" and that it took "full measures to suppress any such acts of inhumanity or torture and to punish the offenders". However, the government's reply did not comment on any of the specific recommendations submitted by Amnesty International in its aide mémoire which had also, among other things, argued that there was an urgent need for a permanent, independent body at central government level to investigate allegations of ill-treatment, torture and deaths in police custody.
Amnesty International remained concerned that no effective measures had been taken to prevent police brutality and torture. Hundreds of such cases were publicized by the Indian press in 1982. Bihar. Uttar Pradesh. Madhya Pradesh and West Bengal were states which figured prominently in allegations of ill-treatment by police. Details of torture and sexual abuse of young children in Kanpur Central Jail, Uttar Pradesh, were reported by Kanpur Sessions Judge O. P. Garg, with a recommendation to the Supreme Court of India to intervene urgently on behalf of young prisoners in the jail. Amnesty International wrote to the Chief Minister of Bihar. Dr Jagannath Mishra, on 22 April 1982 to express concern about the alleged torture of Ragho Pandey by police in the East Champaran district of Bihar. Ragho Pandey had been arrested on 25 March 1982 and was reportedly tortured for 72 hours. Amnesty International urged the Bihar state government to establish an impartial investigation.
Amnesty International continued to receive reports that suspected members of the Communist Party of India (Marxist-Leninist), known as "Naxalites", were often harshly treated in prisons in many states. On 29 January 1982 the Supreme Court of India directed the state government of Kerala to give immediate medical treatment to a sick prisoner, alleged to be a "Naxalite", held in Central Jail, Trivandrum.
Killings and ill-treatment of suspects by Indian army units and the Central Reserve Police Force in Manipur were reported to Amnesty International. Among them was the case of a 22-year-old man, Hawaiban Kumar, who died in army custody on 12 January 1982, allegedly beaten to death. The Armed Forces Special Powers Act 1958, the effective law in Manipur, excludes legal redress against members of the armed forces, but the Imphal High Court issued a judgment on 10 September 1982 which restricted the powers of the security forces under this act. The court declared that the security
198
forces could arrest people only if they had committed or were likely to commit an offence, and that custody of a person arrested by the army must be transferred without delay to the police.
Amnesty International was concerned by continued reports from several states of killings of political activists alleged to be Naxalites in alleged "encounters" with the police. In many cases there was evidence that victims had been killed after arrest by the police, often after torture. Detailed investigations into "encounter" killings continued to be carried out by certain Indian newspapers, notably the Indian Express and Sunday, and by a number of civil liberties organizations within India. In one such investigation the Andhra Pradesh Civil Liberties Committee concluded that two young Naxalites - Ankam Narayana, aged 25, and Vsam Gajender, aged 23 - were not tracked down and killed in an exchange of gunfire as claimed by state police, but were arrested and then killed by police on 27 January 1982. Amnesty International received reports on the death of Kulwant Singh in Punjab state, allegedly killed in an exchange of gunfire by police on the night of 10/11 June 1982. An unofficial inquiry by lawyers in the Punjab stated that Kulwant Singh had been in police custody for some days before 10 June, and that the police version of his death was incompatible with evidence of serious injuries caused by torture and shootings which appeared in the post mortem report.
On 31 January 1982 two men condemned to death for murder -Ranga Kuljit Singh and Billa Jasbir Singh- were hanged in Tihar Jail, Delhi, after the Supreme Court had lifted its order halting executions (see Amnesty International Report 1982). Amnesty International had consistently urged that their sentences be commuted. In January 1982 there were reportedly 138 prisoners under sentence of death in India.
199
