Angola
Amnesty International was concerned about the imprisonment of people for criticizing government policies or officials, and by violations of the human rights of prisoners suspected of supporting armed opposition movements, particularly the Uniào Nacionalpara a Independència Total de Angola (UNITA), National Union for the Total Independence of Angola: such violations included long-term detention without charge or trial, harsh conditions of imprisonment, torture and the death penalty. Amnesty International was also concerned by the detention without trial of other political prisoners and by unfair political trials.
The government of President José Eduardo dos Santos faced continuing problems of internal security throughout the year due to repeated incursions into southern Angola by South African military forces based in Namibia and to the activities of the UNITA guerrillas, who were most active in the central highlands, in the provinces ofBié and Huambo, but were also present in the south. Both sides in the internal armed conflict, the ruling Movimento Popular de Libertaçào de Angola-Partido de Trabalho (MPLA- PT), Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola - Workers' Party, and the UNITA, accused their opponents of committing atrocities in the central highlands.	/
In addition to attacking military targets, the UNITA abducted a considerable number of civilians. Victims included, in particular, both foreign nationals and Angolans working for church missions and for the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). Most such foreign nationals were eventually released, but it was not known what happened to Angolans and a number of Portuguese citizens abducted by the UNITA.
16
A number of Angolans who had formerly been refugees in neighbouring Zaire were detained after publicly criticizing the government's failure to solve problems such as the shortage of housing and public transport. Four government officials and intellectuals closely linked to the MPLA-PT were also arrested in December following the dismissal of a number of government and party officials. They were accused of insulting President dos Santos by arranging the private staging of a play which criticized senior government oftlcials. One of those arrested was the Secretary General of the Union of Angolan Journalists, Fernando Costa Andrade ("Ndunduma"), a former editor of the daily newspaper, \hQJornal de Angola. He was reported to have gone on hunger-strike on 22 December 1982, soon after his arrest. He was adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience.
Horacio Torrado ("Gerry"), a teacher, was accused of insulting former President Agostinho Neto, who died in 1979. He was said to have told students in late 1981 that Angolan poetry, including that of President Neto, was not the best in the world but was equalled by poetry from other countries. For this, he was brought before the People's Revolutionary Tribunal in August 1982, charged under the terms of a May 1978 security law with insulting President Neto, convicted and sentenced to four years' imprisonment. He was adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience.
Amnesty International was not able to estimate the number of prisoners of conscience or the number of political detainees. The frequency with which detainees were held without trial made it difficult to ascertain the reasons for a detainee's arrest and to assess whether the detainee might be a prisoner of conscience.
Both in Luanda and elsewhere, political detainees were frequently detained uncharged at the orders of the Ministry of State Security for much longer than the maximum 90 days permitted by law. In September 1982 prisoners at Sao Paulo prison in Luanda went on hunger-strike in protest at their long-term detention without charge or trial.
In early 1982 Amnesty International learned of the arrest of Constantino Chitwe and four other teachers at Wako Kungo, in Kwanza Sul province, who were accused of having links with UNIT A guerrillas active in the area in December 1981. Unofficial sources claimed that they had been arrested because they were members of both the Ovimbundu ethnic group and the Congregationalist Church. Amnesty International's inquiries received no reply. At the end of 1982 they were apparently still detained without charge or trial.
Amnesty International knew of other long-term detainees accused of supporting either the UNITA or the Frente Nacional deLibertaqao
17
de Angola (FNLA), Angolan National Liberation Front, held in prisons in Luanda and in rural detention camps such as Tari camp, in Kwanza Sul province, and Sào Nicolau camp, in Namibe province, which was reported to have been officially renamed Bentiaba camp. Those detained without charge included supporters of the FNLA who voluntarily returned from abroad in 1979 and 1980 under the impression that they would benefit from a general amnesty for opponents of the government.
Several long-term detainees were released during the year. In May three Portuguese nationals were released from detention and expelled to Portugal following an official visit by President Eanes, the Portuguese head of state. Two of them had been held without trial since 1976 for alleged involvement with the Portuguese security forces during the colonial period. In November 1982 prisoners held by the Angolan and South African authorities and the UNITA were released. Those released from Angola were a US pilot detained since early 1981 and two other Americans who had been among the nine foreign mercenaries given prison sentences at a trial in June 1976.
Amnesty International received several allegations of torture at detention centres controlled by the Ministry of State Security, notably in Luanda, Huambo and Sumbe (in Kwanza Sul province). For example, one report claimed that in January 1982 a police officer imprisoned at the New Prison in Luanda had been severely tortured and was suffering from bums on his head and legs as a result of electric shocks. Other political detainees were also said to have been severely beaten or tortured in the interrogation cells in the basement of the New Prison,
Amnesty International also received reports that political detainees were tortured outside Luanda. The length of incommunicado detention made it difficult to confirm reports of torture. For example, Constantino Chitwe was reported to have been held incommunicado in Sumbe for more than six months; he was said to have been tortured soon after his arrest but it was not possible to obtain independent confirmation.
At least 10 people were reported to have been sentenced to death for political offences in 1982. In April the People's Revolutionary Tribunal in Lobito tried 30 defendants accused of complicity in bomb explosions in Lobito's "Acude" quarter in support of the UNITA. On 22 April, 19 defendants were convicted: five were condemned to death and 14 others given prison sentences of between four and 20 years. The five death sentences were confirmed at the end of May by the special Appeals Tribunal which reviews death sentences and prison sentences of 20 years or more; the five men were reported to have been executed by firing-squad on 29 May 1982.
In May 1982,25 people were tried by the People's Revolutionary
18
Tribunal in Cabinda: three were charged with setting off bombs which damaged oil installations in Cabinda and 22 others with supporting their actions and belonging to the Frente deLibertaqao do Enclave de Cabinda (FLEC), Cabinda Enclave Liberation Front. The three accused of planting bombs - Manuel B andioba, Alberto Casimiro and Daniel Kuende- were all convicted and sentenced to death. The court acquitted one defendant and convicted the 21 others, sentencing them to between one and four years' imprisonment: however, they were all reported to have been granted conditional release.
Subsequent trials in Cabinda of alleged FLEC members in June and November resulted in two more death sentences. However, these trials occurred before military courts and not before the People's Revolutionary Tribunal. It was not known whether the five death sentences imposed in Cabinda province were reviewed by the Appeals Tribunal, nor whether they were executed.
After each of these trials before the People's Revolutionary Tribunal and military courts Amnesty International appealed for the death sentences to be commuted. Amnesty International was also concerned that those sentenced to death were not fairly tried and did not have adequate opportunities to appeal against conviction. Although defendants at such trials have officially appointed defence lawyers, political prisoners have on several occasions claimed that the lawyers did not properly represent their cUents' interests and that the prisoners were not able to defend themselves adequately.
Six prisoners were reported to have been sentenced to death by the People's Revolutionary Tribunal in Luanda in April 1982, when 12 people were tried on charges of murder and armed robbery.
