United States of America
Work for the abolition of the death penalty and against impending executions was the main concern of Amnesty International during 1982. Amnesty International was also concerned about allegations of politically motivated prosecutions and about the fairness of trials in such cases.
In 1972 the US Supreme Court had ruled all existing state death penalty laws invalid on the ground that Ae arbitrary and capricious manner in which they were applied amounted to "cruel and unusual punishment" in violation of the constitution. Thirty-eight states had since introduced revised death penalty legislation to conform to the constitutional requirements laid down by the Supreme Court. New Jersey and Massachusetts reintroduced the death penalty in 1982. On 31 December, 1,137 prisoners were under sentence of death, the highest figure ever recorded in the USA.
Six prisoners had been executed since 1976, when a lO-year moratorium on executions ended with a Supreme Court ruling that the death penalty for murder was constitutional if imposed under certain conditions. During 1982 lawyers predicted a large increase in executions in the near future, as the appeals of many people sentenced since 1972 ran out.
Amnesty International appealed for clemency for two prisoners who were executed during the year and for one who was granted a last-minute stay of execution.
Frank Coppola was executed by electrocution in Virginia on 10 August 1982. On the same day, a federal appeals court had granted a stay of execution but this was overturned by the Supreme Court less than six hours later. This was the first execution in Virginia since 1962.
On 7 December in Huntsville, Texas, Charles Brooks was
174
executed by intravenous injection of a lethal dose of sodium thiopental (pentothal), the first such execution in the USA. Amnesty International wrote to the Texas State Governor and state and federal medical associations expressing concern at the reported involvement of doctors in the administration of drugs for execution. One of two doctors present at Charles Brooks' execution was quoted as saying that, although he had not given the injection, the drugs came from his own supply and he gave guidance to the medical assistant who administered the injection. The same doctor monitored the prisoner's heartbeat until death and reportedly indicated at one point that the injection should continue for a few more minutes. Before the execution the doctor had examined Charles Brooks to assess the suitability of his veins for intravenous injection. Amnesty International pointed out that this appeared to breach guidelines issued by the Texas Medical Association which state that a doctor's only role in execution by injection should be to certify death. The World Medical Association and the American Medical Association have also declared the active participation of doctors in such executions to be ethically unacceptable. The Amnesty International Declaration on Doctors and the Death Penalty {sqq Amnesty International Report 1981), calls upon doctors not to participate in executions.
Amnesty International wrote letters of concern to governors and medical associations in five other states which have introduced lethal injection as a method of execution: Oklahoma, Idaho, New Mexico, Washington and Massachussetts.
On 17 October 1982 a special action against the death penalty in the USA was launched with an international news release. Amnesty International wrote to state governors, newspapers and churches in the 28 states where prisoners were under sentence of death.
No prisoners were adopted as prisoners of conscience during 1982, but Amnesty International continued to investigate a number of cases of prisoners who maintained that, although they were convicted on criminal charges, the real reason for their imprisonment was political.
In October 1982 an Amnesty International observer attended the trial in Lexington, Mississippi, of Eddie Carthan, on a charge of murder, which carried a possible death sentence. Eddie Carthan was former mayor of the predominantly black town of Tchula, Mississippi; he was the first black mayor to be elected to a bi-racial town in the area for more than a century. Eddie Carthan was accused of having hired two men to murder a political opponent, former Tchula alderman Roosevelt Granderson, who was shot dead during a robbery in June 1981. Eddie Carthan denied the charge and alleged that he was the victim of a conspiracy by his (predominantly white) political opponents.
175
At the time of the trial he was already serving a three-year prison sentence on other charges which had led to his enforced resignation as mayor in May 1981. The only evidence against Eddie Carthan at the murder trial was the testimony of two convicted prisoners, who had confessed that they had killed Granderson. At first, only one of these witnesses agreed to testify against Eddie Carthan, in return for which the prosecuting authorities lessened the charge for the killing of Granderson. However, during the trial, it became clear that his testimony did not establish Eddie Carthan's guih. The trial was adjourned to allow the prosecution to offer to the second man who had confessed to the killing reduced charges in return for testifying against the accused. The second witness, who had previously refused to implicate Eddie Carthan, testified that Eddie Carthan had paid him money to kill Granderson. His evidence contained a number of inconsistencies and Eddie Carthan was acquitted by the jury.
AIAough Amnesty International's observer was imable to conclude that the prosecution had deliberately "framed" Eddie Carthan (that is, knowing he was innocent had brought false charges against him), the observer did criticize several features of the prosecution's methods. In particular, he found that the plea bargains offered by the prosecution to the two witnesses, which included the lessening and dropping of charges, were "an inducement to false testimony" and could "jeopardize the right of an accused to a fair trial". He also found that at least some degree of improper political interference had taken place, and that three previous charges against Eddie Carthan (also based on the induced testimony of alleged accomplices) indicated a pattern of prosecution harassment. Trials or appeals against conviction were pending in these cases.
In June 1982 the Federal District Court of Northern California granted a writ of habeas corpus in the case of Johnny Spain and ordered that he be retried or released (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1982). The State of California appealed to the US Court of Appeals against this ruling; this appeal had not been heard by the end of 1982.
On 5 February Amnesty Intemational wrote to the US Attomey General about the procedures applied by the US Government to Haitians seeking asylum in the USA because they feared persecution in Haiti. Amnesty International expressed concern at the US practice of intercepting boats carrying Haitian asylum seekers and of holding expulsion hearings aboard US Coast G uard vessels, without allowing the Haitians to be legally represented. Amnesty Intemational also asked about the procedures applying to the approximately 2,700 Haitian asylum seekers then detained in the USA and Puerto Rico {sQQ Amnesty Intemational Report 1982). On 20 May the Department
176
of Justice replied that, in respect of all the issues raised by Amnesty International, US officials had acted in accordance with US law. The Justice Department also stated that"... the Government of Haiti has given its unqualified assurances that migrants who are returned will not be prosecuted for their departure or otherwise persecuted." On 29 June a federal district judge ordered the conditional release of Haitian asylum seekers held in detention camps in the USA and Puerto Rico, on the ground that the Immigration and Naturalization Service had made procedural errors when it adopted the policy of detention in 1981. As aresult of this ruling, nearly allHaitian asylum seekers had been released into the care of sponsors by the end of the year, while their applications for political asylum were being considered.
Amnesty International also wrote to the US Government about Salvadorians seeking political asylum in the USA who faced possible danger to their lives if returned to El Salvador (see entry on El Salvador).
■ \ "^-ra		
		
	/ 3'	
		

