Afghanistan
Amnesty International's concerns were the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience, trials of political prisoners that appeared to fall short of internationally recognized standards for a fair trial, the torture of detainees, extrajudicial executions and the use of the death penalty.
Widespread armed conflict persisted in i 982 between government forces supported by troops from the Soviet Union and various armed opposition groups which appeared to control much of the countryside. The fighting was accompanied by frequent allegations of human rights violations on both sides. At the same time the Afghan Government published very little information on arrests, trials and death sentences and did not disclose the number of political prisoners. The absence of comment in the official news media about human rights matters was notable compared with earlier years. The arrest of eight prominent intellectuals in May (see below) was not reported. Outside observers were rarely allowed access to Afghanistan in 1982 except for those who visited territory held by anti-government forces. International humanitarian organizations also faced great difficulties in working in Afghanistan during 1982.
Amnesty International appealed in January 1982 to both sides in the fighting to halt executions of prisoners. The appeal followed the execution of at least 16 political prisoners in 1981 by the Afghan Government and the threatened execution by the anti-government group, the Hezbi Islami, of three captured Soviet soldiers. In 1982 some Soviet soldiers captured by anti-government groups were transferred to the custody of the International Committee of the Red Cross to be interned in Switzerland until the cessation of hostilities, or
184
for two years, and then returned to the USSR. Amnesty International also appealed to President Babrak Karmal for information about the reported arrests of at least 5 00 political prisoners, who were alleged to be supporters of "rebel bands", since August 1981. No further information was received about these arrests.
Amnesty International learned of the arrest of eight prominent intellectuals in May 1982 whom it believed might be prisoners of conscience. Among them were Dr Hassan Kakar, a historian, Fazl Rabi Pazhwak, a professor of law at Kabul University and formerly its Chancellor, and Dr Osman Rustan and Dr Tarzi, respectively professor and lecturer in law at Kabul University. Amnesty International received reports that three were beaten at the time of their arrest. The arrests of other possible prisoners of conscience were reported to Amnesty International including that of Gholam Shah Saichare Chamadi, a poet and former manager of the newspaper ./Inw. It was also reported that some 40 artists and officials of the Ministry of Culture were arrested in February 1982.
It was impossible for Amnesty International to gauge the full extent of political imprisonment in Afghanistan. Some prisoners were believed to be held in Pule Charchi prison on the outskirts of Kabul, but at least two other detention centres of the Khad (State Security Police) were known to Amnesty International, one in the Prime Minister's Secretariat, and the other known as the Sedarat. Prisoners were also held in detention centres in the provincial towns of Jalalabad, Faizabad, Khost, Gardez, Khunduz, Ghazni, Kandahar, Herat, Mazar-e-Sharif and Sheberghan.
In September 1982 the Afghan Government promulgated a "Law on the Implementation of Sentences in the Prisons". Article 3 of this law reinforced the prohibition of torture in Afghan prisons. Despite such legal prohibitions Amnesty International received consistent allegations of torture of political prisoners. In December 1982 the organization received the detailed testimony of Farida Ahmadi, a 22-year-old medical student who was detained for six months in 1981 in a Khad detention centre in Kabul. Farida Ahmadi said that during her detention she was interrogated, denied sleep for up to a week, and subjected to electric shock torture. She also alleged that she witnessed the torture of other political prisoners.
Executions and death sentences were not reported for most of 1982. On 4 December, however, 10 anti-government rebels were executed for murder, theft and other offences. On 1 December three men - Niaz Mohammad, Barialay and Enzer Gol- were sentenced to death for abduction. A further three men were sentenced to death on 29 December for acts which included the planting of bombs in a Kabul restaurant resulting in the deaths of 21 people. Amnesty International
185
urged President Babrak Karmal to commute the death sentences passed on the six men. Amnesty International stressed that it opposed the execution of all prisoners in Afghanistan, whether by the government or other organizations.
Amnesty International was concerned about reports of extrajudicial executions which it received in late 1982. Two specific incidents were drawn to the organization's attention. Over 100 unarmed civilians were allegedly killed by government forces in the village of Kasham Kala, Logar province, in August 1982. In the second incident, 105 people were reportedly killed in mid-September near the village of Padkhwab-e-Shama, south of the city of Kabul. In both cases it was reported that there was no resistance offered to the government by the victims and that they appeared not to have been killed in a context of armed combat.
In late 1982 Amnesty International received reports that the Afghan Government was considering ratifying the International Covenants on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and on Civil and Political Rights.
		
		
		
/	O •	
		
		A.
