Swaziland
Amnesty International's main concerns were the death penalty, which was imposed on at least 15 people convicted of murder, and the imprisonment of Jehovah's Witnesses on account of their beliefs. The organization also took action on behalf of one political detainee released early in the year on condition that he leave the country, and was concerned about the safety of South African political refugees resident in Swaziland.
King Sobhuza II died on 21 August 1982 after more than 60 years on the Swazi throne. He had been Head of State and effective ruler of Swaziland throughout the period since independence in 1968. Dzeliwe, his senior wife, was appointed Regent and acting Head of State until the King's male successor, whose identity had not been disclosed by the end of 1982, reached the age of majority. Shortly before his death King Sobhuza had proclaimed a new policy-making body, the Liqoqo or Supreme Council of State. This became the highest authority in the country after the King and the Queen Mother, its members being appointed personally by the King or Regent.
Amnesty International intervened in early January on behalf of Godfrey Mdhluli, a well-known lawyer who had been detained without trial for political reasons in October 1981 shortly after he returned to the country following several years abroad. He had been seeking the return of his Swazi citizenship, which was withdrawn by an administrative tribunal some years before, and had apparently been assured that he would not be detained. He was held on a Prime Minister's detention order, valid for 60 days, which was renewed once more in late December 1981. On 21 January he was freed on condition that he leave the country. He was escorted to the airport and put on a flight to Lesotho. He remained effectively stateless because of the withdrawal of his Swazi citizenship.
Amnesty International knew of no other detainees held under the 60-day law. However, in November Prime Minister Prince Mabandla Dlamini warned that the detention law would be used against people who engaged in political activities which had not been authorized by the government or attended meetings which had not been sanctioned in advance by the Commissioner of Pohce. Political parties had been effectively banned in Swaziland since 1973.
Following the death of the King a period of national mourning was proclaimed which lasted until 30 October. In accordance with custom, ploughing of fields was forbidden and adults were ordered to
86
cut their hair as a mark of respect for the late King. A number of Jehovah's Witnesses refused to obey this last instruction for reasons of religious belief and conscience. They were arrested and prosecuted. Some had their hair cut forcibly on the orders of the courts. At least 13 were sentenced to up to one year's imprisonment and others were fined. Amnesty International regarded them as prisoners of conscience.
The death penalty continued to be a major concern. At least 14 people were sentenced to death for murder during 1982, seven of them at one trial in June. The Appeal Court set aside in October the conviction and death sentence passed on Audrey Mthembu in April but was reported earlier in the year to have confirmed two death sentences imposed in previous years. It was not known whether any executions were carried out. In May Amnesty International wrote to King Sobhuza and government leaders about the use of the death penally, seeking clemency for prisoners under sentence of death.
