Mozambique
Amnesty International was concerned about the long-term detention without trial of suspected opponents of the government, including some detainees arrested before independence in 1975, about trials which did not accord with internationally recognized standards, about reports of the ill-treatment of suspected members of armed opposition groups and about the application of the death penalty.
Tht Resistencia Nacional Moçambicana (RNM), Mozambique National Resistance, the main opposition group involved in armed insurrection against the government, escalated its activities during i 982 and was engaged in fighting with government troops throughout much of the centre and south of the country. RNM guerrillas temporarily occupied many villages and were allegedly responsible for killing and mutilating officials and supporters of the ruling Frente de Libertaçào de Moqambique (FRELIMO), Mozambique Liberation Front. They were also responsible for a series of abductions of expatriate workers, most of whom had either been released near the Zimbabwe border or freed by government troops by the end of the year.
It was not known how many prisoners were captured by government forces during fighting with RNM guerrillas. Official figures released in September 1982 suggested that 194 guerrillas were captured between January and September 1982. Unofficial sources reported that large numbers of civilians were also detained during the year on suspicion of supporting the RNM in some way. Some of these were accused of distributing RNM pamphlets, while others were reported to have been detained uncharged after being denounced to the
62
authorities. Those detained also included people who were found in possession of RNM pamphlets, and who claimed to have received them involuntarily. Amnesty International was concerned that some detainees accused of links with the RNM were arrested arbitrarily when there was no real evidence against them. Amnesty International was also concerned that detainees accused of supporting the RNM were reported to have been severely beaten in custody.
Amnesty International was concerned by the long-term detention without trial of people accused of activities aimed at overthrowing the government. These were believed to include former leaders of political groups opposed to FRELIMO before independence in July 1975, and others arrested since independence, for example after the South African military raid into Mozambique in January 1981. The total number of such detainees was not known.
Following the release in 1981 ofhundredsofprisoners accused of collaborating with the Portuguese colonial security forces before independence, further steps were taken to reintegrate suspected collaborators. A series of rallies involving alleged collaborators took place in May and June 1982 at the end of which President Samora Machel announced that they were being formally pardoned. OfTicial reports indicated that three alleged collaborators present at one rally refused to acknowledge that they had done anything wrong by working with the Portuguese and were consequently arrested and imprisoned. It was not known how many alleged collaborators, if any, were still detained in "re-education" camps at the end of 1982.
Several political trials took place before the Revolutionary Military Tribunal, the special court set up in 1979 to try offences against the security of the state. Trials before this court are usually held in camera and defendants are not represented by legal counsel. It is empowered to impose the death penalty and defendants have no right of appeal to a higher court.
In June 1982,15 people were tried by the Revolutionary Military Tribunal on charges connected with support for the RNM. Six were convicted on charges including membership of a "clandestine" organization and armed rebellion and were sentenced to death. They included two people who were accused of deserting from the FRELIMO armed forces and of setting up the Africa Livre, Free Africa, armed opposition group, which subsequently merged with the RNM. A South African national, Wilson Chivaze Bila, was convicted on charges of being a mercenary and was sentenced to death. Another defendant, Ernesto Josias Valoi, was also convicted on charges of belonging to the RNM and of being sent from Zimbabwe into Mozambique in 1977 on a spying mission. He was sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment. The seven other defendants, who were aged between
63
18 and 21, were considered by the tribunal to be guilty of distributing illegal leaflets in Maputo, but were not sentenced. Instead, the Ministry of the Interior and other departments were asked to organize their "re-education". The seven men sentenced to death had no right of appeal and were believed to have been executed by firing-squad.
In September, 27 more people accused of supporting the FC^M appeared before the Revolutionary Military Tribunal. During a three-day trial the court considered various cases which were not all directly related, except by the charges that all the defendants had been active on behalf of the RNM. Two of the defendants were found guilty of being RNM guerrilla leaders and were sentenced to death. The 25 othere were all convicted and sentenced to terms of imprisonment: one to 15 years, one to 14 years, nine to eight years, 13 to six years and one to four years. The two men sentenced to death - Domingos Caspar and André Gundane - were believed to have been executed by firing-squad.
After death sentences were announced in June and September 1982, Amnesty International appealed to President Machel to commute them. The organization also urged the authorities to reconsider the use of the death penalty, which was introduced in February 1979, and to take measures to abolish it.
