Guyana
Amnesty International observers attended two political trials in 1982.
In February an Amnesty International observer attended the trial of Donald Rodney, who was charged with unlawful possession of an explosive device which killed his brother, Dr Walter Rodney, in June 1980. Amnesty International had earlier urged the government to allow an independent inquiry into the death ofDr Rodney, a leading member of the opposition Working People's Alliance, in view of the international concern which it had created (see Amnesty International Report 1981 and 1982).
Donald Rodney was tried before a magistrate, under special procedures allowing for criminal offences ordinarily heard by a jury to be tried summarily at the request of the prosecutor. He was charged under the National Security Act, 1962, which places the onus of proof on the accused in cases of possession of firearms or explosives. In a statement read to the court Donald Rodney alleged that a two-way radio, which he had handed to his brother and which had subsequently exploded, had been given to him by a former member of the Guyana Defence Force, and that neither he nor his brother knew that it contained an explosive device. The magistrate ruled that Donald Rodney had been in possession of an explosive device, and that he had not proved to the court that he had no knowledge of this. Donald Rodney was found guilty and sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment. In March he was released pending appeal. By the end of 1982 the magistrate had not yet delivered her written judgment in the case, and the appeal was still pending.
In November an Amnesty International observer attended the trial of Ivan Sookram, on a charge of treason. Ivan Sookram was originally charged with five others in June 1980. They were accused of having trained and armed a group with the intention of overthrowing the government. Of seven prosecution witnesses, six subsequently withdrew their testimony. The defendants had made statements to the police after their arrest, but they claimed at the preliminary inquiry that they had been ill-treated while detained incommunicado for a prolonged period in police custody.
In 1981 a magistrate twice dismissed the charges on the grounds that the statements they had made in police custody had not been voluntary and that the testimony of the only remaining prosecution witness was unreliable, However, in August 1981 the Director of
145
Public Prosecutions ordered for a second time that the charges against four of the accused be reinstated and that a new preliminary inquiry be held (see Amnesty International Report 1982). Ivan Sookram was rearrested and arrest warrants were issued for the other three (who were still at large at the end of 1982).
In March 1982 Ivan Sookram was committed for trial by a new magistrate. At his trial he alleged thathe had signed a confession after a prolonged period in police custody during which he was beaten, deprived of food and sleep, and denied access to his lawyer for several days. One of his defence lawyers testified that he had witnessed injuries on the accused while he was in police custody. The trial judge ruled the confession inadmissible. The prosecution offered no further evidence and Ivan Sookram was acquitted.
Amnesty International was concerned that the charges against Ivan Sookram had not been dropped despite the magistrate's rulings dismissing the charges in 1981 and the evident weakness of the prosecution's case. Ivan Sookram had spent nearly two and a half years in prison before his trial and acquittal.
I n April the Himian Rights C ommittee set up under the International Covenant on C ivil and Political Rights considered the initial report of Guyana. The committee asked whether an investigation had been conducted into the death of Walter Rodney and, if so, what the findings had been. It also requested information regarding the procedures for investigating complaints by detainees, and on the circumstances and conditions in which a person could be held in preventive detention; it noted that the provision of the Guyana Constitution that any person who was arrested or detained should be informed "as soon as reasonably practicable" of the reasons for arrest and detention fell short of Article 9 (2) of the covenant.
