Mexico
Amnesty International's main concerns in Mexico were prolonged incommunicado detention, convictions based on confessions reportedly extracted under torture, and "disappearances" of political detainees. Amnesty Intemational was also concerned at reports of killings by the regular police and security units, as well as by paramilitary units linked to regular security services. Many of these abuses were directed at urban slum dwellers or peasants involved in land disputes with government agencies or with groups receiving either explicit or tacit government support. Deaths in custody as a result of torture and the killing or "disappearance" of former prisoners shortly after release were other long-standing Amnesty Intemational concerns.
154
The Mexican organization Comité Nacional Pro-Defensa de Presos, Perseguidos, Desaparecidos y Exiliados Políticos (CNPDPPDEP), the National Committee for the Defence of Prisoners, the Persecuted, Disappeared Persons and Political Exiles, estimated that some 500 people remained missing after arrest in recent years. The committee stated that at least some of the "disappeared" were held at the Campo Militar Niimero 1, Military Camp No. 1, on the outskirts of Mexico City. This is the headquarters of the so-called Brigada Blanca, White Brigade (also referred to as the Brigada Jaguar, Jaguar Brigade), understood by Amnesty International to be in fact the ninth army brigade. Despite international concern about the fate of the "disappeared", officials did not investigate allegations against the Brigada Blanca, and repeatedly stated that many of the missing died in clashes between leftist factions.
One person believed by Amnesty International to have been held at the camp was José Ezequiel Reyes Carillo, reportedly abducted on 31 December 1981 from the Red Cross hospital in Polanco, Mexico City, by agents of the Dirección Federal de Seguridad (DPS), FederalDirectorate of Security, dcnáú[& Departamento de Investigación de Prevención de la Delincuencia (DIPD), Investigation Department for the Prevention of Delinquency. According to the police he had been wounded during an attempted robbery the previous day when they mistook him for a robber. Relatives, however, insisted that he was shot and then abducted because of his leadership of the supporters of the Coordinadora Nacional de Trabajadores de la Educación (CNTE), National Coordinator of Education Workers, in the Valle de Mexico. The CNTE was attempting to form a teachers' union outside the control of the party which has ruled Mexico since its 1917 revolution, the Partido Revolucionario Institucional (PRI), Institutional Revolutionary Party. In June Amnesty International learned that the Procuraduría de Justicia de Distrito Federal, the Attorney General's Office of the Federal District, had issued a statement that Reyes Carillo had been found alive, 136 days after his arrest, outside Mexico City by the Policía Judicial, Judicial Police, together with other local security forces. However, Amnesty International received no information as to how he came to be there or where he had been while he was missing. The court investigating his shooting informed the District Prosecutor that there were no charges against him.
In June Amnesty International called on the authorities to acknowledge the detention of student Fernando Javier Chong and to guarantee his safety. He had been arrested in the presence of witnesses on 13 May 1982 by three men in plain clothes near a teachers' training college in Mexico City. (He had been arrested before in
155
November 1981 together with Rubén Hernández, a student at the same college. On that occasion Chong was released after three hours, but Ruben Hernández remained missing.) A petition of amparo (similar to habeas corpus) was filed on Chong's behalf after this latest arrest and, on 22 June, sworn statements of witnesses to the arrest were filed with the Procurador General, the Attorney General. The authorities failed to respond and Chong remained missing. On 27 August Amnesty International again addressed the authorities about his case and those of a number of other students who had "disappeared" in recent years. The mother of one, Marco Antonio Arana Murillo, who "disappeared" after his arrest in May 1981, declared that her son had been arrested for having participated in a student demonstration, and that other students who had been abducted along with her son and subsequently released had testified that they had been held by the Brigada Jaguar.
Throughout 1982 Amnesty International continued its appeals for information concerning the hundreds of other people who had "disappeared" in previous years. Among them was Roque Reyes Garcia, who had been a political prisoner in the period between 1971 and 1977. Released under a political amnesty Reyes Garcia was warned not to get involved in political activity. However, he continued his work as a trade unionist with the Sindicato de Trabajadores de la Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (STUNAM), Union of Workers of the National Autonomous University of Mexico. Relatives stated that on 11 September 1981 he was violenüy abducted by police officers. After searching for him in all public prisons, his relatives said they had concluded that he was held in secret detention. Repeated appeals on his behalf by Amnesty International, his own family and the CNPDPPDEP received no reply.
Rosario Ibarra de Piedra, the head of the CNPDPPDEP and a candidate in the 1982 presidential elections, received a series of death threats in response to her campaign to locate the "disappeared". On 22 April Amnesty International appealed to the President to guarantee her safety.
On 31 July over 3,000 students from the Universidad Autónoma de Guerrero, Autonomous University of Guerrero, marched in Chil-pancingo calling on the authorities for a full investigation into the death of teacher León C astillo Garcia, who was found dead with marks of torture on 26 July. Officials at the university stated that the security forces had been responsible. Similar abuses directed against teachers, staff working to form teachers' unions, and campaigners for wider access to university education were reported from the state of Sinaloa. In September Amnesty International asked for an investigation
156
into the death of Sinaloa university professor Alberto Barrionuevo Carvajal, whose body had been found in August, 14 days after he had "disappeared". Students and staff at the university as well as other education officials blamed the police for his killing. They said the police had recendy harassed and attacked staff who were active in independent teachers' organizations or who had openly criticized government economic policy.
Bernardo Pastor Garcia, a former political prisoner released under an amnesty by the State Governor of Guerrero in 1976, was detained during a demonstration in early August 1982 at Acapulco, Guerrero, by the Judicial Police, along with his father Agapito Pastor Jiménez. The two were taken to Tecpán as suspected "subversives" and held in the local jail. Shortly afterwards Pastor Garcia was found dead in jail showing visible marks of torture. His father was freed. To Amnesty International's knowledge, Pastor Garcia's death was never officially explained.
Amnesty International was concerned during 1982 by reports of killings of urban slum dwellers or rural campesinos (peasants), allegedly at the hands of regular police and military forces. Many such killings occurred in the context of conflicts over land ownership between peasant farmers and large landowners. According to these reports, peasant leaders and peasants trying to retain disputed land were deliberately killed by "pistoleros" {^nm^n) acting on behalf of large landowners with the implicit or overt support of local military commanders and local, state or federal authorities. On some occasions military personnel themselves had deliberately killed non-violent campesinos during such land disputes. Other reports indicated that allegations of forcible land occupations by peasants had been fabricated to justify attacks on peasant leaders and organizations developing peasant movements outside the control of the ruling party.
In March Amnesty International appealed for information on the whereabouts of Santos Hernández Garcia. He had been arrested in December 1981 by soldiers and the Judicial Police searching the village of Lázaro Cárdenas, Chalma, Veracruz, looking for the community leaders and for two peasants who had been imprisoned earlier but then granted amnesty at the beginning of 1981. Santos Hernández Garcia was reportedly wounded at the time of his arrest.
In August Amnesty International ^pealed for information concerning the arrests on 7 July by the State Judicial Police of four Tzeltal Indians from San Sebastián Bachajón, Chilón municipality, in the state of Chiapas. The arrests were denounced by the Coordinadora Nacional de Pueblos Indígenas (CNPI), National Coordinator of Indigenous Peoples, which stated that they had been based solely on false denunciations by a government-supported peasants' group. The
157
CNPI said that there were arrest orders pending for 50 more Tzeltals, again stemming solely from invented charges. Amnesty International was concerned that these prisoners might be ill-treated in custody, and urged adherence to correct legal procedures. Indians in remote rural areas such as Chiapas have proved particularly vulnerable to abuses and procedural irregularities in custody.
Amnesty International called in August for investigations into reports that the army and state police had been responsible for the killings and "disappearances" of a number of Triqui Indians, from the San Juan Cópala area, Oaxaca. The community was involved in a dispute over lands which it claimed had been its communal property since before the Spanish conquest. It accused the state security forces and the army of acting on behalf of forestry and coffee companies which were claiming the lands. One of the missing Indians was Juan Martinez López, who "disappeared" at the end of November 1981 as he was returning from talks with the Minister of the Interior in Oaxaca's capital city, Oaxaca.
Amnesty International adopted as prisoners of conscience Arturo Albores and Victorico Hernández and investigated the case of Agustín de la Torre. All three were arrested in connection with a land dispute involving the Tzotzil Indians of Venustiano Carranza, Chiapas. Arturo Albores worked in Venustiano Carranza with social service projects connected with the Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM), National Autonomous University of Mexico. He was arrested in May 1981 for participating in an incident when members of the government-sponsored peasants' union, the Confederación Nacional Campesina (CNC), National Peasant Confederation, allegedly attacked members of another peasant group which had been trying to organize the local people independently under the auspices of the Coordinadora Nacional Plan de Ayala (CNPA), National Coordinating Committee Plan of Ayala. Arturo Albores stated that he was in another town at the time of the incident, and Amnesty International believed that he was actually arrested because of his efforts on behalf of the Indians to regain disputed lands. Also arrested was Indian social worker and community leader Victorico Hernández. There were procedural irregularities and delays in the disposition of their cases and the two men stated that they had been ill-treated in custody. In February 1982 a meeting about the case was held between the governor of the state of Chiapas and representatives of the Frente Nacional contra la Represión (FNCR), National Front Against Repression (a coalition including lawyers and human rights groups whose work includes assisting political prisoners and the "disappeared") and the CNPA. It was while waiting for this meeting that Agustín de la Torre was arrested. In
158
a later meeting with the state Attorney General the FNCR-CNPA representatives were denied access to the trial documentation. On 4 December 1982 Arturo Albores was reported to have been released. There was no further news of the two others.
The total number of prisoners of conscience held in Mexico was difficult to establish as the government did not admit to holding political prisoners, and normally brought ordinary criminal charges against those arrested in connection with trade union or peasant activities. This difficulty was further compounded by the fact that many were thought to be held in unacknowledged detention in remote rural areas.
Amnesty International received reports that a number of Argentines arrested in Mexico City in connection with an alleged kidnapping attempt at the end of October 1981 had been released. Some had reportedly been tortured in custody. Amnesty International had appealed to the Mexican authorities not to return the detainees to Argentina, where it believed their lives would be in danger.
Mexico is not a party to United Nations instruments for the protection of refugees, but has permitted the entrance of many thousands of Central American refugees, particularly those fleeing Guatemala. During 1982 Amnesty International appealed to the Mexican authorities to clarify the whereabouts and legal situation of a number of Guatemalan and Salvadorian refugees who were reported to have been sent back to their country of origin, where Amnesty International believed their lives to be in danger. During 1981 Amnesty International had expressed concern at reports of mass expulsions of Guatemalan refugees. In February 1982 Amnesty International reiterated its concern at such reports, noting that in at least one case known to Amnesty International an expelled refugee had reportedly been killed in Guatemala. In November 1982 Amnesty International cabled outgoing Mexican President José López Portillo to express its concern at reports that Guatemalan refugees had been dispersed from two refugee camps. Rancho Tejas and Dolores, and urged the government not to send the refugees back to Guatemala. Amnesty International was also concerned in 1982 at reported incursions into Mexico of Guatemalan military and paramilitary forces, who killed and abducted Guatemalan refugees who had sought asylum there.
During 1982 Amnesty International submitted cases to the United Nations Working Group on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances, which named Mexico as one of the countries where it was concerned at the phenomenon of political "disappearances".
159
