Argentina
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about the lack of progress in clarifying the unresolved question of those who ''disappeared" after the military coup of March 1976, despite persistent attempts by human rights groups and relatives to obtain information from the authorities. Seven cases of politically motivated abduction followed by "disappearance" were reported in 1982: in five cases the "disappearance" was temporary and the detention of the victim was officially acknowledged; in the two other cases the bodies of the victims were subsequently found. Amnesty International remained concerned that government agents were continuing to make arrests without following legal procedures, and by reports of torture during unacknowledged detention. Amnesty International received information about numerous arrests and about short-term detention, particularly in connection with public demonstrations and meetings. Amnesty International was also concerned about prisoners held without charge at the disposal of the National Executive Power (the PEN prisoners) under the state of siege. Some prisoners had been detained since the 1976 military coup without charge or trial; others remained in detention after completing sentences imposed by the civil courts.
During 1982 there was increasing pressure on the authorities from various sectors of Argentine society, international bodies and foreign governments whose nationals have "disappeared" to clarify the question of the "disappeared" prisoners. In February 1982 the Minister of the Interior, General Alfredo Saint Jean, indicated that information on the "disappeared" would be provided on request to relatives. However, in June, before his retirement from office,
108
General Saint Jean suggested that relatives should pursue their inquiries through the courts.
Yet over the years the executive's reluctance to cooperate with the judiciary has made relatives' attempts to obtain information fruitless. Legal measures, such as habeas corpus petitions presented by families, have failed to elicit information. This failure to cooperate was indicated by Judge Pedro Narvaiz in his resignation letter of 1982: "if the Executive itself states that all irregularities and errors should be taken before Justice, it is necessary to give the judiciary the means and information required for it to carry out its function; and to show particular respect to its rulings, which is not happening in a satisfactory manner". One reason for the judge's resignation was the refusal of Army Commander Nicolaides to provide names of military personnel from a unit in Comodoro Rivadavia allegedly responsible for the illegal abduction and detention of Juan Patricio Maroni who "disappeared" on 5 April 1977. The Auditor General of the Army stated that General Nicolaides would not provide the information for reasons of national security. Judge Narvaiz had indicated that he would refer the case to the Supreme Court.
In August 1982 the Argentine press reported that an amnesty law was being considered which would benefit a limited number of political prisoners, but which would also prevent the prosecution or punishment of military personnel involved in "disappearances". Amnesty International expressed its concern about these reports and referred to Resolution 15 of the United Nations Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities which urges states "to repeal or refrain from adopting laws which could impede inquiries into such disappearances".
On 26 October 1982 Amnesty International called for a full investigation to determine the identity of approximately 400 corpses discovered in 88 unmarked graves in the Grand Bourg cemetery in Buenos Aires and to determine whether they had been legally buried. Witnesses testified that between 1976 and 1979 bodies had been brought to the cemetery at night by vehicles belonging to the security forces.
Local human rights groups initiated separate inquiries through the courts after the discovery of similar graves in 12 Argentine cemeteries. An investigation by Judge Raúl Pierini into unmarked graves in La Chacarita Cemetery, Buenos Aires, revealed the names of 76 individuals buried there. The bodies of 53 people had already been handed over to relatives; 23 others were identified for the first time. Eight had been registered by Amnesty International on its list of the "disappeared".
The investigations revealed a series of irregularities involving
109
police, military andjudicial personnel. These concerned the preparation of death certificates and the failure to inform judicial authorities and relatives. In November 1982 the Centro de Estudios Legales y Sociales (CELS), Centre for Legal and Social Studies, a human rights group, held a news conference about the abduction of Norberto Gómez in November 1976. Norberto Gómez had reportedly been shot by the security forces; the court morgue, under orders from the military authorities, had buried the body. A death certificate had been issued but his family had not been informed. CELS filed a complaint to the Federal Court of Appeals maintaining that the Supreme Court judicial morgue had violated its legal functions by failing to notify judges of at least six other cases where burial in unmarked graves had been ordered.
On 6 October 1982 Amnesty International made available a document containing information on 365 "disappeared" persons received since it publishedalistofthe"disappeared" in March 1980. Amnesty International had information on over 3,900 individual cases. Human rights groups in Argentina have estimated that the total number of "disappearances" may be 15,000.
Amnesty International learned of further abductions followed by ill-treatment and torture in 1982 and intervened on behalf of seven individuals. There was no news of one of the victims, abducted in December 1982. The bodies of two others were subsequently discovered. On 4 February 1982 Ana Maria Martinez, a factory worker and supporter of the Partido Socialista de los Trabajadores (PST), Socialist Workers' Party, was abducted by an armed man and woman in a Ford Falcon car (a vehicle regularly used by the security forces) near her home in Buenos Aires. The local police refused to register a complaint by an eye-witness. A habeas corpus petition was presented. On 17 February 1982 the Minister of the Interior announced that her body had been found in a Buenos Aires suburb. Marcelo Dupont's body was found in a residential suburb of Buenos Aires on 7 October 1982. He had "disappeared" from his home on 30 September 1982, some days after his brother had testified in a court case which had revealed details of the activities of the navy and of its alleged involvement in the "disappearance" of the former Argentine Ambassador to Venezuela, Hector Hidalgo Solá on 18 July 1977, and the abduction and murder of diplomat Elena Holmberg in December 1978. An autopsy revealed that some of Marcelo Dupont's injuries had been caused by electric shocks before his death.
Amnesty International was concerned that government agents were continuing to make arrests without following legal procedures. Four individuals abducted in June and July 1982 were subsequently officially acknowledged as detainees. Miguel Angel Del Plá, a worker
110
at the Renault car plant in Córdoba, "disappeared" on 22 June 1982. A habeas corpus petition presented on his behalf was rejected on 24 June 1982. During a visit to the presidential palace on 28 June, a delegation of Argentine human rights lawyers was informed that he had been detained by Córdoba police in connection with the distribution of pamphlets outside a factory. A statement by the Córdoba police indicated that he was being detained at the request of the military and the judiciary. The judiciary subsequently denied issuing an arrest order. After his detention was acknowledged Miguel Angel Del Plá was still refused visits from his lawyer and family. Amnesty International received reports that he was subjected to electric shock torture in detention.
In a statement issued on 12 March 1982 the Buenos Aires Bar Association referred to the judiciary's failure to guarantee constitutional rights, and stated: "the existence of torture as a system of police investigation is a notorious and indisputable fact, as is the constant retrogression of the guarantees of liberty, security and dignity of persons".
During 1982 approximately 450 prisoners who had been detained a la disposición del Poder Ejecutivo Nacional	at the disposal
of the National Executive Power, under the state of siege (known as the PEN detainees) were released into restricted liberty. Among them were 54 prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International. Prisoners in restricted liberty are confined to a given area and have to report regularly to the authorities. Violation of the restrictions, which are normally imposed for six months, carries a prison sentence of two to eight years. At the end of 1982 Amnesty International estimated that approximately 200 PEN prisoners were still detained. Amnesty International learned of several cases in which the executive had refused to comply with the judiciary's release order. In November 1982 Amnesty International appealed on behalf of adopted prisoner of conscience Jorge Mario Domingo Marca, a lawyer detained without charge since 1974. Following the presentation of a habeas corpus petition in November 1982 a federal courtorderedDrMarca's release. The executive appealed against the decision and in December 1982 the judge challenged the executive's power to hold prisoners under the state of siege when conditions for its imposition no longer existed. Dr Marca was still in detention at the end of 1982.
Amnesty International remained concerned about political prisoners convicted by consejos de guerra especiales y estables, special standing military tribunals, established by Decree 21.264 in 1976. Such tribunals not only flout Article 18 of the Argentine Constitution on the right to a fair trial but also fail to conform to internationally recognized standards, by not allowing adequate defence rights or open
Ill
hearings. On 19 August 1982 a group of relatives called for the release of political prisoners and the review of all sentences imposed by military courts. In December the judiciary commuted the sentences passed by military courts on 82 prisoners and ordered their immediate release.
Amnesty International continued to receive reports of inadequate medical treatment for prisoners and of psychological disturbances, particularly among long-term prisoners, caused by the prison regime. The most serious reports came from Caseros prison in Buenos Aires where on 29 June 1982 Jorge Toledo, a prisoner who had served four and a half years of a six-year sentence, committed suicide. On 9 July the Minister of Justice guaranteed psychiatric help for 15 political prisoners whose depression was of particular concern. However, Amnesty International continued to learn of prisoners not receiving adequate medical attention. In 1982 Amnesty International organized appeals on behalf of 11 prisoners with medical problems in various jails. On 2 September 1982 Caseros prison was closed and its inmates transferred to the prisons of Rawson, Chubut Province and La Plata, Buenos Aires Province.
During 1982 Amnesty International appealed on behalf of numerous detainees, including Dr José Westerkamp, a leading human rights campaigner who was detained for three days in Trelew, Chubut Province, after criticizing conditions in Rawson jail in December 1981.
Mass arrests followed by short-term detention regularly occurred before and during demonstrations organized by trade unions, political parties and human rights groups. From September 1982 members of human rights groups, including the Madres de Plaza de Mayo, Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo, CELS and ^h&Asamblea Permanente por los Derechos Humanos (APDH), Argentine Permanent Assembly for Human Rights, filed legal complaints after receiving death threats. Posters bearing the names of five of the Madres de Plaza de Mayo and calling them "Mothers of Terrorists" were plastered outside their homes. Amnesty International called on the government to investigate such incidents, and reports of death threats and attacks on journalists, political figures and trade union leaders.
In May 1982 Amnesty International submitted material to the United Nations under the procedure to examine allegations of a "consistent pattern of gross and reliably attested violations of human rights". The submission referred to the question of the "disappeared" and the continued detention of PEN prisoners. Amnesty International also submitted information to the UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances.
112
