Cameroon
Amnesty International was concerned by the long-term detention without trial of suspected political opponents of the government. These detainees were held under a system of administrative internment developed during civil disorder in the 1960s but retained in 1982. This confers on the President power to detain indefinitely and without recourse to the courts any person considered subversive. Amnesty International was also concerned about the poor conditions in which detainees were held and about renewed reports of torture, including electric shock torture.
On 6 November President El-Hadj Ahmadou Ahidjo, who had been in power since 1958, retired from office for health reasons. He was replaced as President by Prime Minister Paul Biya.
For most of 1982 Amnesty International sought the release of five remaining detainees held in administrative detention without charge or trial since July 1976, when some 200 students, teachers and white-collar workers were arrested apparently for distributing anti-government literature. One of these detainees, Henri Moukouri, was released during 1982. Two others - André Moune and Emmanuel Bille - were reported to have been released but Amnesty International was unable to confirm this. Another, Gaspard Mouen, is reported to have suffered serious cardiac problems in prison in iate 1982. He was released in December. Martin Ebelle-Tobo was still in detention at Tcholliré Centre de reeducation ("re-education centre"). This detention centre was believed to hold only untried political prisoners and administrative detainees; Amnesty International received reports of other untried detainees, possibly prisoners of conscience, held at Tcholliré but was able to confirm only the case of Martin Ebelle-Tobo.
Amnesty International took up the cases of Jean Kona and Thomas Mabong for investigation. Both had lived for several years in France. They were arrested in January 1982 when they returned to Cameroon for a holiday, apparently because Jean Kona had in his baggage a published article which the authorities considered subversive. Thomas Mabong is reported to be held at the Prison de production (labour camp) at Yoko, and Jean Kona at Tcholliré. Amnesty International received reports of the detentions during 1982 of people said to have distributed literature critical of the government. A security. The trial opened on 5 March before three judges, only one of
22
number of Jehovah's Witnesses continued to be detained. This sect was banned by the government in May 1970.
Amnesty International was concerned by reports that torture, including electric shock torture, had been re-introduced at the Yaoundé headquarters of the Brigade mixte mobile (BMM), a paramilitary police force. Both criminal and political detainees were reported to be routinely beaten by both police and the BMM as punishment and during interrogation. Standards of food and hygiene were reported to be very low in Cameroonian prisons, particularly at the Tcholliré "re-education centre". Access to family and friends at Tcholliré and Yoko was very restricted. Amnesty International was concerned by the inadequate medical attention given to Gaspard Mouen and André Moune during their detention at Tcholliré and Yoko respectively.
