Ireland
On 16 November 1982 Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Justice, Sean Doherty, about the case of Eamonn Kelly (known as Nicky Kelly), who was serving a sentence of 12 years' imprisonment. Eamonn Kelly, a member of the Irish Republican Socialist Party, was arrested in April 1976 and convicted ofarmed robbery along with two others, Bernard McNally and Osgur Breatnach. In May 1980 Amnesty International had sent an observer to the hearing of the appeal by Osgur Breatnach and Bernard McNally in the Court of Criminal Appeal, which acquitted both men on the grounds that their confessions were not admissible as evidence. Eamonn Kelly had absconded from Ireland during his trial and returned only after the successful outcome of his co-accuseds' appeal. His appeal to the Court ofC riminal Appeal was rejected on 2 April 1982. In September
262
Amnesty International sent an observer to the appeal hearing in the Supreme Court, which dismissed his appeal on 29 October.
Amnesty International was concerned about the acceptance of confessions in evidence despite complaints that they were extracted under ill-treatment. Eamonn Kelly was convicted solely on the basis of a confession which he claimed was not voluntary. By mutual account, he was held incommunicado for 60 hours after arrest and made his confession only after prolonged questioning and prolonged sleep deprivation. Eamonn Kelly also alleged that he had been beaten into making the confession. This allegation was denied by the police and was not accepted by the trial court or the appeal courts. In its letter to the Minister of Justice, Amnesty International pointed out that his allegation related to a time-April 1976-when ill-treatment of suspects in cases with a political element did occur in police stations, in circumstances like those described by Eamonn Kelly, according to the findings of an Amnesty International mission to Ireland in June 1977.
On 16 December, following elections and the inauguration of a new government, Amnesty International wrote again to express its concerns to the newly appointed Minister of Justice, Michael Noonan. By the end of 1982 Amnesty International had not received a reply.
