Seychelles
Amnesty International was concerned by the short-term detention without trial of suspected political opponents of the government, and by reports of ill-treatment of the Seychelles' only long-term untried detainee.
During the year the government of President France Albert René suffered several major threats to its security. On 17 August troops mutinied over poor conditions of service. In October, there were reports of a London-based conspiracy against President René's government.
On these and similar occasions people were detained on suspicion of plotting against the government. At the beginning of 1982 Amnesty International was investigating reports on some 18 people detained in late 1981 on suspicion of involvement in the attempted mercenary invasion of 25 November 1981. All were released in January and February 1982 except Jean Dingwall, a businessman. Amnesty International appealed unsuccessfully to the government for his trial or release and expressed concern about his treatment. He was
74
reported to be held apart from other prisoners in Union Vale army camp. During the early part of his detention he was reported to have been held in a cell too small to allow easy movement or sleep and to have been deprived of food for short periods.
In late August six to 10 people were detained on the island of Praslin after a meeting at which a plan to overthrow President René was reportedly discussed. Amnesty International requested information on the legal basis for their arrest but the detainees were all released uncharged in September.
In July five foreign mercenaries were convicted by the Seychelles High Court of treason, the only crime carrying the death penalty in Seychelles' law. Four were sentenced to death. Amnesty International appealed to President René for the commutation of the death sentences, noting that President René had himself appealed to the South African Government for commutation of the death sentences passed upon convicted members of the African National Congress.
