__Nicaragua
'f' '	ta- • Amnesty International's concerns
•'■» included the detention of prisoners of conscience, generally for short periods; the application of a far-reaching public order law; continued denial of appeals to prisoners sentenced by Special Tribunals for crimes under the previous government; and allegations that prisoners detained in the Atlantic Coast area, primarily Miskito and Sumo Indians, were held in isolation and beaten.
Amnesty International adopted as prisoners of conscience four leaders of business organizations given three-year sentences under the Law for the Maintenance of Public Order and Security- the public order law - for having published statements considered "damaging to the economy", and four leaders of the Communist Party affiliated Central de Acción y Unidad Sindical (CAUS), Organization for Trade Union Action and Unity, sentenced to seven months to three years' detention for having incited strike action and factory occupations - banned under a State of Economic and Social Emergency then in force. The eight were detained on 21 October 1981; all were provisionally released in February and March 1982 and later pardoned by the Council of State.
Many members of labour federations in conflict with government policies were arrested and questioned although few were charged and tried. By the end of 1982 an estimated 200 members of the Central de Trabajadores de Nicaragua (CTN), Nicaraguan Workers' Centre, a Christian Democratic federation, had been detained for questioning during the previous 18 months, although none were believed to have been held for more than a few days. Some CTN leaders - such as Juan Rafael Suazo, president of the union of workers at Managua cooking oil factories - were detained on several occasions, and each time released without charge after several days.
Amnesty International was investigating the cases of several leaders of the Partido Social Cristiano (PSC), Social Christian Party, a Christian Democratic party, who were detained for alleged "counterrevolutionary" activities under the public order law. Julio Ramón Montes, President of the department of Leon branch of the PSC, was detained on 15 May 1982 and sentenced to two years' imprisonment; he had been detained twice under the present government and released without trial after short periods. Francisco Rodriguez, head of the party's youth organization, was detained on 2 June, and Feliciano Polanco, President of the Esquipulas branch in Matagalpa department, was detained on 14 June and accused of "counter-
160
revolutionary activities". Amnesty International was concerned that their arrests might relate solely to their lawful political party activity.
On 15 March 1982 a state of emergency was declared which suspended those civil rights which under international law may be temporarily restricted. The government attributed the measure, which replaced a September 1981 State ofEconomic and Social Emergency, to a rash of armed attacks in the Nicaraguan-Honduran border area. On 19 March Amnesty International cabled the government to express concern at the declaration of the state of emergency, and to urge that the remedy of habeas corpus remain applicable, and that international standards on human rights be respected. However, recourse to habeas corpus became unavailable and prisoners were regularly held for 10 or more days in incommunicado detention before being charged or released.
Amnesty International in October 1982 expressed concern at the threat posed by incommunicado detention to the health of prisoner Mario Ramirez, shortly after he underwent brain surgery. He was detained on 27 September and held incommunicado for over a week at the top-security El Chipote jail at the Dirección General de Seguridad del Estado - the security service's headquarters in Managua. Mario Ramirez was a former official of the state mining company CON-DEMINA and was sentenced in January 1982 to two years' imprisonment for "counter-revolutionary" activities, reportedly because of leaflets from opposition parties found in his house during a search. Amnesty International was investigating his case.
In its 19 March cable Amnesty International expressed concern about 160 Miskito and Sumo Indians detained in the border area following a series of cross-border incursions from Honduras between October and December 1981. They were tried in Puerto Cabezas in January and February 1982. Amnesty International asked about the legal status of the prisoners and expressed concern at reports of prolonged incommunicado detention and summary trial proceedings.
Amnesty International subsequently confirmed that the prisoners were tried at Puerto Cabezas in six groups according to their place of origin, and were charged with crimes of violence by armed opposition groups in each locality. Eight Miskito Indians from the Bilwaskarma area on the Rio Coco were charged with involvement in an assault on a hospital there on 28 December 1981 ; with kidnapping two doctors and two nurses; and with the rape of a Miskito Indian doctor and a nurse who testified that they were forcibly taken across the river to Honduras. Thirty-nine were charged with involvement in the two-day occupation (20 and 21 December 1981) of the riverside town of San Carlos, some with the killing by torture and mutilation of seven members of a Nicaraguan army patrol captured during the occupation;
161
with the destruction of an army helicopter; and with the 14 December abduction to Honduras and murder of 12 San Carlos militia members. Of 160 prisoners initially detained at Puerto Cabezas in January and February 1982, 135 were convicted on public order law charges of involvement in violent opposition activities; five of these were given suspended sentences and released.
Although Amnesty International believed that some of the 135 prisoners had committed crimes of violence, many Miskito and Sumo Indians appeared to have been detained virtually at random, as if all Miskito residents were held to be jointly responsible for the violent actions that occurred in or near their small communities. Among these cases, Amnesty International was investigating that of Higinio Frank López, a Sumo Indian bom with one leg, who was detained in October 1981 in the La Tronquera region, near Waspan. He was believed to have been arrested solely for having criticized the government in a village meeting. Higinio Frank López was sentenced to three years' imprisonment for "counter-revolutionary" activities.
A principal concern was that most of the prisoners had been detained incommunicado for 27 days before the trial began, in the custody of the security police at Puerto Cabezas. Charges of ill-treatment of some of these prisoners - including prolonged detention in isolation cells, beatings, and intimidation through threats of violence -were being investigated. Although Amnesty International could not confirm charges of ill-treatment, at the trials in February 1982 procedural irregularities might have obstructed examination of these complaints. Evidence for the prosecution was limited largely to declarations taken by Seguridad del Estado, security service, interrogators while prisoners were in incommunicado detention. The trial court accepted these without question as valid while the rights of the defence were limited. Three public defenders alone assisted the 135 defendants, and proceedings were conducted in Spanish, without satisfactory interpretation facilities, although some defendants spoke only the Miskito or Sumo languages.
When an appeals court in Bluefields, Zelaya, re-examined the 135 Puerto Cabezas cases, defendants were represented by private defence lawyers and accorded interpretation facilities. Almost all the sentences were drastically reduced or overturned: 28 prisoners were released and 46 received sentences of three years or less and became eligible for release through a form of parole. All the cases went before the Supreme Court of Justice in a final appeal, including 61 with sentences of over three years.
Following a series of cross-border incursions and violent incidents in Zelaya in late 1981 and related large-scale arrests, residents of most of the Miskito Indian settlements on the Rio Coco were forcibly
162
evacuated, without warning, from the border area. The evacuation, begun in the last days of December 1981, was part of government plans for the defence of the border area, and a response to the fear that anti-goverrunent forces might find assistance in the riverside communities. After the March 1982 declaration of a state of emergency, attacks by violent opposition groups continued in the northern Atlantic Coast region. Government counter-measures included widespread arrests among the Miskito and Sumo population, many of which appeared to have been indiscriminate and arbitrary. Amnesty International was investigating the cases of some 270 Miskito and Sumo Indians transferred to Managua's Zona Franca prison (formally termed the Centro de Reclusión "Héroes y Mártires de Nueva Guinea'^ to await trial before Managua criminal courts on public order charges. It was also investigating some allegations of ill-treatment of these and other prisoners by government forces.
The Report of the Amnesty International Missions to the Republic of Nicaragua: August 1979, January 1980 and August 1980 was pubhshed in June 1982. It included Amnesty International's August 1981 memorandum to the Nicaraguan Government on the findings of the missions{see Amnesty International Report 1981), an extensive response from the government, and the text of a letter of 29 April in which Amnesty International communicated outstanding concerns to the government.
The report addressed the public order law, which it described as "in many ways resembling a law of exception", and the fairness of trials before Special Tribunals set up temporarily after the fall of the previous government. The report urged tiie review of cases, which were not subject to appeal since the disbanding of the Special Tribunals in early 1981. A total of 4,331 people were convicted of serious crimes by these courts, of whom an estimated 2,400 remained in detention at the end of 1982.
In August 1982 the government responded to Amnesty International's 29 April letter. It reiterated the point it had made previously on trials under the public order law, and the right to appeal against sentences of the Special Tribunals. It elaborated on the applicability of a Law of Pardon to these cases as a remedy for miscarriages of justice. Although this law was described as a means by which sentences in all security-related cases could be reviewed. Amnesty International knew of no sentences passed by the Special Tribunals having been altered after review under the Law of Pardon in 1982. Although Amnesty International did not identify any prisoners of conscience convicted by the Special Tribunals, it continued to urge an effective review to detect possible miscarriages of justice. On 27 October Amnesty International wrote to the government to express concern
163
about a group of 73 prisoners whose Special Tribunal sentences had elapsed. They had been retained in custody for up to two months after completion of their sentences on an apparently arbitrary basis under the state of emergency. All prisoners scheduled for release were, however, reported to be at liberty by the end of November.
Amnesty International was investigating the cases of seven possible prisoners of conscience, all charged with offences under the public order law.
