Colombia
Amnesty International's long-standing concerns were affected by the lifting of the state of siege on 20 June 1982, and a general amnesty in November 1982 which freed most political prisoners, including all those whose cases had been taken up by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience or possible prisoners of conscience. Continuing concerns included reports of torture; the ''disappearance" of a number of political prisoners; extrajudicial executions during counter-guerrilla operations in isolated rural areas; and evidence of police and military responsibility for the killings of at least 96 Colombians attributed by the security forces to an independent "death squad".
The lifting of the state of siege by the government of President Julio César Turbay Ayala brought an end to the broad powers of the army to detain, interrogate and bring before military courts civilians charged with political crimes. A s an immediate consequence, trials in progress were transferred to civilian criminal courts and many political prisoners were ordered released by civilian judges who determined that there were no grounds for prosecution.
Shortly before the lifting of the state of siege, military courts dropped charges and ordered the release of some prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International who had been held pending trial for one or more years. Among them were five campesinos (peasants) from the remote region of Arauca detained without trial since 8 November 1980. Adopted prisoners of conscience released shortly after the lifting of the state of siege included José Germán Toro Zuluaga, a national teachers' union leader who was abducted on 28 September 1981 by a plainclothes army intelligence unit and then "disappeared" for 10 days before his arrest was acknowledged (see Amnesty International Report 1982). He was released on 22 July 1982.
There was an upsurge of incidents in which members of political opposition groups and trade unions, and former political prisoners, were detained and killed in operations ascribed by the security services to a supposedly independent "death squad" called Muerte a Secuestradores, Death to Kidnappers, known as MAS. The first killings took place in December 1981 and claimed as victims trade unionists and political opposition figures. Military spokesmen attributed the killings to MAS, which they said had been created by the criminal underworld to combat left-wing guerrillas. Evidence suggesting direct
124
involvement of the armed forces in the actions was, however, received by Amnesty International.
On 9 March 1982 Amnesty International cabled the President to express concern at the killing earlier that day of lawyer Jorge Enrique Cipagauta Galvis. He had previously received death threats in the name of MAS which warned him to stop defending political prisoners in military trials. Amnesty International urged an inquiry into the killing and physical protection and guarantees for other lawyers.
In May 1982 Amnesty International published evidence from a series of cases linking the army to abductions and killings officially attributed to MAS, including people whose detention was initially attributed to MAS by military spokesmen, who were subsequently acknowledged to be in military custody. In J anuary 1982 C olombian news media had cited confidential sources within the Ministry of Defence claiming that the "death squad" activity launched in December 1981 was organized by a section of the army's Military Intelligence Service; labour organizations made similar claims. A document issued by the Confederación Sindical de Trabajadores de Colombia {C STC), Trade UnionFederationofC olombian Workers, in February 1982 said one unit of the "death squad" was part of the army intelligence section in the Medelh'n Fourth Army Brigade. The Federación Colombiana de Educadores, Colombian Teachers' Federation, whose leaders had received death threats in the name of MAS, told a news conference on 16 February 1982 that it held the security services accountable for actions attributed to MAS. It cited the case of a typist for the union detained and interrogated on 16 February by hooded men who said they were from MAS. After her release she reportedly attempted to leave the city, but was intercepted at Bogotá airport by police who warned her not to leave the city on pain of further action by MAS.
M ost of the killings attributed by the army to MAS were reported from rural zones undergoing intensive operations by army counter-guerrilla forces. A number of former political prisoners freed after their cases had been passed to the civil courts were also seized and killed. In the months from June to August Amnesty International observed an escalation in reports of extrajudicial executions by uniformed and plainclothes security forces. On 20 August another lawyer who defended political prisoners - professor of law Alberto Alava Montenegro - was murdered after receiving threats in the name of MAS.
On 7 August 1982 President Belisario Betancur took office and pledged to introduce a far-reaching law of amnesty for members of guerrilla groups and for political prisoners. In reaction to Dr Alava's murder on 20 August President Betancur made his first major
125
statement condemning the killings attributed to MAS and declaring that he had ordered its "unmasking" in order "to return to the country the image of a civilized nation". Notwithstanding the President's actions, "disappearances" and killings attributed to MAS were to continue throughout 1982 and spread to most parts of the country.
On 13 September Amnesty International issued a report on the proliferation of extrajudicial executions in Colombia. It focused on individual abductions and killings, and on incidents in which the army's attribution of illegal actions to MAS appeared intended to conceal unlawful actions directed by sectors of the army itself. Cases cited in the report included that of Camilo Restrepo Valencia, released after two years' imprisonment in July 1982, who was abducted on 9 August in the city of Cali by plainclothes men who identified themselves as members of MAS. Although police initially denied that he had been detained, sources confirmed that he was in the custody of the National Police intelligence division, F-2, and on 10 August he was released. As Camilo Restrepo walked away from police headquarters with his mother he was shot dead by a man in civilian clothes armed with a silenced pistol. Amnesty International had appealed on behalf of C amilo Restrepo after his detention by F-2 in February 1980 with fellow students Jorge Marcos Zambrano and Oscar Fernando Ortega; after transfer to the army's Third Brigade headquarters in Cali the three were interrogated under torture and Jorge Marcos Zambrano died as a consequence. Although the army then denied that Jorge Marcos Zambrano had been detained, and his body was dumped in the outskirts of Cali, the case attracted public attention and the authorities acknowledged that Zambrano had in fact been detained.
The army interrogators of the three prisoners were put on trial, which was still in progress at the end of 1982. Camilo Restrepo Valencia was the principal witness of Zambrano's torture and death; the second witness, student Oscar Fernando Ortega, sought political asylum in Mexico following the kiUing of Camilo Restrepo.
Amnesty International appealed for the authorities to investigate a series of killings in rural areas attributed by the army to paramilitary groups or to MAS. Cases cited in Amnesty International's September 1982 report included the detention, torture and murder of nine campesinos on 4 August at the settlement "El Lagarto" in Amalfi, Antioquia department, reportedly for having "assisted guerrillas" operating in the area. The bodies of the nine were subsequently found mutilated; one of the dead had his tongue and eyes removed, others were disfigured by acid and all had gunshot wounds. The killings occurred in an area then administered by the army, and were attributed by residents to plainclothes army troops accompanied by civilian
126
irregulars. Residents said that seven other local people detained on 4 August remained missing.
The report cited a letter to the civilian governor of the department of Santander signed by leaders of nine communities in the mountainous areas of western Santander and dated July 1982 which requested help to halt massive arrests and killings by forces of the Army's Fifth Brigade. The letter protested against killings by "a paramilitary group, formed and directed by the army based in San Juan Bosco de Laverde". Killings reported in early July 1982 and described in the letter included that of Casimiro Amado, "carried out in Santo Domingo del Ramo by a group of soldiers and the paramilitary band of San Juan Bosco de Laverde" and Julio Bardosa, killed by "soldiers attached to the Fifth Brigade".
An investigation into the "disappearances" and killings attributed to MAS was begun by the Attorney General, Dr Carlos Jiménez Gómez shortly after the change of government in August 1982. Teams of special investigators were sent to rural "militarized" zones and cities where a particularly high incidence of these cases had been reported. A report was completed at the end ofDecember 1982 for the consideration of President Betancur, and, according to unofficial reports, confirmed the involvement of the armed forces. Although Colombian news media reported opposition from the armed forces to the publication of the findings. Attorney General Jiménez Gómez was cited as insisting that the report be made public in early 1983.
On 19 November 1982 President Betancur signed into law a sweeping law of amnesty for collaborators with Colombia's several armed guerrilla movements and for political prisoners. An estimated 400 political prisoners, most of them convicted by military courts for the crime of "rebellion", were released in subsequent weeks. All prisoners adopted or taken up as possible prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International were released. Although the amnesty excluded prisoners convicted of certain crimes, such as the murder of captives, most political prisoners were believed to have been released, including well-known leaders of several of the guerrilla groups active in the country. Under the amnesty law a Commission for Peace was set up to conciliate between the government and guerrilla groups; ex-prisoners and former guerrillas became eligible for financial help to facilitate their re-entry into civilian society.
A continuing concern of Amnesty International was the fate of a number of Colombians presumed to have been detained in 1982 who remained unaccounted for. Most of these "disappeared" prisoners were students. Despite evidence that their detentions were carried out by plainclothes security officers, police and military representatives denied responsibility for the detentions.
127
Leonel Ulises López, a 25-year-old student at the Universidad del Valle, was detained in the city of Cali on 9 January 1982 in an operation involving six unmarked vehicles and at least 15 heavily armed men in plain clothes. Witnesses saw him disabled by gunshot wounds in the leg and shoulder and then beaten before being forced into an unmarked Toyota jeep. Although he was reportedly taken to the Cali headquarters of the Third Army Brigade, his arrest was subsequently denied; repeated appeals for him to be brought before a court of law or released met no response.
Amnesty International appealed on behalf of eight young Colombians believed to have been abducted by units of the security services in 1982 whose whereabouts were unknown, and continued to seek clarification of their fate. In mid-1982 the relatives of some 75 "disappeared" people in Colombia, most of whom were believed to have been captured during 1982, formed a Committee of Relatives of the Disappeared. During a meeting with President Betancur in December 1982 their representatives were reportedly told of the appointment of a special investigator into the cases under the authority of the Attorney General.
During 1982 Amnesty International submitted information on Colombia to the United Nations Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances.
