Sri Lanka
231
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about the use of the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act (PTA) which suspends important legal safeguards and provides for incommunicado detention in undisclosed places for up to 18 months. There were repeated allegations of torture and ill-treatment of detainees under the PTA by the army and police.
Amnesty International delegates visited Sri Lanka on a mission from 31 January to 9 February 1982. Although Amnesty International had been assured as late as 21 January that Sri Lankan officials and ministers would meet the delegates, the government refused to meet the delegates in Colombo. The delegates were, however, able to discuss the human rights situation with members of the legal profession, members of parliament, political leaders, and representatives of various civil liberties groups. The delegates also visited Jaffna, where they gathered information about violations of human rights alleged to have been committed in the north.
The state of emergency was lifted on 11 January 1982 but was re-imposed twice. It was imposed briefly from 30 July after riots in the town of Galle between Sinhalese and Muslims which caused two deaths, and from 21 October for the rest of the year after the presidential elections and during the national referendum held on 22 December. Violence continued in the north, and there were armed attacks in which four police officers were killed and three more injured on 2 July, and three police officers and two civilians were killed on 27 October in an attack on Chavakachcheri police station. The Sri Lankan press attributed these killings to groups belonging to the Tamil minority. While acknowledging that those responsible for these armed attacks should be brought to justice, Amnesty International was concerned about reports that between the end of January and March 1982 many members of the Tamil minority in the north were arrested under the PTA and held without charge or trial. In November, 27 people were reportedly arrested under the PTA in the area, 15 of whom were still in detention at the end of November 1982. At least 65 people were detained without charge or trial under the PTA in mid-December 1982, and allegations of torture and ill-treatment of many of these detainees reached Amnesty International.
Amnesty International was particularly concerned that the Prevention of Terrorism Act, originally specified to run for three years from July 1979 to 1982, was made part of the permanent law of the land on
232
11 March 1982. Amnesty International believed that many provisions of the PTA as well as the retroactive effect of some of its provisions, violated international human rights standards.
The first trial under the PTA took place in i 982, resulting in death sentences being imposed on 13 August on Selvarajah Yogachandiran (known as Kuttimany) and Ganeshanathan Jeganathan (known as Jegan). They were convicted of murdering a police officer on 21 March 1979. Throughout their detention from April 1981, and even during the trial itself, the accused were held in army custody. During the trial the two men stated that their "confessions", made while in army custody, had been extracted under torture. Under the changed rules of evidence of the PTA the burden of proving such allegations had been shifted to the accused, and the court admitted the self-incriminating statements in evidence. At the end of 1982 an appeal was being heard against their sentence.
At the end of 1982 Amnesty International was investigating the cases of 11 possible prisoners of conscience. Of the 22 cases which had earlier been taken up by the organization, 11 were released in 1982, of whom three were prisoners of conscience. The 11 released prisoners were Tamils detained since April or May 1981, after a bank robbery, most of whom had not been charged or tried.
The release of Jaffna University student Appulingam Wimalarajah and some 30 other Tamils arrested under the PTA in April and May 1981 had been demanded in many demonstrations by Tamil students and politicians since April 1981. A habeas corpus application on behalf of Appulingam Wimalarajah was heard in the Court of Appeal on 31 May 1982, and he was released on 8 June.
On 29 September Mudiyappu Davidson, General Secretary of the General Union of Eelam Students, was arrested under the PTA, after leading a non-violent boycott of President Jayewardene's visit to Jaffna. He was detained at Panagoda army camp. A writ of habeas corpus was applied for in the Court of Appeal on his behalf and the court directed the Attorney General to give grounds for his detention. He was released after two weeks.
In November, 27 people in the north were reportedly arrested under the PTA. Amongst those detained were eight priests, five of whom were released after up to five days in detention. Three others -Father Sinnarasa, Father Singarayer and the Reverend Jeyathilakaraja - were still detained at the end of 1982. The charges against them included harbouring terrorists and concealing information from the authorities. A writer, a university lecturer and a doctor were also in detention at the end of the year, reportedly on similar charges. The detained priests were held in Gurunagar Army Camp, where they were denied visits by lawyers, relatives or churchmen. The Roman
233
Catholic Bishop of Jaffna wrote to the President on 23 November stating that two of the priests were being "subjected to moral pressure, intimidation and other questionable methods to extract confessions from them".
From 18 November a large number of peaceful demonstrations and public fasts took place in the north of the island on behalf of the detained priests. Amnesty International expressed concern to President Jayewardene on 20 December 1982 about the detention of the three priests and also about the arrests of nine people reportedly detained for peacefully fasting at Vavuniya on 15 December in protest against the detentions under the PTA. On 21 December 1982 the government replied, confirming that charges against the three priests were being investigated and that they would be either prosecuted in a court of law or released on completion of investigations.
Under the Emergency Regulations imposed from 21 October 1982, after the presidential election on 20 October, many members of opposition parties were detained. Amnesty International received reports that more than 25 members of the Sri Lanka Freedom Party (SLFP) were detained without charge in November. The majority were released within weeks but five, including the Assistant Secretary of the SLFP, were still detained at the end of 1982. According to press reports in November, 11 members of the SLFP, including its General Secretary, were to be indicted in connection with an alleged conspiracy against the state. Before the 22 December 1982 referendum, which extended the Parliament's life for six years, members of other opposition parties - the Janata Vimukhti Peramuna (JVP) and the Communist Party - were also reported to have been detained under the Emergency Regulations. Amnesty International raised its concerns about the detention of opposition party members with President J. R. Jayewardene on 7, 20 and 24 December 1982, urging that those detained be charged or immediately released.
On 5 May 1982 Amnesty International wrote a letter to the Minister of Internal Security, the Commander of the Army and the Inspector General of Police inquiring about the "disappearance" of Ponnuthurai Kanagakulasingham, a 34-year-old Tamil who was reportedly arrested on 28 January 1982 by army and police personnel at Vadaliyadaippu, and taken away in a helicopter. Amnesty International asked the Minister of Internal Security to investigate reports of the arrest and to inform the organization of his current whereabouts or date of release from custody, stating that fears had been expressed that the missing man might have died in custody. Amnesty International did not receive a reply.
A Parliamentary Select Committee was appointed in 1979 to investigate reported "disappearances" and deaths of Tamils in police
234
or army custody. Its report was apparendy put before Parliament at the end of 1982, but as far as Amnesty International was aware, the report had not been published.
	
\ -	) -n
