Egypt
Amnesty International was concerned about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience. The continued use of legislation, often related to the state of emergency, allowed people to be arrested and imprisoned for the non-violent exercise of their human rights. Important political trials took place before military and state security courts with no provision for appeal. Detention procedures allowed prisoners to be held incommunicado for long periods and failed to protect them from torture and ill-treatment
301
Amnesty International learned of five executions carried out during the year.
On 24 June 1982 Amnesty International sent a memorandum to President Mubarak describing Amnesty International's concerns in that country. Drawing attention to Egypt's ratification of the International C ovenant on Civil and Political Rights on 14 January 1982, Amnesty International recommended:
—	a comprehensive review of existing legislation which allows the imprisonment of individuals for their non-violent political beliefs or activities;
—	an amnesty for all prisoners of conscience;
—	that consideration be given to lifting provisions of the state of emergency legislation which have facilitated the arbitrary arrest and imprisonment of individuals for their conscientiously held beliefs, as well as incommunicado detention and trials before exceptional courts;
—	that impartial machinery be established to investigate all allegations of torture and ill-treatment, and steps taken to bring those responsible for the torture of detainees to justice and to compensate the victims;
—	that all outstanding death sentences be commuted as a humanitarian gesture of clemency and that consideration be given to abolishing the death penalty.
In an accompanying letter to President Mubarak Amnesty International said that it hoped the memorandum would form a basis for discussion and proposed sending a delegation to Cairo for this purpose.
Amnesty International continued its work on behalf of more than 20 adopted prisoners of conscience, most of whom were released into provisional liberty pending trial. They included Pope Shenouda III, spiritual leader of the Coptic Orthodox Church, who had been confined in a monastery in Wadi Natroun since September 1981, and Ali Said Zahran, a furniture maker who completed his five-year sentence for activities on behalf of a banned communist organization in September 1982.
Large-scale arrests started in September 1981 under President Sadat and after his assassination in October 1981 thousands more were arrested. Arrests continued in 1982. The majority of those arrested were allegedly members of various Islamic organizations, but a group of about 30 people alleged to be communists were arrested in February. They were held under detention procedures introduced under the state of emergency imposed in October 1981 following the assassination of President Sadat and renewed for a further year in
302
October 1982. These procedures allowed for detainees to be held for a renewable period of six months, with no recourse to a court of law to challenge their detention. At the end of the six-month period petitions for release could be addressed to the President of the Republic who was responsible for deciding on release or renewed detention. These procedures were contrary to Article 9 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights which states among other things that the detainee should be informed promptly of the reasons for arrest and the charges faced, and is entitled to go before a court with the power to decide whether the detention is lawful. These procedures were amended by the People's Assembly in June 1982 to permit detainees to appeal for release before the courts.
According to official figures approximately 4,000 detainees were released during the year. Amnesty International was concerned that some remaining detainees had reportedly been held for over one year without charge or trial, and that the names of all detainees, their place of detention and any charges against them were not made public. Amnesty International was also concerned at reports that some detainees had been denied access to relatives or to a lawyer of their choice.
In 1982 a number of important political trials were held before military or state security courts. The trial of 24 people accused of participating in the assassination of President Sadat on 6 October 1981 continued in early 1982 under stringent security precautions befpre the Supreme Military Court. Amnesty International expressed concern to the authorities that almost all proceedings were being held in camera and that defence lawyers were at one stage expelled from the court, and thus were unable to complete their defence. They were replaced by other lawyers appointed by the court. The verdicts were announced on 6 March 1982. Five people were sentenced to death and later executed.
During 1982 two trials took place before the Supreme State Security Court in Cairo in which the defendants were accused of illegal political activities on behalf of the banned Egyptian Communist Party. Thirty individuals were charged in State Security Case No. 632 of 1979 and 47 in State Security Case No. 207 of 1981. Some were charged in both cases. Charged under Law 40 of 1977, and articles of the penal code, they faced a maximum punishment of life imprisonment with hard labour for their non-violent political activity. All had been released provisionally, pending trial. A number had earlier been adopted as prisoners of conscience while in detention. Both trials were scheduled to continue in January 1983.
On 17 April 1982 the retrial began of 176 people initially arrested in connection with the "food riots" of 18 and 19 January 1977. They
303
were charged with membership of banned poHtical parties (the Egyptian Communist Party and the Egyptian Workers' Communist Party) and with instigating the disturbances through written and other materials. They had originally been tried and sentenced in April 1980 when the Supreme State Security Court acquitted 156 of them and passed sentences of one or three years' imprisonment and fines on the remaining 20. However, these sentences were not served as, under the state of emergency provisions, the verdict was not considered final until it had been reviewed by the President of the RepubHc. In 1981 President Sadat vetoed the verdict on all 176 defendants and ordered a retrial in another court. In October 1982 the Supreme State Security Court adjourned until 15 January 1983 - six years after the disturbances.
The trial continued of 302 people accused of being members of the Islamic group, Al Jihad. They were also accused of attempting to overthrow the government by force and of fomenting armed clashes with the police and security forces, which resulted in more than 80 deaths in Assiut in October 1981 following President Sadat's assassination. The trial was taking place before the Supreme State Security Court and many of the defendants, if convicted, might face the death penalty. Twenty of those charged were being tried in their absence, and two were reported to have died in detention.
Amnesty Intemational was concemed that in all these cases defendants were tried before exceptional courts and denied the right of judicial appeal, contrary to Article 14 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The court's verdict is presented to the executive authority, which is empowered inter alia to approve the court's decision, reduce the sentence or annul it, or refer the case to a different court for retrial.
In early 1982 Amnesty Intemational received reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees alleged to belong to various Islamic fundamentalist movements. During the trial of 302 alleged members oiAlJihad many defendants reportedly claimed that they had been tortured or ill-treated, and denounced the officers responsible in court. In late December lawyers for the defence urged that the torture allegations be investigated. Amnesty Intemational could not conclude on the basis of available information that torture of political detainees had become routine. However Amnesty Intemational was concemed that the lack of safeguards accorded to political detainees, particularly when state of emergency procedures led to long-term incommunicado detention, increased the likelihood of torture and ill-treatment.
Amnesty Intemational appealed for the commutation of nine death sentences passed during the year on people convicted of premeditated and deliberate murder, and other offences. Appeals
304
were addressed to President Mubarak on behalf of Khalid Ahmed Shawqi Islambouli, Muhammad Abdul Salam Farag, Abdul Hamid Abdul Salam Abdul Al, Ata Tayel Rahel and Hussein Abbas Muhammad who were sentenced to death by the Supreme Military Court on 6 March for their part in the assassination of President Sadat. The five were executed on 15 April.
