Somalia
Amnesty International appealed for the release of a number of prisoners of conscience and was concerned about the detention without trial of political opponents of the government. The organization was also concerned by a trial before the National Security Court which did not appear to conform with internationally recognized standards. Amnesty International expressed concern about allegations of ill-treatment of prisoners, harsh prison conditions, and executions.
Somalia signed the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights on 26 February 1982.
The nationwide state of emergency imposed by President Siyad Barre in October 1980 was lifted in March 1982 but reimposed later in certain border areas where there was fighting between the armed forces and the externally based Democratic Front for the Salvation of Somalia (DFSS), which was said to receive support from Ethiopia. The lifting of the 1980 emergency led to the disbanding of the regional and district revolutionary committees which had been given special powers of arrest and detention. Political arrests and detentions continued, however, under national security legislation.
At least 15 of the prisoners of concern to Amnesty International were released by the end of 1982. In February Amnesty International
75
welcomed the release of several prisoners of conscience and appealed for a general amnesty for all political prisoners. This was not granted although some further releases took place later in the year. Released prisoners of conscience included Mohamed Haji Ibrahim Egal, former Prime Minister, detained in 1976 and previously held under house arrest or in prison from 1969 to 1975; and Mohamed Abshir Musse, former head of police, detained in 1973 shortly after release from house arrest since 1969.
Other political prisoners released during 1982 included over 60 officers of the armed forces detained without trial after the April 1978 coup attempt, and several civilians arrested in January 1981 after bomb explosions in Mogadishu. The latter included three members of parliament and of the central committee of the official Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party (SRSP) - Mohamed Yusuf Weirah, Colonel Abdullahi Warsame Nur, and Mohamed All Warsame-who had been detained without charge or trial. They appeared to have been arrested because they had made public allegations of abuses by the security forces, and they were regarded by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience.
In February, 20 people went on trial before the National Security Court in Hargeisa. They included doctors, teachers, civil servants and businessmen who belonged to an organization engaged in community self-help projects in Hargeisa hospital. They had all been arrested in November 1981. They were convicted on a range of charges under the National Security Law of 1970 including subversion and illegal distribution of leaflets critical of the government. They were sentenced to prison terms ranging from two years to life imprisonment. There is no right of appeal from the National Security Court, although sentences are subject to presidential review, and trial standards fall short of international norms. Amnesty International appealed for their release as prisoners of conscience. The prisoners were initially held in Mandera prison but were moved later in the year, reportedly to Lanta Bur prison.
During demonstrations against the imprisonment of the defendants in Hargeisa hundreds of demonstrators were arrested and held for a short time and at least one was allegedly shot dead by the security forces. In later demonstrations in Hargeisa on 13 April over 200 secondary school students were arrested; some were reportedly held without charge for up to three months. Mass arrests followed similar demonstrations in the nearby townofBurao. In April, 21 members of a committee of clan elders in Hargeisa were reportedly arrested after presenting a list of grievances to the President concerning alleged government discrimination against the northern region. The Attorney General replied in July to Amnesty International's inquiries about the
16
arrests of the elders by stating that when the investigation of their cases was completed they would be brought to court. At least two of them, however, were still detained without charge at the end of 1982.
On 10 June seven prominent members of parliament and of the SRSP central committee were arrested and publicly accused of "undermining the state". However no specific charges were brought against them and they were still detained without trial at the end of 1982. They included the third Vice-President, Ismail AliAbokor, and former government ministers Omar Arleh Ghalib and Mohamed Aden Sheikh. Amnesty International inquired about the reasons for their detention and called for their release if they were not to be tried in accordance with internationally recognized standards. The Attorney General replied in October 1982 that investigations were continuing and that they were in good health and well-treated in prison.
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the release of Yusuf Osman Samantar ("Barda'ad"), a left-wing politician held without charge or trial since 1978, and to investigate the continued imprisonment of several others arrested in previous years. The number of political prisoners held was not known. The government published no information on detentions, and details of National Security Court trials were difficult to obtain.
Most political detainees and convicted political prisoners were held in one of the two modern maximum security prisons at Lanta Bur (near Afgoi) and Labatan Jirow (near Baidowa). Prisoners were denied all contact with relatives or legal representatives. Several reportedly suffered from nervous complaints produced by prolonged solitary confinement, some being held in cells that were permanently lit, others in cells admitting little daylight and with no artificial light. Medical treatment was inadequate. Political prisoners held in Mogadishu central prison and regional prisons were usually allowed visits and correspondence, but there was often serious overcrowding and poor sanitation. Others were held incommunicado for long periods at the National Security Service headquarters, where some prisoners were allegedly beaten and denied medical treatment.
Amnesty International protested to President Siyad Barre about the execution in public at the Police Academy in Mogadishu on 15 December of two people convicted of murder three months earlier. Amnesty International appealed to the President to exercise clemency in all future reviews of death sentences.
77
