Bahrain
Amnesty International was concerned about the imprisonment of five known and 27 possible prisoners of conscience. During 1982 it learned of the release of eight of these, including 'Abbas Hillal {sqq Amnesty International Report 1982). It was concerned about long-term detention without trial of political prisoners, in some cases for over five years; the lack of legal safeguards in political trials before the Supreme Court of Appeal, including one major trial in which 73 people were sentenced to long prison terms; and reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners.
Amnesty International investigated the cases of 16 Bahrainis convicted under Article 159 of the Bahraini Criminal Code of membership of, or forming, an illegal organization. Four were members of the Organization of Islamic Unity and nine were members of the Movement of the Revolutionary Cell. All 13 were arrested in December 1980 and sentenced in April 1981 by the Supreme Court of Appeal to between three and seven years' imprisonment. The three others were members of the Constituent Committee of the Bahraini Workers' Union which had been attempting to gain official recognition (trade unions are banned in Bahrain). They were arrested in December 1979 and sentenced in March and April 1981 by the Supreme Court of Appeal to seven years' imprisonment. These two trials were held in camera.
Amnesty International continued to be concerned about the detention without charge or trial of political prisoners. The State Security Law of 1974 grants the government the right to arrest and imprison for up to three years without charge or trial any person
299
suspected of threatening national security. Under this law a detainee may appeal against imprisonment to the Supreme Court of Appeal after three months and may renew the appeal every six months.
At the year's end Amnesty International was working for the release or fair trial of eight detainees held under this law about whom it had specific information; it believed that the number of such detainees was considerably higher. Amnesty International continued to call for the release of Hassan Bu Allai and fair trial of Abdullah Rashid Mutaiwi'a (see Amnesty International Report 1982). They were arrested in late 1976, as were two others whose cases were taken up in 1982: Jawad Hassan al Ikri, a former member of the National Union of Bahraini Students (an illegal organization); and Ahmad Ibrahim Makki, who was acquitted in 1977 of a reportedly political murder, but detained since then without charge or trial. Other detainees for whom Amnesty International worked had been held for between one and four years. It was not known whether all the detainees had been permitted to appeal against their imprisonment.
Amnesty International was concerned about procedures governing the Supreme Court of Appeal which is empowered, in accordance with Article 195 of the penal code and decree law No. 7 of 1976, to try those charged with offences relating to internal and external security. Such trials may be held in camera, need not be held in normal courtrooms, and there is no right of appeal.
In March and April 1982, 73 people who had been arrested in December 1981 were tried before the Supreme Court of Appeal (see Amnesty International Report 1982). They were charged with forming an illegal organization, the Islamic Front for the Liberation of Bahrain, illegally possessing arms and explosives, planning to overthrow the government and having contact with a foreign power. If convicted, almost all the defendants could face the death penalty. Amnesty International was also concerned about their pre-trial detention and the manner in which the trial was conducted. The defendants were held incommunicado for up to two months until they were first brought before an examining magistrate in January and February 1982. They were permitted no meetings with lawyers until late March at the earliest, and no visits from relatives until their trial. There were reports of ill-treatment and torture, including beatings and mock executions, to extract confessions. The lawyers were given insufficient time to prepare their case, being assigned to the defendants a day or two before the trial was due to start on 13 March. The lawyers were granted an adjournment until 27 March to allow them to receive and study the papers. They were not permitted to meet privately with their clients until the court convened on 27 March. Although it had been officially announced beforehand that the trial would be public, no
300
foreign journalists or international observers (including two Amnesty International delegates who travelled to Bahrain to observe the trial), nor the defendants' families, were allowed to attend. The venue of the trial was kept secret until the morning of the trial, ostensibly on security grounds, and it was held in an ad hoc court-room in the village of Jau, where the defendants were being held.
On 24 March Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of Interior expressing its concern about the trial and urging "that lawyers be given the opportunity to have full and private access to their clients in time to prepare their case; that the defence be allowed to give and call evidence on the defendants' behalf, and that they have the rightto cross-examine the prosecution witnesses; and that the trial be open to the families, the public, the press and international observers."
The lawyers were permitted to meet their clients twice after 27 March. After the first interview the lawyers asked for the defendants to be examined by two independent doctors. The prisoners were examined by doctors working for the Ministry of the Interior; their medical report mentioned no evidence of ill-treatment. It was reported that the defence lawyers were given only limited opportunity to present evidence during the trial, and it was not known whether they were able to cross-examine the prosecution witnesses. The trial continued to be held in camera, the families being admitted to the court only for the verdict on 22 May. The evidence upon which the defendants were convicted was never made public. On 27 April Amnesty International wrote to the Emir of Bahrain, asking him to commute any death sentences that might be passed (the last executions had been in 1977 when three Bahrainis were hanged for murder). In the event, three were sentenced to life imprisonment, 60 to 15 years, and 10 to seven years.
