Zaire
Amnesty International remained concerned about the detention without charge or trial of suspected political opponents of the government, many of whom were believed to be prisoners of conscience. A number of detainees arrested during 1980 and 1981 were released, but new detentions were also reported. Amnesty International was concerned about the forcible conscription into the army of 95 students whom it considered to be prisoners of conscience until their release from the army in November 1982. More than 20 prisoners of conscience were tried and convicted by the State Security Court during 1982. Amnesty International also received detailed allegations of torture, and reports of extrajudicial executions by security forces. It was concerned by the frequent imposition of the death penalty.
Amnesty International obtained information on some 200 named individuals arrested for political reasons during 1982, many of whom were released by the end of the year. However, there were many others about whom Amnesty International received less specific information. It was consequently not possible to estimate the number of political prisoners at any one time. The number of prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty International varied between about 30 at the beginning and end of the year and more than 100 in mid-1982.
In December 1981 President Mobutu Sese Seko had invited Amnesty International to visit Zaire for a second time. The organization
96
sought on several occasions during 1982 to send delegates to continue the discussions with the Zairian Government which had begun in 1981. Amnesty International also attempted to send an observer to a political trial. However, the authorities would not agree to receive Amnesty International's delegates. In October the invitation was withdrawn shortly after President Mobutu claimed in an interview on French television that his was the only government in Africa to have twice invited Amnesty International to its country.
Throughout 1982 Amnesty International was concerned by the incommunicado detention without charge of prisoners suspected of criticizing the government or of maintaining links with illegal political parties. No measures appear to have been taken by the authorities to limit the security services' powers of arrest and long-term detention. Although they informed Amnesty International in May that the cases of untried detainees named in Amnesty International's appeals were being communicated to the judicial authorities to expedite proceedings, many detainees continued to be held for months without any reference to the courts.
The military security service, as well as its civilian counterpart, continued to arrest and detain civilians suspected of opposing the government. For example, two civilians who returned to Zaire from Brazzaville, in neighbouring People's Republic of Congo - Muteba Tshitenge and Wamba-dia-Wamba - were known to have been detained by the military security service in Kinshasa.
The civilian Centre national de recherches et d'investigations (CNRI), National Research and Investigation Centre, was responsible for the detention of suspected opponents of the government throughout the country, notably in Kinshasa, Bukavu and Lubumbashi. Many were held for between one and six months and then released. Detainees held by the CNRI in Bukavu in early 1982, for example, included a doctor accused of writing a pamphlet criticizing a new Zairian nationality law, a student suspected of links with an opposition group and a man suspected of helping a former official to flee from the country. All were released in May 1982. In Bukavu in August 1982 students and academics were arrested, accused of links with government opponents outside Zaire. Some were still held uncharged at the end of 1982.
Amnesty International was concerned about the detention without trial of refugees living in Zaire and about the arrest and detention of Zairian citizens forcibly returned to Zaire from other countries. At the beginning of the year several Angolan refugees were held by the CNRI in Kinshasa apparently because they had refused to join the Comité militaire de résistance angolaise (COMIRA), Angolan Resistance Military Committee, a new organization formed to oppose
97
the government in neighbouring Angola. In January 1982 the CNRJ detained Luis Ranque Franque, a leader of the Frente de Libertaçao do Enclave de Cabinda (FLEC), Cabinda Enclave Liberation Front, upon his arrival in Zaire after being deported from Gabon. He was held without charge for more than six months and eventually transferred to hospital.
In November 1982 Amnesty International learned of the forcible repatriation from the Congo to Zaire of a Zairian refugee. Eke Akanga N'Koy. A former soldier who had been detained in Zaire during 1981, he had escaped and left the country. He was detained in the Congo between July and September 1982 and then rearrested and forcibly returned to Kinshasa in November 1982. In July 1982 two of his relatives had been arrested in Kinshasa after visiting him in the Congo. They were reported to have been severely ill-treated by the CNRI. At the end of 1982 he escaped from custody and returned to the Congo.
Amnesty International was also concerned about the forcible conscription of 95 students into the army for 10 months during 1982. The students came from Kinshasa University and from two other institutes of higher education in Kinshasa where students staged a strike for higher grants at the end of January 1982. The three institutes were closed by the government at the beginning of February 1982 and it was announced that 84 students accused of organizing the strike and described as "subversives" were being conscripted into the army for two years. They included the entire leadership of the university's branch of the ruling party's youth wing and other students who appear to have been arrested arbitrarily.
Within a few days most of the students were sent to a special military training camp at Kota-KoU, in Equateur region. However, 15 students were questioned by the CNRI and held at the CNRI detention centre for more than a month. In March 1982 they and 11 more students who had been arrested were sent to Kota-Koli. They were reported to be held in harsh conditions at Kota-Koli camp and not allowed to leave the camp or to communicate freely with their relatives. Amnesty International adopted as prisoners of conscience all 95 students. In November the authorities announced that all 95 were being released from their military obligations and allowed to return to Kinshasa to continue their studies.
In June 18 people adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience appeared before the State Security Court in Kinshasa accused of supporting a new political party, the Union pour la démocratie et le progrès social (UDPS), Union for Democracy and Social Progress. In ail, 45 people had been arrested either in Kinshasa or in Shaba province in March and April 1982 in connection with this
98
case. However, 26 of these detainees were released uncharged in June 1982 after preliminary examination of their cases by the State Security Court.
Twelve of the trial defendants were former People's Commissioners (elected members of the National Assembly) who had been arrested in January 1981 after signing an "open letter" criticizing President Mobutu. They were later restricted to isolated villages until December 1981, as was Kibassa Maliba, a former government minister. All 13 were released in December 1981. They then applied for permission to form a new party, the UDPS. In March 1982 some of them were arrested during a visit to Shaba region, where more than 30 other people were also arrested and accused of helping to form an illegal political party. Under Zaire's one-party constitution the establishment or membership of any other political party is a criminal offence.
Nineteen people were eventually referred to the State Security Court for trial. At the first hearings the principal defendants declared that they did not have the defence lawyers of their choice and the trial was adjourned. On 28 June 1982 it began again. One of the People's Commissioners did not respond to his summons and the 18 other defendants refused to enter the court on the grounds that it had been packed with government supporters. The trial began in their absence but five of the defendants eventually entered the court.
The trial lasted half a day and the verdict was announced four days later. Most of the defendants were convicted under Article 196 of the criminal code, which makes it an offence to conspire to destroy or change the constitutional form of government. Kibassa Maliba and the 12 former People's Commissioners, including one tried in absentia, were sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment, the maximum penalty under Article 196. Five of the six others were convicted: two received suspended sentences and three sentences of between'one and five years' imprisonment. One defendant was acquitted after his lawyers apologized to the court for his actions. Twelve of the defendants lodged appeals with the Supreme Court, but these were turned down on the grounds that the correct court fees had not been paid. Amnesty International believed that all those convicted were prisoners of conscience and appealed for their release.
Four other people were reported to have been convicted by the State Security Court; one in April on charges of bringing subversive documents into the country and three for belonging to an illegal political party. All four were adopted as prisoners of conscience. Amnesty International also continued to press for the release of 10 other adopted prisoners of conscience convicted at trials in March 1978 and January and November 1980.
Amnesty International received reports that torture was used
99
during 1982 at detention centres in Bukavu, Kinshasa and Lubum-bashi. Ill-treatment was said to be particularly severe at detention centres administered by the military security service: women alleged that they had been raped by soldiers and male prisoners were said to have been severely beaten. Detainees held by the CNRI were also reported to have been tortured. In January 1982 a deaf and dumb woman is reported to have been thrown down stairs at the CNRI headquarters in Kinshasa in an attempt to make her speak and in February 1982 a student leader held there was subjected to electric shocks. Several detainees arrested in Kinshasa in June and July 1982 by the CNRI were reported to have been so badly treated that they had to be transferred to hospital.
Despite Amnesty International's appeals to the authorities to prevent torture and in particular to limit the use of incommunicado detention, no known attempts were made to prevent the systematic ill-treatment of political detainees, nor were cases of ill-treatment reported to court authorities properly investigated.
During the first few months of 1982 Amnesty International received a series of reports from the Lubumbashi area alleging that a special unit attached to the military security service had killed suspected political opponents. Although few details were available, considerable circumstantial evidence was presented that civilians arrested in Lubumbashi had been taken out of the town after a short period of imprisonment and then deliberately killed. They were said to include suspected supporters of illegal political groups. Reports of similar killings had been received before from Lubumbashi, particularly concerning the periods from 1966 to 1971 and 1977 to 1979. The government made no response to inquiries about the killings.
Amnesty International remained concerned by the frequency with which the death penalty was imposed by the courts. No political prisoners were reported to have been condemned to death. Mandatory death sentences on prisoners convicted of murder were imposed by civilian courts throughout the country. In January eight people were sentenced to death by a military court at Kikwit, in Bandundu region, after being convicted of armed robbery. Three of the defendants were civilians who were tried by a military court because they were accused of being in league with five soldiers.
In April a non-commissioned officer was sentenced to death by a military court in Kinshasa only three days after he had allegedly killed one student and wounded another in an incident which provoked considerable publicity. Four months later his sentence was commuted upon appeal and reduced to two years' imprisonment.
It is not known how many death sentences were carried out.
