Sudan
Amnesty International's main concerns
feu ^ _^^	imprisonment of prisoners of
conscience, the detention of political opponents without trial or their imprisonment after unfair trial, and short-term political arrests carried out on a large scale. Many of the 190 prisoners on whose behalf Amnesty International was working in 1982 had been adopted as prisoners of conscience or taken up as investigation cases in the previous three years. The majority were detained indefinitely without charge or trial under the State Security Law. Most were arrested because they were alleged members of opposition political groupings banned by the government - the only legal political party was the official Sudanese Socialist Union (SSU). A substantial proportion of these prisoners were believed to have been released during 1982. Amnesty International's information on detentions and releases of prisoners was often incomplete, since no official details on prisoners were published, and the authorities often failed to reply to Amnesty International's inquiries.
Sudan signed the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights on 3 September 1982.
Many arrests took place in 1982 of political critics, demonstrators, trade unionists, and members of banned opposition organizations such as the Sudan Communist Party, Arab Ba'athist Socialist Party and a section of the Democratic Unionist Party. Several hundred people were reportedly arrested on various occasions, held without legal formalities for a few days or weeks, and then released. This happened to three women - widows of communist leaders executed in 1971 - who participated in a women's demonstration in Khartoum in late January, in protest at the death of a student shot by the security forces during violent demonstrations earlier in the month. Amnesty International issued urgent appeals for their release; Fatima Ahmed Ibrahim was arrested while ill in bed and not allowed to take her medication for diabetes with her to prison. They were released a few weeks later. Further arrests took place after the funeral in Khartoum of the Democratic Unionist Party leader Sharif al-Hindi in January; during the period preceding the annual commemoration of the May 1969 revolution; during trade union leadership elections in July; and after anti-government demonstrations by students and others in various parts of the country towards the end of 1982.
Some of those arrested were subsequently detained for an indefinite
83
period under the State Security Law. Two former prisoners of conscience - Mahgoub Sharif, a poet, and Saudi Daraj, a trade unionist - were detained in May and December respectively. Detainees were not provided with any formal notification of detention or detailed explanation for their detention; their numbers and names were not published by the government; and there was no independent review of their detention. Their number was believed to be over 200 at the end of 1982. Political detainees were normally held in Kober prison in Khartoum, but in 1982 several were transferred to regional prisons where conditions were reportedly poor. Some prisoners were held for several months at the State Security Service headquarters in Khartoum. Amnesty International expressed its concern to the authorities about allegations that Gasim Abbas Mustafa had been ill-treated while held in the State Security Service headquarters in Khartoum in July, but received no reply.
Several prominent politicians were arrested in the south between June and December. The arrests took place amid increasing political tension in the south and a deteriorating security situation in Upper Nile Province in particular, involving armed gangs alleged to be in some cases politically motivated. Former regional minister Brigadier Samuel Abu-John and former regional assembly Speaker Angela Beda were arrested in July and still detained without charge at the end of 1982. Several other former regional ministers, including Ambrose Riny and Gama Hassan, were arrested in December together with over 30 senior civil servants, SSU party officials, teachers and students. Amnesty International was investigating their legal status and grounds for detention. They were reportedly held for criticizing the central government's proposal to divide the south into three separately administered regions.
In October El-Tigani el-Tayeeb Babiker, a former member of the central committee of the Communist Party, who had been arrested in 1980 and initially charged with treason, was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment by a state security court on charges which included "formation of an organization with intent to disintegrate national unity". His co-defendant, Abdu Hashim Hamdallah, received a two-year sentence for belonging to the Communist Party. Amnesty International had earlier taken up their cases for investigation as possible prisoners of conscience. The sentences of state security courts, which are composed mainly of officers of the police and security forces, are reviewed by the President of the Republic for confirmation or revision before being announced. Defendants have the right to legal representation, but no right of appeal. These and other aspects caused doubts about whether defendants received fair trials in these courts.
84
Amnesty International was concerned about the detention without trial of four people forcibly returned to Sudan after living in exile abroad. David Dak Gash, a former diplomat, was reported to have been arrested in Kenya on 14 March, although the Kenyan pohce denied arresting or holding him. He and two other southern Sudanese exiles who also "disappeared" in Nairobi were subsequently discovered to be detained in Kober prison in Khartoum. Ali Ibrahim, a doctor and exile member of the banned Democratic Unionist Party, was arrested in Egypt on 20 November, deported to Sudan despite Amnesty International's appeals to the Egyptian authorities, and arrested on arrival.
Amnesty International continued to press for the release of over 150 adopted prisoners of conscience. Most were held in Kober prison, in Khartoum, but some were transferred to Port Sudan prison in April. Among these were Mohamed Murad, a history lecturer, Sidgi Kaballo, a graduate student, Youssif Hussein, a Communist Party leader, and Mokhtar Abdullah, a trade unionist.
Those released during 1982 included several detained trade unionists; at least five members of the Arab Ba'athist Socialist Party detained in March 1979; three members of a section of the Umma Party who had been accused of a coup conspiracy in May 1980 but were never charged; six or more untried detainees belonging to a section of the Democratic Unionist Party opposing the government; and at least 60 alleged communists. Four members of the southern regional parUament, arrested in December 1981 for their involvement in a new unofficial "Council for the Unity of the Southern Sudan", were released in February. A fifth, Samuel Am Bol, former president of the High Executive Council for the South, was freed in October without having been charged or tried.
Amnesty International appealed to President Numeiri to commute the death sentence imposed for murder on retired Brigadier General Awadal Karim Bakkar in May. No reply was received and he was executed in November. The number of those condemned to death or executed in 1982 was not known.
85
