Rwanda
Amnesty International adopted as prisoners of conscience 19 people convicted in November I98i of offences against the security of the state and was concerned by the long-term incommunicado detention without trial of other political prisoners arrested during 1981. The organization also received disturbing reports of torture and harsh conditions in prisons in the capital, Kigali, and at Ruhengeri, and was concerned by the execution in September 1982 of 43 prisoners, who had been convicted of non-political offences.
In November 1981 the State Security Court convicted 26 defendants of security offences. Amnesty International adopted 19 of them as prisoners of conscience. Most had been convicted under Article 166 of the criminal code on charges of distributing documents which advocated the overthrow of the government. However, the documents were "open letters" distributed in Kigali, in March 1980. They criticized certain of President Juvenal Habyarimana's poHcies but did not advocate the overthrow of the government.
The seven others convicted in November 1981 included Alphonse-Marie Kagenza and Théoneste Lizinde, who had been convicted of trying to kill the Head of State and sentenced to death. Their sentences were commuted in July 1982 by President Habyarimana to life imprisonment. Two other defendants were given short sentences and released during 1982. The remaining three were convicted of various offences against the security of the state and Amnesty International continued to investigate their cases during 1982.
Six of the 26 defendants convicted in November 1981 subsequently appealed unsuccessfully to the Cour de cassation, appeal court, to annul their convictions. In August the court rejected all the appeals, mostly on technical grounds. For example, an appeal by Donat Murego, a former judge, on I December 1981 was rejected because it was not received until 30 December 1981, beyond the maximum stipulated period. In his appeal Donat Murego claimed that his letters had been deliberately delayed.
71
Four people arrested in late 1981 and reportedly accused of being involved with Théoneste Lizinde remained in detention without trial throughout 1982. They included Floduard Gasamunyiga, a former Director of State Investments at the Ministry of Finance, and Muvun-anyambo, a former soldier who had been forcibly repatriated to Rwanda by Ugandan soldiers after he had sought refuge in Uganda. All four were held in Ruhengeri prison.
In April the authorities expelled two Ugandans who had sought asylum in Rwanda. Both had been unsuccessful candidates in the December 1980 parliamentary elections in Uganda. One had been detained in Rwanda in December 1980 and the other in August 1981 on the orders of the security service, the Service central de renseignements, Central Information Service. No charges were brought against them and they were apparently told that they might be forcibly repatriated to Uganda. They were eventually expelled and sought asylum in Europe. A number of other Ugandan asylum-seekers were also reported to be held in Kigali prison in early 1982, and in June 1982 six refugees from Burundi were reportedly arrested at Bugarama: they included the head of Bugarama refugee camp, André Mugatiriza.
In November 1982 Rwanda's representative at the United Nations General Assembly made a unilateral declaration against torture in support of the UN Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. However, during 1982 Amnesty International received a number of reports of prisoners held by the Service central de renseignements being tortured at its headquarters in Kigali and at the special section for political prisoners at Ruhengeri prison. Some of this information related to defendants convicted in November 1981, several of whom were reportedly tortured in pre-trial detention. They were said to have been tortured to obtain confessions after judicial inquiries had established that some of the defendants had no case to answer. The forms of torture are reported to have included severe and prolonged beatings and electric shocks. Both before and after their conviction, many of the defendants were imprisoned in cells in total darkness {cachots noirs) in the special section for political prisoners at Ruhengeri prison. Donat Murego, for example, was reported to have spent almost a year in such a cell. Untried detainees were also said to be held in such cells.
In early 1982 some of the 26 prisoners convicted in November 1981 were transferred from Ruhengeri to prisons in Kigali and Gitarama. However, 16 of them remained at Ruhengeri, most of them in the special section, where they were held incommunicado. In addition, they were not given any medical assistance and several are reported to have become seriously ill. Stanislas Biseruka, who was
72
forcibly abducted by members of the Rwandese security forces from Kampala in neighbouring Uganda in September 1981, is reported to have been tortured when he was brought back to Rwanda; he received medical treatment after he appeared in court, but after his conviction was reported to have received no further treatment for his wounds.
In June 1982 Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to allow the prisoners at Ruhengeri medical attention. The Minister of Health is reported to have subsequently visited the prison to inspect conditions there. However, at the end of the year conditions remained extremely harsh. Several prisoners were reported to have stomach illnesses and to be receiving no medical attention and one, a woman, was reported to be seriously ill after being held continuously in a cachot noir.
On 15 September 1982, 43 prisoners who had been sentenced to death for common-law crimes were executed by firing-squads at prisons in Kigali and Butare. In a speech in July 1982 President Habyarimana had indicated that although he was commuting the death sentences imposed in November 1981 on two political prisoners he was not going to grant presidential clemency to other prisoners. In March 1982 a representative of the Rwanda Government told the Human Rights Committee set up under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights that since 1974 all death sentences had been commuted to life imprisonment. Following the executions Amnesty International appealed to President Habyarimana to prevent any further death sentences being carried out.
