Libya
Amnesty Intemational was conccrned about renewed official calls for the "physical liquidation of enemies of the revolution". Itwas also concerned about the continuing imprisonment of at least 80 prisoners of conscience under legislation for "the protection of the revolution" which explicitly restricts the non-violent exercise of fundamental human rights: hundreds of arbitrary arrests: prolonged pretrial detention: summary procedures of revolutionary courts with no right of appeal; allegations of routine torture by the intelligence services and revolutionary committees during interrogation; and three deaths in custody.
On 7 October 1982 Tripoli radio broadcast a speech by Colonel Gaddafi at a rally in Jabal Al-Akhdar during which he warned Libyans abroad, as he had in 1980. to return home or face liquidation by the masses. He slated that "from now on. this cannot be restricted to the revolutionary committees alone .. . Every Libyan who travels abroad... if he is a Libyan loyal to Libyan soil, wants Libya to be free ... He is then responsible for the elimination of its enemies wherever they are."
319
In official pronouncements on 10 October, 20 and 25 December 1982 Colonel Gaddafi renewed his call for the continuation of the campaign to eliminate his opponents. In a live radio and television broadcast on 20 December he said "the revolution has destroyed those inside the country, and now it must pursue the rest abroad". Since a declaration in February 1980 which called for "the liquidation of enemies of the revolution abroad" and of "counter-revolutionary elements within Libya", over 15 Libyans living abroad have been the victims of assassination attempts. {Sqq Amnesty Intemational Report 1980. 1981. 1982.)
Amnesty Intemational was not in a position to estimate the total number of political prisoners held. Access to the country and travel by Libyans abroad remained strictly controlled and no reliable statistics were published on political arrests or prisoners. Nor did the Libyan authorities respond to Amnesty International's inquiries.
Amnesty Intemational remained concerned about the continued imprisonment of 80 known prisoners of conscience. Many were serving life sentences in Tripoli and were said to be suffering from ill-health and severe depression. (See Amnesty Intemational Report 1980, 1981, 1982.)
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about reports that several hundred students had been arbitrarily arrested in a number of incidents during the year, beginning in April. That month 100 students from Gar Yunis University in Benghazi were reportedly arrested for their alleged "lack of support for the revolution". Several were believed to have been released shortly thereafter but the whereabouts of the others remained unknown. Amnesty Intemational was not able to verify these reports.
Between June and August fresh arrests were reported, particularly of students including 10 women from Tripoli and Benghazi Universities, for writing " anti-revolutionary" slogans on the walls of the universities. A revolutionary court composed of members of revolutionary committees rather than of the judiciary was said to have been set up to try these prisoners. However, no details of the exact charges against them or their places of detention were available. Amnesty Intemational was seeking further information on these events at the end of 1982.
Amnesty Intemational was concerned about the continued detention of several alleged former members of the pro-Iraqi wing of the Ba'ath Party, including students, lawyers, teachers and writers, who were arrested in Febmary and March 1980 (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1981). They were tried before a criminal court on charges of membership of an illegal organization and were reportedly acquitted after the court heard evidence that the defendants' statements had been extracted under torture. However, an administrative decree overmled
320
the verdict and they remained in prison, reportedly in Tripoli Central Prison. On 18 August Amnesty Intemational expressed its concem to the authorities that the defendants had been denied a fair trial, that the defendants had been tortured before their trial, and that the court verdict ordering their acquittal and release had been overruled by an administrative decree.
In December 1982 Amnesty Intemational wrote to the Libyan authorities about the continued detention of 13 students from Benghazi High School who were reportedly arrested in December 1981 following rumours of a coup attempt They were charged with subversive activities and tried before the criminal court in Benghazi. In May 1982 the court ordered their release for lack of evidence against them. Nine days later, however, they were rearrested. Their exact whereabouts as 1982 ended were unknown.
Amnesty Intemational was following the case of Robert Maxwell, a 34-year-old British engineer, who was arrested in December 1980 and detained for two years without trial. He was tried in December 1982 and sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment by the permanent revolutionary court set up in Febmary 1980 to try people charged with economic crimes. The charges brought against him included "leaking secrets about his work in return for bribes" and "submitting false information which misled the people's administration". Amnesty International was unable to say whether or not he was a prisoner of conscience. However, it was concerned that the procedures of the revolutionary court fell short of internationally recognized standards for a fair trial: as far as is known, the tribunal is composed of members of the revolutionary committees rather than of the judiciary, trials are summary, defendants are not allowed to choose their defence lawyers and there is no possibility of appeal.
During 1982 allegations of torture and ill-treatment were more frequent and more consistent than in previous years. They appeared to indicate that during interrogation torture of political detainees by the intelligence services and revolutionary committees was routine and systematic. The basement of the Military Intelligence Headquarters in Tripoli, in what was formerly the Ministry of Planning building, was mentioned in most reports as the main torture centre. Among the methods most commonly alleged were beating, kicking, whipping with cables while chained to the wall, beating on the soles of the feet ifalaqa), electric shocks, threats of execution and threats of sexual abuse.
Amnesty Intemational received the names of three students who were said to have died under torture in 1982. Saleh A1 Kounayti from Misratah, Ahmed Ismael Maklouf and Naji Bahouia from Benghazi, arrested in April 1982 following student demonstrations at Benghazi
321
University, had allegedly died in the custody of the security services. Their bodies were returned to their families in sealed coffins at the end of July. In a letter to Colonel Mu'ammar Gaddafi on 6 October Amnesty International requested an immediate inquiry into these allegations,
Amnesty International was concerned about reports that two Libyan citizens residing in the Federal Republic of Germany were tortured by members of the revolutionary committee at the residence of the Secretary-General of the Libyan People's Bureau in Bonn. On 13 November 1982 Elhadi Elghariani and Ahmed Shaladi went to the Secretary-General's residence to attend a meeting of the official Libyan Students' Organization. They were allegedly held inside the Secretary-General's residence for 24 hours and released only after they had submitted written and recorded confessions about their political activities. Their confessions were said to have been extracted under torture, including beating, kicking, threats of execution and verbal humiliation. Amnesty International was seeking to verify these reports.
Libya retains the death penalty for a number of offences, many of a political nature. Amnesty International was not able to say whether or not any prisoners were executed during 1982.
