Comoros
Two prisoners of conscience and at least 18 other prisoners whose cases were being investigated by Amnesty International were released during 1982 after two series of trials of political opponents of the government Amnesty International was concerned that the political trials which took place in January and May 1982 did not conform to internationally recognized standards. At the end of the year Amnesty International was still investigating the case of one prisoner who was convicted in January 1982.
It was difficult to obtain details about the trials in January and May 1982. The defendants in January included Salim Himidi, Minister of the Interior under the former government of Ali Soilih which was overthrown in 1978. Amnesty International adopted him as a prisoner of conscience. He was tried with a number of other former officials and soldiers detained since May 1978 including eight whose cases Amnesty International had taken up for investigation. At least three of this group were tried by the Cour spéciale de justice, Special Court of Justice, on charges of embezzlement, despite the fact that the court exists to deal with political offences. Amnesty International was concerned that these detainees were charged principally because of their support for the previous government. One of the three prisoners tried by the Special Court of Justice was acquitted, and the other two convicted, but all three were immediately released. It was not clear whether Salim Himidi and the remaining defendants were tried by the Special Court of Justice or by the Cour de sûreté de l'Etat, State Security Court, which was sitting at the same time. Nor could Amnesty International ascertain the number of defendants or details of the charges against individuals. However, all those tried in January 1982 were known to have been released after the trials.
Another political trial took place in January 1982 before the Moroni Criminal Court. Eight people who had been arrested in February 1981, and whose cases were being investigated by Amnesty International, were convicted of plotting against the government. They were given sentences of up to two and a half years, but all but one were released during 1982. It was not known why political cases were tried before the Criminal Court rather than before one of the two courts created for political offences.
The State Security Court was again assembled in May to hear the case of Mouzaoir Abdallah, a former Minister of Foreign Affairs
28
arrested in November 1981 on account of his contacts with opposition groups. He was convicted on 18 May of having acted "in a manner liable to disturb public order and to incite hatred of the government". Amnesty International considered him to be a prisoner of conscience. Mouzaoir Abdallah was sentenced to two years' imprisonment but was released by presidential order on 28 May. Some of his supporters were released at about the same time, including four on the same day. It was not known whether they had been tried.
Amnesty International was concerned that the Special Court of Justice and the State Security Court did not conform to internationally recognized standards. It was particularly concerned that defendants had no guarantee of legal representation and no right of appeal. These concerns had been communicated to the authorities in a memorandum following an Amnesty International mission to the Comoros in 1981.
