Federal Republic of Germany
Amnesty Intemational's concerns were the imprisonment of conscientious objectors to military service, the prosecution of people in violation of their right to freedom of expression and continued reports that some people suspected or convicted of politically motivated crimes were held in prolonged isolation.
Amnesty Intemational appealed on behalf of several people convicted for their refusal on conscientious grounds to perform military service. Thomas Hansen, whose rejected application for conscientious objector status was based on moral and political considerations, had been convicted by the Schöffengericht (lay assessors' court) of Oldenburg on 7 October 1981 for his refusal to obey and sentenced to six months' imprisonment (see Amnesty Intemational Report 1982). An appeal against the sentence was lodged with the Landgericht (regional court) of Oldenburg. Amnesty International
252
appealed to the authorities on 22 February, stating that it beheved Thomas Hansen to be a genuine conscientious objector. On 23 Marcli the court rejected his appeal and increased the sentence to 10 months. The chairman of the criminal court stated that the sentence should be regarded as a "deterrent" to those who "question and therefore endanger the defence readiness of the Federal Republic of Germany". Thomas Hansen then appealed to the Oberlandesgericht (state supreme court) of Oldenburg. On 6 July Amnesty International again appealed to the authorities on his behalf. On 23 August the court rejected his appeal. At the end of 1982 Thomas Hansen was still at liberty awaiting the outcome of a hearing concerning a constitutional aspect of his case.
Amnesty International also intervened on behalf of Jürgen List, sentenced to six months' imprisonment for his conscientious objection to military service and imprisoned from 20 October to 30 December. Bernard Willeke, another conscientious objector (see/Imwejfj/rtier-national Report 1982), was convicted at his trial on 29 March 1982 and fined. The Public Prosecutor's Office appealed against the court's decision, but the appeal had not been heard by the end of 1982.
Amnesty International continued to follow the cases of a number of people prosecuted for expressing opinions which the authorities regarded as constituting "support for a criminal association" in the sense of Article 129a of the criminal code. {Sqq Amnesty International Report 1982.) Amnesty International believed that these prosecutions arose out of an excessively wide interpretation of the law, which might result in the violation of the defendant's right to freedom of expression. In some of the cases followed by Amnesty International the charges were dropped, in others the defendants were convicted and fined; the rest were still outstanding at the end of 1982.
The organization continued to receive complaints that prisoners of the Red Army Fraction and 2 June Movement were being held in prolonged isolation, either alone or in small groups. The conditions under which such prisoners are kept have been of concern to Amnesty International as a result of its finding that prolonged periods of isolation (whether in solitary confinement or small groups) had seriously afiected prisoners' health. (See Amnesty International Reports 1980, 1981 and 1982.)
On 26 June Sieglinde Hofmann and Ingrid Barabass went on hunger-strike, complaining they were being held in isolation. They were supported by a number of other prisoners in Frankfurt-Preungesheim prison. On 14 July Amnesty International appealed to the Minister of Justice for Hesse, Dr Herbert Gunther, to prevent loss of life or danger to the health of the hunger-striking prisoners. Amnesty International also informed the Federal Minister of Justice, Dr Jürgen
253
Schmude, of its concern. Amnesty International noted reports that the prisoners had been held in isolation and again called attention to its concerns regarding confinement of prisoners in conditions of isolation.
The Ministry of Justice for Hesse replied on 20 August 1982 that the prisoners, who had ended their strike on 2 August, had on many occasions been allowed to associate with other prisoners, but that they had not taken advantage of these opportunities.
