Greece
Amnesty International's main concern was the continued imprisonment of Jehovah's Witnesses for refusing on conscientious grounds to perform military service. The organization was also concerned by several allegations of torture of people charged with criminal offences.
In recent years Jehovah's Witnesses have not usually been made to serve more than one term of imprisonment for their refusal to perform military service. However, on 29 March, Law 1240/82, which provides for the early release of certain categories of prisoners, came into effect. Some Jehovah's Witnesses were released as a result, but most of these were almost immediately called up again for military service and rearrested when they refused. By the end of 1982 Amnesty International had received information about two such prisoners. John Parayios was sentenced to a further six months" imprisonment and a fine and was released on 11 November. Konstantinos Theodorakis was also imprisoned for a further six months, but after his release on 13 November he was again called up and when he again refused was reimprisoned. His trial was due to take place on 1 February 1983.
Jehovah's Witnesses are usually sentenced to between four and five years' imprisonment, but during 1982 Amnesty International learned of several sentences of up to 12 years being passed. These were, however, reduced to the usual length on appeal. At the end of 1982 Amnesty International was working for the release of 16 conscientious objectors but was informed that the number of imprisoned conscientious objectors at any time was usually well above 100.
The Greek daily newspaper ^v^Ai reported on 10 March 1982 that Yannis Manolakos, a prisoner in Patras prison, was suing the Patras Criminal Prosecutor. On 22 February he and three others-Dimitrios Papathanasiou, Vasilis Gogos andDimitrios Trachanas-were allegedly beaten and tortured in the head warder's office in order to make them confess and Dimitrios Trachanas was taken to hospital as a result. Amnesty International sent a letter of inquiry concerning the incident to the Minister of Justice, Efstathios Alexandris, on 26 March. A reply dated 24 June was received stating that "after conclusion of the preliminary investigation, the criminal file assembled on the four police employees said to be responsible has been sent to the 3rd Prosecutor of Patras with instructions to conduct the main investigation of the above police employees ... We will let you know
259
the result of the above case immediately after the Criminal Court has issued its verdict." Amnesty International had not received any further information by the end of 1982.
Several further allegations of torture in police stations and prisons were received by Amnesty International from foreigners who had served sentences on criminal charges in Greek prisons. The allegations referred to beatings, falaka (beating on the soles of the feet) and electric shocks.
