Thailand
Amnesty International was concerned about the use of detention without trial for political offences and by the imposition of the death penalty. Amnesty International had no adopted prisoners of conscience in Thailand in 1982. Several thousand former members and guerrillas of the Communist Party of Thailand surrendered to the authorities. In exchange for their surrender and renunciation of violence the Thai authorities undertook to reintegrate the former guerrillas and their sympathizers into Thai society. To Amnesty International's knowledge those surrendering were not detained or imprisoned following their surrender.
However, Amnesty International remained concerned that prisoners could be detained without trial under Section 18 of the Anti-Communist Activities Act (ACAA) of 1979 which allows people accused of communist activities to be detained without trial for up to 480 days. The number of people held under this act, although believed to be small, was not divulged by the government Detainees have in the past been denied access to lawyers and relatives for long periods and have been held incommunicado. In December 1982 Amnesty International wrote to Prime Minister General Prem Tinsulanond noting recent indications that the government was considering the repeal or amendment of the ACAA in view of the improved security position in the country and urged an early review of the act
In Amnesty International Report 7952 Amnesty International noted the reported operation of "death squads" in Thailand. In its December letter to General Prem, Amnesty International welcomed the statement reported in the Bangkok Post of 10 December by Interior Minister General Sitthi Chirarot that these "death squads" were not operating with official sanction and that the government was continuing its investigation into the cases of 43 people who had died in violent circumstances or "disappeared" since the beginning of 1981. Amnesty International urged General Prem to establish an independent review body to examine the allegations of killings and "disappearances" presented to the government by civil rights groups on 9 December. Amnesty International also raised two cases: Kamol Pientamdee, allegedly a member of the Communist Party, was reportedly arrested and taken to Chipravat Army Camp in Nakhon Sawan on 25 December 1980; and Darani Phanbusayakul, a law student, was reportedly arrested and taken to the interrogation centre of the Internal Security Operation Command (ISOC) in Bangkok on 11
238
May 1981. Amnesty International asked the government to give details of their whereabouts and of any charges against them.
Amnesty International remained concerned about the imposition of the death penalty in Thailand. Death sentences were frequently passed for robbery and murder. In November the government announced that there were 16 people awaiting execution and a further 38 in the process of appealing against death sentences. A defendant who is sentenced to death may appeal to the Court of Appeal, and thereafter to the Supreme Court. Finally, a defendant can seek clemency from the King. In 1981,175 people were sentenced to death and in the firet six months of 1982, 33 people received the death sentence. The majority had their sentences commuted, but some were executed. Figures for the number of executions were not released.
