Syria
The main concerns of Amnesty International were the imprisonment of over 200 prisoners of conscience; wide powers of arrest and detention used to detain hundreds of political prisoners; long-term detention without trial, in some cases for over 12 years; summary procedures and the lack of basic legal safeguards in trials by military and state security courts; the routine use of torture by the security forces; "disappearances"; extrajudicial executions including the reported kiUing of several thousand people in the town of Hama; and the death penalty. Many of these human rights violations took place under provisions of the state of emergency, in force since 1963.
During 1982 Amnesty International worked for the release of 255 adopted prisoners of conscience and investigated the cases of 77 possible prisoners of conscience. They included officials of previous governments, lawyers, and members of banned political parties.
Amnesty International adopted as prisoners of conscience 149 members of the illegal Communist Party Political Bureau (CPPB). They were arrested at various times after the detention in October 1980 of a number of the CPPB's Executive Committee {see Amnesty International Report 1982). In January 1982 Amnesty International appealed urgently for the release of Riad al-Turk, First Secretary of the CPPB and an adopted prisoner of conscience. The organization had received reports that he had been moved to the intensive care unit of al-Mezze military prison, unconscious and suffering from severe inflammation of the kidneys and renal failure. He had been held incommunicado since October 1980. Reports indicated that he had been tortured. Amnesty International learned through unofficial sources that his wife, 'Asmah al-Feisal, had been released. She had been arrested and held hostage while the security forces searched for and eventually arrested her husband. Other party members released included Liwa' al-Ashkar and journalist Michel Kilo.
In June 1982 Amnesty International received the names of 54 members of the Party for Communist Action (PCA) arrested and detained at various times since early 1980. (In 1979 Amnesty International had investigated as possible prisoners of conscience over 60 PCA members; most were released in 1980, but a number were later rearrested.) After their arrest, 50 of the 54 detainees were held incommunicado without charge or trial and were adopted as prisoners of conscience. They included journalists, teachers and
329
students as well as the writer Wa'il S awwah. The remaining four were tried by state security courts but requests by Amnesty International for information on the charges against them and the sentences passed were not answered. Their cases were taken up for investigation.
Amnesty International continued to seek the release of 17 people who had served in or were connected with the previous government, including Nur al-Din al-Atassi, former President of the Republic, and Muhammad Rabah al-Tawil, a former Minister of the Interior. They were arrested after the coup in November 1970 which brought President Assad to power and in 1982 were in their 13th year of detention without trial in a special wing of al-Mezze military prison, Damascus.
Also adopted as prisoners of conscience were 20 Syrian lawyers detained without charge or trial since April and May 1980 following the dissolution of the General Congress of the Syrian Bar Association and its regional councils {see Amnesty International Report 1982). In December 1982 international appeals were sent on behalf of one of this group, Maitre Muwaffaq al-Din al-Kozbari, who had been moved from al-Qala' a prison, Damascus, to a nearby hospital suffering from kidney stones, malfunction of the gall bladder and serious loss of weight. Maitre Muwaffaq al-Din al-Kozbari was President of the Prisoners' C are Association and First Secretary of the Syrian League for the Defence of Human Rights.
Amnesty International continued to work on behalf of members of the Kurdish Democratic Party detained without trial for more than nine years. Since their arrest in 1973 for protesting in a memorandum to President Assad against the planned displacement of Syrian Kurds from their homes in northern Syria, they had been separated and transferred at different times to various prisons in Damascus and Aleppo. Repeated Amnesty International appeals to the government for their release as prisoners of conscience and requests for information on their health and whereabouts remained unanswered.
Among the 77 cases being investigated by Amnesty International were those of 38 youths detained on 15 March 1980 in the town of Deir al-Zor following an anti-government demonstration. Three months after their arrest they were transferred to an unknown destination and, despite appeals to President Assad, their parents were not told of their fate or whereabouts. Amnesty International was also investigating the "disappearance" ofTawfiq Drak al-Siba'i, a 3 5-year-old neurologist and father of five. He was detained in Homs towards the end of May 1980 after a letter sent to him by relatives in Saudi Arabia had been intercepted by the Syrian censors. On 2 June he was transferred to an unknown destination. When approached by his relatives, the prison authorities inHoms denied any Imowledge of
330
his whereabouts and there was no response from the Syrian authorities to inquiries on his behalf.
Amnesty International received a number of allegations of torture and ill-treatment of detainees by security forces in 1982, as in previous years. Although the organization was not able to verify fully these allegations, they were consistent with reports received over many years, some of which have been supported by medical evidence. Amnesty International believed that the security forces were systematically torturing detainees suspected of security offences.
Urgent appeals were sent in June 1982 on behalf ofF ateh Jamus, Jamil Hatmal and 'Abbas 'Abbas, members of the PC A who had been tortured and transferred to al-Mezze military prison hospital for urgent treatment. In July Amnesty International learned of the release in a weakened condition of Jamil Hatmal, who was known to suffer from heart disease before his arrest. Unconfirmed reports indicated that Fateh Jamus might have been transferred to Tadmur desert prison. There was no news on the whereabouts of'Abbas 'Abbas. The last two were adopted as prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty International learned of 12 officially confirmed executions in 1982. In June a Syrian was hanged publicly after being tried for armed robbery; in July a man was hanged for the murder and attempted rape of a minor; in August five people were hanged, three for armed robbery, an army deserter for spying for Israel, and a bank manager for embezzling over four million dollars of public funds; and in October four army deserters were shot and a civilian hanged for armed robbery, looting and burglary. Six executions took place in Damascus, five in Aleppo and one in the southern city of Dera'a.
Although these were the only executions officially acknowledged in 1982, there were numerous unconfirmed reports of executions within prison walls after trials by military courts with summary rules of procedure. In February 1982 the international news media reported the arrest of more than 300 Syrian army and airforce officers following the discovery of a plot to overthrow the government. Up to 50 officers were reported to have been sentenced to death. In its publication of 12-18 February 1982 the Paris-based Arabic weekly al-Watan al-'Ambi reported that 19 officers had been executed and six had received prison sentences of between 10 and 15 years. Amnesty International was not able to verify these reports.
On 2 February violent clashes between security forces and Muslim Brotherhood fighters, following the discovery by the security forces of a hidden cache of arms, developed into a near-insurrection in the town of Hama. The town was encircled by Syrian troops and security forces and subsequently bombarded from the air and from the ground. A news blackout was imposed by the authorities. In early
331
March, after the fighting had ended, reports of massacres and atrocities began to reach the outside world. Most reports indicated that at the start of the fighting government officials and their families in Hama were systematically sought out and killed by the rebels. Later, however, large numbers of unarmed inhabitants were killed by government troops as they regained control of the town and by aerial bombardment. Unofficial estimates put the number dead at over 10,000 but Amnesty International was not able to investigate the circumstances or scale of these killings. In previous years Amnesty International had received reports of massacres by Syrian security forces and it has repeatedly requested the authorities to set up commissions of inquiry to investigate the facts and make public their findings. No response was received from the Syrian authorities.
