Laos
Amnesty International remained concerned about the continued detention in "re-education" camps of large numbers of people detained since 1975 for their political activities or positions under the former government, and by the lack of legal safeguards for people detained on political grounds. It was also concerned by reports that some political prisoners had been taken away from camps and were alleged to have been executed. Most political detainees in "re-education" camps had been detained for
212
over seven years without charge or trial. The releases from such camps which had started in late 1980 appeared to have nearly stopped by the end of 1981 and Amnesty International learned of very few individual releases during 1982.
Despite statements made in 1979 by the Prime Minister, Kaysone Phomvihane, on the need to promulgate 'Maws on the people's fundamental rights, interests and responsibilities" and to publicize them "extensively", the country remained without a constitution or any published legislation seven years after the establishment of the new government. In a report dated 11 March 1982 by the United Nations Secretary-General the Lao Government was cited as having given the following justification for detention without trial in "reeducation" camps:
"The government emphasizes above all the educational character of punishment for the purposes of preparing the offender for reintegration into society, rather than its purely punitive nature. Depending on the degree of gravity of the offence, instead of being sentenced to punishments involving the loss of freedom such as imprisonment or confinement, offenders are placed in re-education centres or state farms where they engage in productive activity both to the benefit of themselves and of society."
Amnesty International groups continued to work on behalf of over 50 political detainees who were adopted as prisoners of conscience or whose cases were being investigated. Most were former civil and military officials and professional people held without trial since the change of government which marked the end of the "neutralist" coalition in Laos in 1975. The highest ranking civil servants and military officers were sent to "re-education" camps in northeast Laos, particularly in Houa Phan province. Among those adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International were Khamking Souvanlasy, former Director of Education in the Ministry of Education, and Phak Savanh, former Director General in the Ministry of Education.
New cases came to Amnesty International's attention during 1982. They included: Chouang Chanh Angnamany, a former army colonel from Savannakhet held in a camp of the Viengsay area since 1975, who was reported to suffer from malaria and anaemia; Khamphan Pradith, a former civil servant held in Camp 05 whose health was said to have seriously declined due to malnutrition; and Souvanny Phomphakdy. a former police general held in Camp 05 who was reported to be in poor health, suffering from head and
213
stomach aches, rheumatism, icidney stones and an elbow injury caused by an accident.
Amnesty International received reports from former prisoners about conditions of detention in several "re-education" camps. These included reports that several groups of detainees from Camp 05 in Houa Phan province had been "arrested" in the camp in 1977 and "taken away", allegedly to be executed. Amnesty International received the names of 26 detainees of Camp 05 alleged to have "disappeared" in such circumstances. They were all high-ranking civilian and military officials of the former government who had been detained since 1975. They included Liem Pravongviengham, formerly Ambassador in Peking, who had returned to Vientiane in 1975 in order to prepare for his next posting in Washington; Khamchanh Pradith, also a diplomat and former Ambassador in Australia from 1972 to 1975: Pheng Phongsavan, a former politician aged 70 in 1977. who was Minister of the Interior before 1975; Touby Lyfoung, aged about 60, a former leader of the Hmongs ethnic group and Secretary of State for Post and Telecommunications before 1975; and General Bounleut Samchanh, former Secretary of State for National Defense and Commander in Chief of the Lao Royal Army. Other military officers reported to have "disappeared" in this group include former generals Ouane Ratikoun, Bounchanh Savadphaiphane and Rattanabanleung Choulamountry.	^
The circumstances in which they were allegedly executed remained unknown. According to information received by Amnesty International, camp officials told prisoners in Camp 05 that the 26 had been arrested because they were planning a "revolt" in the camp. It was also reported that most of the families of the detainees in this group were told by local officials in 1980 or 1981 that the detainees were dead. In several individual cases known to Amnesty International, the families had received no news from the detainees since 1977. whereas detainees in the camps were usually able to communicate by mail with their families at relatively frequent - though irregular - intervals.
On 26 August 1982 Amnesty International wrote to Prime Minister Kaysone Phomvihane expressing concern about these allegations. It submitted a list of the 26 people from Camp 05 allegedly executed and of six other people reported to have been summarily shot after alleged attempts to escape from Camp 04 and Camp 05. The latter included LyTekLyNhiaVu, former Director of Administrative Affairs in the Ministry of the Interior, Khamtou Sackda, former civil servant in the Ministry of Finance and a parliamentarian, and his brother Kampha Sackda, former Director of Customs. Amnesty International also submitted the names of 35 people alleged to have died of disease in four camps in northeast Laos.
214
Most were former military or police officers. Amnesty International urged the government to disclose the situation of all those named. No such information had been revealed by the end of 1982.
In its letter Amnesty International also referred to reports by former prisoners that the total number "arrested" in Camp 05 in 1977 and 1978 who had since "disappeared" was about 100. According to some reports deaths due to illness and execution had also occurred in other camps in various parts of the country. These reports generally indicated that conditions varied substantially in different camps. General conditions were reported to be fairly adequate in Camp 03 in Viengsay, whereas in other places food and medical care were described as grossly insufficient and in some camps prisoners were reportedly punished harshly.
In mid-1982 Amnesty International received reports claiming that Camp 05 in Houa Phan province had been made an "open" camp where prisoners were living in restricted freedom, being allowed to move around the camp but forbidden to leave the area. No further information was received about this.
In 1982 Amnesty International learned of few individual releases. Most reports concerned people freed in 1981 or earlier. Among them were six medical students detained since 1976 who had been adopted as prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International. They were reportedly held in a "re-education" camp at Phou Leng, Phou Khoune. near Phounesavanh in Xiengkhouang province, until early 1981. Five of them, Keovilaysack, Bounlay, Sa, Khili and Prasongsith Boupha, were reported to have returned to Vientiane.
