Kampuchea
Amnesty International was concerned about reports of detention without trial of people suspected of anti-government activities. On several occasions in 1982 the authorities of the People's Republic of Kampuchea (PRK) acknowledged detaining people because of their opposition to the government. Few details of individual cases were made available.
Many of those detained were believed to be connected with three groups with bases near the border with Thailand: the Khmer People's National Liberation Front(KPNLF), led by Son Sann; the Moulinaka, led by Norodom Sihanouk; and armed forces of the former government of Democratic Kampuchea (DK), led by Khmer rouge leaders including Khieu Samphan and Pol Pot. Although Amnesty International would not consider imprisoned members of these groups to be prisoners of conscience, it was concerned that they should be given a fair trial within a reasonable time. In July 1982 the three groups formed the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea and continued fighting the army of the PRK, which was supported by Vietnamese forces.
More than 200 prisoners suspected of supporting the KPNLF were reportedly held in the former Prwo« centrale, central prison, in Phnom Penh. Other prisons in Phnom Penh believed to hold political prisoners were those of the municipal police, the Ministry of the Interior and the army. Political prisoners were reportedly also held in provincial and district prisons. People arrested near the border with Thailand and suspected of connections with the anti-communist resistance were said to be sent to a labour camp at Trapeaing Phlong in the eastern part of Kompong Cham province. Khmer rouge deserters were reportedly sent to separate prisons and mostly released after three to six months' political "re-education".
205
Most political detainees were held without trial. The only known cases to have been tried were those of a group c?i\\Q(\"Sereika " (Free Kampuchea) tried in June 1980 and of a group called "Neak Cheat Niyum" (The Nationalists) tried in November 1980. Both groups were charged with treason and counter-revolutionary activities including open propaganda against the Vietnamese presence in the country and a plan to take up arms against the government (see Amnesty International Report 1981). One of the prisoners in the second group, Botum Bopha, was said to have been kept in detention after serving her two-year prison sentence.
Amnesty International investigated the arrest in late 1982 in Kompong Thom of two people accused of stealing rice for armed opposition groups; Amnesty International received reports that the reason for their detention may have been their participation in unauthorized Christian gatherings. Amnesty International was also concerned about reports that they were tortured to force them to confess. Amnesty International also received details of several cases of people detained without trial for up to two years on suspicion of anti-government activities; some were released after admitting the charges and pledging loyalty to the government.
Amnesty International learned of the release in January 1982 of Theam Sovanneirand, a radio broadcaster said to have been arrested in January 1980 for criticizing the government. Amnesty International had inquired about her situation in a letter to Heng Samrin, Chairman of the State Council, in early December 1981. Amnesty International wrote to Heng Samrin on 8 March 1982 asking for official confirmation of her release. No reply was received.
Amnesty International received reports of the arbitrary killing of 100 civilians by Vietnamese forces in a village in Prey Veng province in mid-August 1982. It was, however, unable to investigate these reports. Later, the Vietnamese authorities denied that the killings had taken place.
206
