Gambia
Throughout 1982 the authorities pursued their policy of bringing to trial individuals charged with offences committed during the failed coup attempt of July 1981, when at least 500 people died and many hundred others were seriously wounded. In all, some 120 individuals were tried during the year before the Special Division of the Supreme Court on charges such as treason, kidnapping, robbery, murder and rape. Of those tried, over 100 were convicted and sentenced, 28 receiving the death sentence. Eleven of the accused were acquitted and released, including the leader of the main opposition party, She riff Dibba. At the end of 1982 the trials of 60 individuals charged with treason were in progress. According to official figures, 52 people were arrested and detained in 1982 in connection with the coup attempt, thereby bringing the total number detained since August 1981 to 1,084. Of these, more than 700 detainees were officially reported to have been released during the year, in addition to over 100 detainees released before the end of 1981. Every detainee had passed before the Review Tribunal, established to advise the authorities on the "necessity or expedience" of continued detention. Official sources stated that 82 individuals remained in detention without trial at the end of the year.
In early January 1982 an Amnesty International observer attended two trials before the Special Division of the Supreme Court. In one, two individuals were accused of robbery and the other involved three officers of the Field Force, the army, and four civilians, all accused of treason and of taking up arms on the side of the rebels. The second trial was not completed at the time of the observer's departure from the Gambia.
The report of Amnesty International's trial observer, which was sent to the Gambian authorities in June 1982, concluded that the trials observed satisfied the principal international standards for a fair trial. However, the report concluded that although no policy of using detention powers for poUtical ends was in operation, there appeared to have been a number of abuses of detention, some reportedly on political grounds. In August 1981 powers were introduced to allow the detention of individuals suspected of involvement in the failed
38
coup attempt. These were broadened retroactively in September 1981 to allow detention on suspicion of "acts prejudicial to the public safety or to public order", providing a legal basis for the detention of political opponents to the government. Also, the President delegated to the police his constitutionally-conferred powers to order detentions in accordance with his "general or specific directions". Both these developments appeared to have faciUtated abuses of detention powers. By the end of 1982 all the individuals reportedly detained improperly were either released or on trial, and none were adopted by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty International's observer expressed concern that some detainees remained in detention despite having been recommended for release by the Review Tribunal. Few detainees appearing before the Review Tribunal were assisted by defence counsel. However, this did not appear to be due to any poHcy by the authorities. Concern was also expressed by the delegate about the practice of allowing the state counsel to participate in the deliberations of the tribunal after the defendant (and defence counsel, if any) had withdrawn, which cast doubts on whether the tribunal was fully independent and impartial.
Although Amnesty International's trial observer concluded that the trials he observed before the Special Division of the Supreme Court were fairly conducted, concern was expressed in his report that the majority of those appearing were not represented by defence counsel. This did not, in the opinion of Amnesty International's observer, render unfair the first trial he observed, in which the defendants were unassisted, but appeared to deprive them of a full cross-examination of prosecution witnesses. Concern was also expressed about the short time between formal charging and trial, from the stand-point of the preparation of the defence; in the second trial observed by Amnesty International's observer, counsel was assigned by the court only days before the opening of the trial.
In June 1982 Amnesty International sent the authorities the report of its mission to the Gambia (see Amnesty International Report 1982) in late December 1980 and early January 1981. This was to observe part of the trial of six members of a political group called the Movement for Justice in Africa (MOJA), which was banned on 30 October 1980. The six accused were arrested on the morning of 31 October 1980 and charged with "managing an unlawful society" and "possessing firearms and ammunition". The charges against four of the accused were dropped in April 1981, but proceedings continued against the two remaining defendants - Koro Tijan Sallah andFakebba Juwara. On 10 July 1981 they were found guilty of the first charge, ordered to pay a fine and released. The magistrate's ruling on the case was not available to Amnesty
39
International until early 1982, following which a report on the trial was completed. This report concluded that, although the trial was conducted fairly in most respects by the magistrate, the verdict contravened the constitutional prohibition against the retroactive application of criminal law. No evidence of the defendants' "managing" MO JA between the banning of MO JA and the arrest of the accused had been offered by the prosecution. Their conviction was based solely on their continuing possession at the time of their arrest of certain items linked to MOJA, such as writings and seals, which the report concluded was equivalent to convicting them for managing MOJA before its banning.
In late August 1982 an Amnesty International mission visited the Gambia to discuss its two trial observation reports with the authorities. Meetings were held with President Sir Dawda Jawara, Fafa Mbai, Attorney General and Minister of Justice, Alieu Badji, Minister of the Interior, and with high-ranking officials of these ministries, the police and the prison service. Most of the discussions concentrated on the report of the trial observation mission in early 1982, on the use of detention powers since the mission and on the conditions under which individuals arrested since the failed coup attempt were being held. The authorities stated that politically-motivated abuses of detention powers had not taken place and that police powers had always been controlled by the President of the Republic or the Minister of Justice. Amnesty International's delegates suggested that such abuses appeared to have taken place in a number of cases, including those of Demba Bojang and Alhaji Kausa Jammeh, both of whom were detained having reportedly been denounced for political ends. The authorities did not comment on these two cases at the meeting where they were raised. Amnesty International's delegates informed the authorities that they had been shown detention orders signed solely by police officers, but were given assurances that such orders would not have been issued without the prior assent of the President or the Minister of Justice. The authorities accepted the report's conclusion that the Review Tribunal's recommendations for release had sometimes not been implemented, and informed the delegates that the Ministry of Justice had to approve the tribunal's recommendations before they were sent to the President. The authorities also accepted that the practice of allowing state counsel to be present at the deliberations of the Review Tribunal should be ended as it reflected poorly on the independence of the tribunal. The authorities accepted that some defendants were not represented but stressed that the state was obliged to ensure defence counsel only when the accused faced a possible death sentence. Legal aid had been provided in trials before the Special Division of the Supreme Court whenever this penalty was
40
applicable. The authorities denied the report's conclusion that defence counsel were allowed insufficient time to prepare their cases and stated that adjournments were invariably granted at the first sitting. Amnesty International's delegates confirmed this.
Amnesty International's delegates expressed concern to the authorities that the conditions under which detainees and convicted prisoners arrested after July 1981 were being held at Mile Two prison, Banjul, contravened internationally-recognized standards in several important respects. All 36 prisoners sentenced to death since December 1981 were beheved to be held in leg-irons, which are specifically banned by international standards. These prisoners were also reported to have been held in solitary confinement since their conviction. All inmates at Mile Two prison were, according to Amnesty International's information, deprived of their rights to visits and to correspondence. After discussion the authorities stated that the Inspector General of Police would investigate Amnesty International's information. In subsequent meetings the authorities informed the delegates that this investigation had been completed, but had confirmed only a part of Amnesty International's information, namely that the prisoners sentenced to death were being held in leg-irons. However, the authorities stated that for reasons of security, the use of leg-irons would not be discontinued, despite the authorities' recognition that the use of leg-irons constitutes cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment The authorities also stated that the 36 prisoners in leg-irons were held in separate cells, rather than in solitary confinement, and that some communication between these cells was possible. The authorities denied that all inmates in Mile Two prison were deprived of visits and correspondence.
The authorities contested the main conclusion of Amnesty International's report on the trial of MO J A members: that the convictions resulted from a retroactive application of the law. The authorities also stated that the report contained a number of subsidiary conclusions which were erroneous due to insufficient information or misinterpretation.
Shortly before the end of 1982 Amnesty International was informed that the rights to visits and correspondence had been restored for all inmates at Mile Two prison. The use of leg-irons was banned by presidential order on 30 December 1982.
Amnesty International was concerned about the 36 death sentences imposed between late December 1981 and June 1982. Sixteen of these sentences were confirmed on appeal and Amnesty International urged the authorities to commute them. None of these prisoners had been executed by the end of 1982.
41
