Spain
Amnesty International's main concern was the ill-treatment and torture of people detained under the anti-terrorist laws. In Amnesty International's opinion the continued application of provisions of these laws facilitated such incidents. Amnesty International was also concerned about the large number of prosecutions on charges of criticizing the state, its representatives and institutions.
According to official figures, in 1982 there were 43 violent deaths, principally involving the armed Basque group ETA. Between January and July 1982,5 72 people, mostly in the Basque country, were detained under the anti-terrorist laws. A large proportion were subsequently released without charge.
An Amnesty International mission visited the Basque country between 1 and 4 April. The delegates, one a doctor, investigated the death on 29 March of a Basque doctor, Esteban Muruetagoyena, four days after his release from custody. They also examined allegations of ill-treatment made by Vicente Ibarguren, one of three brothers arrested at the same time as Dr Muruetagoyena. The four men were arrested with others on 15 March by units of the Guardia Civil, Civil Guard, reportedly in plain clothes, and taken to the Comandancia (Regional Headquarters) in San Sebastián. All were held under the anti-terrorist legislation which permits the authorities to hold suspects incommunicado for up to 10 days without access to family or lawyer. The detainees were alleged to have been systematically physically ill-treated . It was alleged that they were punched in the stomach and chest and slapped in the face. They were forced to do prolonged exercises: Dr Muruetagoyena suffered from polio as a child and could only walk in special shoes which had been taken away. Two prisoners
275
alleged that they were given electric shocks and one that he had his face repeatedly plunged into a bucket of water.
On 5 May Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of the Interior, Juan José Rosón, giving a detailed account of the mission's findings and asking for an immediate investigation. Amnesty International pointed out that it had repeatedly condemned the use of extended incommunicado detention, even if under judicial supervision. The letter noted that none of the detainees were accorded access to counsel while in custody, that none were ever charged with any offence and that, apart from the visit by the judge during the first three days, there was no judicial supervision. The Minister's reply failed to allay Amnesty International's concerns.
On 10 May Amnesty International appealed for ajudicial investigation into allegations of ill-treatment made by Ana Ereño Achirica. A former Mother Superior of a convent of the Roman Catholic order of the Madres Mercedarias Misioneras, Missionary Mothers of Mercy, she became a well-known feminist working for the Basque newspaper ¿"^/n. Amnesty International asked for a statement as to whether she had been seen by medical or judicial officials while in custody.
Ana Ereño Achirica was arrested on 28 April in San Sebastián when leaving work and held incommunicado without access to lawyers or her family for nine days: first for one day in Bilbao and afterwards in the Dirección General de Seguridad (DOS) in Madrid, the headquarters of the national police. She alleged that while in Bilbao she was hit on her breasts, thighs, head and neck while held by her interrogators. She said that this treatment continued for several hours. She was transferred to Madrid the next day. On arrival she was examined by police doctors who found facial swelling, including her eyelids; her left eye was bloodshot and her jaw, stomach and abdomen were bruised. Her neck was also bruised and swollen. Further medical examinations, including one ordered by the court, confirmed the earlier reports and finally the Head of Medical Services requested that she be kept under observation.
On 7 May she appeared in court and was committed to Yeserías prison on charges of belonging to or collaborating with an armed band. She was provisionally released on 12 June and finally acquitted in November 1982. She was however given a suspended sentence of four months for resisting arrest and using insulting language.
The Minister of the Interior replied to Amnesty International's appeals saying that she was '"suspected of being implicated in the activities of the terrorist organization ETA-Militar'' and had been continuously looked after by the police medical services. Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of the Interior on 11 October,
276
confirming its view that the injuries described in the medical certificates relating to Ana Ereno were consistent with her allegations, and reiterating Amnesty International's opposition to prolonged incommunicado detention. Amnesty International referred the Minister to the general comments adopted by the Human Rights Committee relating to Article 7 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. This suggested measures to prevent torture by allowing detainees access to doctors, lawyers and relatives.
Amnesty International has repeatedly informed the government of its belief that extended incommunicado detention, even when ordered by a court, was conducive to the ill-treatment of detainees because of a failure by the courts to supervise effectively the conditions in police stations and Civil Guard posts. The constitution of 1978 guarantees under Article 17.3 the right of detainees to see lawyers while in detention. However, the special provisions of the anti-terrorist laws effectively deny this right. The courts and, in particular, the military courts in cases involving the Civil Guard, have signally failed to pursue even well-founded complaints of ill-treatment or torture.
In 1982 two court judgments were delivered which were potentially of great importance to Amnesty International's concerns as described above. In December the Constitutional Court overruled a decision of the Supreme Court and directed that an action alleging torture should be investigated by an ordinary court. (The action was brought against the Civil Guard in 1980 and related to eight men from Amorebieta.) This decision was a step towards removing the right to exclusive jurisdiction of military courts in cases involving Civil Guards accused of torture. The military judicial authorities had been allowed to hear all cases involving allegations of torture by the Civil Guard, which in practice almost invariably remained unresolved.
On 2 December the Supreme Court upheld an appeal by three men sentenced for alleged involvement in ETA-Militar on the grounds that the only evidence against them had been obtained after 10 days' incommunicado detention in a police station, where the men alleged they were tortured and where they were denied their constitutional rights to legal counsel.
The new Minister of the Interior, José Barrionuevo, publicly declared in a magazine interview in December 1982 that the use of torture would not be tolerated; however, he also stated that in his view the anti-terrorist laws could not as yet be abolished.
Amnesty International was concerned about the continuation of prosecutions for the non-violent exercise of freedom of expression. On 4 February 1981, following an incident in the Basque parliament in Guernica, Miguel Castells, a prominent lawyer and senator in the
277
Cortes (parliament), and 18 other councillors and regional and national members of parliament representing the Basque coalition Herri Batasuna were ejected from the chamber. The King had come to the microphone to make an address and, while he was there, approximately 40 members of the coalition stood up to sing the Basque nationalist hymn Eusko Gudariak. Following this incident it was decided to prosecute 19 members of the coalition, including one who was reportedly not present at the time, for insulting the King. In May 1982 police arrested all the accused who had refused to furnish bail pending trial and in September the Supreme Court agreed to try them after parliamentary immunity had been denied by a vote in the Senate. In December the prosecution requested sentences of eight years' imprisonment for all the accused. The defendants had repeatedly stated that they did not wish to insult the King personally. Amnesty International appealed on 18 May for their immediate and unconditional release.
In December 1981 Amnesty International sent an observer to the trial in the Audiencia Nacional, National Court, of five town councillors of Larrabezùa who were charged with publicly insulting the head of state, after voting for a resolution opposing a visit from the King. The prosecution asked for a sentence of six years and one day on conviction. The hearing was suspended (see Amnesty International Report 1982). When it resumed they were all found guilty and in April 1982 sentenced to a suspended term of one year's imprisonment. Amnesty International believed this sentence was a violation of their right to freedom of expression.
