Iran
Amnesty International's concerns were the large number of executions, numerous allegations of torture and cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment of prisoners, the imprisonment of many prisoners of conscience and denial of fair trials to political prisoners. Amnesty International recorded 624 executions during 1982, but regards this as a minimum figure. The information received concerning torture indicated that it was a routine practice in many prisons in Iran. The number of prisoners of conscience was not known, but the cases brought to the attention of Amnesty International indicate that of the thousands of political prisoners, many were detained because of their non-violent political or reUgious beliefs or activities or ethnic origins, or simply because of their relationship with people who had been politically active. Arrest appeared to happen quite arbitrarily, prisoners were often held for long periods before being charged and those trials that did take place lacked the safeguards which would ensure a fair trial.
On 29 January 1982 Amnesty International raised all its concerns in a letter to Prime Minister Hussein Musavi. The letter referred to the large number of executions and pointed out that: .. in many cases there is no indication that those executed have been tried, or have had any opportunity to appeal against death sentences when these are passed. Very often executions are not announced and families are informed that they have taken place some time after the event or not at all." Amnesty International urged the authorities to investigate allegations of torture and to "issue a public, unequivocal condemnation and prohibition of torture from the highest level." The letter also expressed the wish to "discuss with Your Excellency and other relevant government ministers all matters of concern to Amnesty International and hopes that it will be possible for us to send a delegation to Iran for this purpose in the very near future." No reply was received.
305
At the end of 1982 the number of executions recorded by Amnesty International since the revolution of February 1979 was 4,605, of which 624 took place in 1982. However, these figures reflect only officially announced executions, and exclude those which have not been announced by the authorities. Amnesty International cannot estimate the number of unannounced executions, but information received from many different sources before and during 1982 suggests that they have occurred on a large scale.
Those executed included members of the Baha'i faith; Kurds; people accused of espionage; monarchists; and "counter-revolution-aries", including members of groups actively opposed to the government, such as the Mujahideen, Peykar, Fedayeen and Sarbedaran. Others were accused of participation in attempted coups. They included former Foreign Minister Sadegh Ghotzbadeh and two alleged coconspirators who were shot in September. In August reports from exile sources were widely quoted that about 70 army officers had been executed in connection with the alleged Ghotzbadeh plot. Of these the names of three officers were given.
In many cases the charges cited were so vague that the exact offence was not known, although the wording made it clear that it was political. The Jerusalem Post, 11 October 1982, reported the execution of a Jew, Mussa Frejj-Zeida Hahimi, accused of spying on behalf of Israel. Jews and Baha'is - whose international headquarters are in Israel - have been particularly vulnerable to charges of "Zionism" or espionage on behalf of Israel.
Executions for drug and alcohol offences continued and executions were reported for adultery and homosexuality. On 21 September Reuters reported that a new law would punish persistent homosexuality by execution. Reuters also quoted Iranian newspapers as saying that the stoning to death of adulterers would be more widespread under the new legislation. Reports of the execution of pregnant women and people under 18 continued during 1982. Article 6(5) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which Iran has ratified, states: "Sentence of death shall not be imposed for crimes committed by persons below 18 years of age and shall not be carried out on pregnant women."
Allegations of torture, sometimes resulting in death, continued. Former prisoners interviewed by Amnesty International described being whipped while suspended by their wrists and whippings on the soles of the feet. Prisoners who had not themselves been tortured frequently referred to the torture of fellow-prisoners and to hearing the screams of people being tortured. Towards the end of 1982 Amnesty International received from Iran a detailed report of the ill-treatment
306
of prisoners in five different prisons, Salehabad (a former dairy farm), Komiteh, Evin, Qasr and Vakilabad (near Mashad). The report was based on the testimony of released prisoners, including some belonging to opposition groups and others not politically involved, and prisoners' relatives. It was consistent with information obtained by Amnesty International from other sources and confirmed that torture had become a routine practice in at least some Iranian prisons. Prisoners described being beaten and whipped with cables on all parts of the body, being hosed with water, being given electric shocks, having their heads held under water and being subjected to mock executions.
Other forms of ill-treatment described by prisoners were being kept blindfolded in very overcrowded conditions for long periods and being deprived of food and water for the first 48 hours of detention.
Whipping and amputation of limbs were officially sanctioned punishments for certain crimes. Amnesty International regards these as cruel, inhuman and degrading punishments. In its "general comments" adopted on 27 July 1982 the Human Rights Committee, set up under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, endorsed the view that corporal punishment is prohibited under Article 7 of the covenant. In many cases reported to Amnesty International the "punishment" of whipping was administered without a trial having taken place.
The number of prisoners of conscience was not known to Amnesty International. In most cases it was impossible to establish whether a given prisoner was a prisoner of conscience: either the person had not been charged, or the charges were phrased in such general terms that Amnesty International was unable to ascertain whether they included a specific offence, or the lack of fair trial made it difficult to assess the validity of a conviction. However, information reaching Amnesty International from many different sources left no doubt that among the thousands of people imprisoned and executed since the revolution were many who had not used or advocated violence. Among them was Abolfazl Ghassemi, one of the leaders of the Iranian National Front and Secretary General of the Iran Party, imprisoned since July 1980 (see Amnesty International Report 1981 and 1982). In October Amnesty International learned of further deterioration in his health and appealed once again to the authorities for his release. Also considered by Amnesty International to be prisoners of conscience were four officials of the Iranian Bar Association arrested in January 1982 and still detained without trial at the end of 1982: Abdul Hamid Ardalan (President), Mohammad Taqi Damghani, Jahangir Amir-Hosseini, and Batoul Keyhani (Secretary). Other prisoners of conscience included members of the Baha'i religion, the only substantial religious minority not recognized in the Iranian constitution, who
307
appear to have been imprisoned and executed for no other reason than their religious belief
Many people appear to have been arrested for no reason other than their relationship to someone politically active. Sometimes it seems that they were held as hostages; others were treated as guilty by association.
During 1982 the legal system was completely converted to what the leadership has termed "Islamic law". For some time after the revolution both Islamic law, as interpreted by the Islamic Revolutionary Tribunals, and the existing codified law were applied. Although in all the cases which came to the attention of Amnesty International, including those concerning political, religious, sexual, drug and alcohol offences, trials took place before Islamic Revolutionary Tribunals, the ordinary civil courts continued to deal with some civil cases and some criminal offences. On 23 August 1982 the Tehran Times pubhshed the full text of a speech delivered the day before by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini in which he stated: "I hereby declare to all the judges across the country and all those engaged injudicial affairs that all the laws in practice during the former regime were contrary to Islam and should be discarded... The former Ministry of Justice should be transformed into an Islamic Justice Ministry. Anyone who still insists on practising according to the laws of the former regime should be tried himself." On 24 August the Tehran Times reported that: "The High Judicial Council yesterday in a circular instructed all courts and prosecutors' offices of the Justice Department to consider null and void all laws which are contradictory to Islam."
Amnesty International believes that the guarantees necessary for a fair trial are effectively lacking in cases heard by the Revolutionary Tribunals (see the Amnesty International report, Law and Human Rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran, May 1980). In particular, defendants are often not told the exact charges against them; they are not always allowed to call defence witnesses or to question witnesses against them; they are not allowed counsel of their choice; many trials are closed to the pubUc; there is no effective right of appeal and no effective presumption that defendants are innocent until proved guilty. Many prisoners were held for long periods without charge or trial and some prisoners appear to have been executed without trial, or after a very summary trial.
At its 16th session in July 1982 the Human Rights Committee considered a report from Iran on its implementation of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Members of the committee raised specific questions relating to summary executions, torture, arbitrary arrest and detention and religious freedom, particularly in
308
connection with the repression of the B aha'is. These were not addressed in substance in the subsequent response of the Iranian representative who, however, assured the committee that a comprehensive and detailed report was being prepared and would be submitted when the constituent assembly had approved all laws and had communicated its findings to the executive power. Amnesty International also submitted information to the Secretary-General of the United Nations in connection with Resolution 198/27 of the UN Commission on Human Rights which requested him to establish direct contact with the Government of Iran on the human rights situation in the country and to submit a report to the commission in February 1983.
