Italy
Amnesty International's main concern in 1982 was the delay in trying people accused of politically motivated crimes. This led to excessively long periods of detention for defendants; over three years in the case known as "7 April". Other concerns were the imprisonment of conscientious objectors regarded by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience, and allegations of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners. There was a marked increase in such allegations and these were the object of wide judicial investigation.
The Urgent Measures for the Protection of the Democratic Order and Public Security introduced in February 1980 (see Amnesty International Report 1980 and 1981), extending time limits in the judicial process, remained in force although the government authorized one additional assize court in Rome to reduce the backlog of cases.
Amnesty International was concerned by the undue delay in
263
bringing the "7 April" defendants to	Amnesty International
Report 1982). Amnesty International sent an observer to the first hearing of the case in Rome on 7 June. Some of the defence lawyers objected to the trial taking place in the same court as the trial of those charged with the kidnapping and murder of the former Prime Minister, Aldo Moro. The hearing was, therefore, postponed until 9 November.
Amnesty International again sent an observer. The trial was postponed once more, until February 1983, this time because the President of the Court of Assizes declared that it should not proceed while the "Moro" trial was still in progress. By the end of 1982 some defendants had been held for between 36 and 44 months awaiting trial.
The majority of the defendants were academics, journalists and teachers who had allegedly been associated with a movement called Autonomia Operaia, Workers' Autonomy. The best known was Antonio Negri, professor of political science at Padua University and lecturer at the Sorbonne in Paris. The arrests took place after the kidnapping and murder, between March and May 1978, of the former Prime Minister, Aldo Moro, by the Red Brigades. Most of those arrested in April and in the subsequent wave of arrests on 21 December 1979 had been involved some years earlier with an organization called Potere Operaio, Workers' Power. This was a left-wing grouping in the late 1960s and early 1970s which advocated mass working-class revolt against the capitalist system and state. It was not an illegal or clandestine organization. There were, at the end of 1982, 140 people charged in connection with the "7 April" case under the jurisdiction of the courts of Rome and Padua. All defendants were charged inter alia with "subversive association" and "participation in or formation of an armed band". Some of the defendants were also charged with "insurrection against the powers of the State" and faced a mandatory life sentence if convicted. A number of these individual cases were under investigation by Amnesty International.
Amnesty International consistently criticized the length of time a person might spend in prison in Italy under the law, while legal proceedings continued. With the extended time limits granted by the urgent measures of February 1980 this could mean, in the most serious cases, a period of 10 years and eight months before a final verdict.
The problem of the delay in hearing cases and the possibility of releasing prisoners into provisional liberty, if not tried within the time limits, was addressed by the Procurator General of the Court of Cassation. In his report of the past judicial year he described the establishment of one additional assize court in Rome to cut the backlog as "a totally inadequate and insufficient measure which will have no effect".
264
The prisoners of conscience known to Amnesty International were conscientious objectors to military service. The reform of the laws on conscientious objectors continued with proposals for a new law to replace the existing Marcora Law on conscientious objection {sQQ Amnesty International Report 1982). The draft bill presented by the Minister of Defence, Lelio Lagorio, recognized that the existing law had "disadvantages and defects making a revision of it indispensable". It was awaiting examination before the Defence Commission of the Senate. On 24 December Amnesty International wrote to the Minister welcoming the new draft bill and in particular the proposal to reduce the length of alternative service from 20 to 16 months. However, the organization was concerned that the bill appeared to make no provision for recognizing political grounds for conscientious objection and no allowance for volunteers for military service who subsequently changed their views and became conscientious objectors. It also appeared that the responsible authorities were not obliged to explain their reasons for rejecting a request for alternative civilian service.
Sporadic allegations of torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment had been received and investigated by Amnesty Internationa! in previous years. However, 1982 saw a sharp increase in the number of allegations, in particular with relation to arrests made at the time of theiiidnappingofthe NATO Chief of Staff, Brigadier-General James Lee Dozier, and after his release on 28 January 1982. Amnesty International received information on approximately 30 cases, some of which were supported by medical reports.
On 16 March Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of the Interior, Virginio Rognoni, to express its concern at the number and scope of recent allegations. It requested the Minister to review the police procedures followed in cases in which allegations of ill-treatment had been made publicly. Some of these allegations were already being investigated following earlier formal complaints. However, new allegations continued to be made. Amnesty International in its letter referred specifically to the testimony of Anna Rita Marino who was arrested in Rome on 2 March. She stated that after her arrest she was stripped naked, slapped in the face and beaten on her head, stomach and legs. Her nipples were twisted with an unidentified instrument. A medical examination on 11 March in the women's section of Rebibbia prison referred to skin contusions and bruises on her right and left breasts and thighs. The allegations of ill-treatment made in court in Verona on 8 March by Cesare di Lenardo were also mentioned. Di Lenardo alleged that not only he, but also his co-defendants, had been ill-treated. The investigating judge issued arrest warrants in June against five police officers after a four-month investigation. The
265
Minister of the Interior pubHcly criticized this as giving "rise to much perplexity and bitterness". The police officers were finally released and reintegrated into their forces after transfer. However the Deputy Prosecutor of Padua subsequently recommended that they should be tried.
