Malaysia
Prisoners of conscience were released 'at a growing rate during 1982. However, Amnesty International remained concerned about the continued detention without trial of about 300 Malaysians under the Internal Security Act (ISA) 1960.
Also of concern were the number of executions carried out and the increased use of the death penalty to punish drug trafficking offences.
Amnesty International continued to work on behalf of 40 actual or possible prisoners of conscience. Seventeen of these were reported to have been released during the year. They were held under the ISA, which permits the detention without charge or trial for renewable two-
215
year periods of people whom the govemment considers a threat to national security. Among the prisoners of conscience whose release Amnesty Intemational sought was Ng Wei Siong, a former secretary in the Labour Party and town councillor in Keluang, Johore, who was arrested on 31 July 1967 and detained since then without trial. He was first detained in Batu Gajah Camp, then in a detention centre in Johore, and was later transferred to a police station in Kuala Lumpur where he was still believed to be held in 1982. Amnesty Intemational was also concerned about Wong Yong Huat, a former college student who was arrested in 1972 after he had started working on a rubber estate. He had been held in solitary confinement at Batu Gajah since 1977 and his health was reported to have deteriorated as a result.
According to official figures, 168 ISA detainees were released between July 1981 - when a new govemment came to power - and February 1982, and over 100 more during the rest of 1982; in Febmary 1982 the number of remaining ISA detainees was 444.
In January 1982 two trade unionists - S. Nada Rajah and S. Thurairatnam - who had been detained for 11 years without trial, were released from Batu Gajah Detention Camp, 90 miles north ofthe capital Kuala Lumpur. The two men were released conditionally: they were served with restriction orders prohibiting them from political or trade union activities. However, they did not have to recant or make a public confession before release, which political prisoners released previously had been required to do {see Amnesty International Report 1982). Upon his release S. Nada Rajah held a news conference in which he called upon the govemment to try detainees in Batu Gajah Camp who had been held for more than 10 years without trial and to improve detention conditions there. He had spent the last four years of his detention in solitary confinement, under regulations introduced in 1977 at Batu Gajah Camp which provide for detainees to be kept in individual ceils for a minimum of 21 hours a day. He said that this practice "demoralizes the detainees and has disastrous and irreparable mental and physical effects". About 60 political prisoners were still being held in solitary confinement under these regulations at Batu Gajah Camp in January 1982.
In April several prisoners of conscience adopted by Amnesty Intemational were freed, and 47 more ISA detainees were released on 31 August 1982, Malaysia's 25th anniversary of independence from Britain. They included: Tan Hock Hin, a former Assistant Secretary General of the now defunct Malaysian Labour Party and previously a member of the Penang State Assembly, who had been arrested in July 1968; Tong Hock See, 33 years old, a former Labour Party member arrested in April 1971; Ong Loong Sheng, 3 9 years old, a trade union organizer arrested in 1967; Eng Kwee Ba, aged 40, a manual worker
216
held since June 1968; and Lau Yam Chou, 38 years old. a former teacher arrested in December 1968. Tan Hock Hin's release was unconditional but most other releases were believed to have been conditional. He had been kept in solitary confinement at Batu Gajah Camp for the previous five years and said on his release that prisoners at the camp were initially kept in isolation cells for 24 hours a day but were later allowed to mix with other prisoners for three hours a day for exercise and baths.
On 5 February the Deputy Prime Minister. Datuk Musa Hitam. announced that in response to the repeated appeals from "foreign individuals or groups", all ISA detainees held without trial could be released if they were "adopted" by people or groups abroad and left the country. However, they would have to renounce their Malaysian citizenship and would not be permitted to return to Malaysia. Amnesty International wrote to Datuk Musa Hitam on 18 February 1982 welcoming the releases which had taken place in previous months and explaining its position on the announcement. As a matter of principle people detained under the ISA for the non-violent exercise of their rights should be released and permitted to reside in their own country, and should not be confronted with the choice of continued detention or exile. Amnesty International urged the government to review the cases of all remaining ISA detainees and release all prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty International's concerns were raised again in a letter dated 23 June 1982 to Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamed. Amnesty International welcomed statements by the Prime Minister and other officials on the government's intention to continue releasing detainees, but expressed concern about other statements indicating that some long-term detainees might never be considered for release on the grounds that they might in future constitute a threat to the "national interests" of Malaysia. Amnesty International noted that the ISA had been in force for over 20 years'without being reviewed and urged the government to consider such a review. It also expressed its readiness to discuss these matters directly with the government. The government accepted Amnesty International's request to send a delegation there, although no date had been fixed by the end of 1982.
By mid-1982 the majority of political prisoners still held under the ISA were detained in the Taiping Kamunting Camp. In July Amnesty International was informed that about 200 were in Taiping Camp, approximately 65 in Batu Gajah and over 110 in police stations throughout the country. The reasons for detention in police stations were unclear, and some detainees appeared to have spent an unusual amount of time in them. Chan Wai Sai, a woman arrested in October 1979, was reported to have been first held in Kuala Lumpur police
217
headquarters until January 1980. then in a police station on Jalan Bandar (High Street) in Kuala Lumpur until May 1980, then again at the police headquarters until August 1980, when she was transferred again to the Jalan Bandar police station. She stayed there until July 1981 and was then reportedly transferred to a rehabilitation centre in Kuala Lumpur. She was reported to have been held in solitary confinement for the whole period.
At least 14 people were known to have been executed in 1982, mainly for drug trafficking offences. Some press reports put the total number of executions for drug offences at 23. Statements from officials generally indicated a hardening of attitude towards people convicted of drug trafficking.
Others were sentenced to death under the ISA for firearms offences. Section 59 of the ISA provides the mandatory death penalty for illegal possession of firearms. One subject of Amnesty International appeals was Lim Kwang Yeow, aged 24, who, after his arrest in 1977, was held in preventive detention for over two years before being charged with possession of firearms (reportedly one bullet and several bullet cases). He was sentenced to death for this in October 1980. Another, Tan Chay Wa, was convicted on similar charges and sentenced to death in January 1981. Chiow Thiam Guan was also held for over two years in preventive detention before being charged with possession of hand grenades and sentenced to death in June 1981. These three prisoners and two others sentenced to death were granted a stay of execution in July 1982, when their defence lawyers challenged the constitutionality of the mandatory death sentence passed under the ISA. However, their appeal was dismissed by the Federal Court in September 1982.
