UNISIA
REPUBLICOFTUNISIA
Head of state: Zine El 'Abidine Ben 'Ali
Head of government: Mohamed Ghannouchi
GapitahTunis
Population: 9.6 million
Official language: Arabic
Death penalty: retentionist
Upto 1,000 political prisoners, most of them prisoners of conscience, remained in prison. Several had been held for more than a decade. The families of prisoners often faced harassment and denial of their basic rights. The authorities used various means to prevent former prisoners from resuming a normal life after their release. Several political opponents of the government were imprisoned during 2001.They included several political opponents, or alleged opponents, resident abroad who were arrested when they returned to Tunisia and faced unfair trials before military courts. The authorities once again stepped uptheirrepression of human rights defenders.
245	Amnesty International Report 2002

TUN
Torture and ill-treatment by the security forces continued to be reported both in police stations and in prisons, in a general context of impunity.
Background
The ruhng Rassemblement Constitutionnel Démocrarique, Constitutional Democratic Movement, led a campaign calling for President Ben 'Ali to be re-elected in 2004 for a fourth term. President Ben "Ali seized power on 7 November 1987 and in July 1988 introduced a constitutional law stipulating that the president can serve a maximum of three consecutive terms of office. President Ben 'Ali was elected in 1999 for a third term. During 2001, those who dared to speak out against the possible further re-election of President Ben 'Ali faced reprisals.
In July, a new political party, the Congrès pour la République, Republican Congress, was created and headed by human rights defender Moncef Marzouki. The party, which had not been recognized by the end of the year, called for civil and political freedoms and reform of the political system.
In the aftermath of the 11 September attacks in the USA, the authorities used the so-called struggle against "terrorism" to justify systematic repression during the previous decade, and to further toughen measures against human rights defenders, political opponents and political prisoners.
Human rights defenders
The authorities further increased repressive measures against human rights defenders in an attempt to curb their peaceful activities. The measures included arrest and imprisonment, judicial proceedings, ill-treatment by security agents, police surveillance and harassment. Several human rights defenders were banned from leaving the country or saw their movements arbitrarily restricted. Means of communication, including phone and fax lines and Internet connections, were cut.
The two main domestic human rights organizations continued to face tremendous difficulties.
Judicial proceedings against the Ligue tunisienne des droits de l'homme (LTDH), Tunisian Human Rights League, continued. In February, the court annulled the results of the LTDH's general assembly of October 2000, including the election of the new leadership; an AI delegate observed the trial. In June the Appeal Court in Tunis ruled that new elections for the leadership of the LTDH should be organized. The authorities initiated judicial proceedings in January and March against the newly elected leaders Slaheddine Jourchi and Mokhtar Trifi, Vice-President and President respectively of the LTDH, for having signed an LTDH communiqué denouncing human rights violations.
Measures were taken to curtail the activities of the Conseil national pour les libertés en Tunisie (CNLT), National Council for Liberties in Tunisia. The CNLT had been created in December 1998, but had still not been registered by the authorities at the end of 2001. On several occasions, members were prevented from gathering and were ill-treated by the security forces. Judicial proceedings were initiated against leading figures of the CNLT.
Q On 26 June, Sihem Ben Sedrine, a Journalist and spokesperson for the CNLT, was arrested when she arrived at Tunis airport; an Al delegate observed the hearing before the examining judge on 5 July. Sihem Ben Sedrine was released on 11 August by presidential decision, pending judicial proceedings on charges of defamation. The charges related to comments on the lack of independence of the judiciary she had made in June on Al Mustakillah, a private television channel, based in London, United Kingdom. Intergovernmental organizations In January, the UN Special Representative on human rights defenders stated in her report to the UN Commission on Human Rights that she had received no reply from the Tunisian authorities to the urgent appeals sent in November 2000 concerning Moncef Marzouki as well as the suspension of the new executive of the LTDH. In May, the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights passed a resolution on the situation of human rights defenders in Tunisia and expressed concern about the government's decision in November 2000 to suspend the activities of the LTDH. International human rights organizations In a continued attempt to prevent international human rights organizations from monitoring human rights in the country, their representatives were either expelled or denied access to the country. Some were assaulted by members of the security forces. Q Although the Human Rights Minister Slaheddine Maaoui had stated in an interview in the French daily newspaper LeMondeon 6 April 2001 that the two representatives of the Fédération internationale des ligues des droits de l'homme (FIDH), International Federation of Human Rights, and Al who had been banned from Tunisia since 1995 and 1994 would be welcome in the country, the proposal by the two organizations to conduct a joint visit to the country did not result in a favourable response, despite repeated attempts to follow up the request. Q In September, during an official visit to Tunisia, two Al delegates were detained at night and ill-treated by plainclothes agents of the security forces. Equipment and documents relating to human rights issues were stolen. When the delegates attended a meeting with the Human Rights Minister, scheduled prior to their arrival in Tunis, the authorities failed to acknowledge the severity of the assault or to allay Al's concerns regarding the security of human rights defenders in the country. At least one person reported having received overt death threats from security agents to dissuade him from meeting with the Al delegates.
Torture and ilkreatment
Political prison«^, includingprisoners of conscience, and common law prisoners continued to be subjected to torture and ill-treatment. Althou^ in at least one case prison ^lards were charged and sentenced to four years' imprisonment for inflicting torjure, the 1999 law making torturea criminal offence continued to be largely disregarded. At least one person was reported to have died in custody as a result of torture in 2001.
245
Amnesty International Report 2002
TUN
Q On 9 March, 25-year-old AbderrahmanJhinnaoui died in prison. He had been arrested on 12 January on suspicion of theft, and was reportedly tortured by the police in order to make him confess. After 54 days on hunger strike to protest his innocence, Abderrahman Jhinnaoui was allegedly tortured by agents of the prison administration. He died a few days later. Although the investigation into his death had not been completed by the end of the year, the authorities denied that the death resulted from torture. The authorities also exerted strong pressure on the family to take legal action to put a stop to the campaign by Tunisian human rights defenders for an investigation into Abderrahman Jhinnaoui's death.
Political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, were held in extremely poor conditions and several were ill-treated when they protested, usually by hunger strikes, at these conditions. A new law on prison administration adopted in May was largely disregarded.
Q Abdelatif Bouhajila, a 31-year-old political prisoner sentenced to 17 years' imprisonment after an unfair trial in November 2000, began a hunger strike in Borj Erroumi prison in Bizerte in May to protest about poor prison conditions. Abdelatif Bouhajila, who suffers from asthma, kidney disease and a blood-clotting disorder, was placed in an overcrowded cell, forced to sleep on the floor and denied medical care. In July, he was transferred to the 9 April Civil Prison in Tunis following ill-treatment by a member of the prison staff.
Prisoners of conscience
Known or suspected opponents of the government from across the political spectrum continued to face detention and imprisonment for exercising their right to freedom of expression.
Q In June. 64-year-old Mohamed Mouadda, a former leader of the opposition Mouvement des Démocrates Socialistes (MDS), Movement of Socialist Democrats, was put back in prison to serve his remaining sentence, Mohamed Mouadda, a prisoner of conscience, had been arrested in October 1995 and sentenced to 11 years' imprisonment after an unfair trial. He had been conditionally released in December 1996. In March 2001, Mohamed Mouadda had signed a joint manifesto with Rached Gh^nnouchi, exiled leader of the unauthorized Islamist movement al-Nahda (Renaissance), in which they rejected the possible candidacy of President Ben "Ali for the next presidential elections in 2004.
Harassment of prisoners'families and former prisoners
Various measures continued to be used to exert pressure on relatives of political prisoners. Some were denied access to medical care or had difficulty finding employment or keeping their jobs. Their homes were kept under surveillance and their phone lines were cut.
Measures were also taken to prevent former political prisoners from resuming a normal life. Hundreds of former political prisoners were deprived of their right to enrol at a university, dismissed from their jobs and
denied medical care. Some were subjected to rearrest without notification of the charges; police surveillance; administrative control which required them to obtain authorization in order to move within the country; and arbitrary decisions obliging them to register daily, or sometimes several times a day, at local police stations during working hours.
Irregularities in the administration of justice
Unfair trials and impunity remained a pattern in the country. Several civilians were tried before military courts where procedures fell short of international standards. Allegations of torture were usually not investigated or prosecuted. Complaints lodged against the security forces or the prison administration for ill-treatment were rarely investigated. In some cases, the police refused to register the complaints of victims or their relatives. Human rights lawyers were subjected to harassment and intimidation and their clients were also harassed in an attempt to curtail the lawyers' activities.
Q 0n6July, JudgeMokhtarYahiaoui, Presidentofthe loth Court at the First Instance Court in Tunis, sent an open letter to President Ben 'Ali in which he criticized a situation where magistrates were forced to comply with executive decisions on the outcome of investigations and trials. He requested the implementation and guarantee of the constitutional principle of independence of the judiciary, Mokhtar Yahiaoui was thereafter suspended from his position, summoned before a disciplinary body, but restored to a post as President of the 5th Court just before the date set for the hearing, following a national and international solidarity campaign. In July, the UN Special Rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers sent an urgent appeal to the Tunisian authorities seeking clarification regarding the case, to which the government responded in November. At the end of the year. Judge Yahiaoui was summoned again before a disciplinary council. The council convened on 29 December and decided to dismiss him, apparently on charges that the content of the 6 July letter constituted in itself a breach of his professional duties. This decision coincided with the creation of an association for the independence of the judiciary of which Judge Yahiaoui was expected to become president.
Communications with the authorities
The authorities denied the existence of repression against human rights defenders and considered "null and void" the concerns expressed by AI on the administration of justice. There were no responses to concerns raised by Al on individual cases.
Al country reports/visits Report
• Tunisia: Joint report on the continuing deterioration of the human rights situation in Tunisia (Al Index: MDE 30/031/2001) Visit
Two AE deLe^tes visited Turisia in S^tartoe: (see abcjve).
245	Amnesty International Report 2002
