KYRCYZSTAN
KYRCYZ REPUBLIC
Head of state: AskarAkayev
Head of government: Kurmanbek Bakiev
Capital: Bishkek
Population: 5 million
Official languages: Kyrgyz, Russian
Death penalty: retentionist
Human rights defenders, including journalists, faced continued harassment. One prisoner of conscience was released from prison. Members ofthe Uighur ethnic minority were at risk of forcible deportation to China. At least 10 death sentences were passed during the year.
Background
As a result of heightened security measures following the attacks in the USA on 11 September, detentions of suspected members of banned Islamic organizations increased and ethnic tensions were exacerbated. At least 50 members of Hizb-ut-TahririPany of Liberation) were reportedly convicted after unfair trials on charges of distributing leaflets and inciting national, racial or religious intolerance; dozens more were detained. The majority of the detentions reportedly took place in southern regions, bordering Uzbekistan, and the majority of those detained were apparently ethnic Uzbeks, Relatives of those arrested alleged that they were targeted because of their ethnic origin.
Prisoner of conscience
On 20 March the Supreme Court turned down an appeal against his September 2000 conviction by Topchubek
150
Amnesty International Report 2002
KYR
Turgunaliev, leader of the opposition ErkindikiUherly) party and chairman of the independent human rights organization Guild of Prisoners of Conscience. The Supreme Court upheld the November 2000 decision by Bishkek City Court to reduce his 16-year prison sentence to six years on appeal.
In January and again in July, 6o-year-oldTopchubek Turgunaliev was moved from a labour colony outside Bishkek to a prison hospital, reportedly to receive treatment for a deteriorating heart condition. He was released from prison on 20 August after being granted a special presidential pardon.
Topchubek Turgunaliev had been convicted on charges connected with an alleged plot to assassinate the President; seven others were also convicted in the trial. He had consistently denied the charges and alleged that the case against him was fabricated by the Ministry of National Security (MNS) in order to punish him for his peaceful opposition political activities.
Harassment of human rights defenders
The authorities continued to harass a number of independent newspapers and human rights organizations, as well as several individual human rights defenders and independent journalists. Q On 13 March Tolekan Ismailova, the leader of the Coalition of NGOs for Democracy and Civil Society, was attacked by an unidentified assailant as she left her home. She was hit over the head and lost consciousness. Human rights sources alleged that she had been deliberately targeted by the authorities to frighten her into stopping her activities to promote and monitor human rights.
Q On 27june the office of the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights (KCHR) in Osh was temporarily shut down by the MNS. Noomagan Arkabaev, the KCHR coordinator for Osh Region, was detained and charged with "public appeals for the violent overthrow of the constitutional order". During the search of the KCHR office, MNS officers claimed to have discovered leaflets which called for the overthrow of the President. The KCHR alleged that the real reason for the arrest of Noomagan Arkabaev was because he had prepared articles for publication accusing the director of the MNS of Osh Region of corruption. He was released from detention on 18 July on medical grounds when his health sharply deteriorated as a result of a hunger-strike.
Political prisoner
On 22 January Bishkek Military Court sentenced Felix Kulov, the chairman ofthe opposition Ar-Namys (Dignity) party, to seven years' imprisonment on reportedly fabricated and politically motivated charges of abuse of authority while serving as a Minister of National Security.
In August 2000 Bishkek Military Court had cleared Felix Kulov of the same charges. In September 2000, after the prosecution had lodged a protest against his acquittal, the Board of the Kyrgyz Military Court ruled that the verdict should be reconsidered, and ordered a retrial in Bishkek Military Court under a new presiding
judge. Felix Kulov's supporters had alleged that his arrest and the criminal case brought against him had been intended to disqualify him from running in the October 2000 presidential elections.
In July the Supreme Court rejected Felix Kulov's appeal against the verdict. He was also facing new charges of embezzlement and abuse of office while he was governor of Chui Region and mayor of Bishkek.
Fear of forcible deportation
In January, China and Kyrgyzstan signed an agreement on cooperation, including on mutual extradition, of "criminals hiding on their territories". According to unofficial sources, Kyrgyzstan had been actively cooperating with China in tracing Uighur separatists from Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous Region in the People's Republic of China, living in Kyrgyzstan; Chinese State Security officers were reported to have regularly visited Bishkek where they detained or assisted the Kyrgyz authorities in arresting Uighurs. Al feared that Uighurs extradited to China would be at risk of torture and possibly the death penalty for alleged "separatist" activities.
Q In March, four Uighurs, two of them Chinese citizens, were sentenced to death after being accused of having caused bomb explosions which killed four people in the city of Osh in 1998. In September the Supreme Court confirmed their death sentences. Supporters of the men claimed that they had nothing to do with the bombings, but rather that they had been targeted and prosecuted because of their ethnic origin. Due to a moratorium on executions in Kyrgyzstan the men were not in immediate danger of being executed. However, there was a danger that China might request the extradition of the two Chinese nationals.
Death penalty
In June the military court of Batken garrison sentenced to death two members of the banned Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan (IMU) (see Uzbekistan entry). The men, one Russian and one Tajik, were captured by Kyrgyz troops during military operations against IMU detachments in Batken Region in August 2000. They were accused of being mercenaries and were charged among other offences with terrorism, hostage-taking, banditry and premeditated murder, the latter being the only charge to carry a possible death sentence. Unofficial sources reported that although the prosecution had failed to provide evidence that the two men had themselves killed any Kyrgyz soldiers, they were nevertheless held responsible for murders committed by their organization. The Military Court of Kyrgyzstan upheld their death sentences in November.
Al country reports/visits
Report
• Central Asia: No excuseforescalating human rights violations (Al Index: EUR 04/002/2001 )
151	Amnesty International Report 2002
