PAPUA NEW GUINEA
PAPUANEWCUINEA
Head of state: Queen Elizabeth II, represented by Silas Atopare
Head of government: Mekere Morauta Capital: Port Moresby Population: 4.9 million
Official languages: English, Papua New Guinea Pidgin Death penalty: abolitionist in practice
The peace process in Bougainville led to far^eaching agreements between the government and provincial representatives. There was increasing concern about reported excessive use offeree by police. More than 220 asylum-seekers intercepted by the Australian navy were arbitrarily detained on an isolated island.
Background
In March, soldiers at three army bases seized weapons from an armoury and demanded the resignation of Prime Minister Sir Mekere Morauta's government over proposed military reforms. The stand-off ended after two weeks of negotiations when the government gave up plans to halve the army's manpower and granted rebel soldiers an amnesty.
Lack of police and military cooperation hampered efforts to investigate alleged ill-treatment of criminal suspects and the suspected extrajudicial execution of Bougainville transitional government premier Theodore Miriung in 1997.
Bougainville peace process
Provincial and national leaders signed a major agreement in August on political autonomy for Bougainville, reconciliation and on a future referendum on independence. The Bougainville Peace Agreement, which was supported by the UN Security Council, also set out responsibilities for human rights, international obligations and the disposal of arms by opposition groups. In November, the government
supported the agreement, paving the way for parliament to finally decide on its implementation.
Po I ice u se of excess i ve fo rce
Armed police units continued to use excessive force with impunity. Government investigations into reported ill-treatment or extrajudicial killings were hampered by a lack of cooperation from some officers. Q Four men were shot dead during a police operation in June against anti-government protesters in circumstances suggesting excessive use of lethal force. In public statements, the investigating Coroner and the Chief Magistrate stated that police were "avoiding bringing those responsible before the law by using the Coroner's Office" to delay investigations. The Coroner said that armed police shooting downhill towards protesters near a university dormitory "were aiming with the intention of killing." In July, retired judge Sir Robert Woods was appointed to chair a Commission of Inquiry which held public hearings into the circumstances which led to the killings. The government did not make public any details of the commission's findings.
Arbitrary detention of asylum-seekers
In October, 216 mainly Iraqi asylum-seekers intercepted by the Australian navy were detained at Lombrum, a remote military base in Manus Province, following agreements between the governments of Papua New Guinea (PNG) and Australia and the International Organization for Migration which administered the isolated detention centre at Australia's expense. After their arrival at Lombrum, the asylum-seekers reportedly tied placards asking to meet UN representatives on the detention centre fence, but these were only seen by local residents. The PNG government did not allow the asylum-seekers an opportunity to claim asylum in PNG and made no effort to individually assess the need for their detention, in contravention of international law. Australian immigration officials later processed their applications for refugee status under procedures and criteria not made available for public scrutiny. When PNG Foreign Minister John Pundari publicly opposed Australia's request in October to send another 1,000 asylum-seekers to Lombrum, he was removed from office by Prime Minister Morauta. Al country reports/visits Statement
• Papua NewCuinea: Investigate police killings (Al Index: ASA34/001/2001)
192
Amnesty International Report 2002
