DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
Head of state and government: Hipólito Mejía
Ca p ita I: Sa nto Do m i ngo
Population: 8.5 million
Official language: Spanish
Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes
2001 treaty ratifications/signatures: Optional
Protocol to the UN Women's Convention
The pattern of unlawful killings by security forces, noted in previous years, continued in 2001. Although a growing number of such cases were tried by civilian courts, the majority continued to be heard before police or military tribunals. There were reports of ill-treatment of criminal suspects in police stations. Prisons remained severely overcrowded, with at least ha If the total number of prisoners in pre-trial detention.
Background
On 23 March, the UN Human Rights Committee reviewed the Dominican Republic's fourth periodic report on its implementation of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The Committee's recommendations focused on illegal killings by security forces, police and military courts, torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, prison conditions and treatment of suspected Haitians. The national Commission for the Reform and Modernization of the Armed Forces and the Police, set up in 2000, continued its review of police tribunals. The military were given increased policing functions, with the creation of new riot and anti-terrorism units within the armed forces.
Killings and excessive use efforce
Killings in disputed circumstances by police and military continued. Some appeared to be extrajudicial executions. In many cases, the authorities alleged that the victims were killed in exchanges of gunfire with criminal suspects, but this version was often disputed in witness testimony and other evidence. Q On 29 September, à police officer repeatedly shot Pedro Manuel Contreras, aged 19, in his family's house. He then reportedly dragged the body into the street where he continued to shoot at it. When Pedro Manuel Contreras' mother tried to intervene she was held at gunpoint by two other officers. According to an official complaint lodged by the family on 24 August, a month before the killing took place, they had requested a local non-governmental organization to intervene with the authorities to provide protection for their son, as he had received several death threats from the same police officer who shot him. The officer was suspended from his post.
Demonstrations
Demonstrations against police brutality and electricity blackouts took place across the country throughout the year, during which several demonstrators were killed and many were injured or arrested. In some instances the military were sent to help police the demonstrations.
On 13 February, hundreds of doctors and other medical personnel participating in a protest march in Santo Domingo against new social security measures were fired at by police in an attempt to disperse the marchers and prevent them from reaching the National Congress building. Several doctors reportedly received wounds from rubber bullets or pellets, and others were beaten and kicked.
Police tribunals
The Commission for the Reform and Modernization of the Armed Forces continued its review of police tribunals. Both the police and the military were governed by their own codes of justice, which dictated whether members were to be tried by police or mUitary rather than civilian courts. The Supreme Court of Justice was considering a petition, initiated by seven civil society organizations, demanding that police tribunals be declared unconstitutional. In a step widely perceived as positive, by June civil prosecutions had begun against seven police officers accused of shooting civilians.
Amnestylnternational Report2002
EAS
Forced repatriation
Forced repatriations continued to be carried out throughout the year of those of Haitian origin and Dominicans suspected of being Haitian because of their colour.
Father Ruquoy, a Belgian priest and human rights activist, continued to denounce ill-treatment of Haitian sugar workers, in particular the increasing numbers of arrests and forced deportations by the army. After he testified at the Inter-American Court of Human Rights in August 2000, Father Ruquoy became the victim of anonymous death threats and attacks, and was threatened at knife point in his home in April 2001.
On 16 January, soldiers opened fire with machine guns on a lorry transporting Haitians across the border at Lascahobas- Two passengers, Théodore Alexandre and Telvi Jean, died later from bullet wounds, and an unspecified number of people were injured.
Following the attacks in the USA on 11 September, there were reports of harassment, arrest and detention of people believed to be Muslim or of Middle Eastern origin.
Prison conditions
Severe overcrowding and poor conditions reportedly continued in the majority of the country's prisons. Skin diseases were rampant and contagious diseases such as tuberculosis were of major concern. Medical care was inadequate. Water and sanitary conditions were substandard in many prisons, contributing to intestinal and other health problems. The government announced that the standard and quality of food in prisons would be improved, and that an automated information system to record prisoner numbers and details would be introduced.
Torture and ill-treatment
Reports of beatings of detainees in prison and police detention continued to be received. There were several reports of killings of detainees, by military or police guards, generally in the context of escape attempts or prison riots.
Several activists were detained on 18 June, the day before a national day of protest against cuts in the national electricity supply and the economic measures introduced by the government, and to call for the removal of the chief of police. Victor Gerónimo was allegedly beaten by three police officers, and Fernando Peña was said to have been beaten about the head by a police officer, causing damage to his right eye. The complaint subsequently lodged by the men was rejected by the district prosecutor on the grounds that it did not identify those responsible by name.
Al country reports/visits
Report
• Dominican Republic: UN Human Rights Committee's recommendations must be implemented (Al Index: AMR 27/003/2001)
