TANZANIA
UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA
Head of state: Benjamin Mkapa Head of government: Frederick Sumaye Capital: Dares Salaam Population: 36 million Official languages: Kiswahili, English Death penalty: retentionist
Securityforces shot dead at least 22 peopleduring demonstrations in circumstances suggesting unlawful use of lethal force. Torture, including rape, and ill-treatment were widely reported. Hundreds of political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, were detained. Two opposition leaders were held as prisoners of conscience for eight months. Courts continued to pass death sentences.
Background
A political impasse surrounding disputed election results in 2000 and the brutal suppression of demonstrations in January 2001 continued until October when a political accord was signed between the ruling Chama Cha Mapinduzi (CCM), Party of the Revolution, and the main opposition party, the Civic United Front (CUF). It restated the unimplemented 1999 agreement on reconciliation and democratic reform. It also identified measures to address human rights concerns stemming from the events of January 2001; these included the establishment of an independent commission of inquiry to investigate the January unrest and measures to assist the victims and their families. No details as to the time-frame for implementation of these and other measures were available by the end of the year.
Parliament passed a bill in March to establish a Commission on Human Rights and Good Governance, No appointments were known to have been made by the end of the year.
January demonstrations
On 27 January demonstrations organized by the CUF were held in Zanzibar town, three towns on Pemba island and in Dar es Salaam and other mainland towns. They had been organized to protest against the election results of 2000 and the government's refusal to hold new elections in Zanzibar. Killings, large-scale arrests, beatings and torture of CUF officials and supporters occurred before, during and after the demonstrations, which were declared illegal by the government. Hundreds fled to neighbouring Kenya following the violence. Unlawful killings
In Pemba security forces, reportedly armed with pistols, rifles and sub-machine guns, shot dead at least 22 demonstrators, in circumstances suggesting unlawful use of lethal force. Q In Micheweni, Pemba island, security forces used tear gas against demonstrators, reportedly followed by
240
Amnesty International Report 2002
THA
indiscriminate use of live ammunition without advance warning. Police chased and tried to arrest demonstrators, reportedly shooting some in nearby swamps and from a helicopter. Imprisonment
Hundreds of people, among them possible prisoners of conscience, were arrested and held without access to lawyers or families. Most were released on bail shortly afterwards. Following the CCM-CUF political accord, charges were dropped against all those accused of participating in an illegal demonstration. Q Ibrahim Lipumba, CUF Chairperson, was among nearly 50 CUF officials and supporters arrested during a meeting on 25 January and beaten by armed riot police. Forty-four of those arrested were charged with holding an illegal meeting and released on bail. The case against them was dismissed in December. Q In Pemba 18 people were arrested and charged in connection with the murder of a police officer, HaJi Muslim Simai, during the demonstrations. All except one were released in May after the Attorney General dismissed the charges against them. Q Juma Duni HaJi and Machano Khamis Ali, leading members of the CUF, were arrested on 23 February on charges of participating in an illegal demonstration. They were released the following day but immediately rearrested and charged with murdering HaJi Muslim Simai, bringing to 20 the number of people charged in connection with the murder (see previous case). The two men remained in Zanzibar Central Prison until 15 October when, following the CCM-CUF agreement, charges against them were withdrawn and they were released. They were among 18 prisoners of conscience who had been held on charges of treason from 1997 to 2000. Q In January CUF Secretary General Seif Sharif Hamad and 39 others were arrested and charged with armed conspiracy and theft of weapons, and released on bail. Al believed the charges may have been politically motivated. Thetrial was adjourned several times. Charges against Seif Hamad and at least 10 others remained pending at the end of the year. Torture and ill-treatment Methods of torture used against hundreds of the demonstrators included beatings with long wooden batons and canes, and kichura (being made to squat and "jump like a frog"). Women were beaten, raped and otherwise sexually abused by police after the demonstrations in Zanzibar. In May police were reported to have set up an investigation into the beating of five CUF supporters in Pemba. No details as to the outcome of this investigation were available at the end of the year.
Q Police in Zanzibar town reportedly gang-raped a five-months pregnant woman and her two teenage daughters in front of each other after they entered their house searching for male demonstrators in January.
Freedom of expression
Journalists and others were detained for carrying out their professional duties or for the non-violent expression of their views.
Q A magistrates' court sentenced Khamis Rajab Dibagula, a Muslim preacher, to 18 months' imprisonment in July under Section 129 of the Penal Code on charges of insulting Christianity. In August, the same day as demonstrations organized by Muslims to protest against his imprisonment, the High Court ruled the sentence unlawful and ordered his release. O In November Augustine Mrema, National Chairman of the Tanzanian Labour Party, and Rugemeleze Nshala, President of the Lawyers' Environmental Action Team, were briefly detained after security officers searched their properties, reportedly for materials about alleged deaths at Bulyanhulu goldmine in 1996.
Al country reports/visits
Statement
• Tanzania: Inquiry into Zanzibar killings must be prompt, independent and impartial (Al Index: APR 56/013/2001) Visit
An Al delegation visited Kenya and Tanzania in February and March to investigate reports of human rights violations during the January demonstrations and to interview refugees. Its findings were addressed to the government in November
