PARAGUAY
One person was killed in circumstances suggesting an extrajudicial execution. A peasant union organizer was shot dead and several others were injured when police apparently used excessive force to break up a demonstration. Peasant leaders were arrested and intimidated in the context of land disputes. Prosecutions for human rights violations under the past administration continued.
An unprecedented wave of unrest and disturbances swept the country in the first three months of the year. Numerous peasant protests and demonstrations took place, some of which were violently repressed by the state security forces. In February police violently broke up a blockade of Highway No. Ill near the town of Guayaiby, San Pedro department, by peasants, some of whom were armed with farming implements. At least 20 protesters were injured by the Police Special Operations unit when rubber bullets, tear-gas and buckshot were fired indiscriminately into the crowd. The demonstration had been called to protest at the violent eviction days before of a group of 400 landless peasant families from a farm belonging to a Senator of the ruling Colorado Party. At least 40 protesters were arrested. Digno Brítez Pérez, a lawyer working for the In-terchurch Committee, a human rights organization, received repeated anonymous death threats reportedly because of his work representing the interests of the evicted peasant families. In March he presented a formal criminal complaint against the police alleging malicious wounding, death threats and torture in connection with incidents in Guayaiby.
PARAGUAY/PERU
The case had not been concluded by the end of the year.
In April peasant leader and former candidate for the governorship of Itapúa, Esteban Balbuena Quiñónez, was killed in circumstances giving rise to suspicions that ruling party officials might have been involved. Esteban Balbuena, who was a regional leader of the Itapúa Regional Farmers' Committee and a member of the Workers' Party, was shot dead as he approached his home in the community of Colonia 7 de Agosto, district of Carlos Antonio López, Itapúa department. The previous month Esteban Balbuena had requested the Commission for Investigation of Unlawful Acts of the National Congress to investigate alleged "political persecution" against him by a member of the governing committee of the ruling Colorado Party. Police authorities denied the murder was politically motivated and arrested a number of people from the community. Most were released without chcirge. The investigation was continuing at the end of the year.
Sebastian Larrosa, student and secretary of the peasant union Organization of Peasant Farmers for Integrated Development, was shot dead in May by a police sergeant when police apparently used excessive force to break up a demonstration in the town of Tacuara, department of San Pedro, during a general strike. Mariano Godoy, a journalist from the national newspaper ABC Color, was also shot and seriously wounded by the security forces when he went to Sebastian Larrosa's assistance. The commander of the National Police opened internal disciplinary investigations against the sergeant and 18 police agents who participated in the operation to disperse the demonstration. The sergeant was arrested and detained. The Minister of the Interior, who on the eve of the strike had reportedly said that any demonstrations would be repressed, denied that he had given orders to open fire on the demonstrators.
Leaders of peasant organizations reported constant intimidation and anonymous death threats as a result of their activities. Many reports were received of the participation of civilian gunmen, believed to be acting for landowners, in land conflicts. On several occasions civilian gunmen cooperated with the regular security forces in illegal evictions and detentions of
squatters. In August, 11 landless peasants were seized by armed civilians from land they had been occupying in Santa Rosa de Monday, Alto Paraná department. The captured men were later handed over by the civilian gunmen to prison authorities in Ciudad del Este, where they were then charged with illegal land occupation.
Judicial investigations continued into torture and deaths in custody of political prisoners committed under the former administration of General Stroessner (see previous Amnesty International Reports). New evidence emerged from police records confiscated by judicial officials in December 1992 and from the records of other branches of the security forces uncovered in early 1993. However, sentences were passed in only one further case. In November Pastor Coronel, the former head of the Police Investigations Department (dip-c), Sabino Montonaro, former Minister of the Interior, and Lucilo Benítez and Agustín Belotto, former dip-c officials, were charged in connection with the torture and death of Amilcar Maria Oviedo Duarte, who was killed in detention in 1976. Pastor Coronel, already serving a prison sentence, was sentenced to a further 25 years in prison and the others to five years in prison.
