ARMENIA
Seventeen members of the Hare Krishna religious sect alleged that they were ill-treated in detention. Six Azerbaijani prisoners were allegedly killed in custody. At least four people were sentenced to death, but there were no judicial executions.
Parliamentary discussion of a new draft constitution continued (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1994), but it had not been adopted by the end of the year. President Ter-Petrosyan again met his Azerbaijani counterpart in talks aimed at resolving the Karabakh conflict (see Azerbaijan entry),
The continuing Karabakh conflict made it difficult to investigate allegations that Azerbaijani civilians taken hostage in connection with the fighting were held in Armenia, in private hands but with the complicity of the authorities. The whereabouts of Yolchu Gyoyushov and Rama-zan Mamedov (see Amnesty International Report 1994), said to have been seized from neighbouring Georgia and held pending an exchange for Armenian hostages in Azerbaijan, remained unknown at the end of the year.
Seventeen devotees of the Hare Krishna sect alleged that they were beaten in police custody on 31 August in the capital, Yerevan. They had been detained at their temple after an altercation with four men who the devotees claimed had been among a group who had entered the premises two days earlier and had assaulted several sect members. The devotees also alleged that the police refused to respond to their request for protection during the earlier attack, or to investigate the incident.
ARMENIA/AUSTRALIA
There were conflicting reports about the circumstances in which eight Azerbaijani prisoners died on 29 January in Ministry of Defence custody in Yerevan. Six died of gunshot wounds to the head, and in three cases the muzzle of the gun was in contact with the head at the time the shot was fired. An independent forensic expert dismissed an early claim that these men were shot while trying to escape, saying that the pattern of their injuries suggested "execution-type shootings". However, the expert did not absolutely exclude the possibility of mass suicide, a later explanation given by the Armenian Military Procurator who said seven of the men shot themselves with one pistol in several minutes after an escape bid failed. The seventh victim died of a gunshot wound to the chest, and the eighth of throat wounds typical of suicide. A commission of inquiry was established, but no results were known to have been published by the end of the year.
Two other Azerbaijani prisoners, Bakhtiar Khanali ogly Shabiev and Garay Muzafar ogly Nagiev, were sentenced to death in Yerevan in April. They were convicted of murdering three ethnic Armenians in the Kelbajar district of Azerbaijan and of attempting to poison a reservoir in Armenia. According to official statistics, at least two other people were sentenced to death during the first half of 1994. In all, 13 death sentences had been passed since 1990, but no executions had taken place since 1991.
Amnesty International continued to express concern about allegations that hostages from the Karabakh conflict were held in Armenia. The authorities responded that their investigations failed to substantiate any of the reports raised with them. Amnesty International urged comprehensive and impartial investigations into reports of ill-treatment in custody and allegations that at least six Azerbaijani prisoners had been killed in custody. Amnesty International also called for all pending death sentences to be commuted. A response from the authorities in August confirmed that no executions had taken place during President Ter-Petrosyan's term of office, and that this policy would not change for the remainder of his tenure.
