JORDAN
About 450 security detainees, including possible prisoners of conscience, were arrested during the year and many were held in prolonged incommunicado detention. Most were released without charge, but at least 40 were brought to trial before the State Security Court whose procedures do not satisfy international standards for fair trial. There were allegations of torture by the General Intelligence Department (gid). Fourteen people were executed.
The state of war between Jordan and Israel ended in July and a peace treaty was signed in October. Measures taken against opponents of the treaty included a ban on independent preachers giving sermons in mosques and on demonstrations.
Several journalists were prosecuted
JORDAN
under the Press and Publications Law during the year. For example, Nidal Mansur, editor of the newspaper al-Bihd, was detained twice, once for three hours and the second time for three days, in connection with articles pubhshed in the paper. Other journalists, including Ramadan al-Rawashidah, a journahst for the newspaper al-Ahali] its former editor, Jamil al-Nimri; and Sana 'Attiyah and Georges Hawatmah, both with the Jordan Times, were fined in connection with articles published in 1993 concerning allegations of torture raised during a trial before the State Security Court (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1994).
About 450 security detainees were arrested. Most were detained by the Gid, frequently in prolonged incommunicado detention. The majority were released without charge. At least 10 members of an Islamist organization, the Liberation Party in Jordan (lpj), including prisoners of conscience, were detained by the gid. Two were arrested in August after giving sermons in mosques opposing the ending of the state of war with Israel. One of them, Al-Shaikh Taher 'Abd al-Hamid, was released without charge after three weeks. The other, Salem al-Ja'fari, was held for over a month before his release on bail. He was tried before the State Security Court and acquitted of charges of slandering the King. Eight others were arrested during November. Four of them were held as prisoners of conscience after conviction of membership of an illegal organization and distribution of leaflets opposed to the King. They were sentenced by the State Security Court to three years' imprisonment. The other four had not been charged by the end of the year.
In February between 15 and 30 members of Fatah-Revolutionary Council (frc), a Palestinian group led by Abu Nidal, were arrested in the wake of the assassination of a Jordanian diplomat in Lebanon (see Lebanon entry) for which frc members were allegedly responsible. They were held for more than a month by the gid and were denied visits by lawyers or family members. They were then released without charge.
Up to 40 people were arrested after two cinemas were bombed in January and February, injuring several people. Twenty-five people were eventually charged, three in absentia, with forming an illegal organization; conspiracy to carry out terrorist activities; illegal possession of explosives with the intent to carry out subversive actions; and concealing crimes related to national security. The group was alleged to have been composed largely of "Arab Afghans" - men who had returned ft'om fighting with Islamist groups in Afghanistan. Some were also alleged to have been members of the Palestine Liberation Army in Jordan. The trial of the 25 before the State Security Court began in August. Eleven of the accused were sentenced to death (three in absentia) in December.
The trial before the State Security Court of five military cadets and five others (including two who were tried in absentia) ended in January (see Amnesty International Report 1994). All 10 were convicted of plotting to kill King Hussein bin Talal, and four were convicted of membership of the lpj. Isma'il Wahwah and the two tried in absentia were sentenced to death. Three others were sentenced to life imprisonment. and four to 15 years' imprisonment. An appeal against their sentences to the Court of Cassation had not been concluded by the end of the year.
There were allegations of torture by the gid. At least 16 of those on trial in the "Arab Afghans" case (see above) retracted their confessions during their trial, alleging that they had been extracted as a result of "physical pressure". They had been held incommunicado for up to six months before being transferred to prison. It was not clear whether the court had ordered an investigation into their allegations of torture.
At least 14 people were executed during the year. People on death row are informed of their execution only minutes
JORDAN/KAZAKHSTAN
beforehand. Their families do not have the opportunity for a last visit and are informed only after the execution has taken place. At least two men, 'Uthman Subh and Muhammad Abu Zinah, have apparently been held under sentence of death since 1976.
Amnesty International received reports that some Iraqi asylum-seekers, deported to Jordan from third countries, had been forcibly returned to Iraq where they were at risk of human rights abuses. No information about their fate or whereabouts was known.
Amnesty International called for the commutation of all death sentences and expressed concern about the use of prolonged incommunicado detention which facilitates torture and ill-treatment. In March Amnesty Intemational published a report, Jordan: Human Rights Reforms: Achievements and Obstacles, which discussed the human rights reforms introduced since November 1989 and Amnesty International's persisting concerns in the country. Recommendations included the review of legislation restricting freedoms and regulating interrogations; prompt access for detainees to judges, lawyers and families; and effective protection for asylum-seekers. The report was submitted to the un Human Rights Committee which considered Jordan's third periodic report on the implementation of the International Covenant of Civil and Political Rights in July. The Committee welcomed the changes introduced in Jordan since 1989, but expressed concern about the death penalty and about reports of incommunicado detention, torture and ill-treatment. The Committee recommended that measures be taken towards abolition of the death penalty and of the State Security Court. It also recommended steps to prevent torture and ill-treatment, to restrict administrative and incommunicado detention and to place detainees under judicial supervision. In March Amnesty International issued a report, Jordan: Executions on the Increase.
The authorities provided information on specific cases raised by Amnesty International and stated that arrest and detention orders for detainees held by the gid, and orders denying access, are the responsibility of the Public Prosecutor of the State Security Court, and not of the gid itself. However, Amnesty International was
unaware that these functions had been carried out by anyone other than gid officials, some of whom can act as public prosecutors.
