DENMARK
There were significant developments concerning alleged police misconduct in previous years.
In February Denmark ratified the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty.
In June the government suspended the use of the "fixed leg-lock" as a method of restraint. This restraint method involves laying detainees face down, handcuffing them behind their backs, bending their legs, wedging one foot against the opposite knee and wedging the other foot up under the handcuffs. In December the suspension of the use of the fixed leg-lock was made permanent; assessment of other methods of restraint was under way.
In-court investigations led by prosecutors into individual cases of alleged ill-treatment in previous years, including the cases of 11 people who alleged that they had been ill-treated during a police operation in Christiania, a community in Copenhagen, had not been concluded by the end of the year (see Amnesty International Report 1994). Some of those detained in Christiania alleged that they had
DENMARK
been restrained in the fixed leg-lock.
The civil action on behalf of Benjamin Schou, who suffered permanent brain damage after being arrested by police in 1992, was still pending at the end of the year (see Amnesty International Report 1994). In the light of evidence that he had been restrained in the fixed leg-lock, the case was resubmitted for further opinion to the Danish Medical-Legal Council.
The civil action for compensation brought by Babading Fatty, a Gambian national who was ill-treated in 1990 in a Copenhagen prison, remained unresolved (see Amnesty International Reports 1992 to 1994).
Twenty-six people were tried in connection with a violent demonstration in the N0rrebro district of Copenhagen on 18 to 19 May 1993. Eight of the accused were sentenced to up to three months' imprisonment, one was fined and the rest were acquitted of charges relating to the incident. The convictions and all but one of the acquittals were appealed. During the demonstration, several police officers had been injured and at least 11 people, most of whom were reportedly bystanders, had been wounded by shots fired in disputed circumstances by police in riot gear and plain clothes (see Amnesty International Report 1994).
In August the Director of Public Prosecutions (dpp) published a report of the investigation into the events, which was in large part based on investigations by police. The report described how, outnumbered and without tear-gas, police were ordered to advance on stone-throwing demonstrators owing to imprecise and misinterpreted radio communications. The report concluded among other things that: faced with violent bombardments of stone-throwing demonstrators and diminution of their numbers owing to injuries, believing that retreat of the police chain would place injured officers in further jeopardy, and having run out of tear-gas, there were no grounds to criticize the police judgment that it was necessary to draw their weapons, fire "warning shots" and, in some instances, aimed shots. The report was critical of demonstrators' violent actions and some actions of individual officers. It recommended some changes in police procedures, regulations and equipment. However, the precise circumstances in which police fired each of the 113 shots
and in which at least 11 people were injured had not been made public at the end of the year.
The dpp started a supplementary investigation after an independent analysis of a video recording indicated that evidence that an order to shoot at demonstrators' legs might have been given had been overlooked. Charges against one police officer in connection with alleged ill-treatment during the arrest of a demonstrator and criminal investigations against three other officers, who allegedly fired shots which injured six people, were pending at the end of the year.
In October a governmental commission on the handling of complaints against the police published its report recommending that regional Public Prosecutors take over this task.
In April Amnesty International welcomed the initiative of the government and Greenland Home Rule Administration in setting up the Greenlandic Legal Commission to review and make recommendations for revision of Greenland's legal and criminal justice systems. The organization urged consideration of additional measures to ease the deterioration of the physical and psychological health of Greenlandic prisoners serving sentences in Denmark after conviction for serious crimes in Greenland (see Amnesty International Report 1994).
In May Amnesty International delegates met the Minister of Justice to discuss the organization's concern about reports of police ill-treatment, including the use of the fixed leg-lock.
In June Amnesty International published a report, Denmark: Police Ill-treat-ment. It highlighted cases of alleged police ill-treatment including at violent demonstrations and during a special 15-month police operation in 1992 to 1993 against hashish dealing in Christiania. It also expressed concern over the authorities' failure to address adequately complaints of ill-treatment. Amnesty International recommended an immediate end to the use of the fixed leg-lock; the establishment of an independent commission of inquiry to examine the use of force and restraint by police; establishment of an independent and impartial body to investigate and act on complaints against the police; and the review and revision of police training and equipment. The organization called on the
DENMARK/DJIBOUTI
government to initiate independent impartial investigations into allegations of ill-treatment by police, and where appropriate to pay victims compensation for the injuries and ill-treatment suffered, and to institute criminal or disciplinary procedures against alleged perpetrators. Following the publication of the report, the government announced the suspension of the use of the fixed leg-lock and the initiation of a review of restraint methods used by and taught to police.
Amnesty International welcomed the government's suspension of the use of the fixed leg-lock which the organization considers to be cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. It also welcomed the announcement of thorough reviews of restraint techniques used by police. The organization continued to urge the government to adopt its broader recommendations.
