CONGO
Government security forces and alUed armed civilian militias were responsible for arbitrary detention, torture and extrajudicial executions. The authorities took no steps to investigate human rights violations. Armed opposition groups also abducted and deliberately killed unarmed civilians.
Political violence, which had erupted in 1993 (see Amnesty International Report 1994), continued during the first months of the year. Dozens of unarmed civilians were killed in fighting between government troops loyal to President Pascal Lis-souba and armed political groups, which effectively controlled parts of the capital, Brazzaville. The main armed groups and
CONGO
militias opposed to the government were loyal to Bernard Kolelas, leader of the Mouvement congolais pour la démocratie et le développement intégral (mcddi), Congolese Movement for Democracy and Integrated Development. A cease-fire was signed in late January under the auspices of the Comité parlementaire inter-régional du Pool et des pays du Niari pour la paix, Inter-regional Parliamentary Peace Committee of Pool and Niari regions, on which the major political parties were represented. President Lissouba ordered the recruitment in January of 2,000 new members of the army, national police and gendarmerie and created special units. In February one such unit, the Force d'interposition, Intervention Force, was deployed in Brazzaville to disarm civilians and to allow people who had been displaced by fighting to return home.
An international commission of judges from the Organization of African Unity, the European Union, Gabon and France, which was investigating alleged irregularities in elections in May 1993 (see Amnesty /niernaf/ona^ Report 1994], reported in February, It annulled the results in nine constituencies, but this did not affect control of the National Assembly by the Union panafricaine pour la démocratie sociale (uPADs), Pan-African Union for Social Democracy. Parliamentarians from both the goverrunent and the opposition appealed to their supporters to accept the results. Two opposition leaders. Bernard Kolelas and Jean-Pierre Thystère-Tchicaya, were elected as mayors of Brazzaville and the town of Pointe-No ire, respectively. The elections had been delayed for two years.
Government troops and allied militia were responsible for arbitrary detention,
torture and extrajudicial executions.
The level of violence made it difficult for human rights organizations to carry out independent investigations and to confirm who was responsible for individual killings of defenceless civilians, many of whom appeared to have been targeted on account of their ethnic origin. Victims reportedly included both unarmed civilians and captured opposition combatants. Marcel Mpoudi, a taxi-driver, was arrested by members of the security forces in February after being stopped at a road-block. He was taken to a detention centre where he was reportedly beaten to death. His body was allegedly buried in the grounds of the detention centre. His arrest appeared to be based solely on his ethnic origin: he came from a part of the country where support for opposition parties was strong. In June armed militia allegedly allied to the Mouvance présidentielle, a coalition of parties loyal to President Lissouba, arbitrarily detained the drivers and conductors of two buses owned by opposition supporters. The captives were released after the police intervened.
There were reports that scores of people, mostly young men, were tortured by members of the security forces in Brazzaville's central police station early in the year.
The authorities took no steps to investigate human rights violations committed by government and security officials, effectively allowing their forces to commit abuses with impunity. In particular, there was no official inquiry into reports of extrajudicial executions by government forces in both 1993 and 1994 (see Amnesty International Report 1994).
Armed militia organized by the mcddi and other opposition political parties also committed abuses, including deliberate and arbitrary killings. In some cases prisoners appeared to be held as hostages. At the beginning of the year there were reports of abductions and of the killing of defenceless civilians who were perceived as government supporters. For example, four railway workers, including Jean Pierre Batoukounou, Fidèle Ngoma and Prosper Nkama were killed in February, apparently in retaliation for killings by government troops.
Abuses committed by armed political groups included the abduction of two political supporters of President Lissouba.
CONGO/COSTA RICA/COTE D'IVOIRE
They were held in June for several days and reportedly ill-treated.
Amnesty International called on the authorities to take steps to prevent extrajudicial executions by the security forces. Amnesty International urged the authorities to investigate all reports of extrajudicial executions and to bring those responsible to justice. Amnesty International also condemned abuses committed by armed opposition groups including hostage-taking and deliberate and arbitrary killings.
