EQUATORIAL GUINEA
Five prisoners of conscience serving sentences imposed after an unfair trial in October 1993 were released under an amnesty in June, as were nine untried detainees who appeared to be prisoners of conscience. Hundreds of suspected government opponents were detained without charge or trial for short periods. Most appeared to be prisoners of conscience.
EQUATORIAL GUINEA
Many were reported to have been tortured or ill-treated. Seventeen political prisoners were convicted at two unfair trials. At least two people were extrajudicially executed by security forces. One person was reportedly sentenced to death and executed the next day.
At the opening in April of the new parliament elected in November 1993 (see Amnesty International Report 1994), President Teodoro Obiang Nguema promised greater respect for human rights. He announced that municipal elections would be held and promised that laws passed in 1992 and 1993, including the electoral law, would be revised. In June, at a conference of aid donors, the government agreed to compile an electoral register with the participation of opposition parties before taking a population census. However, in September the government started to compile a population census which opposition parties boycotted, on the grounds that the government might conduct local elections on the basis of a census which they had been unable to monitor.
In late November and early December the opposition Convergence for Social Democracy (cpds) held its first congress in Bata, capital of the mainland region of Rio Muni. It was the first congress to be held in Equatorial Guinea by an opposition party.
At the beginning of the year five prisoners of conscience were serving varying prison terms for conspiracy, incitement to rebellion and slander imposed in an unfair trial in October 1993 (see Amnesty International Report 1994). They and nine untried detainees who appeared to be prisoners of conscience were released under an amnesty in June to mark President Obiang Nguema's birthday. However, one of them, former sergeant Jacinto Nculu Abaga, was rearrested in October for reading an old Spanish military magazine: he was told that as he was no longer a soldier he should not read military publications. He remained in prison without charge or trial at the end of the year.
During the year at least 300 political activists and suspected government opponents were arbitrarily arrested in small groups or individually, especially in Rio Muni. Most were released uncharged after a few days or weeks. Many had to pay what officials called "fines", but which had no legal basis, in order to be released.
Those who could not or refused to pay were detained for longer periods at the whim of provincial government officials.
About 100 people were briefly detained in several towns in Rio Muni in January and February. Some were apparently arrested because they had not voted in the November 1993 elections, others because they were members of political parties which held political meetings. Others were arrested for criticizing government officials. Norberto "Tito" Mba Nze, a member of the cpds, was arrested and tortured in February in Akonibe, in the southeast of Rio Muni, for criticizing the behaviour of the government representative in the area. He was released over a week later. The government denied that Norberto "Tito" Mba Nze had been tortured or even arrested.
In March, 15 Equatorial Guineans who had been working in Gabon returned to Equatorial Guinea and were arrested in Acalayong, in southwest Rio Muni. Five others evaded arrest but one, former police sergeant Antonio Ndong, was later captured and deliberately killed. The 15 were accused of attempting to attack the local military barracks as part of a plot to overthrow the government. They were taken to Bata prison where they were severely tortured. Two other people - a woman and a man - were also arrested and accused of sheltering those who had evaded arrest. They too were imprisoned in Bata.
Small groups of people were arrested on Bioko Island between March and May for allegedly belonging to the Movement for the Self-determination of Bioko Island (maib), a non-violent political party which had not obtained legal recognition. They included Weja Chicampo who was arrested in May in Rebola, 20 kilometres from the capital, Malabo. Members of his family and friends were also briefly detained. A week after his arrest Weja Chicampo was interrogated by security officials for several hours on two consecutive days. The interrogation was filmed and an edited version was later shown on television. Two others accused of belonging to the maib were interrogated with Weja Chicampo but they were not detained. Weja Chiccimpo was one of nine detainees released uncharged under the June amnesty.
In July Deogracias Nguema, the president of the League for the Defence of
EQUATORIAL GUÍNEA
Human Rights in Equatorial Guinea, was arrested in Malabo while he was collecting testimonies from victims of human rights violations. He was released uncharged three weeks later.
Tension mounted in September after the authorities started to compile the population census. Between September and October scores of people who opposed the census, including human rights and political activists, were arrested in Rio Muni and ill-treated. Three human rights activists - Indalecio Abuy, Indalecio Eko and Tomás Nzo - were arrested in October outside Niefang in central Rio Muni where they had gone to investigate reports of human rights violations. They were released uncharged a week later. Three political activists were arrested in the border town of Acalayong when they returned from a meeting organized by the European Union in Gabon in October. They were taken to the main police station in Bata where they were severely beaten. The three - Plácido Micó, a leading member of the cpds who was a prisoner of conscience in 1992 (see Amnesty International Report 1993), Victorino Bolekia Banay, vice-president of the People's Democratic Alliance, and José Mecheba Ikaka, president of the National Democratic Union - were released uncharged several days later.
Three members of the cpds were arrested in November just before their party's congress. Marcos Manuel Ndong, the cpds representative in Spain, was arrested a few hours after his arrival in Bata. He was held without charge for several days and then expelled to Spain although he is an Equatorial Guinean citizen. This expulsion appeared to be illegal. Two other delegates were arrested in Akonibe and detained for several days.
There were two political trials. In July the 17 people who had been arrested in Acalayong in March were tried in Bata by a military court. Five defendants did not appear in court but no reason for this was given. The military trial procedures were unfair and there was no right of appeal. The court ignored the defendants' claims that they had been tortured. One defendant was acquitted and 16 were convicted of attempting to undermine the security of the state. Juan Mongomo Evolo and Rosendo Endong Nguema each received 30-year prison sentences, 12 defendants were each sentenced to 25 years' impris-
onment, and two, including María Teresa Akumu, received 12-year sentences.
There was a further political trial in November. Although the three defendants faced ordinary criminal charges of murder and were tried before a civilian court, it appeared that they had been falsely charged for political reasons. Two brothers and a sister-in-law of the president of the Progress Party were charged with killing their nephew and tried in Niefang. Three other brothers were arrested but released before the trial. A forensic doctor and the district judge in charge of investigating the death had reportedly certified it as suicide, Before their trial the defendants were shown on television, and statements they had made under torture were broadcast. The court apparently admitted these statements as evidence. Santiago Moto was convicted of homicide and sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment, The other two defendants were acquitted.
Many of those detained during the year were tortured. Two brothers were arrested in Bata in July for listening to a cassette recording of a song dedicated to Pedro Motú Mamiaga who died in police custody in August 1993 (see Amnesty International Report 1994). They were each beaten 250 times on the soles of the feet. Then they were made to run in front of a row of officers who beat them on the back with sticks. Santiago Moto and his brothers were also tortured in detention: their arms and legs were tied behind their backs and they were suspended from a pole and beaten with batons on their backs and the soles of their feet.
There were several reports of killings by the security forces, at least two of which appeared to have been extrajudicial executions. In March Antonio Ndong was reportedly killed by two soldiers. He was among the group of 20 who had crossed the border from Gabon in March (see above). According to reports, he surrendered to soldiers who found him hiding. Instead of arresting him, one soldier shot him in the forehead and the other shot him through the ear after he fell to the ground. In a separate case, in late September, Aguado Ndong Nguema was reportedly shot dead by a soldier in Mosok, in central Rio Muni, because he refrised to give his personal details to population census officials. The government denied that Aguado Ndong Nguema had been killed.
EQUATORIAL GUINEA/ERITREA
Juan Mongomo, a former army officer, was reportedly sentenced to death by a military court in December. Amnesty International had no details of the charges against him. He had no right of appeal and was reportedly executed the day after the sentence was passed.
Amnesty International delegates visited Equatorial Guinea in July to gather information about human rights violations and to discuss the human rights situation with officials. Throughout the year the organization appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience. It repeatedly called for the introduction of effective safeguards against torture and ill-treatment and urged the government to set up inquiries into all reports of torture and extrajudicial executions. In February Amnesty International published a report, Equatorial Guinea: A missed opportunity to resfore respect for human rights, which described the human rights violations at the time of the elections held in 1993.
