MOROCCO AND WESTERN SAHARA
Over 50 political prisoners and prisoners of conscience continued to serve long sentences imposed after unfair trials in previous years, although more than 350 political prisoners, including over 130 prisoners of conscience, were released under a royal amnesty. Dozens of prisoners of conscience were arrested and held briefly. Dozens of people were arrested on charges of arms smuggling and armed attacks on behalf of militant Islamist groups. Eight received long prison sentences after unfair trials. Torture and ill-treatment of detainees in garde a vue (incommunicado) detention continued to be reported, particularly in Western Sahara. At least four people died in police custody. Hundreds of Sahrawis and Moroccans who had "disappeared" in previous years remained unaccounted for. Over 300 former Sahrawi "disappeared" continued to remain under restrictions in Western Sahara. No executions were carried out and 196 death sentences were commuted.
The un-sponsored referendum on the future of Western Sahara, originally scheduled for 1992, had still not taken place by the end of the year (see Amnesty International Reports 1992 to 1994) and it was postponed until late 1995. Observers from the un Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (minurso) remained in place, but freedom of expression, association and movement in Western Sahara remained restricted.
In luly the government repealed a 1935 dahir (decree) which had been frequently used to sentence prisoners of conscience to up to two years' imprisonment on vague charges such as "disturbing public order".
Among the prisoners of conscience convicted in previous years who were still held at the end of 1994 were Abdelkader Sfiri and Ahmed Haou. They were among a group of supporters of the illegal Islamist organization al-Shabiba al-Islamiya (Islamic Youth) arrested in 1983 after putting up anti-monarchist posters, distributing leaflets and taking part in demonstrations. In luly 1984 they were sentenced to death for plotting to overthrow the monarchy.
MOROCCO AND WESTERN SAHARA
Their convictions were based on confessions signed under torture during months of incommunicado detention. Their sentences were commuted to hfe imprisonment in March 1994. Another prisoner of conscience, 'Abdessalem Yassine, the spiritual leader of the banned Islamist association a¡-'Ad¡ wa'I-Ihsan (Justice and Charity), remained under house arrest in Salé. He had been held without charge or trial since 1990.
Over 350 political prisoners, including over 130 prisoners of conscience, were released under a royal amnesty in July. Most had been imprisoned after unfair trials in previous years on charges which included offences against state security, membership of illegal organizations, distributing leaflets and disturbing public order. The majority had been convicted on the basis of confessions extracted under torture. They included six people arrested after demonstrations in Bouznika in 1993; people arrested after demonstrations and riots in 1984 and 1990; and supporters of banned Marxist and Islamist organizations (see previous Amnesty International Reports).
Over 30 prisoners of conscience were arrested during 1994, including government critics and peaceful demonstrators. They were sentenced to up to two years' imprisonment, although most sentences were suspended or reduced on appeal to time already served.
Seven Berber activists from the association for Berber culture, TihU (Freedom), who were also members of the Moroccan Association for Human Rights (amdh) and the Confédération démocratique du travail (cdt). Democratic Trade Union, were arrested in Errachidia after peaceful demonstrations on 1 May. They had chanted slogans calling for the recognition of Berber as an official language in Morocco. Three were sentenced in May to up to two years' imprisonment on charges of chanting slogans attacking the Constitution, and the other four were acquitted. At the appeal in June the sentences were reduced to
two months' imprisonment.
Political trials continued to fall short of international fair trial standards. For example, 14 members of the Association of Unemployed Graduates arrested in June in Guercif after protesting peacefully about unemployment were sentenced to two years' imprisonment for holding an unauthorized meeting. All of them told the judicial authorities that they had been beaten by police during incommunicado detention, and some reportedly still bore marks and bruises several days later. A medical examination ordered by the Public Prosecutor was never carried out, In July their sentences were reduced to three months' suspended imprisonment.
In Western Sahara detainees were frequently held for up to several months in secret detention. Six Sahrawi women arrested in Laayoune after demonstrations in September 1992 were held incommunicado in secret detention until their release in April 1994. Beatings and torture or ill-treatment of detainees in police custody continued to be widely reported, especially in Western Sahara. Methods of torture which had been routinely used in the past - such as suspension in contorted positions for prolonged periods, electric shocks and suffocation with cloths soaked in chemicals - were again reported.
Torture was also alleged by several Moroccans, Algerians, and French citizens of Moroccan and Algerian origin who were accused of arms smuggling and armed attacks on behalf of Islamist militant groups, including an attack on a hotel in Mar-rakech during which two people died. According, to reports they were visibly bruised when they appeared in court and they alleged that they had been tortured by being suspended from a metal bar in contorted positions and beaten during illegally prolonged garde á vue detention. No investigation was ordered by the courts into their allegations. Eight of them were sentenced in June by the military court in Rabat, the capital, to prison terms varying between ñve and 20 years' imprisonment; others remained detained awaiting trial; and others were released without charge.
At least four people died in police custody in Khouribga, Ouled Si Bouhia, Sidi Bennour and Salé, allegedly as a result of beatings and ill-treatment. Younes Zer-zouri died of head injuries on 17 August
MOROCCO AND WESTERN SAHARA/MOZAMBIQUE
in Rabat, a few days after having reportedly been beaten by four policemen in front of his home. No independent investigation was ordered by the authorities into these and other deaths in custody which occurred over the past years, including three deaths in custody in 1993 (see Amnesty International Report 1994).
There was no new information on hundreds of Sahrawis and Moroccans who had "disappeared" after arrest since 1975. They included Faraji Mohamed-Salem Bueh-Barca, who "disappeared" in Laay-oune in 1976 at the time of a Polisario Front attack, and Abdelhaq Rouissi, a trade union activist who "disappeared" in 1964. More than 300 former Sahrawi "disappeared" who were released in 1991 after up to 16 years in secret detention continued to have their freedom of movement and assembly severely restricted. Former Moroccan "disappeared" who were released from the secret detention centre at Tazmamert in 1991 began receiving monthly payments from the authorities, but hundreds of other former Sahrawi and Moroccan "disappeared" did not benefit from this measure. The families of some of the 34 people who died in Tazmamert between 1973 and 1991 received death certificates, but no inquiry was held into these and other cases of long-term secret detention and deaths in custody.
In March, 196 death sentences were commuted to life imprisonment. Up to 10 other people sentenced to death reportedly awaited a review of their cases by the Supreme Court. No new death sentences were imposed and no executions were carried out.
Amnesty International welcomed the commutation of the death sentences and the amnesty for more than 350 political prisoners. It called on the government to release immediately all remaining prisoners of conscience and all political prisoners convicted after unfair trials unless they were to be promptly retried in full accordance with international fair trial standards, and to shed light on the fate of hundreds of remaining "disappecired". The organization also welcomed the repeal of the 1935 decree, and urged the authorities to bring the Moroccan legal code into line with international standards, in particular to abolish the provisions that allow the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience.
In May Amnesty International published a report, Morocco: The Pattern of Political Imprisonment Must End. In August the Minister of Human Rights wrote to Amnesty International commenting on the content and presentation of the report and on Amnesty International's interpretation of the application of specific Moroccan laws. In November the un Human Rights Committee recommended that Morocco take steps to ensure that past cases of "disappearance", deaths in custody and torture are investigated and that such abuses are prevented from recurring. The Committee also recommended that Morocco take steps to limit the use of the death penalty with a view to abolishing this punishment. Also in November the un Committee against Torture recommended that Morocco set up a system of systematic monitoring of interrogation procedures in all police stations so as to ensure the protection of detainees.
