SAUDI ARABIA
Hundreds of people, among them prison' ers of conscience, were arrested during the year for their political or religious activities. The vast majority were suspected Sunni Islamist opponents of the government although several Christian worshippers were also detained. At least 30 Iraqi refugees from Rafha camp continued to
SAUDI ARABIA
be detained without trial. New information came to light regarding the torture and ill-treatment of detainees in previous years. The judicial punishment of amputation continued to be imposed. At least 53 people were executed.
In January King Fahd bin 'Abdul-'Aziz opened the inaugural session of the Majhs al-Shura, Consultative Council, whose 60 members are appointed by the King and have an advisory role (see Amnesty International Reports 1993 and 1994). In April the banned Committee for the Defence of Legitimate Rights (cdlr) transferred its headquarters to the United Kingdom (uk) following the release of about 20 of its members and supporters at the end of 1993 (see Amnesty International Report 1994). Among them was Professor Muhammad al-Mas'ari, the Cdlr's spokesperson, who fled Saudi Arabia and sought political asylum in the uk. During the year two Saudi Arabian diplomats based in the usa sought political asylum, allegedly because they feared reprisals for opposing the government's policies.
Hundreds of suspected Sunni Islamist opponents of the government were arrested during the year. A wave of arrests began in April following the transfer of the cdlr headquarters to the uk and the establishment there of offices of another opposition group, Hay'at a!-Nasiha wal-Islah, the Advice and Reformation Committee. Among those detained was Anmar al-Mas'ari, son of the cdlr's spokesperson, who was arrested in April and held in al-Ha'ir prison with other detainees suspected of supporting the cdlr. He was released in late December without charge. There were further arrests in September; two leading cdlr members were arrested by al-Mabahith al-'Amma, General Intelligence, and held at an unknown location. 'Abdullah al-Hamid, a writer and lecturer at Imam Muhammad bin Sa'ud University in Riyadh, and Muhsin al-'Awaji had been detained in 1993 (see Amnesty International Report 1994) and released after giving a written undertaking to forgo any political activities deemed to be hostile to the Kingdom. All those detained were believed to be prisoners of conscience. Some remained held without charge or trial at the end of the year and there were fears that they were being tortured while in incommunicado detention.
In mid-September, two prominent reli-
gious figures and critics of the ruling royal family were arrested: Sheikh Salman bin Fahd al-'Awda, a religious scholar, and Sheikh Safr 'Abdul-Rahman al-Hawali, former Head of the Islamic Jurisprudence Department at Um al-Qura University. Hundreds of other suspected Sunni Islamist opponents were arrested in the same period, among them possible prisoners of conscience. They included religious scholars, businessmen, students and academics. The arrests were carried out by al-Mabahith al-'Amma and other security forces, principally in the towns of al-Buraida, al-'Unaiza and al-Bukayriya in al-Qaseem Province. All the detainees were held incommunicado without charge or trial in al-Ha'ir prison, al-Mabahith al-'Amma headquarters in al-'Ulaisha and in police stations in al-Qaseem Province and Riyadh. In late September the government acknowledged the detention of 110 people, whom it accused of sedition and conspiracy to threaten state security in cooperation with foreign forces. It stated that investigations launched into their cases might lead to the release of some of the detainees. Most of them were released, but some were still held at the end of the year.
The fate and whereabouts of suspected government opponents arrested in 1993, all said to be followers of Salafiyya, a Sunni Muslim doctrine, also remained unknown (see Amnesty International Report 1994).
At least nine Christians were arrested in August and held as prisoners of conscience. Sherif Fahmy Ishak, a Coptic Christian and an Egyptian national, was arrested at his home in Riyadh by al-Mabahith al-'Amma, who reportedly confiscated religious cassettes, a Bible and other possessions. Eight Filipino Christian worshippers were arrested during a religious service in Riyadh by members of the Committee for the Propagation of Virtue and Prevention of Vice (cpvpv), an official body which supervises the observance of the Shari'a (Islamic law). All were released by the end of the year. Nine other Filipino Christians arrested in 1993 were released at the beginning of the year (see Amnesty International Report 1994).
At least 30 Iraqi refugees cirrested following a protest in Rafha refugee camp in March 1993 remained held without trial (see Amnesty International Report 1994). They were among an estimated 23,000
SAUDI ARABIA
refugees still held in the desert camp in northern Saudi Arabia; all had fled from Iraq during and after the Gulf War or had been captured and held as prisoners of war. While the government continued to regard them as refugees, the International Committee of the Red Cross (icrc) was understood to consider them as civilian internees to whom the provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 still applied. Disagreement over this issue led to the closure of the icrc offices in Riyadh in January.
New information was received about the torture and ill-treatment of Iraqi refugees in Rafha and Artawiyya camps since 1991. Among the victims was 'Ali Muhsin Abu Zahra, a former drama teacher arrested in Artawiyya camp in March 1992 on suspicion of writing a play criticizing the camp's authorities. According to his testimony, he was stripped and threatened with rape, and subjected to falaqa (beatings on the soles of the feet), beatings all over his body and electric shocks. He eventually signed a "confession" to the effect that he had incited other reftigees against the camp's authorities, and was released in April 1992 after one month in incommunicado detention. 'Ali L'aibj Abu Khanjar, son of a prominent tribal leader from southern Iraq, was beaten with cables after refusing to identify any of the refugees who had participated in a protest in Rafha camp in March 1993. He was subsequently taken to an unknown destination and his fate and whereabouts remained unknown.
No known investigation or inquiry was carried out into the death in custody in 1992 of Hussein al-Shuwaykhat (see Amnesty International Report 1993], whose body was returned to the family allegedly bearing the marks of torture, He had been held without charge or trial since March 1991 on suspicion of theft.
The judicial punishment of amputation continued to be imposed. Five Sudanese nationals convicted of theft had their right hands amputated in August in Jeddah. Mashooq Banj, a Pakistani national convicted of theft, had his right hand amputated in Jeddah in August.
At least 53 people were executed, all by public beheading. The victims included Indian, Nigerian, Pakistani, Saudi Arabian and Syrian nationals who had been convicted of murder, rape, or drug-trafficking.
The executions were carried out in several cities including Mecca, Medina, Jeddah, Khobar and Riyadh.
Amnesty International expressed concern during the year about the arrest of people for the peaceful expression of their political or religious beliefs, calling for the immediate, unconditional release of all prisoners of conscience. The organization also called for hundreds of suspected Islamist opponents of the government to be released unless charged with a recognizably criminal offence and tried in accordance with international standards. It sought assurances that all were being humanely treated and urged that they be allowed access to family members, defence counsel and doctors. The organization reiterated its opposition to the continued imposition of the cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment of amputation and of the death penalty, appealing for the commutation of all such sentences. No response was received.
In May Amnesty International published a report, Saudi Arabia: Unwelcome "guests": the plight of Iraqi refugees. It expressed concern about the pattern of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment and punishment to which the refugees had been subjected; the detention of some refugees without trial and without access to legal counsel and family members; the excessive use of lethal force in the camps by the Saudi Arabian army and possible extrajudicial executions; and cases of forcible return of refugees to Iraq where they may face grave human rights violations. Amnesty International called on the government to initiate prompt, thorough and impartial investigations into all such cases and to take immediate steps to put an end to these practices and bring to justice those found responsible. The Saudi Arabian Ambassador to the uk promptly issued a statement denying that Iraqi refugees had been tortured or ill-treated. In mid-May Prince Sultan bin Abdul-'Aziz, the King's brother and Second Deputy Prime Minister, also rejected Amnesty International's findings.
In April Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Saudi Arabia for un review under a procedure established by Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728F/1503, for confidential consideration of communications about human rights violations.
