TANZANIA
At least two supporters of an opposition party in Zanzibar imprisoned for sedition and others briefly detained were prisoners of conscience. Two journalists were charged with sedition. Courts continued to impose caning sentences. At least three people were sentenced to death and at least eight people were executed.
In August the ruling Chama Cha Mapinduzi (ccm), Party of the Revolution, announced its opposition to the creation of a Tanganyika government on the mainland equivalent in status to the government of Zanzibar. The Union government, led by President Ali Hassan Mwinyi, dropped plans to amend the Constitution in order to create a Tanganyika government.
There continued to be allegations of harassment by the authorities of members and supporters of opposition parties, notably in Zanzibar. The opposition Civic United Front (cuf) was repeatedly denied permits by the authorities to hold public meetings in the north of Zanzibar.
cuf members and supporters in Zanzibar were arrested for short periods and at least two people were imprisoned on charges of possessing seditious material in the form of recordings of cuf public meetings. Bosa Haji and another man were sentenced by Mkokotoni primary court to three months' imprisonment for possession of an audio-cassette of a cuf public meeting at which government officials were accused of corruption.
In March, two mainland journalists, Paschal Shija, editor of The Express, and Riaz Gulamani, its publisher, were arrested after an editorial accused the Union
government of incompetence. They were released after 10 hours but were rearrested soon after and charged with sedition before being granted bail. If found guihy, they could face up to five years' imprisonment. Their lawyers challenged the constitutionality of die charges in the High Court. They had not been tried by the end of the year.
Outstanding charges from September 1993 against 10 opponents of the Zanzibar Government, including Huwena Hamad, the wife of the Vice-Chairman of the cuf, were dropped in 1994 (see Amnesty International Report 1994). They had been charged with organizing an illegal assembly and insulting Dr Salmin Amour, the President of Zanzibar.
Courts continued to impose sentences of caning - a cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment. In August a resident magistrate in Kisutu sentenced Emmanuel Charles and Joachim Chacha to 10 strokes each of the cane and 30 years' imprisonment for robbery with violence. It was not known if the sentences had been carried out by the end of the year.
At least three people were sentenced to death for murder. At least seven men and one woman were executed in secret in Dodoma in October. In June a judge ruled that the death penalty violated the Tan-zanian Constitution and was accordingly null and void, when he sentenced two men found guilty of murder to life imprisonment. In October the Attorney-General appealed against his ruling to the Court of Appeal. The Court of Appeal had not ruled by the end of the year.
Amnesty International expressed its concern about the detention or imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and about the use of caning. It called on the Union government to abolish the death penalty.
