NICARAGUA
Numerous cases of ill-treatment by police were reported. There was an attempt on the life of a trade unionist in circumstances suggesting official involvement. A military court dismissed charges against nine members of the military accused in connection with the killing of a youth in 1990.
Amid growing political divisions between and within the government and the opposition Frente Sandinista de Liberación Nacional (fsln), Sandinista National Liberation Front, military and
constitutional reforms were passed by the National Assembly. In August the National Assembly approved the new Military Code aimed at strengthening civilian control over the armed forces. The new Military Code would, among other things, allow civilian courts to try military personnel charged with common criminal offences. A draft bill which would partially reform the 1987 Constitution drafted under the previous fsln government was presented in October. The draft bill would modify 149 of the Constitution's 195 articles.
In March the Supreme Court rejected an appeal challenging the constitutionality of Article 204 of the Penal Code, concluding that it did not violate any of the rights guaranteed in the Constitution. The ruling upheld changes to the Penal Code introduced in 1992 to penalize homosexuality. Article 204 states; "anyone who induces, promotes, propagandizes or practices in scandalous form sexual intercourse between persons of the same sex commits the crime of sodomy" (see Amnesty International Reports 1993 and 1994). The law could result in the prosecution and im-prisorunent of prisoners of conscience. Its broad terms could permit the prosecution of individuals solely for their homosexuality, for activities such as advocating lesbian and gay rights, imparting health information concerning sexuality or having homosexual relations in circumstances which are not criminal if they involve heterosexuals.
Killings and abductions by groups of former rebels and former army combatants continued to be reported, linked partly to the government's failure to comply with demobilization provisions agreed at the end of the civil war. There was continued violence by a group of former rebel combatants in the north, who claimed that the government had breached agreements for
NICARAGUA
the group's demobihzation signed in April. A report by the Ejército Popular Sandin-ista (eps), Sandinista Popular Army, covering the first five months of the year, indicated that military operations to combat rebel groups in the north had left nearly 200 people dead and over 100 injured: the victims included civilians as well as irregular troops and members of the army.
There were numerous complaints of ill-treatment of detainees by the police. The non-governmental human rights organization Centra Nicaragüense de Derechos Humanos (cenidh), Nicaraguan Centre for Human Rights, recorded 20 complaints of human rights violations, including ill-treatment, in the first half of 1994. Although all the cases were submitted to the Inspectoría General de la Policía Nacional, the monitoring body of the National Police, no investigations were apparently initiated. Police reportedly ill-treated people during strikes protesting against government economic measures. In January scores of strikers were beaten by police during a transport strike in the capital, Managua. Many people were brieñy detained, among them 26 juveniles and several people not participating in the strike.
In June, 12 members of the Federación de Trabajadores de Comunicaciones Enrique Smidth, Telecommunications and Postal Workers' Federation, were arrested and ill-treated by members of the Brigada Especial de la Policía Nacional, National Police Special Brigade. The trade unionists were demonstrating in Managua against the privatization of the telecommunications and postal services. They were allegedly beaten and kicked during their arrest and one, Adonis Montiel, required hospital treatment for internal injuries. All 12 were released a few hours later.
A trade union leader actively involved in opposition to the government's economic measures was attacked by unknown assailants in circumstances suggesting official involvement. In April trade union leader Roberto González Gaitán, a member of the National Board of the Confederación Sindical Central Sandinista, Sandinista Central Union Confederation, was shot at by unidentified armed assailants who fired at the car in which he was travelling. He lost control
of the vehicle and crashed against a tree, suffering concussion and bruises. The attack was allegedly related to a public declaration made a few hours earlier by the head of the National Police, who described Roberto González Gaitán as a "dangerous individual and a destabilizing influence". A police investigation was initiated.
In June the military court of first instance dismissed charges against the head of the armed forces and eight of his military escorts. They were accused of carrying out or covering up the killing of Jean Paul Genie Lacayo, a 17-year-old shot dead on the Managua-Masaya highway (see Amnesty International Reports 1993 and 1994). The military court ruled that there was insufficient admissible evidence against the accused. The military court also ruled that the case should remain open until responsibility for the crime was established. In August an appeal to the Military Appeals Court against the ruling was passed on to the Supreme Court, whose decision was still pending at the end of the year. At the end of the year the case was being considered by the Inter-American Court on Human Rights.
In May Amnesty International wrote to President Violeta Chamorro expressing concern that the case of Jean Paul Genie Lacayo was under military jurisdiction, because military jurisdiction does not offer guarantees of due process and impartiality, and permits undue influence by the army high command at the appeals stage. In July the authorities sent Amnesty International the ruling of the military court of first instance. In November Amnesty International made public its concerns in the light of the ruling.
In October Amnesty International published a report, Nicaragua: Article 204: Legalizing the repression of homosexuality, which called on the government to guarantee that Article 204 would never be used to prosecute people solely for their homosexuality. It also urged the authorities to give serious consideration to amending or repealing Article 204, to ensure that the Penal Code did not interfere with fundamental rights.
