The authorities failed to restore the rights of people (known as the “erased”) whose permanent residency status was unlawfully revoked in 1992. Despite some government measures discrimination against Roma, especially in access to housing and education, continued.
Discrimination

The ‘erased’

The authorities still failed to guarantee the rights of former permanent residents of Slovenia originating from other former Yugoslav republics, whose legal status was unlawfully revoked in 1992. It resulted in violations of their economic and social rights. Some of them were also forcibly removed from the country.
In November, the government submitted a draft law to parliament which would retroactively restore the status of the “erased”. By the end of the year the law had not been adopted.
The authorities did not present any plans on further steps to ensure that the “erased” were granted reparation for past human rights violations such as restoration of their economic, social and cultural rights, compensation or an official apology.
The parliamentary and public discussion on the “erased” was marred by xenophobic statements by several parliamentarians throughout the year.
Roma

In spite of some steps taken by the government towards improving the situation for the Roma community, discrimination continued.
Enrolment of Romani children in pre-school education was very low, which put them at a disadvantage compared to their peers when they entered primary education. In December, the government announced an initiative to increase attendance of Romani children in pre-school programmes. Some progress was made in addressing the consequences of past segregation of Romani pupils. After several years of campaigning by human rights and Roma organizations, the authorities started an external and independent evaluation of Roma education in September. However, this evaluation did not include the so called “Bršljin model” which had previously resulted in the de facto segregation of Romani pupils.
Many Roma experienced inadequate housing conditions, including lack of security of tenure, access to water, sanitation facilities and electricity. Romani settlements were very often isolated and segregated. In some cases, where planned evictions were supposed to take place the community had not been properly informed and consulted.
In November, a draft National Roma Programme was presented to the general public and for consultation with NGOs. The programme outlined measures to improve the situation of the Roma community for the period 2010-2015. It covered several social aspects where Roma face discrimination, such as housing, education, employment and access to health.
