BOLIVIA
A Spanish citizen died allegedly as a result of a beating by military personnel. A farmer died in suspicious circumstances after being arrested by an anti-narcotics police patrol. There were reports of torture and ill-treatment of coca-growers detained during an operation to counter drug-trafficking.
Throughout the year there were widespread strikes and other protests against social and economic conditions and government reforms to the political, electoral and educational systems. In August coca-growers from Cochabamba and other departments marched to the capital. La Paz, to protest against the enforced eradication of their crops by anti-narcotic security agents and ill-treatment of local
union members. In July the government launched an anti-narcotics operation in the El Chapare region of the department of Cochabamba. Between 200 and 300 people were detained for up to 10 days during the first phase of the operation.
As a result of constitutional reform, the government announced in August the creation of the office of State Ombudsman. An article was also incorporated into the Constitution which gave formal recognition to the rights of indigenous peoples.
Former president General Luis Garcia Meza, sentenced in absentia to 30 years in jail for human rights violations and other crimes committed during the period of his military rule, was arrested in Sao Paulo, Brazil, in March. However, extradition proceedings, approved in October by Brazil's Supreme Court, were suspended in November because of procedural irregularities. In April, two co-defendants of the former president in the seven-year Responsibilities Trial who had also been sentenced to 30 years' imprisonment (see Amnesty International Report 1994] were also detained: Tito Montano Belzu, a former senior member of the armed forces, and Juan Carlos Garcia Guzmán, who had been sentenced in absentia and was detained in Argentina.
Two people were killed by security forces in circumstances suggesting that they may have been unlawfully killed. On 10 February a Spanish citizen, Manuel Ramón Puchol Pastor, died in the village of San Matías, department of Santa Cruz, allegedly as a result of a severe beating by members of the Monte Florida 14 infantry regiment. In September the trial began of seven members of the regiment who were charged with the killing. The trial was still in progress at the end of 1994.
On 18 August Felipe Pérez Ortiz, a peasant farmer living in the El Chapare region, died in suspicious circumstances at the hands of security agents. The Subsec-retary for Human Rights of the Ministry of Justice and representatives of the Chamber of Deputies' Human Rights Commission, among others, visited the area as part of a commission of inquiry into the death. They reported that Felipe Pérez had been shot at close range after being arrested. Eight of the nine security agents implicated in the killing were suspended from duty and detained pending further investigations, The ninth, reported to be the
bolivia/bosnia and herzergovina
agent who fired the fatal shot, escaped.
Reports of ill-treatment of detainees by police continued. Sandalio Verdúguez Salazar alleged that on 28 July he was abducted by approximately 20 members of the Mobile Rural Patrol Unit (umopar), taken to an empty house and severely beaten. No investigation into the allegations was known to have been initiated, In July an inter-institutional commission of inquiry visited El Chapare to investigate allegations of arbitrary detentions and beatings of detainees held in the context of anti-narcotics operations.
Two television journalists were the victims of politically motivated attacks. On 29 October a letter-bomb addressed to Carlos Mesa in La Paz was intercepted; accompanying it was a letter from a group calling itself the Dignity Command, an armed political group apparently linked to former president General Luis Garcia Meza. On 30 October, in the city of Santa Cruz, three men fired on the home of Luis Soruco Barba, injuring a neighbour. Both journalists were granted police protection and investigations into the incidents were opened.
Amnesty International wrote to the government in March urging a full and independent investigation into the death of Manuel REunón Puchol Pastor. In a letter to President Gonzalo Sánchez de Lozada in September, Amnesty International asked to be informed about the terms of reference of the investigation into the killing of Felipe Pérez Ortiz. The organization also called for assurances that all allegations of human rights violations would receive prompt and thorough investigation. Amnesty International welcomed the incorporation of the office of State Ombudsman into the reformed Constitution as a further step towards safeguarding human rights in Bolivia and asked to be kept informed of its legal status and terms of reference.
