NEPAL
Eleven prisoners of conscience were reportedly detained. Several hundred people, including possible prisoners of conscience, were detained for short periods during a series of nationwide strikes and demonstrations. There were reports of torture and ill-treatment in police custody.
Prime Minister Girija Prasad Koirala resigned in July after losing a key parliamentary vote. King Birendra Bir Bikram Shah Dev dissolved parliament and ordered fresh elections, appointing Girija Prasad Koirala as leader of the interim government, A coalition of left-wing opposition parties, led by the Communist Party of Nepal-United Mcirxist Leninist (cpn-uml), demanded the dismissal of Girija Prasad Koirala and the reinstatement of parliament under an all-party government. The cpn-uml won parliamentary elections in November by a narrow margin but failed to secure an overall working majority, cpn-uml Chairman Man Mohan Adhikari was appointed Prime Minister.
Eleven Christians, one a Nepali national and the others ethnic Nepali refugees from Bhutan, were arrested in Ham District in August on suspicion of proselytizing, an offence under Nepali law. They were prisoners of conscience. They were brought to trial at the district court in December but the outcome was not known by the end of the year.
Several hundred people were arrested
NEPAL/NETHERLANDS
in July and August during nationwide strikes and demonstrations called by the alliance of left-wing opposition parties in support of their demands for the reinstatement of parliament. Some of the demonstrators threw stones and attacked public transport facilities. Most of those arrested, some of whom were possible prisoners of conscience, were detained for short periods and then released, According to a Home Ministry spokesperson, about 300 people were arrested during strikes called between 20 and 24 July, of whom 42 were charged under the Public Offences and Penalties Act, 1970, and 13 under the Anti-State Crimes and Penalties Act, 1989. Human rights groups maintained that, between 14 and 19 August, over 2,000 people were detained nationwide, although police reports put the figure at about 600. All those arrested and detained in July and August were reportedly released.
There were several reports of torture and ill-treatment in police custody, although ill-treatment of detained demonstrators was not reported on the scale it had been in previous years.
Laxman Rai, a farmer who was tried in June on charges of cutting down trees belonging to the Forestry Department, was reportedly tortured by forest guards at the Forest Ranger's offices in Kerakha. He had been arrested at Bidhakhola, Jhapa District, in early October 1993. He was beaten with a bamboo stick, including on the palms of his hands and the soles of his feet, and pins were stuck under his fingernails. Laxman Rai was reportedly found not guilty and released unconditionally.
Seventeen people who were detained in Khalanga, Pyuthan District, in May during a student demonstration were allegedly tortured in police custody and denied medical treatment. All were charged under the Public Offences and Penalties Act, but were reportedly not brought before the Chief District Officer within 24 hours of their arrest, as required by law. Seven of tliose arrested were reportedly released within days, but the fate of the remaining 10 was not known by the end of the year.
Bamdev Devkota, a student, was arrested during demonstrations on 20 July in Kathmandu, the capital, on suspicion of causing damage to a vehicle. He was taken to the Mahendra Police Club where he was reportedly beaten severely by police
officers, given electric shocks to his right hand and denied food for two days. During his six days' detention, he was reportedly not brought before a magistrate or informed of the charges against him.
Police officers remained immune from prosecution. There was not one case reported in 1993 or 1994 in which a police officer suspected of being responsible for torture or ill-treatment was prosecuted.
The Supreme Court heard a habeas corpus petition filed on behalf of Pravakar Subedi, a student who "disappeared" in Kathmandu in June 1993 (see Amnesty International Report 1994]. The court ordered the police to identify a man alleged to be Pravakar Subedi shown in a photograph being arrested by four policemen. The Inspector General of Police responded by denying that the person in the photograph was Pravakar Subedi. The Supreme Court ordered all four policemen to be produced in court. The outcome of the case was unknown at the end of the year.
Amnesty International wrote to the government to express concern about reports of torture in police custody at Pyuthan, Kathmandu and Jhapa but had received no response by the end of the year. It urged the government to ensure that all reports of torture by police were promptly, thoroughly and independently investigated.
Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns regarding torture and ill-treatment in police custody to the un Committee against Torture in April when Nepal submitted its first report under Article 19 of the un Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. In October Amnesty International drew the attention of the un Human Rights Committee to its concerns about unlawful killings in 1993 (see Amnesty International Report 1994) and about torture.
