AFGHANISTAN
Thousands of civilians were killed and thousands more were wounded in artillery attacks deliberately aimed at residential areas by all factions in the civil war. Hundreds of men, women and children were deliberately and arbitrarily killed by members of the main armed groups during raids on civilian homes. Torture, including rape of women and children, was reportedly widespread. People were unlawfully imprisoned in private detention centres because of their political opinions, religion or ethnic origin, or as hostages. Journalists covering the war were detained or imprisoned by the warring factions. Hundreds of people "disappeared". Warlords acted as Islamic judges and ordered punishments including executions.
As in previous years, no effective central authority was established, Leaders of the main warring factions, Borhannudin Rabbani of the Jamiat-e-Islami (Society of Islam) and Gulbuddin Hekmatyar of Hezb-e-lslami (Party of Islam), remained President and Prime Minister respectively. An alliance of Mujahideen groups led by Jamiat-e-Islami retained control over most of the capital, Kabul, and an opposition alliance led by Hezb-e-Ishmi controlled other parts. Autonomous commanders allied to one or other of the rival alliances controlled the rest of the country. Some set up quasi-governmental structures and conducted their own foreign affairs.
Continuing armed conflict and political instability made it difficult to verify reports of human rights abuses within the country, but newly arriving Afghans interviewed in the border areas in Pakistan
testified to an unfolding human rights catastrophe. Hundreds of thousands of Afghans were displaced or fled to the neighbouring countries. In February food convoys organized by international aid agencies had their access into Kabul blocked by the allied forces of Prime Minister Gulbuddin Hekmatyar and General Abdul Rashid Dostum. Despite repeated warnings by the aid agencies that mass starvation of the Kabul population was imminent, six un-organized trucks of relief supplies were not permitted to reach the city for several weeks. Following international appeals, three of the trucks were allowed to move on to Kabul on 6 March. However, on 7 March, in the northern Kabul suburb of Khair Khana where thousands of displaced Kabul inhabitants had fled to escape fierce fighting, people awaiting emergency food distribution were attacked with cluster bombs, reportedly by the forces of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar. At least six people were reportedly killed and 30 injured. The blockade remained in force until December when un food convoys arrived in Kabul.
The un Commission on Human Rights Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Afghanistan, whose mandate was renewed for a further year in March, visited the country several times and submitted his interim report to the un General Assembly in November, stating that the most basic elements of humanitarian law applicable to civilians were not being observed in Afghanistan.
Fighting over control of territory resulted in the killing of thousands of civilians caught in cross-fire or subjected to indiscriminate artillery attacks. The vast majority of the victims were unarmed civilians killed in the streets of Kabul, in their houses or in dwellings in the city where they had sought shelter after their homes had been destroyed. Other civilians were deliberately killed in their homes by members of the warring factions on suspicion of supporting rival armed groups. The fighting and attacks on civilians, originally confined to Kabul and the northern town of Mazar-e-Sharif, spread during 1994 to the provinces of Kunduz, Herat, Kandahar, Baghlan, Badghis and Nan-garhar.
On 1 January the allied forces of General Abdul Rashid Dostum and Prime Minister Gulbuddin Hekmatyar launched
AFGHANISTAN
an attack on President Rabbani's forces at Kabul's Presidential Palace and the Ministry of Defence. Rival groups took up positions in residential areas on both sides of the River Kabul. Within a few weeks, hundreds of people, the majority of whom were unarmed civilians, had been killed in indiscriminate artillery attacks aimed at residential areas.
Attacks on Kabul continued throughout the year, reportedly killing dozens of people almost daily. In August, three hospitals in Kabul were reportedly attacked with rockets which killed over 30 patients and destroyed a store holding medical supplies provided by international aid organizations.
Armed clashes broke out in September between two Shi'a factions - Hezb-e-Wahdat. allied to Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, and Harakat-e-Islami, allied to Borhan-nudin Rabbani. Hundreds of people were killed and thousands were injured during the clashes. Scores of them were believed to have been killed deliberately and arbitrarily.
Factional fighting and attacks against Kabul led to thousands more civilian casualties in the last third of the year. According to one estimate, up to 800 people were killed and over 17,000 wounded between 12 September and 12 October alone. Several hundred of them were unarmed men, women and children killed in their houses by armed faction members who suspected them of supporting their political rivals. In a round of artillery and mortar fire on 21 October around Kabul University, the Deh Mazang area and the so-called Television Mountain, at least 45 people were killed and 150 wounded. Eye-witnesses reported that one of the bombs hit a school housing displaced people, killing 10. Another round of rocket attacks on Kabul on 23 October reportedly left at least 15 people dead and 43 injured; and in a barrage of rockets on Kabul on 24 October, at least 35 people were killed and 98 wounded. By the end of the year over 3.000 people had reportedly been killed in Kabul.
Members of armed political groups routinely entered civilian houses in Kabul and other parts of the country, killing male members of the family who resisted their entry and confiscating household property. For example, in March a man was killed in Kabul's Chel Sotoon district
by armed faction members who entered his house, allegedly because he had allowed his 15-year-old daughter to go to school. She was repeatedly raped by the killers.
Unarmed civilians suspected of belonging to rival groups were reportedly tortured and ill-treated. Hundreds of women, young girls and boys were reportedly subjected to brutal torture and rape by members of the armed factions. Beatings were widespread. All armed groups reportedly held captives for long periods in private jails and tortured them. Former detainees said they had been beaten with rifle butts, tied to dead bodies for several days and forced to eat what they were told was human flesh. Some detainees reportedly received electric shocks, were subjected to suffocation, or had their testicles crushed by pliers. Scores of detainees reportedly died under torture. Prisoners who could not buy their release were at risk of being killed deliberately and arbitrarily.
In Kabul, secret detention centres known as riasats were reportedly used as torture centres. In at least three cities -Mazar-e-Sharif, Jalalabad and Herat - prisoners were reportedly kept in official jails and it was believed that former prison buildings in other cities were also used to hold prisoners.
The vast majority of those held were believed to be detained because of their ethnic origin or their association with rival political or religious factions. Among the hundreds of detainees were scores who had been arrested in previous years. Some prisoners were reportedly released during the year in exchange for money or for prisoners held by rival political groups. Prisoners held in previous years in private jails run by armed political groups in border areas in Pakistan were believed to have been transferred to detention centres inside Afghanistan.
Over a dozen journalists were captured and ill-treated at the hands of various Mu-jahideen groups. They were then warned not to report on armed groups' involvement in weapons transfers or drug-traf-ficking; many had to leave the country. In January an Afghan journalist was reportedly arrested and beaten repeatedly with a rifle butt by members of an armed political group. They accused her of spying and told her she would only be released if she had sex with six armed guards. She was
AFGHANISTAN/ALB/WIA
released, reportedly after payment of a large sum of money. A New Zealand journalist, Shane Teehan, illegally detained since early January in Kunduz because of his journalistic activities, was released on 2 March when the city was captured by a rival Mujahideen group. In March a representative of the UN Children's Fund UNICEF, Sami Saqeb, was abducted in northern Kabul and his whereabouts remained unknown. Mir Wais Jalil, an Afghan journalist with the BBC World Service, was killed after being abducted in an area reportedly controlled by Hezb-e-Islami. He was apparently returning home after he had interviewed Gulbuddin Hekmatyar. There had been no moves to bring his killers to justice by the end of 1994.
Hundreds of people were believed to have "disappeared" in all parts of Afghanistan during the year after being abducted by armed guards belonging to the various armed political groups. Najmud-din Musleh, an Uzbek employed as a personal assistant of President Rabbani, was arrested and detained on 31 December 1993 in Kabul. He had been sent to negotiate with General Dostum. Members of the alliance between Gulbuddin Hekmatyar and General Dostum were reported to have publicly admitted detaining him, but his family was unable to establish his whereabouts or to contact him.
By mid-March at least 200,000 people had reportedly fled Kabul for the eastern town of Jalalabad, and some 300,000 people had reportedly been displaced within the city. Tens of thousands managed to cross Pakistan's officially closed border by paying bribes. Afghan refugees in Pakistan with professional or academic backgrounds reported receiving frequent death threats from Afghan armed groups in Pakistan.
The majority of refugees from Tadzhik-istan were believed to have returned home voluntarily, with an estimated 6,000 Tadzhiks remaining in Afghanistan (see Amnesty International Report 1994).
Armed political groups acted with total impunity. The judicial system was virtually non-existent in most parts of the country and armed warlords acted as Islamic judges and ordered prisoners to be executed, stoned to death or whipped, with no legal safeguards. In a few areas, Islamic courts were reported to have dis-
pensed summary justice, including public floggings and executions.
In March Amnesty International called attention to the continuing human rights abuses in the context of the country's civil war. In a report released in April, Afghanistan: Incommunicado detention and "disappearances", Amnesty International expressed concern about the safety of scores of Afghans, and urged all the Mujahideen groups to observe minimum international humanitarian standards and to respect the right to life and security of the person. In August Amnesty International called for an impartial investigation into the killing of Mir Wais Jalil, reiterating the fact that since there was no civil structure in Afghanistan, only the international community could take action to ensure that there was an impartial investigation to bring those responsible to justice.
In December Amnesty International issued a statement, based on interviews with Afghans in refugee camps in Pakistan, raising its concern about reports of mass murder, arbitrary detention and torture - including widespread rape of women and children - being carried out by all armed political groups in Afghanistan. It called on the international community to take action to bring the human rights catastrophe in the country to an end.
