CUBA
Some 600 prisoners of conscience were believed to be serving sentences of imprisonment. Human rights and political activists continued to face frequent short-term detention and harassment. Detention and trial procedures for pohtical prisoners fell far short of international standards. There were frequent reports of ill-treat-ment in prisons and police stations. The
CUBA
authorities were suspected of bearing at least partial responsibility for the death by drowning of some 40 people trying to flee Cuba by boat. One man was executed and several others were facing possible death sentences.
The government, which continued to face serious economic problems, including a us trade embargo condemned by the un General Assembly in October 1994, carried on with its program of economic reform but resisted international pressure to initiate political reform. Independent human rights monitoring remained severely limited. Members of unofficial political, human rights and trade union groups continued to face imprisonment, short-term detention and frequent harassment. The un High Commissioner for Human Rights visited Cuba for three days in November at the invitation of the Cuban Government but the government continued to refuse to cooperate with the un Special Rapporteur on Cuba.
In May reports were received that a special committee of the National Assembly of Popular Power was reviewing legal procedures and individual rights but no further news was heard. In November the Assembly was said to be considering updating migration laws.
Cuban exile groups continued to threaten armed attacks inside Cuba. On 15 October the authorities captured seven armed men, said to belong to the Miami-based Partido de Unidad Nacional Democrático (pund), Party of National Democratic Unity, who had landed on the coast near Caibarien and shot dead a fisherman.
Large numbers of people fled Cuba by sea in the hope of reaching the usa. President Fidel Castro accused the us Government of inciting Cubans to take to the seas and, following a series of attempted hijackings of vessels resulting in the deaths of three Cuban officials, he ordered the Cuban Coast Guard to stop preventing people from leaving the country by sea. Between 19 August and mid-September, 32,000 Cubans were picked up at sea by the us Coast Guard and taken to the us naval base at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba. During a visit to the Guantánamo base in September (see usa entry), an Amnesty International delegation found that a substantial number of the Cubans held there were former political prisoners and activ-
ists of unofficial political, human rights and trade union groups. Some said they had been told by the authorities to leave Cuba, under threat of renewed imprisonment, or even physically put on boats or rafts. Others were facing trial on political charges such as "enemy propaganda" or "disrespect".
On 5 August in Havana, violent clashes took place between the Cuban security forces and crowds hoping to hijack boats. Members of the Rapid Response Brigades (see Amnesty International Reports 1992 to 1994), armed with sticks and metal tubes, were also called in to confront the crowds. The authorities acknowledged that some 300 people were arrested and charged in connection with the disturbances: in September it was reported that 162 of them were imprisoned in Cam-agüey Provincial Prison (known as "Kilo 7") charged with public order offences. Some 40 activists belonging to unofficial political and human rights groups were also arrested on 5 August and the following days, apparently as a precautionary measure, even though they had not participated in the disturbances. All were released without charge within 15 days. They and other activists subsequently reported being repeatedly subjected to short-term detention, during which they were threatened with renewed imprisonment if they did not give up their activities or leave the country.
At least 600 prisoners of conscience were believed to be awaiting trial or serving prison sentences, the majority on charges such as "enemy propaganda" and "disrespect". Prisoner of conscience Francisco Chaviano González was arrested at his Havana home on 7 May, moments after being handed a compromising document by a stranger in an apparent set-up. He was held under investigation on a charge of revealing state security secrets and had not been brought to trial by the end of
CUBA
1994. Francisco Chaviano is President of the unofficial National Council for Civil Rights in Cuba, which had been documenting cases of people who had died at sea while trying to flee the country.
Prisoner of conscience Marta María Vega Cabrera was arrested on 3 June in Nueva Gerona, Isla de la Juventud, following a search of her home during which she and other family members were reportedly ill-treated. After being held for several weeks by the Department of State Security, she was transferred to the Western Women's Re-education Centre in Havana charged with "enemy propaganda" in connection with her activities in the unofficial Partido Cívico Democrático (pcd). Civic Democratic Party. She was said to have been beaten by prison guards and prisoners in July and subsequently sent to a punishment cell after she complained about the beating of another prisoner.
A large number of people, including some prisoners of conscience, were believed to be imprisoned for up to four years under a section of the Penal Code entitled "The Dangerous State and Security Measures" which contains few fundamental judicial guarantees (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1994). Some reports estimated that as many as 800 people were arrested under this legislation in Havana alone during the first eight months of the year.
Despite indications that the authorities were encouraging people to take to the seas during August, at other times of the year many of those who did so were arrested. Some were reportedly released without charge or given a non-custodial sentence if it was their first offence. Those imprisoned in previous years solely for trying to leave the country illegally continued serving prison sentences. They included Rolando Cambra Javert, arrested in 1992 and sentenced to three years' imprisonment.
Writer Norberto Fuentes (see Amnesty International Report 1994) was granted permission to leave the country in August following the intervention of Colombian writer Gabriel Garcia Márquez, a close friend of President Castro.
Several prisoners of conscience were released during the year. They included four prisoners of conscience released early through the mediation of a senior Spanish politician, but only on condition they left
Cuba for Spain. They were: Aurea Feria Cao (see Amnesty International Report 1991), María Elena Aparicio (see Amnesty International Report 1993], Luis Alberto Pita Santos (see Amnesty International Reports 1992 to 1994) and Pablo Reyes Martinez, sentenced to eight years for "enemy propaganda" in 1992. Joel Dueñas Martínez, who was released conditionally after serving 27 months of a four-year sentence for "enemy propaganda", remained in Cuba.
Detention and trial procedures again fell far short of international standards. Detainees accused of offences against state security were held under investigation for several weeks or months without access to lawyers.
Prisoner of conscience Rodolfo González González (see Amnesty International Report 1993), a spokesman for the unofficial Comité Cubano Pro Derechos Humanos (ccpdh), Cuban Committee for Human Rights, who had been arrested in December 1992, was sentenced to seven years" imprisonment in March after a show trial in Havana. He was convicted of spreading "enemy propaganda" on the grounds that he had given false information to usA-based radio stations. Unusually, foreign journalists and local human rights monitors were allowed to attend the hearing and Rodolfo González was permitted to speak at length despite criticizing the government. He was told in September that, as a result of appeals by the Spanish Government, he would be released if he agreed to go to Spain. He refused to do so and remained in prison. Other prisoners of conscience also reportedly refused to accede to pressure to accept early release in exchange for exile.
Prisoner of conscience Domiciano Torres Roca, who had been arrested in August 1993 (see Amnesty International Report 1994), was brought to trial in July and sentenced to three yecirs' imprisonment, also for spreading "enemy propaganda". Domiciano Torres, Vice-President of the pcd, admitted that he had made an anti-government poster bearing the words "Down with Fidel".
Reports were received that detainees were sometimes beaten, both at the time of arrest and in prisons, and frequently sent to punishment cells for complaining about their treatment. Gloria Bravo Melgares, President of the unofficial Movimiento 8
CUBA/CYPRUS
de Septiembre, 8 September Movement, who was detained for 11 days in August and later reportedly pressurized by the authorities to flee the country on a raft, was said to have suffered severe bruising and scars after being beaten by ñve female officers while detained in a police station. Another activist arrested at the time of the 5 August disturbances reported hearing other detainees in a Havana police station being beaten to force them to shout pro-government slogans.
Conditions in many police stations and prisons were described as insanitary and medical attention was said to be inadequate or non-existent. Many prisoners suffered serious weight loss because of the poor diet. Although some prisoners were alleged to have been deprived of food or medical treatment as a form of punishment, the general economic conditions prevailing in the country were undoubtedly a contributory factor. Conditions at El Pitirre Prison (also known as Unit 1580) were frequently cited as being particularly poor.
On 13 July some 40 people died when a tugboat, "13 de Marzo", in which they were attempting to flee Cuba, sank. Some of the 31 survivors alleged that they had been pursued and deliberately rammed by three other tugboats causing their boat to capsize. The authorities, announcing that the incident would be investigated, claimed the boat was unseaworthy and blamed the deaths on the organizers of the escape attempt, two of whom were later charged with piracy and theft. The authorities denied there had been official involvement but survivors believed that the pursuing boats were acting under official orders. The results of the investigation were not made public.
Several government opponents were attacked by civilians, some of them armed, in circumstances suggesting official involvement. The victims included Francisco Chaviano González (see above), attacked in his home in March by four armed men; René del Pozo Pozo of the unofficial Cuban Commission for Human Rights and National Reconciliation, attacked in the street in August by a man who beat him with brass knuckles; and Lázaro Corp Yeras, President of the unofficial National Commission of Independent Trade Unions, who, together with his young son Ray, was beaten in the street in
August by three men with sticks.
One execution was known to have been carried out. The official Cuban newspaper, Granma, reported in August that Félix Oviedo Aguilera, who had been convicted of murder and armed robbery in November 1993, had been executed. No further news was received of six men believed to be awaiting execution in 1993. As far as was known, no death sentences were passed in 1994. However, the prosecution was said to be seeking the death penalty in three separate cases of alleged murder, involving at least eight defendants.
In March the Minister of Foreign Affairs turned down a request from Amnesty International to carry out a research visit to Cuba. The organization had not been able to visit Cuba since 1990.
Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to release all prisoners of conscience unconditionally, including those imprisoned solely for trying to leave the country, and to allow political and human rights groups to carry out their legitimate activities in peace. It urged the authorities to cease putting pressure on political prisoners and government opponents to leave Cuba, to repeal the "Dangerous State and Security Measures" legislation, and to disband the Rapid Response Brigades. It also called on the authorities to carry out an impartial investigation into the 13 July tugboat sinking, to investigate allegations of ill-treatment, and to commute the death sentence on Félix Oviedo Aguilera. Amnesty International received little substantive response to its communications.
