SWITZERLAND
Scores of conscientious objectors to military service were sentenced to terms of imprisonment or compulsory work by military tribunals. There were allegations of ill-treatment by law enforcement officers.
In April the un Committee against Torture considered the government's periodic report on its compliance with the un Convention against Torture. The committee expressed concern about police ill-treat-ment and recommended reforms in legislation and procedures relating to police custody and preventive detention.
There was still no alternative civilian service available to conscientious objectors to compulsory military service. However, in June the government approved the text of a bill introducing such a service. Conscripts demonstrating their inability to reconcile military service with their consciences would qualify for the right to perform civilian service one and a half times
the length of ordinary military service. In November a parliamentary committee examining the bill proposed restricting access to civilian service to those objecting to military service on "ethical" grounds, Further parliamentary examination of the bill was scheduled for 1995.
Meanwhile, under the Military Penal Code, refusal to perform military service remained a criminal offence. However, where a tribunal concluded that a conscript was unable to reconcile military service with his conscience because of "fundamental ethical values", he was sentenced to a period of work in the public interest and did not acquire a criminal record. Conscientious objectors who failed to qualify because, for example, the tribunals considered that they had opposed military service on political grounds, continued to be sentenced to terms of imprisonment. However, few conscientious objectors reportedly served prison sentences during 1994 as many cantons had moratoriums on such sentences, pending the introduction of a civilian service. Those who were imprisoned were considered prisoners of conscience.
There were allegations of ill-treatment by law enforcement officers; many concerned foreign nationals. Emmanuel John and George James both claimed Sudanese nationality on applying for political asylum in Switzerland, but their nationality was disputed by the refugee authorities. They lodged a complaint claiming that two police officers had subjected them to an unprovoked physical assault and racial abuse following an identity check outside Sissach railway station, in the Canton of Basel-Land, in July. They alleged that one officer punched George James in the stomach, knocking him to the ground, and that a police dog was set on them. George James was apparently bitten by the dog on his thigh and Emmanuel John was bitten so severely on his buttocks and stomach that he lost consciousness. The officers then left the scene, but returned after George James sought assistance at a local police post. They called an ambulance which transferred both injured men to hospital where they were kept overnight for treatment. The officers accused them of obstructing the police by refusing to identify themselves. A judicial investigation was opened into the alleged incidents, but Emmanuel John and George
SWITZERLAND/SYRIA
James were not questioned about their allegations for over three months. As their asylum applications had by then been rejected definitively they were obliged to leave the country shortly after being questioned.
Several allegations of ill-treatment came from the Canton of Geneva. In a complaint lodged in September, Denise Moreira, a Brazilian citizen, alleged that she had been ill-treated by two Geneva police officers following an identity check in August. She claimed that they subjected her to racist insults and used a disproportionate degree of force to remove her from her apartment after she refused to accompany them to the police station. She alleged that they siezed her, threw her down a flight of stairs and kicked and punched her repeatedly. She stated that in an attempt to escape the blows she tried unsuccessfully to bite the hand of one of the officers, upon which they attacked her more violently, leaving her prostrate on the floor. Neighbours stated that they had heard sounds of someone being hit, insulted by the police and crying for help. She was taken to the police station where she was seen by a doctor who supplied medication. She was formally accused of illegal residence and of using violence against the police and transferred to prison where she received a medical examination the next day. The examination found cuts and bruises on her right hand, elbow and side, on both knees and the stomach. A medical certificate issued by a local hospital after her release from prison two days later recorded bruises "compatible" with the blows she claimed to have received, The Prosecutor General filed Denise Moreira's complaint in December stating, apparently incorrectly, that she was an illegal resident and concluding that her injuries were "perfectly compatible with the legitimate use of force".
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience and expressed concern that people continued to be punished for refusing military service on grounds of conscience. It welcomed the progress made towards the introduction of a civilian alternative to military service.
In April Amnesty International published a report, Switzerland: Allegations of ill-treatment in police custody. It concluded that the number of such allegations received by the organization, taken
together with the findings of other international governmental and non-governmental organizations, indicated "a substantial cause for concern".
Amnesty International sought information from the authorities on the steps taken to investigate cases of alleged ill-treatment and the outcome of inquiries opened into such allegations. The authorities responded to the majority of cases raised by the organization. Some gave information about the status of investigations or court proceedings. Others stated that the allegations were unfounded or that injuries incurred by detainees were the result of police officers using the degree of force necessary to subdue a person violently resisting arrest.
