TUNISIA
Hundreds of suspected supporters of the unauthorized Islamist organization al-Nahda and of the unauthorized Parti communiste des ouvriers tunisiens (pcot), Tunisian Communist Workers' Party, and other government critics were arrested. Most of them were prisoners of conscience. Many were released without trial, but scores were given prison sentences. Over 2,000 political prisoners, most of them prisoners of conscience sentenced after unfair trials since 1991, remained held. Prolonged garde a vue (incommunicado) detention continued to facilitate torture and ill-treatment of detainees held in the Ministry of the Interior and in police stations across the country. Cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment of political prisoners was reported to be widespread. At least four political de-tainees died in custody.
A new wave of repression of government opponents and critics further restricted freedom of expression and association. At least six foreign newspapers were banned, foreign journalists and observers were expelled or denied access to Tunisia, and government critics were prevented from leaving the country. A former socialist leader was arrested for questioning in April and was refused permission to register a "forum democra-
tique" (democratic forum). In May a group of women who signed a petition calling for respect for public liberties were summoned by police for questioning. The Ligue turjisienne des droits de I'homme (ltdh), Tunisian Human Rights League, resumed its activities in February, but its communiques could not be published in the government-controlled press.
Presidential elections were held in March and according to official sources President Zine el Abidine Ben 'Ali was reelected with over 99 per cent of the votes. He was the only candidate. The two people who had announced their intention to stand as candidates were arrested. Moncef Marzouki, the former president of the ltdh, was arrested in March and detained for four months on charges of having insulted the Tunisian judiciary in an interview with a foreign newspaper. He was released on bail and was still awaiting trial at the end of the year.' Abderrahmane Hani, a lawyer, was arrested in February and held for over two months on charges of setting up an unauthorized association and spreading false information. He was later sentenced to eight months' imprisonment, suspended.
Several people were imprisoned as prisoners of conscience as a result of legislation introduced in 1993 which allows prosecution of people for offences committed in other countries even when the offences are not recognized as crimes in those countries (see Ainnesty International Report 1994). 'Adel Selmi, a Tunisian academic resident in France, was arrested in June on arrival at Tunis airport. He was held in illegally prolonged garde a vue detention but the arrest date was falsified to conceal this. Showing his wrists and ankles which still bore marks, he stated in court that he had been suspended in contorted positions and had his head plunged in buckets of water to force him to sign a confession without knowing its content. He was sentenced to four years and two months' imprisonment for belonging to an unauthorized organization [al-Nahda), participating in an unauthorized demonstration and collecting funds without authorization. The charges related either to al-Nahda meetings outside Tunisia, which he denied participating in, or to events which were beyond the statute of limitation.
Wives and other relatives of Islamist
TUNISIA
political activists who were in prison or abroad were often detained for questioning. Many were reportedly ordered to stop wearing the headscarf and subjected to ill-treatment and harassment, including sexual harassment and threats of rape. Those known or suspected of having given financial assistance to families of Islamist detainees, or of having themselves received financial assistance, were imprisoned on charges of unauthorized collection of funds. Monia Mannai, whose husband continued to serve a long prison sentence for alleged political activities on behalf of al-Nahda and whose brother was being sought by police for the same reason, was sentenced in July with four other women to one year's imprisonment for membership of an unauthorized association, participating in unauthorized meetings and unauthorized collection of funds.
Hundreds of prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience sentenced in previous years remained in prison. Most of those released were ordered to report to a police station daily, weekly or in some cases twice a day, and were denied passports.
Torture and ill-treatment of both male and female detainees during garde ä vue detention continued to be reported. The 10-day statutory garde a vue limit, which itself contravenes international human rights standards, was often illegally prolonged. No independent and impartial investigations were carried out into any of the allegations of torture and illegally prolonged garde a vue detention. Hamma Hammami, a leading pcot figure arrested in February, stated in court that he was tortured and ill-treated in the police station and in the Ministry of the Interior. He stated that he was severely beaten, sexually humiliated and threatened with rape and death. Days after his arrest he still bore bruises and marks on his face and neck. He had been sentenced in absentia in December 1992 to four years and nine months' imprisonment for maintaining an unauthorized organization, holding unauthorized meetings and distributing leaflets, and was in hiding at the time of arrest. After his arrest he was also accused of assaulting two police officers and carrying a false identity card. He was sentenced in April to nine years and seven months' imprisonment, reduced by one year on appeal in June. In April an Amnesty Interna-
tional delegate who planned to observe his trial was refused access to Tunisia.
Ill-treatment in prisons continued to be widely reported. Prisoners of conscience who went on hunger-strike were put in isolation cells and kept chained by the foot. Inmates were reportedly beaten by prison guards inside the prisons and sometimes taken back to the Ministry of the Interior and beaten and ill-treated. Political prisoners were also often denied medical treatment and family visits.
Courts ignored complaints by defendants who retracted their confessions stating that these had been extracted under torture, even when the marks of torture or ill-treatment were still visible at the time of the trial. These confessions were accepted as evidence, as were confessions of other detainees who were never brought to court for cross-examination as requested by defence lawyers.
At least four people died in custody during the year. Isma'il Khemira and 'Ezzeddine Ben 'Aicha died in prison in February and August respectively, and Lotfi Gla'a and Amar el Beji died during garde a vue detention in police custody in February and November respectively. The authorities did not reply to requests for clarification of the causes and circum-stcuices of these deaths. The government took no further action to investigate the death in custody of Faisal Barakat, Rachid Chammakhi and at least six others in 1991 cind 1992, despite compelling evidence of torture prior to the deaths. No further information was made available about Kamal Matmati, who "disappeared" after curest in 1991 (see Amnesty International Report 1994).
In November the un Human Rights Committee expressed concern at the deterioration in the human rights situation in Tunisia since 1990, about continuing reports of abuse, ill-treatment and torture of detainees, deaths in custody under suspicious circumstances, and about the lack of independence of the judiciary.
Amnesty International renewed its call for the release of all prisoners of conscience and for the fair trial or release of other political prisoners. It called for full and independent investigations into allegations of torture and ill-treatment and into all cases of death in custody in recent years. It also expressed concern at the continuing denial of access to Tunisia of an
TUNISIA/TURKEY
Amnesty International delegate, and at the continuing harassment of its Section in Tunisia. In January Amnesty International issued a report, Tunisia: Rhetoric versus reality, the failure of a human rights bureaucracy.
