HUNGARY
One possible prisoner of conscience was detained for 10 days. He and another person were allegedly ill-treated in detention.
In February Hungary acceded to the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty. The European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment was ratified in 1993 but its entry into force was delayed until March.
Throughout the year prosecutions were initiated against suspected perpetrators of gross human rights violations during the 1956 uprising.
On 19 January Hermán Péter was arrested in Szarvasgede and held for 10 days on charges which appeared to have been fabricated because of his non-violent political activity. He had campaigned against the decision of the local council to approve the construction of a medical waste incinerator. During his arrest, police officers reportedly sprayed him with tear-gas, manhandled him while putting on handcuffs and pushed him into a gutter. He was released on 28 January by order of a county court. Also on 19 January, his colleague Pálinkás József was taken to a police station in Szarvasgede for questioning about an apparently unrelated incident. During interrogation he was reportedly punched in the face by a police officer and forced to sign a statement.
In March Amnesty International urged the Minister of the Interior to initiate an independent and impartial inquiry into the alleged ill-treatment of Hermán Péter
and Pálinkás József and expressed concern that Hermán Péter had been held in detention apparently for exercising non-vio-lently his right to freedom of expression. In September the Interior Ministry informed Amnesty International of the Public Prosecutor's decision not to charge officers involved in the alleged ill-treatment of the two men, No other inquiry appeared to have taken place.
In April Amnesty International expressed concern to President Goncz Árpád about the prosecution of Eorsi Mátyás and Lengyel László for defamation of public authority or officials, under the provisions of Article 232 of the Penal Code, The organization considered that this law could be applied in violation of the right to fi-ee-dom of expression and urged the President to initiate a judicial review. In June the Constitutional Court abolished Article 232.
