UKRAINE
At least 200 people were sentenced to death. At least one execution came to light during the year, but the true figure was believed to be much higher; information was received of 181 executions in 1992 and 1993. There were reports of inadequate protection for asylum-seekers.
Parliamentary elections took place in
March. Following presidential elections in July Leonid Kuchma succeeded Leonid Kravchuk as President. Discussions continued throughout the year on the draft of a new constitution (see Amnesty International Report 1994).
At least 200 people were sentenced to death by October 1994. Detailed statistics on the application of the death penalty were released for 1992 and 1993. In 1992, 79 people were sentenced to death and 103 executed. In 1993, 117 death sentences were passed, all for premeditated, aggravated min?der, and 78 people were executed. The same year, 11 death sentences were quashed on appeal and one was commuted.
Sessions of the presidential clemency commission were delayed in the second half of 1994 following the July elections. Among those awaiting the outcome of a petition for clemency was Vasily Krivonos, who was sentenced to death for murder in November 1993. He had just tiu-ned 18 at the time of the crime and he was said to have learning difficulties and psychiatric problems. His appeal had been rejected by the Supreme Court in February. Vasily Krivonos was reportedly beaten and taunted by prison guards.
Among those known to have been executed in 1994 was Anatoly Lyubarsky. who had been sentenced to death for murder in October 1993. His appeal was turned down in January and he was executed after President Kravchuk rejected his petition for clemency in July.
In July reports were received of inadequate protection of at least eight Iraqi asylum-seekers who, if forcibly returned to their country of origin, could have risked falling victim to human rights violations. The authorities were said to have intended expelling them without examining their reasons for seeking protection or the risks they faced in Iraq. They were believed still to be in Ukraine at the end of the year.
Throughout the year Amnesty International urged the President to commute all pending death sentences. The organization also called for a full investigation into allegations that Vasily Krivonos had been beaten while on death row. Amnesty International luged that no asylum-seeker, including the eight Iraqis, be expelled without a thorough examination of his or her case, and that asylum-seekers at risk of
UKRAINE/UNITED ARAB EMIRATES/UNITED KINGDOM
human rights violations in their own countries be granted effective and durable protection against forcible return. No replies had been received by the end of the year.
