BRAZIL
Hundreds of people were extrajudicially executed by police and death squads. Torture and ill-treatment of detainees were reported from police stations and prisons. Journalists, human rights activists, church workers and state prosecutors investigating human rights violations by members of the police received death threats.
BRAZIL
Elections were held in October for a new President, state governors and members of parliament at federal and state level. Fernando Henrique Cardoso of the Brazilicin Social Democratic Party was elected President and was due to take office on 1 January 1995.
In November, following a wave of killings by police and by drug gangs in Rio de Janeiro, the federal government appointed an Army General to assume joint command of the civil and military police of the state to oversee the fight against arms and drug-trafficking.
Hundreds of people, including adolescents and children, were killed by death squads in cities including Rio de Janeiro, Recife, Belo Horizonte and Salvador. The involvement of civil and military police in death squad activities in many states was openly acknowledged by the authorities but little progress was made in investigations and prosecutions.
On 18 June the dead bodies of two girls and a boy aged between 12 and 15 were found semi-naked in front of Santa Cecilia Church in the Bras de Pina neighbourhood of Rio de Janeiro. The bodies had been arranged to form a cross on the tarmac. All had shotgun wounds to the head, chest and limbs; the boy had his hands tied behind his back. These were typical of death squad-style executions which were reported to have claimed 1,200 lives in Rio de Janeiro from September 1993 to June 1994. Ninety per cent of these cases remained unsolved.
In October Rio de Janeiro police shot dead 13 people in the Nova Brasilia shanty town. The killings were apparently in revenge for an armed attack by a drug gang on a police station in which one policeman lost a leg. The police claimed that the 13 lost their lives in a gun battle, but members of the community alleged that some had been dragged out of their homes and extrajudicially executed.
On 9 December Wagner dos Santos was shot and seriously wounded in Rio de Janeiro. He was a key witness who had identified three military police standing trial for the Rio de Janeiro Candeléria massacre in which seven street children and a youth were shot dead outside Candeléria church in July 1993. On regaining consciousness Wagner dos Santos claimed that he had been abducted, handcuffed, beaten and then shot and left for dead by a
group of policemen in plain clothes, who blamed him for identifying some of their colleagues. Amnesty International had repeatedly urged the Brazilian authorities to protect him and several child witnesses to the Candelâria killings, but learned during the year that up to 40 of them remained sleeping on the streets.
Rural workers and trade union leaders were also extrajudicially executed with impunity. A member of an alleged death squad operating within a military police unit in Sergipe state testified that military police took part in several operations to kill cattle thieves and others in Sergipe and Bahia states, on the orders of high-ranking state police and judicial officials. In November authorities in Parâ state announced an investigation into military police participation in hired killings of rural workers in the south of the state, after claims by a landowner that he had paid police to commit such crimes.
In July Ivaldo Severino da Silva, a rural trade union representative, was shot dead in Ipojuca, Pernambuco state. Six previous attempts had been made on his life. A local judge had previously refused to detain three employees of the Trapiche sugar mill in connection with an attempt on the trade unionist's life in October 1993. According to trade union sources, 16 people had been killed at the Trapiche sugar mill since 1986, the majority in connection with their trade union activities.
José Amaral Cirilo went into hiding in September; he had been tortured and nearly killed by police in Maréchal De-odoro, Alagoas state, in 1993. He sought protection in a police station in the state capital, Maceio, in May 1993 after seeking compensation through the labour courts from the Sumauma sugar mill in Maréchal Deodoro. Two civil policemen from Maréchal Deodoro collected him from Ma-ceiô and took him away in handcuffs. He was then held at the police station in Maréchal Deodoro and beaten on the hands with a wooden club. After signing papers produced by the manager of the sugar mill, he was handcuffed and taken in a car without licence plates to a waste ground. He was forced to lie down and shot twice in the face. Police removed his handcuffs when they thought he was dead. He ran away and was pursued by a police sergeant who shot at him, wounding him three times in the leg and twice in
BRAZIL
the side. After reaching safety, he reported the case to the authorities. During the subsequent investigation, evidence of a clandestine cemetery was found at the waste ground. The state authorities confined him to the state mental hospital for 14 months "for his own safety". Police officers were charged with his attempted murder but had not been brought to trial by the end of 1994.
In May a former military policeman was sentenced to 50 years' imprisonment for killing two rural trade unionists, brothers José and Paulo Canuto, and wounding Orlando Canuto in Xinguara in April 1991 (see Amnesty Internationa} Report 1992). This was the first trial and conviction in connection with hundreds of murders of rural workers and trade unionists in the south of Para state which had taken place over three decades. In November the convicted policeman escaped from the central prison in Belém. Another police sergeant charged with the same crimes had escaped from police custody in 1992. In May the mayor of Coqueiro Seco, Alagoas state, was acquitted of planning the murder of town councillor Renildo dos Santos in 1993 (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1994). Four military policemen and one civilian were at liberty awaiting trial for Renildo dos Santos' murder.
Torture and ill-treatment of detainees were reported from police stations and prisons. In January a rural worker, José Bernadino Algatano, died in hospital after being beaten by military police in Dionisio, Minas Gérais state. According to witnesses he was handcuffed, thrown to the ground and beaten and kicked in the abdomen, back and genitals. His brother was detained when he tried to intervene and taken to the local police station. There, he reported seeing José Bernadino Algatano being beaten, being suspended from an iron bar (a torture known as parrot's perch) and being semi-asphyxiated with a wet cloth. The autopsy report revealed severe injuries to the intestines consistent with blows to the abdomen. A military police inquiry had not been concluded by the end of 1994.
In September a judge ordered the Minors' Police Station in Belo Horizonte, Minas Gérais state, to be closed following evidence of systematic torture and sexual abuse there. Members of the Juvenile Welfare and Prosecution Service visiting the
police station in August had taken testimonies from detainees who alleged that they had been beaten and given electric shocks. The prosecutors inspected a small room in the basement where torture sessions were held and found a strip of rubber attached to a wooden stave with which the juveniles had been beaten. Charges of torture were brought against two police chiefs and two detectives. The crime of torture is still not included in the Brazilian penal code, but charges of torture can be brought under the 1990 Children's Statute.
There were reports that prison guards repeatedly beat prisoners in the House of Detention prison in Sao Paulo. In March José Roberto dos Santos, a prisoner suffering from aids, was injured on his limbs, chest and back after being beaten with iron bars. In June, after inspecting wounded prisoners, the Sao Paulo State Public Defender's Office initiated criminal proceedings against 15 guards for injuring 40 prisoners in Block 4 of the prison. There were further reports of beatings following a number of escape attempts.
Journalists, human rights activists, church workers and state prosecutors investigating human rights violations by members of the police received death threats and some were killed. On 13 June Reinaldo Guedes Miranda, a lawyer, and Hermögenes Da Silva Almeida Filho, a poet, who were both human rights advisers to the opposition Workers Party, were shot dead in their car. They had been closely following the investigation into the 1993 Vigârio Geral massacre (see Amnesty International Report 1994) on behalf of the local council's human rights commission. The two had reported receiving threatening notes, apparently relating to their activities on behalf of black people and homosexuals. A police informant was detained and charged with the killings. Colleagues of the two men disputed the authorities' claim that the killings were not political.
Cesar Gama, José Antonio Moura Bom-fim and Marcos Cadoso, all newspaper journalists in Aracajû, Sergipe state, received repeated death threats after publishing allegations that a military police death squad was operating with the collusion of high-ranking state authorities.
In September the existence of a "hit-list" of some 40 people in the town of
BRAZIL/BULGARIA
Xinguara, Para state, was reported. Six of those named on the list were already dead and two had been attacked. According to evidence given by gunmen already charged with related incidents, those named on the list had been singled out because of their links with peasant farmers involved in local land conflicts. One of the gunmen alleged that he had been contracted to kill Father Ricardo Rezende (see Amnesty International Report 1993). Brother Henri des Rosiers, Father Bened-ito Rodrigues Costa and a local councillor, Elpidio Pereira da Silva, were also named on the list.
During the year Stella Kuhlman, military state prosecutor in Sao Paulo, made public a series of telephone threats she had been receiving for the previous 18 months in relation to her work prosecuting military police charged with homicide and extortion - in particular from the military police battalion known locally as rota. Threats recorded on her private telephone included: "If you continue branding my friends, your children will die, then your mother and you will die last". Stella Kuhlman was one of the prosecutors in the trial of 120 military police charged with the House of Detention prison massacre (see Amnesty International Reports 1993 and 1994). Tania Sales Moreira, Rio de Janeiro state public prosecutor, continued to receive death threats because of her work prosecuting members of death squads (see Amnesty International Report 1992).
In September Amnesty International published a report. Beyond Despair: An Agenda for Human Rights in Brazil. The report analysed the increasing scale of human rights violations in urban areas over the previous four years which it attributed to the virtual impunity enjoyed by police committing human rights crimes. It also pointed to encouraging initiatives by some state prosecutors. It proposed major institutional reforms of Brazil's police and judiciary and specific measures for the effective protection of victims and witnesses of human rights violations. An Amnesty International delegation visited Brazil in September to present the report to the Minister of Justice, the Attorney General and to presidential candidates and to gain their commitment to an emergency program to improve human rights protection in Brazil.
Throughout the year Amnesty International raised individual cases with the Brazilian authorities, seeking investigations and protection for witnesses of human rights crimes in order to hold the security forces to account and so end the cycle of impunity and violence.
