JAMAICA
Corporal punishment was imposed as a sentence for the first time for over 20 years. At least eight death sentences were imposed. There were no executions.
In August a High Court judge sentenced a man to six strokes with a tamarind rod and a prison term on conviction of wounding with intent. Corporal punishment had not been implemented since the early 1970s but had remained in the statute book despite a recommendation by a government-appointed committee in 1976 that flogging (with the cat-o'-nine-tails) and whipping (with a tamarind rod) be abolished as punishments. Corporal punishment may be imposed for offences such as rape, indecent assault and robbery with violence. In September, three other men were sentenced to three strokes and prison terms for robbery and illegal possession of firearms. The sentences had not been carried out by the end of the year.
The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council Ocpc) in London, Jamaica's final court of appeal, rejected the appeal of Albert Huntley in December. Albert Huntley had appealed against the Court of Appeal's dismissal in November 1993 of a constitutional motion in which he had claimed that the review of his case (provided in the Offences against the Person (Amendment) Act of 1992 for those already under sentence of death to classify their offences into capital or non-capital
JAMAICA
murder) had violated his right to protection under the law and to a fair hearing (see Amnesty International Reports 1993 and 1994). He argued that he had not had the opportunity to be heard or to have legal representation of his choice during the classification review proceedings. The hearings of the cases of all other prisoners who had had their cases classified as capital murder were suspended in 1993 pending the resolution of Albert Huntley's appeal. No death sentences were commuted as a result of the November 1993 jcpc ruling that execution more than five years after sentencing would constitute "inhuman and degrading punishment or other treatment" (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1994). The jcpc had further advised that in order to achieve justice swiftly, the Governor General should refer all relevant cases to the Jamaica Privy Council which should recommend commutation instead of waiting for all those prisoners who had been under sentence of death for five years or more to appeal individually. However, no action was taken in the cases of dozens of prisoners due to have benefited from the ruling.
At least eight people were sentenced to death for capital murder. There were no executions and at the end of the year there were over 150 prisoners on death row. The last hanging was carried out in February 1988.
The trial of five police officers charged with manslaughter in connection with the deaths of three men in the Constant Spring Pohce Station in October 1992 started in February. An inquest had found criminal negligence amounting to manslaughter as the cause of death. The men died from suffocation while being held in an overcrowded, unventilated cell (see Amnesty International Report 1993). At the end of the five-week trial the jury did not find the officers to be criminally liable for the three deaths and they were acquitted in late March. It was reported that the government intended to settle pending civil claims on the case.
Several policemen were tried on murder charges for killing people in previous years when they could have apprehended them instead. In one case, relating to the death of Rudolph Edwards in 1990, the jury could not reach a unanimous decision and a retrial was ordered.
In February the Minister of Justice and
National Security replied to Amnesty International's 1993 report on the four death row prisoners who were shot dead by warders on 31 October 1993 after allegedly trying to take warders hostage (see Amnesty International Report 1994). The report also described concerns about previous deaths of inmates of the prison as well as allegations of ill-treatment and threats to prisoners. The Minister said that the police had been asked to carry out a thorough investigation into the deaths.
In June the Minister replied more fully to the concerns raised by Amnesty International in the above report about ill-treatment of prisoners between 1989 and 1993. He said that in the case of a disturbance at St Catherine's District Prison in May 1990 in which three prisoners died after allegedly being beaten by warders, a coroner's jury had decided in 1992 that there were people criminally responsible and the police had been asked to "carry out further investigations in order to obtain additional information about these persons" (see Amnesty International Report 1991). On the 31 October 1993 deaths he said that the report of an investigation by the Inspector of Prisons had been sent to the office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (dpp) for a ruling on the question of criminal responsibility, but that it had not been found necessary to appoint an independent Commission of Inquiry as recommended by Amnesty International.
In October Amnesty International replied, welcoming the inquiry conducted by the prison Inspectorate into the 31 October incident and the fact that the dpp would examine the report to see whether there was evidence of any criminal wrongdoing on the part of individuals. It regretted, however, that without the publication of a full report setting out the terms of reference, the sources examined and the findings, such an investigation could not be shown to have the impartiality and thoroughness that is required under international standards. Amnesty International reiterated its appeal for a full, independent inquiry and urged that, in the first instance, the report of the Inspectorate should be made public at the earliest date.
In March Amnesty International wrote to the Attorney General urging that all relevant death sentences be commuted under the 1993 jcpc five-year ruling. It also called for the commutation of all death sentences.
JAMAICA/JAPAN
In September Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of National Security and Justice expressing its concern about the whipping sentence imposed in August. It pointed out that this sentence violated international standards to which Jamaica is a State Party and called on the government to introduce legislation to abolish corporal punishment and to ensure that the punishment was not carried out. In November the Minister replied stating that the sentence was legal under the current law. He added that when amendments to the Constitution, which were under discussion, came into force it would be "appropriate to consider whether this particular piece of legislation authorizing sentences of whipping and flogging can remain as part of our law in the light of current international conventions and practices".
