FRANCE
Hundreds of conscientious objectors to the national service laws were considered prisoners of conscience. There were reports of shootings, killings and ill-treatment by law enforcement officers, sometimes accompanied by racist insults. Investigations into such cases were subject to long delays.
FRANCE
In March widespread public protests followed the announcement by Prime Minister Edouard Balladur of a reduction in the guaranteed minimum wage for young professionals, the contrat d'insertion professioneUe (cip). Numerous demonstrators alleged that they were ill-treated by law enforcement officers.
Many domestic human rights groups were concerned by a major increase in police identity checks during the year. Police had been given sweeping new powers in 1993 to demand proof of identity even in cases where there was no evidence of suspicious behaviour. Allegations of ill-treat-ment during identity checks were received throughout 1994. In July a draft bill on security was presented to parliament. The control of immigration and of illegal workers was listed as one of six national priorities for the police.
There was still no right to claim conscientious objector status during military service and the alternative civilian service available to recognized objectors remained twice the length of ordinary military service. Conscientious objectors refusing to conform to the national service laws continued to receive prison sentences. The vast majority were Jehovah's Witnesses; some 500 were unofficially estimated to be imprisoned during the year for refusing to perform military service. They had not applied for conscientious objector status because they also rejected, on religious grounds, the option of civilian service.
Shootings and killings by law enforcement officers continued throughout the year. In January, two gendarmes near Rouen shot dead Ibrahim Sy, an 18-year-old youth who was a passenger in a stolen car which they were trying to stop. All three youths in the car were unarmed. In June an off-duty policeman in Paris killed two yoimg men, Joël Nebor and Frédéric Adom, during an attempted robbery in a shop. The men, who were not carrying firearms, had thrown a chair at the officer, who was in plain clothes. He then fired nine shots at close range without attempting to subdue the men and also wounded the shop proprietor's companion.
Judicial inquiries into many other cases of shootings and killings were still unfinished at the end of the year. These included the cases of Rachid Ardjoimi and Makomé M'bowole (see Amnesty International Report 1994). In other cases, courts
imposed nominal sentences. In January the court in Chambéry gave a suspended sentence of one year's imprisonment to a police officer for manslaughter, Eighteen-year-old Eric Simonté had been shot through the head and fatally wounded by an officer who was putting handcuffs on him (see Amnesty International Report 1994). The prosecutor considered this "serious misconduct" and an "inadmissible error in the technique of challenging a person".
There were numerous reports of physical, including sexual, ill-treatment by law enforcement officers. Many people who had participated in or observed the anti-cip demonstrations alleged that they had been beaten and injured by officers. Didier Laroche, who took part in a large and mostly peaceful march in Bordeaux in March, was ill-treated by officers from an "intervention squad". He claimed that they punched and kicked him and beat him with a truncheon. He was put in a van and further ill-treated on the way to the police station, where a doctor examined him and requested hospital treatment. A certificate was issued by the hospital recording a broken nose and various injuries to his eyes, face, chest, knees and thighs. His judicial complaint of ill-treatment was still under investigation at the end of the year.
At the end of 1994 judicial investigations into many complaints by people allegedly ill-treated when they were arrested after riots in Paris in April 1993 remained unfinished (see Amnesty International Report 1994). However, two police officers were indicted on charges of unlawful use of violence against Philippe Lescaffette, a civil servant. He had claimed that police officers armed with clubs charged him, threw him to the ground and beat him. He spent four hours in a cell without medical attention and later received 24 stitches for facial injuries.
There were numerous complaints of ill-treatment associated with identity checks, some of them relating to previous years. In June 1993 police were called to a Paris restaurant because a group of diners, including Tameem Taqi, the son of a former United Arab Emirates diplomat and a French national, had disputed a bill. Their identity papers were examined and the disagreement settled. Tameem Taqi claimed that the same officers stopped
FRANCE
him outside, handcuffed him, and pushed him to the floor of their van. He was kicked, punched and beaten with truncheons in front of witnesses. Another diner from the same group was also detained, The police transferred both men to hospital where the officers subjected them to further ill-treatment and racial insults, A medical certificate recorded multiple contusions to Tameem Taqi's face and body consistent with his claims. His nose and mouth were particularly damaged. A prosecutor extended his custody order despite his visible physical injuries. Tameem Taqi lodged a complaint against the officers for torture and using racist insults, and against the prosecutor for illegal arrest. The judge in charge of the investigation into the two complaints indicted four police officers and remanded a sergeant in custody for assault and battery. However, her investigation was still unfinished at the end of the year.
In February Pierre Kongo, a gynaecologist from the Central African Republic, was stopped by two railway officers at the Care du Nord railway station in Paris. He said that the police officers who arrived subsequently asked him for his identity papers and he showed his passport. The officers pushed him down the stairs, handcuffed him behind his back and knocked him to the ground. He claimed that the officers punched him while he was lying on the ground. The next morning he was treated in hospital for his injuries. A medical certificate was issued recording, among other injuries, a serious fracture to his right eye-socket. The railway and police officers gave differing and contradictory explanations for his injuries. These included statements that Pierre Kongo had injured himself by accidentally falling down; by falling over a bench trying to strike one of the officers with an arm, as he was not handcuffed; by trying to head-butt an officer because he was handcuffed; and by falling over a bench with an officer while he was resisting a body search, Pierre Kongo was released without charge. An internal police inquiry was opened and Pierre Kongo served a summons against one of the officers alleging intentional assault and battery.
Two cases illustrated the delays characteristic of the investigation and hearing of complaints of ill-treatment. In July 1993 Moufida Ksoury, a French citizen of
Tunisian origin, was returning to France from Italy. At the border two Italian police officers stripped and raped her. They then took her to the French border post which was manned by two officers of the border police. A French police corporal sexually assaulted her in the toilets. He acknowledged that he had had oral sex with her but claimed that she had provoked him. In July 1994 the two Italian officers were sentenced to five years and eight months' imprisonment, but the French judicial investigation was still unfinished at the end of the year.
Two police inspectors and an investigating officer were charged with acts of violence and racist abuse against Lucien Djossouvi in September 1989 in Paris (see Amnesty Internationai Reports Î990 to 1994). In September 1994 the hearing in the case was postponed for the second time until January 1995, The investigation had taken nearly four and a half years.
Ill-treatment was also alleged in prisons. In March there was a serious disturbance in Varces prison near Grenoble. News of this was largely suppressed for three weeks. Riot police were called in to support prison staff in clearing exercise yards of prisoners who were reportedly peacefully protesting. Prisoners claimed that the operation was carried out with excessive brutality. They stated that officers, wearing hoods to conceal their identity, beat them with truncheons. Unmuzzled dogs allegedly attacked prisoners who had returned to their cells. Approximately 15 prisoners were reportedly treated for their injuries in the infirmary and others were transferred to other prisons. Lawyers repeatedly demanded an inquiry into the incidents. An administrative inquiry under a gendarmerie officer was opened in March but the authorities refused a full judicial inquiry.
Amnesty International continued to express concern that, because of its punitive length, civilian service did not provide an acceptable alternative to military service. Amnesty International was also concerned that there was still no provision for conscientious objection developed after joining the armed forces. It reiterated its belief that conscientious objectors to military service should be able to seek conscientious objector status at any time.
Amnesty International sought information from the authorities about the
FRANCEyGABON
progress of investigations into incidents of shootings, kilhngs and ill-treatment. In August 1993 the organization had written to the Ministers of the Interior and Justice regarding its concerns. In view of the failure of the government to reply to this letter and the organization's concern over the persistence of such incidents, Amnesty International published in October a report, France: Shootings, killings and alleged ill-treatment by law enforcement officers. This analysed 29 selected cases which occurred between January 1993 and June 1994. Seven detailed recommendations were made to the Ministers of the Interior, Defence and Justice who are responsible respectively for the police, gendarmerie and justice. Particular emphasis was placed on improvements in training for law enforcement officers and specific reforms to the judicial system. No answer had been received by the end of the year.
An Amnesty International delegate was sent to the twice-postponed trial of police officers accused of the ill-treatment and racist abuse of Lucien Djossouvi.
