PHILIPPINES
At least 43 people were victims of apparent extrajudicial executions and several "disappearances" were reported. Some political prisoners were released, but almost 300 remained in detention, among them possible prisoners of conscience. There were reports of torture and ill-treatment of suspected government opponents. Twenty-two people were sentenced to death but no executions were carried out. Armed opposition groups committed human rights abuses.
The government continued to face armed opposition from the New People's Army (npa), the armed wing of the Communist Party of the Philippines (ccp); and from groups seeking independence for predominantly Muslim areas of Mindanao. Armed opposition groups committed abuses, including deliberate and arbifrary killings.
Peace negotiations between the government and opposition groups continued. Talks with the National Democratic Front, representing the npa, took place in October, but broke down after two days over security guarantees. Talks with the Moro National Liberation Front (mnlf) in Jakarta led to limited agreement, and were to be resumed in 1995.
Two amnesty proclamations were issued by President Fidel Ramos in March. Those eligible were prisoners detained for
criminal acts committed in pursuit of political objectives, and soldiers or police involved in coup attempts or who had committed crimes during counter-insurgency operations. After widespread protest, President Ramos amended the second proclamation in May to exclude perpetrators of "serious" human rights violations.
The government announced that the transfer of counter-insurgency functions from the Armed Forces of the Philippines (afp) to the Philippine National Police (pnp), expected in 1993, would not be implemented in areas of Mindanao, Sulu, Tawi-Tawi, the Cordillera, Southern Taga-log, Bicol, Panay and Samar in 1994 or 1995. In March a report by the official Commission on Human Rights (chr) named the pnp in 43 per cent of complaints filed in 1993. Senior pnp officials said they would investigate the allegations. The official militia, the Citizens' Armed Forces Geographical Units (cafgu), were also accused of human rights violations during counter-insurgency operations. Some cafgu companies were reportedly deactivated during the year.
Effective investigation of alleged human rights violations and related prosecutions continued to be obstructed by security forces. Methods used included threats and intimidation of witnesses, complainants, lawyers and judges; and refusal of access to information or military premises. Court proceedings were characterized by cumbersome, lengthy procedures, as were investigations by the chr.
At least 43 people were victims of apparent extrajudicial executions by government and government-backed forces. Among those killed were former political prisoners and criminal suspects. Rural dwellers in militarized zones were also attacked and those killed included the very young and the elderly. For example, Antonio Pacis, a former political prisoner, and his wife were riding to their farm in Isabela province in February when they were shot dead, reportedly by cafgu members.
Two cafgu members were arrested and charged with murder in connection with the 1993 killing of Chris Batan, a human rights worker (see Amnesty International Report 1994). One reportedly "escaped", however, and despite numerous court hearings the case apparently had not been resolved by the end of the year.
PHILIPPINES/POLAND
"Disappearances" continued to be reported. In several cases detentions were acknowledged by the authorities after some weeks or months. However, the whereabouts of a man known as "Jun", who "disappeared" after being abducted by the security forces in May, remained unclear at the end of the year. The whereabouts of the majority who have gone missing remained unknown. The bodies of three people who "disappeared" in 1990 were recovered in May. Ernesto Biasong, Ladislao Pillones and Wilfredo ViUaruz had reportedly been abducted by members of a military-backed vigilante group in Negros Occidental.
Some political prisoners were released but an estimated 291 others, including possible prisoners of conscience, remained in detention at the end of 1994. Most were accused of supporting armed opposition groups and charged with criminal offences. Among those held were Juanito Itaas and Donato Continente, sentenced to life imprisonment in 1991 for the killing of an army colonel from the usa. Both signed "confessions" said to have been extracted under duress.
There were reports of torture or ill-treatment of political suspects. Eddie Donos, arrested in June and accused of taking part in an ambush of a company of soldiers, was reportedly beaten and threatened with a gun during interrogation.
The death penalty, restored in 1993 for a wide range of crimes, was imposed on 22 people, the majority after conviction for rape or murder. No executions were reported during the year.
Deliberate and arbitrary killings were reportedly carried out by armed opposition groups. In January the npa released a list of 345 individuals targeted for "execution". Leopoldo Mabilangan, a former npa commander, was shot dead in April for supposed "heinous crimes". In Mindanao the Abu Sayyaf group abducted 74 people in June. The majority were quickly released, but 15 were killed and a Roman Catholic priest was held for two months before being released unharmed.
Throughout the year Amnesty International appealed to the government to conduct independent and impartial investigations into all apparent extrajudicial executions and "disappearances" and called for those responsible to be brought to justice. It called for the release of all
prisoners of conscience and for political prisoners to be given fair trials or released. It urged the government to commute all death sentences. It appealed to opposition groups not to commit human rights abuses.
