TURKEY
Hundreds of people were detained as prisoners of conscience. Some were soon released, but dozens were sentenced to prison terms. Torture of political and criminal detainees in police stations was routine and systematic, and there were at least 29 reported deaths in custody as a result of torture. At least 55 people reportedly "disappeared" in security force custody. There were hundreds of political killings in the mainly Kurdish southeastern provinces, many in circumstances that suggested that the victims had been extrajudicially executed by the security forces. There were no executions, but death sentences were passed during the year. Armed opposition groups were re* sponsible for at least 170 deliberate and arbitrary killings of prisoners and other non>combatants.
State of emergency legislation was in force throughout the year in 10 southeastern provinces, where the 10-year-long conflict between government forces and the secessionist Partiya Karkeren Kurdistan (pkk), Kurdish Workers' Party, claimed 3,500 lives, including civilians, during the year.
Hundreds of people suspected of supporting Kurdish separatism were arrested, many of them at public meetings and demonstrations, and held for hours or days in police custody as prisoners of con-
science. Article 8 of the Anti-Terror Law, which outlaws any advocacy of separatism, was increasingly used to prosecute and imprison people for the peaceful expression of their opinions. In May Mehdi Zana, the former mayor of Diyarbakir, began serving a four-year prison sentence under Article 8 of the Anti-Terror Law for testifying before the Human Rights Sub-Committee of the European Parliament in Brussels in December 1992. Giinay Asian, author and television journalist, who had been arrested in October 1993, continued to serve an 18-month sentence because of a historical book he had written.
In January Ahmet Zeki Okçuoglu, a lawyer, began serving a 20-month sentence for "spreading separatist propaganda" because of an article in a political jomnal. In October Mahmut Akkurt, another lawyer, began a 14-month prison sentence for a speech he made in 1992 as president of the Bahkesir branch of the Turkish Human Rights Association (hra). Four members of the board of the Diyarbakir branch of the hra, Melike Alp and the lawyers Mahmut Çakar, Nimetul-lah Gundiiz and Abdullah Çager, were arrested in December and remanded in custody on charges of "separatist propaganda" and membership of the pkk. The indictment against them contained no evidence to support the charges of membership of the pkk. All were prisoners of conscience.
Torture by police or gendarmes (soldiers carrying out police duties in rural areas) continued to be reported from all parts of Turkey, particularly the major cities and the southeast. Detainees suspected of links with illegal armed organizations were held for up to 30 days in incommunicado detention, unprotected by even the most basic safeguards against torture. A 13-year-old boy, Abdullah Salman, wrongly accused of theft, reported that he had been blindfolded, beaten, choked and given electric shocks while being interrogated at §i§li Police Headquarters in Istanbul. Bruising on his shoulders, arms and neck was confirmed by a medical report.
There were at least 29 deaths in custody apparently as a result of torture. Those who died included criminal suspects and people detained on suspicion of involvement with armed political organizations. Garip Olmez of the village of
TURKEY
Yogurtyemez in the Ahlat district of Bitlis province was arrested in April and interrogated at Bitlis Gendarmerie Headquarters. Ten days later Garip Olmez's family were asked to collect his body from the mortuary of Bitlis State Hospital. They found that the body had severe injuries to the head and stomach. The ankles bore marks of bindings and the feet had apparently been burned with melted plastic. The family submitted a petition of complaint to the Ahlat Prosecutor's office, but it was reportedly rejected.
Abdullah Baskm was detained with 14 other Kurdish villagers from Gùmû§gôrgû in the Kozluk district of Batman province in July. They were interrogated at Batman Gendarmerie Headquarters because they had refused to participate in the system of village guards (villagers armed and paid by the government to fight the pkk). After 13 days in custody Abdullah Baskm, who was in good health before being detained, was taken to hospital where he died. The other villagers said that they were tortured and that Abdullah Baskm had been tortured particularly severely - that he was subjected to hanging by the wrists tied behind the back, continually beaten and subjected to electric shocks. No judicial investigation appears to have been carried out into Abdullah Baskm's death.
There were reports of ill-treatment of inmates in prisons, particularly when police or gendarmes entered prisons during hunger-strikes and other protests by prisoners, or when prisoners were travelling to or from court in the custody of gendarmes. In September the female inmates of Konya e-type prison were returned to their dormitory by force when they protested that their exercise period was being curtailed. Later that evening approximately 80 prison warders and an equal number of soldiers entered the women's dormitory and beat the women with sticks, truncheons and pipes. Many women were injured, including Çmar Yaçar whose ribs were broken.
In October scores of prisoners at Di-yarbakir e-type Prison were injured when soldiers and plainclothes police attacked a barricaded prison ward with firearms and explosives. Two prisoners, Ramazan Ôzûak and Suleyman Ongun later died of their injuries.
Hayriye Gundiiz and 11 other prisoners on trial for membership of the illegal
armed organization Devrimci Sol (Revolutionary Left) were severely beaten by gendarmes who were guarding them at Istanbul State Security Court No. 3 in October. The attack was witnessed by three lawyers, who reported that the gendarmes shouted, "Get the lawyers out, we are going to kill this lot." Police hustled the lawyers away. The prisoners were beaten in the court corridor before being dragged into a yard where they were kicked and punched by plainclothes police and members of the Mobile Force (an anti-riot squad).
At least 55 people were reported to have "disappeared" in the custody of police or soldiers. Mehmet Giirkan, head of the village of Akgayurt in Diyarbakir province, and the inhabitants of his village were forcibly evacuated by security forces in July. At a press conference in Ankara, the capital, Mehmet Giirkan publicized the plight of his village, where security forces had burned both houses and crops, and asked the government for help. He returned in August to the village to collect his belongings and was seen being detained by members of the security forces and taken away in a helicopter. He has not been seen since.
Kenan Bilgin "disappeared" in unacknowledged detention in Ankara following his arrest in the Dikmen district of the city in September. Nine people, including a lawyer, who were detained at Ankara Police Headquarters in September claim to have seen a person answering Kenan Bil-gin's description, apparently being interrogated under torture. Another detainee who knew Kenan Bilgin spoke to him. The police denied holding Kenan Bilgin.
Hundreds of people were victims of political killings, many of which may have been extrajudicial executions. Those targeted included journalists, members of the Halkm Demokrasi Partisi (hadep). People's Democracy Party, which campaigned for political rights for the Kurdish minority, and people who had been imprisoned for or interrogated about separatist offences, or whose relatives had joined the pkk.
Necati Aydin and Mehmet Ay were detained in March. In April they appeared in Diyarbakir State Security Court on charges of supporting the pkk. The court ruled that they should be released. The prosecutor lodged an objection, demanding that they should remain in custody. The objection
TURKEY
was overruled, but the two men were never released or seen alive again: seven days later their bodies were found in a field.
Muhsin Melik, a founder of the §anliurfa branch of hadep, was attacked in June. Before he died of his wounds he said that he recognized the faces of three of his attackers and that they were members of the police team following him.
In March several villages in §irnak were bombed, reportedly by jet aircraft. Thirty-six people were killed, including 17 children. Official statements claimed that the bombing was accidental, but local inhabitants said that just days before the bombing they had been threatened with death by the security forces for refusing to join the village guards.
There were also allegations of extrajudicial executions in Istanbul and Ankara during police operations against Devrimci Sol. Fuat Erdogan, who was wanted by police, Elmas Yalgin and Ismet Erdogan were shot dead by police in a café in the Be§ikta§ district of Istanbul in September. Istanbul police claimed that the three opened fire when approached for an identity check. However, the café owner said that police evacuated the café before the shootings took place, and a lawyer who visited the scene of the killing on behalf of the hra found no evidence of shots fired from inside the café outwards. The three victims had bullet wounds to their heads.
After 10 years in which no judicial executions had been carried out, Turkey became de facto an abolitionist country. However, the death penalty remained in force and a number of death sentences were passed during 1994.
pkk guerrillas were responsible for over 170 deliberate and arbitrary killings. Most of their victims were Kurdish villagers who participated in the system of government-armed village guards. Village guards captured by the pkk during the course of attacks were frequently "executed", as were their extended families. Sixteen women and children were killed by grenades throvvm by pkk members into a building during an attack on village guards in Ormancik, Mardin province, in January. The pkk also claimed responsibility for bomb attacks which were clearly directed at civilian targets. In January Ali Ertugrul Tokag and Ruhi Can Tul were killed by bombs placed on buses in
Ankara. Also in January a six-year-old boy was killed by a bomb planted in the Di-yarbakir governor's office. In June, 12 foreign tourists were injured by a bomb in Marmaris, southwest Turkey, for which the pkk claimed responsibility. One later died. In September pkk forces raiding the village of Kazankoyii, Agri, entered the house of a primary school teacher, Sait Korkmaz, dragged him out, bound his hands and legs, and shot him dead. Guerrillas of the pkk reportedly shot dead four primary school teachers in Mardin province in November.
Amnesty International condemned these grave abuses and in June publicly called on the leadership of the pkk to ensure that all pkk forces were instructed to respect human rights and basic international humanitarian standards.
Amnesty International published a number of reports including Turkey: Time for Action in February, Turkey: More people "disappear" following detention in March, and Turkey: Dissident voices jailed again in June. Throughout the year the organization appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience and urged the government to initiate full and impartial investigations into allegations of torture, extrajudicial executions and "disappearances". In January an Amnesty International delegate observed a hearing in the trial of 16 lawyers at Diyarbakir State Security Court, The lawyers faced charges of assisting the pkk, but Amnesty International believed that the real reason for their prosecution was their work for human rights. At the end of the year, the trial was continuing. In May an Amnesty International delegate observed a hearing in the trial of Soner Onder at Istanbul State Security Court. In October he was sentenced to life imprisonment on charges of participating in an arson attack on a department store, in which 12 people were killed. Amnesty International believed that Soner Onder's trial was unfair. In August an Amnesty International delegate observed a hearing in Ankara in the trial of eight Kurdish members of parliament being tried for treason. In December the parliamentarians were convicted of assisting the pkk and sentenced to long terms of imprisonment.
In September the Turkish Government refused to admit an Amnesty International researcher into Turkey on the grounds that
TURKEYAURKMENISTAN
he had links with the pkk. Amnesty International denied this and asked the authorities for specific information. This was not provided.
In an oral statement to the un Commission on Human Rights in February Amnesty International included reference to its concerns about extrajudicial executions and "disappearances" in Turkey. In October in Budapest at the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (csce) Review Conference, Amnesty International raised concerns about human rights violations against human rights defenders in Turkey. Amnesty International also continued to urge that a csce expert mission be sent to the country {see Working with International Organizations).
