URUGUAY
There was an increasing number of reports of ill-treatment of detainees by the police. Human rights violations committed during the period of military rule remained uninvestigated.
President Julio Maria Sanguinetti of the Colorado Party, who was elected in November 1994, took office in March, replacing Luis Alberto Lacalle.
In November the Inter-American Convention on the Forced Disappearance of Persons was approved by Parliament. By the end of the year the ratification instrument had not been deposited.
There were increasing reports of ill-treatment of detainees by members of the police. Judicial proceedings were initiated in several cases as a result of formal complaints of tortiu-e and ill-treatment of detainees during police patrol operations. In January a chief inspector of police and a police sergeant were charged with a number of serious crimes, including homicide, in Soriano Department in 1994. The police sergeant was charged with the killing of Narciso Fleitas, a 62-year-old labourer who reportedly died of internal injuries
caused by a beating. Also in January, four members of the police were charged with attempted homicide, inflicting serious in-jiu"ies and concealment in connection with the wounding of Ceferino Nery Acosta in Montevideo in that month. According to reports, after being wounded during a confrontation with the police, Ceferino Nery Acosta was taken away by police and shot again.
In March the Criminal Court of Appeals revoked an acquittal by a lower court of a policeman, a sergeant, and a chief of police and ordered judicial proceedings to continue. The police officers had allegedly subjected a man whom they had detained and questioned in a Montevideo street to a mock execution and had fractured his lower jaw. The policeman and sergeant were charged with inflicting deliberate and serious injuries, and the chief of police was charged with failing to report the crime, No further progress in the judicial proceedings was reported by the end of the year.
Judicial inquiries into many other reported cases of alleged ill-treatment of youths by police were still in progress at the end of the year. These included, for example, the arrest and detention for several hours of over 20 youths who were trying to gain entry to a rock concert in Montevideo in April. Formal complaints filed by a number of those arrested stated that they were punched and beaten during arrest and that they were thrown to the ground and trampled on at the 13th Police Station. A medical report on one of the youths, Pablo lavier Delgado, registered burns consistent with injuries caused by electric shocks. The case was raised before parliament.
A judicial investigation into the killing of Alvaro Fernando Morroni and the injury of over 50 other demonstrators by police in August 1994 at the Filtro Hospital in Montevideo continued throughout the year (see Amnesty International Report 1995). In March the public prosecutor assigned to the case concluded that members of the police had committed "excesses", that the use of firearms during the combined security forces operation was unjustified, and that the crimes of homicide and grievous bodily harm had been committed. The prosecutor also concluded that irregularities had been committed by the authorities, including the
URUGUAY/UZBEKISTAN
Ministry of Interior, which prevented the identification of the individuals responsible for the attacks on the demonstrators. Criminal charges of negligence were filed against seven members of the police. A judicial investigation into the death of Alvaro Fernando Morroni had not concluded at the end of the year. The public prosecutor requested that judicial proceedings be initiated against seven members of the police. A judge upheld the request for proceedings against four of them. Subsequently, their defence lawyer appealed against the judge's decision.
There was renewed interest in the fate of political detainees who "disappeared" in the 1970s, but the government again failed to take measures to bring to justice those responsible for human rights violations during the period of military rule. In March members of parliament requested official information about the investigation into more than 20 unidentified corpses found at several locations along the Uruguayan banks of the River Plate between 1976 and 1979. The corpses, showing clear signs of torture, were buried in unmarked graves, some of them in the cemetery of Colonia in southwestern Uruguay. The request followed revelations by former members of the Argentine armed forces that "disappeared" political detainees were thrown from military aircraft into the ocean and the River Plate (see Argentina entry). The members of parliament also asked the Uruguayan Government to pursue inquiries with the Argentine authorities about more than 100 Uruguayans who "disappeared" in Argentina during the years of military rule (1976 to 1983).
A civil court case brought by Sara Méndez in 1991 challenging the adoption of a boy she believes to be her "disappeared" son, Simón Riquelo, (see previous Amnesty International Reports] was rejected by a judge in August. An appeal filed before the Appeals Court against the judge's decision had not been decided by the end of the year.
In November Amnesty International wrote to the authorities requesting information as to what steps had been taken to clarify the fate of Uruguayan victims of "disappearances". The organization also asked to be informed of the outcome of judicial investigations into torture and ill-treatment of detainees by the police.
