CHINA
Hundreds of political activists and members of ethnic and religious groups were arbitrarily arrested during the year and scores were detained without charge or trial or sentenced to prison terms after unfair trials; many were prisoners of
CHINA
conscience. Thousands of political pris-oners detained in previous years, many of them prisoners of conscience, continued to be held. Torture and ill-treatment of prisoners were widely reported. At least 3.110 death sentences and 2,190 executions were recorded.
The transition from the "third" to the "fourth" generation of political leaders and the wide-ranging program of economic reforms continued during the year. Several petitions by members of the public were presented to the National People's Congress (npc), including some signed by senior intellectuals, calling for the release of political prisoners and the protection of human rights. The npc took no public action on these.
In March China narrowly escaped censure at the un Commission on Human Rights when a draft resolution critical of its human rights record was defeated by one vote. For the previous four consecutive years, China had succeeded in preventing critical resolutions going to the Commission for debate and vote.
Hundreds of people, many of them prisoners of conscience, were arbitrarily arrested during the year. Many were released without charge, some were sentenced to prison terms after unfair trials, and others were held in various forms of administrative detention. They included human rights and pro-democracy activists; members of religious groups who chose to worship outside the confines of official organizations; and members of ethnic groups, some of which sought greater political autonomy.
At least 50 dissidents were detained in the weeks around 4 June, the anniversary of the crack-down on pro-democracy protests in 1989, when troops killed hundreds of protesters. Many were later released, but at least nine remained in detention at the end of the year. They included Deng Huanwu, a signatory to a petition calling on the authorities to protect human rights. He was reportedly tried for alleged "bigamy" in September. The outcome of his trial, which was clearly politically motivated, was not known at the end of the year. Among others arrested in June were Liu Nianchun. a labour activist; Wang Dan, a former student leader; and Liu Xiaobo, a literary critic who had circulated a petition calling for the law to be changed to allow basic freedoms. Chen
Ziming, a prisoner of conscience and veteran pro-democracy activist, was taken back to prison in June to serve the remainder of his sentence despite suffering from cancer and needing constant medical care. He had been sentenced to 13 years' imprisonment in 1991 for "counter-revolutionary" activities but had been released in May 1994 on "medical parole" (see Amnesty International Reports 1992 and 1995).
Political and human rights activists were also detained or restricted during the Fourth UN World Conference on Women, held in Beijing in September. Among those detained were Ding Zilin and her husband, Jiang Peikun, whose son was killed during the June 1989 massacre in Beijing. Ding Zilin has since campaigned for an independent investigation into the killings. The authorities had taken no steps to investigate publicly the circumstances of the 1989 killings or to bring to justice those responsible. Ding Zilin and her husband were arrested in Wuxi city, Jiangsu province, and accused of "economic irregularities". They were released in October.
"Re-education through labour", a form of administrative detention, continued to be used to arbitrarily detain dissidents, including human rights activists and members of unauthorized religious groups, without charge or trial for up to three years. Xu Yonghai, a doctor and prominent member of an unofficial Protestant group, was detained in May for signing a petition calling on the government to protect human rights. He reportedly received a two-year term of "re-education through labour" in October.
Hundreds of Roman Catholics and Protestants were detained. Between 30 and 40 Roman Catholics were arrested by police officers from Linchuan city, Jiangxi province, during Easter celebrations in April. Many were beaten during their cir-rests. About half were released shortly afterwards but at least 17, most of them women, were detained and five were sentenced to prison terms. Pan Kunming was sentenced in July to five years' imprisonment and Rao Yanping was sentenced to four years. Many of the others were fined. Over 80 Protestants were detained in Zhoukou, Henan province, in March and June and at least three of them later received three-year terms of "re-education
CHINA
through labour". Arrests of Christians were also reported in Anhui, Zhejiang, Shanxi and other provinces.
An appeal from Roman Catholics from two mountain villages in Hebei province alleged that villagers had been arbitrarily detained, tortured and fined by local officials for breaches of the government's birth control policy.
Thousands of political prisoners detained without trial or convicted after unfair trials in previous years remained held. Many were prisoners of conscience. In January a Ministry of Justice official stated that 2,678 people convicted of "counterrevolutionary offences" were imprisoned. This figure excluded many more held for political reasons but convicted of other offences, or held under various forms of administrative detention without charge or trial, or detained for prolonged periods pending trial.
New information came to light during 1995 about political prisoners jailed since the early 1980s. They included people imprisoned for alleged membership of banned secret religious sects, and scores of prisoners jailed for their activities during the 1989 pro-democracy protests, many of whom had been convicted of ordinary criminal offences such as "hooliganism". For example, Liu Wensheng was reported to be serving a seven-year prison term for "disturbing the traffic" during the 1989 protests in Beijing.
Prisoners of conscience still serving long sentences for their part in the 1989 pro-democracy movement included Tang Yuanjuan, an assistant engineer in a car factory who organized a protest march in Changchun city after the Beijing massacre. He was sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment in 1989. which was one of the heaviest sentences imposed. He was reported to be in poor health.
Many prominent dissidents arrested in 1994 remained imprisoned throughout the year (see Amnesty Internationa! Report 1995). Wei Jingsheng, an outspoken critic of the government and former long-term prisoner of conscience, was charged in November with "activities in an attempt to overthrow the government" after being held incommunicado and without charge for over 19 months. He was tried in December and sentenced to 14 years' imprisonment, plus three years' deprivation of political rights. Li Guotao, president of the
Shanghai Human Rights Association, continued to serve a sentence of three years of "re-education through labour" imposed without trial in 1994. Journalist Gao Yu. a prisoner of conscience serving a six-year term for allegedly "leaking state secrets", was transferred in January to Yanqing Prison, about 80 kilometres from Beijing; she was reported to be in poor health.
Widespread human rights violations continued in the Tibet Autonomous Region (tar). In the first three months of the year alone, 123 people were reported to have been detained in connection with peaceful pro-independence activities or following police raids on monasteries or nunneries. Those detained included 50 nuns and 68 monks, most of whom were prisoners of conscience. For example, in January over 100 troops raided the Ya-mure monastery, Medro Gongkar county, where monks were protesting peacefully against official restrictions on the sale and possession of photographs of the Dalai Lama; four people were arrested. Similar protests by monks and nuns in Phenpo Lhundrup county in February led to at least 60 arrests. At least 39 people, including 31 nuns, were reportedly detained in Lhasa in February and March for taking part in peaceful pro-independence demonstrations.
Many people were also detained between June and August for allegedly promoting Tibetan independence, some in connection with events organized by the authorities on 1 September to mark the 30th anniversary of the establishment of the tar. Nearly 60 others were detained in connection with a dispute over the recognition of a young boy as the reincarnation of the Panchen Lama, the second highest spiritual leader in Tibet. They included Chadrel Rimpoche. abbot of Tashilumpo monastery, who was arrested in May and reportedly accused of colluding with the Dalai Lama in the search for the 11th Panchen Lama. He remained in detention at the end of the year, but was not known to have been charged.
At the start of the year over 650 Tibetan political prisoners, the majority prisoners of conscience, were reportedly detained. Of these, 45 had been under the age of 18 when arrested, and some had been as young as 12.
Political trials continued to fall far short of international fair trial standards.
CHINA
Extreme limitations on the right to defence continued. Defendants had no right to call witnesses and had insufficient time and facilities to prepare their defence. Verdicts and sentences were routinely decided by the authorities before trial.
Torture and ill-treatment of detainees and prisoners held in prisons, detention centres and labour camps were reported. Methods most often cited were beatings, electric shocks, the use of shackles, sleep deprivation and exposure to extremes of cold or heat. Prison conditions were frequently harsh and many prisoners suffered from serious illnesses as a result. Medical care and food were often inadequate, and punishments frequently threatened the physical and psychological well-being of prisoners. Tong Yi, assistant to Wei Jingsheng (see Amnesty International Report 1995), was reportedly beaten by inmates who were camp "trustees" in the Hewan Labour Camp in Wuhan, Hubei province. According to a letter smuggled out of the camp in January, inmates were forced to work extremely long hours to fulfil unrealistic production quotas. Tong Yi complained to camp officials about the beatings, but they took no action to protect her. The following day, more than 10 women prisoners beat her again, leaving her face and body swollen and covered in bruises. Members of her family were warned that they would lose their jobs if they tried to pursue her complaints.
A young Tibetan nun was reported to have died shortly after release from detention. Gyaltsen Kelsang, who died in February, was alleged to have been beaten in detention and held in harsh conditions without adequate medical care. No investigation was known to have been carried out into the cause of her death.
Beatings by police at the time of arrest were frequent. In January, for example, two young monks from the Jokhang temple in Lhasa were severely beaten by police while held in custody for three days. They were released without charge, but warned not to report their ill-treatment.
The widespread use of the death penalty continued. At least 3,110 death sentences and 2,190 executions were recorded by Amnesty International, but the frue figures were believed to be far higher. At least 16 people were executed in Beijing in August: officials said the executions were carried out to ensure "public order"
during the un World Conference on Women. At least 68 criminal offences, many of them non-violent, are punishable by death in China. For example, in March a man was sentenced to death in Zhejiang province for stealing a car. Wang Jianye, a former senior official in Shenzhen, Guangdong province, was sentenced to death in July for alleged economic offences. His lawyer was reportedly not allowed to present arguments in his defence during the trial and had only had 10 days to examine a 10-volume file compiled by the prosecution during an 18-month investigation. The Supreme People's Court approved the sentence and he was executed in late December.
Amnesty International urged the Chinese authorities repeatedly to release all prisoners of conscience, ensure fair and prompt trials for other political prisoners, investigate torture allegations and safeguard prisoners from ill-treatment. It also urged the authorities to commute all death sentences. The government did not respond.
Amnesty International published several reports on China including: in February, China: Dissidents detained without charge or trial since 1994; in May, People's Republic of China: Persistent human rights violations in Tibet] and in June, China: Six years after Tiananmen -Increased political repression and human rights violations, and Women in China: Imprisoned and abused for dissent.
In August and September, an Amnesty International delegation attended the Fourth un World Conference on Women in Beijing. Representatives of the organization sought meetings with the Chinese authorities and publicly raised the cases of prisoners of conscience, However, the authorities refused to meet Amnesty International's representatives or to receive written documents from them.
In October Amnesty International delegates who had been invited by a government institution to attend an international conference were denied access to China.
In an oral statement to the un Commission on Human Rights in February, Amnesty International included reference to its concerns in China.
