THAILAND
At least four death sentences were imposed during the year, although there were no reports of any executions. Prisoners and asylum-seekers were reportedly held in conditions amounting to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Hundreds of Burmese asylum-seekers were arrested for "illegal immigration" and arbitrarily detained.
Prime Minister Ghuan Leekpai called elections for July, following the withdrawal of one political party from his five-party coalition government. Banharn Silpa-archa, leader of the Chart Thai Party, became Prime Minister when he formed a new seven-party coalition government following the elections.
In lanuary several amendments to the 1991 Constitution were approved by parliament, including lowering the voting age to 18 and reducing the size of the non-elected Senate. Despite the commitment made by the government to the un World Conference on Human Rights in Vienna in June 1993 that Thailand would accede to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, by the end of the year it had not done so.
In May a senior police official publicly stated that a shoot-to-kill policy against dangerous criminals was one way to reduce serious crime.
Draft legislation to impose the death penalty for illegal trade in weapons and their use in crime was rejected by a government comnittee in April (see Amnesty International Report 1995). In September the Corrections Department, the Ministry of the Interior, and the Justice Ministry debated whether to impose the death penalty for amphetamine manufacture and trafficking. In October the Public Health Minister announced the imposition of the death penalty for amphetamine traffickers in possession of more than 100 grams.
The whereabouts of 39 people who went missing during the security forces' violent crack-down on pro-democracy demonstrations in May 1992 (see Amnesty International Reports 1993 to 1995) had still not been established by the end of 1995; they may have been victims of extrajudicial executions. In May the Civil Court dismissed for the second time a suit filed by the relatives of the 39 missing people who were seeking compensation from military officials involved in the crack-down. The Coiul ruled that the officials were protected under an amnesty decree issued in May 1992.
Prominent social critic and Buddhist scholar Sulak Sivaraksa was acquitted of lese-majesty charges in April (see Amnesty International Reports 1994 and 1995). Kamron Pongsanan, a truck driver, was arrested in August under the commodity control provisions of the 1952 Anti-Communist Act when he attempted to transport an oil shipment to Uttaradit, once considered a communist-infiltrated zone. He was released on bail in September after protests by human rights groups, who called for the repeal of the law on the grounds that communist insurgency was no longer a threat to public security.
At least four death sentences were imposed during 1995, one for murder, one for rape and murder and two for heroin-trafficking. Some 100 people were believed to be under sentence of death at the end of the year. In September a Ministry of Interior official stated that one of these prisoners would be executed in October in order to deter others from committing
THAILAND/TOGO
crimes. However, the execution did not take place, and there were no other reports of executions during the year.
There were continuing reports of prisoners being held in conditions amounting to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. These included the use of heavy leg-chains for prolonged periods. In August the government informed Amnesty International that prison conditions for foreign nationals conformed to the un Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners.
Immigration officials and police continued to detain asylum-seekers and refugees from Myanmar and other countries in harsh conditions, including severe overcrowding and poor medical care. Detained asylum-seekers were not given an opportunity to challenge the legality of their detention, as required by international standards. Asylum-seekers convicted of "illegal immigration" had to pay a fine or serve a prison sentence at the Immigration Detention Centre (iem:) in Bangkok. Burmese asylum-seekers in Bangkok were arrested in increased numbers during 1995. They were often not tried or charged, but were held in the idc and then forcibly taken to areas near the Thai-Myanmar border. Many returned to Bangkok, only to be rearrested. Burmese asylum-seekers continued to be held by the Thai authorities in the designated Ma-neeloy Safe Area in Raatchaburi province, where they were subjected to severe overcrowding. Two Burmese asylum-seekers were among dozens who agreed to go to the Safe Area but were still held at the Special Detention Centre in Bangkok by the end of the year. They had been arrested in December 1993 for "illegal immigration" while attending a seminar on non-violent action for change in Bangkok. At least 25 Burmese asylum-seekers were arrested in November in a government crack-down on peaceful protests by Burmese before a regional intergovernmental meeting. By the end of the year, 23 had been released.
At least 10,000 Karen people from Myanmar fled to Thailand after the Myanmar armed forces and the Democratic Kayin Buddhist Organization (dkbo), a breakaway Karen faction, launched an offensive against the armed insurgent group, the Karen National Union (knu), in eastern Myanmar. From February onwards, the
dkbo attacked Karen camps inside the Thai border, killing at least four Thai civilians (see Myanmar entry).
In June Amnesty International asked the Thai authorities to transfer a severely handicapped Mon asylum-seeker from Myanmar to the Maneeloy Safe Area; he was subsequently moved from the idc in Bangkok in July. In September Amnesty International appealed to the authorities not to execute a convicted criminal after reports indicated that officials were planning to execute him as a deterrent. In October Amnesty International urged the authorities to investigate reports of prolonged shackling of convicted prisoners, and in December the organization called on the government to release Burmese asylum-seekers arrested that month.
