BRAZIL
Hundreds of people were extrajudicially executed by police and death squads and there were further reports of "disappearances". There were reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees in police stations and prisons. Human rights activists and prosecutors in human rights cases received death threats. One environmental activist was held as a prisoner of conscience.
Fernando Henrique Cardoso took office as President on 1 January, as did new governors in all 27 states. President Cardoso dedicated his national day speech on 7 September to human rights. He made several commitments to human rights reforms and announced that Brazil would draw up a national action plan on human rights, as recommended by the UN World Conference on Human Rights in Vienna in 1993. In March the Federal Chamber of Deputies established a permanent Human Rights Commission.
In December the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States visited Brazil for the first time.
Hundreds of extrajudicial executions of criminal suspects were reported in urban areas. Cristiano Mesquita de Melo was shot dead by a military police corporal while being held down on the ground outside the Rio-Sul shopping centre in Rio de Janeiro in March. Unusually, this killing was filmed and broadcast on national and international television: most extrajudicial executions are committed in secret. In this case the police corporal who shot the criminal suspect was charged with homicide. In July he received a 24-year prison sentence for killing a taxi driver in 1992.
Everaldo Silva Santos was dragged from a prison by 15 hooded men and executed outside the prison in Uruguaiana in Rio Grande do Sul on 17 March. He had fatally wounded a police officer five days earlier and escaped to Argentina. Hooded police officers then allegedly shot at and beat neighbours and members of his family, set fire to his sister's house and shot dead Francisco Gonçalves da Silva, whom they mistook for Everaldo Silva Santos. Then, on 16 March, with no judicial warrant or extradition order, but with the collaboration of Argentine police, Brazilian military police from Uruguaiana collected Everaldo Silva Santos from Argentina. Within hours of his being remanded in custody in Uruguaiana prison, Everaldo Silva Santos was killed. Thirty-eight military police were charged with human rights violations connected with his capture and execution, but a local judge revoked detention orders against them.
In May, 13 residents of the Nova Brasilia shanty town were killed during a joint drugs raid by civil and military police. There was medical and witness evidence to suggest that some had been extrajudicially executed. Thirteen residents from the same shanty town had been killed in October 1994 in similar circumstances (see Amnesty International Report 1995). Investigations into both incidents had made no progress by the end of the year.
In Sao Paulo, new procedures suspending police officers involved in fatal shootings from street patrols for a period of six months curbed a previous rise in such killings. Official figures for fatal shootings fell from 42 in August to 15 in September. However, during the year multiple killings on the periphery of the city increased. Members of a special police department
BRAZIL
set up to investigate these killings and evidence of police involvement in them received death threats.
Killings by death squads and so-called extermination groups continued. Their activities were reported in cities such as Salvador, Rio de Janeiro, Recife and Manaus. In the state of Rio Grande do Norte, an extermination group within the state civil pohce, allegedly operating with the support of a high-ranking official within the Public Security Secretariat, was reportedly responsible for 18 killings, as well as torture, death threats and other crimes. In Mato Grosso do Sul, a death squad operating on the border with Paraguay was reportedly responsible for scores of killings. In Sergipe, a death squad known as "A Missào", "The Mission", which operated under the previous administration was disbanded, a number of reforms were introduced into police operating procedures, and attempts were made to promote respect for human rights in the state. However, no one was brought to justice for crimes committed by the death squad, some of whose members remained in active service in the police force.
Violence related to land conflicts in rural areas increased, In August nine pos-seiros (squatter peasants) and two military police were killed when military police violently evicted 500 squatter-peasant families from the Santa Elina estate in Co-rumbiara, Rondônia state. Investigations revealed that military police shot indiscriminately into a crowd of fleeing men, women and children, killing seven-year-old Vanessa dos Santos, and that they extrajudicially executed at least six men after they had surrendered. Over 170 people were wounded and military police were alleged to have beaten peasants who had gunshot wounds. By the end of the year, seven posseiros remained unaccounted for. The battered corpse of Sérgio Rodriguez Gomes, last seen in police custody the day after the eviction, was found in the Tanaru river later in August.
Indigenous communities involved in disputes over land rights continued to suffer human rights abuses. In January military police beat and threatened to kill members of the Macuxi indigenous community in the state of Roraima who were protesting against the construction of a hydroelectric dam on the Cotingo river, which they feared would flood their land.
An increase in the number of "disappearances" was noted in Rio de Janeiro and other cities. Alexander Santo Cunha and José Francisco do Rosério Filho "disappeared" after reportedly being taken into custody by uniformed military policemen in Belford Roxo, Rio de Janeiro, in March. In September a witness testified that she had seen Jorge Carelli, who "disappeared" in August 1993 in Rio de Janeiro (see Amnesty International Report 1994), being tortured inside a city police station. Twenty-two members of Rio de Janeiro's Anti-Kidnapping Police Division had previously been acquitted of his abduction. New proceedings were initiated against eight officers in the case. Lindalva de Souza, the witness, received death threats.
After unprecedented national debate, legislation to recognize the deaths of 136 people who "disappeared" after being taken into custody by state agents between 1961 and 1978 was passed in Congress. A commission was established to decide on compensation for families, to examine relatives' claims in such cases and in relation to other deaths in police or military custody between 1964 and 1985, and to take steps to locate the remains of the "disappeared". The legislation did not provide for a full investigation into the circumstances of these human rights violations.
Torture in police stations and prisons continued. Much evidence of torture was brought to light through a national campaign to make torture an offence in the penal code, coordinated by the Chamber of Deputies' Human Rights Commission. Legislative assemblies in several states held public sessions at which reports of torture during 1995 were presented, confirming allegations that torture continued to be widespread and a common method of extracting information from criminal suspects. In January Edileuza dos Santos, a domestic servant in Salvador, Bahia, suspected of having stolen money from her employer, died after being beaten by a member of the military police. In October José Ivanildo Sampaio Souza was found dead in his cell in the Federal Police headquarters in Fortaleza, Cearâ state, where he was being held in connection with drugs offences. An autopsy revealed that he had eight broken ribs, a broken sternum, and severe injuries to his left kidney and liver caused by a blunt instrument. In
BRAZIL
Brasilia, Paulo de Tarso Mendez Díniz, a forensic doctor, received death threats after providing medical evidence that Benjamin de Jesus, a detainee in the Robbery and Theft Police Station, had been tortured in October.
In Porto Alegre, a judge took action against prison guards on several occasions for beating prisoners in state prisons. In Sao Paulo, the state administration adopted a policy of suspending from duty prison guards responsible for beating prisoners. As in previous years there were numerous prison riots in Sao Paulo. The new state administration successfully negotiated the end of such riots without resort to unnecessary force, although two prisoners and one guard were killed in a riot in Hor-tolandia prison in June.
Human rights activists and state prosecutors in human rights cases continued to receive death threats. Caio Ferraz, administrator of the Casa da Paz (Peace House), a community centre built in a house where eight members of one family were killed during the 1993 Vigário Cerai massacre in Rio de Janeiro (see Amnesty International Report 1994), received death threats. During the year armed police repeatedly raided the Casa da Paz, and threatened and harassed community members. Plots to kill the judge, Maria Lucia Capiberibe. and two prosecutors, José Muiños Piñeiro and Mauricio Assayag, in the Vigário Cerai massacre case were revealed during court hearings. Threats against Sao Paulo military prosecutors Stella Khulmann, Franco Caneva Jr and Fernando César Nucci intensified after the Minister of Justice urged the Sao Paulo military court to expedite its prosecution of 120 military police for the 1992 massacre of 111 prisoners at the Casa de De-tençào prison in Sao Paulo (see Amnesty International Reports 1993 and 1995). The prosecutors had also declared their support for transferring jurisdiction over common crimes by military police from military to civilian courts.
Wagner dos Santos, a key witness in the trial of those accused of the massacre of street children near Candelária church in Rio de Janeiro in July 1993, received further threats while under state protection in the Firemen's Hospital, where he was recovering ft-om a second attempt on his life in December 1994 (see Amnesty International Report 1995). He was moved
to another hospital and then to the state Witness House, where conditions were extremely poor. After relinquishing protection by the state of Rio de Janeiro, which he believed to be inadequate, he was given federal police protection by order of President Cardoso. In November arrest warrants were issued against a further four members of the military police in connection with the massacre, after Wagner dos Santos had identified them from photographs.
Antònio Batista de Macedo, a rubber tapper and environmental campaigner, was sentenced in September to 16 months' imprisonment because of his peaceful labour and environmental activities in the state of Acre. He was a prisoner of conscience. He continued to appeal against the conviction after being conditionally released into two years' compulsory community service.
The charge of "forming a criminal gang" was used to detain people campaigning for agrarian reform or involved in land occupations. Deolinda de Souza and Màrcio Barrato, both members of the Landless Rural Workers' Movement, were held in high security prisons in Sao Paulo for two weeks in November, apparently to put pressure on their movement to cease land occupations. Brother Antastacio Ribeiro, a Franciscan priest, was detained in November in connection with a land occupation in the state of Paraiba. He was charged with "forming a criminal gang" and "ill-treatment of children" on the grounds that encouraging land occupations put children in precarious and unhygienic conditions.
An Amnesty International delegation, led by the organization's Secretary General, visited Brazil in March and April and met President Cardoso, the Attorney General and government ministers. The delegation presented a memorandum containing 40 recommendations and urged the government to formulate a national action plan to improve human rights protection and promotion. The delegation also visited the states of Brasilia. Rio de Janeiro, Fernambuco. Sao Paulo and Rio Grande do Sul and met state governors, representatives of human rights organizations and victims of human rights violations and their families. During the year Amnesty International appealed to the authorities at state and federal levels
BRAZIL/BULGARIA
to investigate cases of human rights violations, to bring those responsible to justice, and to oifer protection to victims, witnesses, human rights activists and members of the judiciary. The organization appealed for legislation on the "disappeared" to conform to international human rights standards and to include a full investigation into the circumstances of "disappearances" and deaths in custody during the period of military rule.
