JORDAN
Scores of political detainees were held during the year. They included dozens of prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience. Many of those arrested were held in prolonged incommunicado detention. Most were released without charge. At least 48 were brought to trial before the State Security Court, which did not appear to satisfy international standards for fair trial. There were several reports of torture. One extrajudi« cial execution was reported. At least 12 people were executed and 10 people remained under sentence of death.
A new government, headed by Sharif Zaid bin Shaker, was formed in January, after the resignation of the previous prime minister. A Jordanian parliamentary committee on civil liberties issued a report in September which said that liberties had diminished since the peace with Israel in 1994; the Jordanian Government rejected the report.
In April the un Committee against Torture examined Jordan's initial report regarding implementation of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel. Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. The Committee welcomed positive steps taken by Jordan such as the abolition of martial law in 1992 but expressed concern
on several issues including the number of allegations of torture; the right of officers of the General Intelligence Department (gid) to act as public prosecutors and detain suspects incommunicado; the continuing use of the death penalty; and the refoulement of asylum-seekers to countries where they might be at risk of torture.
Scores of people, including prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience, were arrested on political grounds. Those arrested included dozens of suspected members of Islamist and leftist opposition groups opposed to the peace treaty with Israel. Prisoners of conscience included at least two journalists, who were detained for up to two days, and an opposition leader. Leith Shubeilat, an Islamist leader, was arrested in December and detained in Jwaideh Prison on charges that included lese-majesty after a speech the previous month in which he criticized King Hussein bin Talal. He had not been brought to trial by the end of the year. The public prosecutor's office served scores of writs on newspapers charging them with offences such as harming national unity under the Law on Press and Publications. Cases lasted several months and ended in fines or acquittals.
Those arrested on security grounds were held incommunicado for up to nine months by the cro. Detainees held by the gid were frequently not told the charges against them; they were allowed irregular access to relatives but denied access to lawyers. Most detainees were released without charge.
More than 40 alleged members of Islamist groups were brought before the State Security Court in at least seven trials. 'Ata' Abu'l-Rushta, an engineer and spokesmcui for the Hizb al-Tahrir fi'l-'Urdun, Liberation Party in Jordan, was arrested in October and brought to trial in November before the State Security Court on charges of insulting the King and membership of an illegal party, after an interview published in the weekly newspaper al-Hiwar. He appeared to be a prisoner of conscience. His trial was still continuing at the end of the year.
Trials before the State Security Court appeared to fall short of international standards of fair trial. In a trial which started in September before the State Security Court, Salem Bakhit and Ahmad Khaled were accused of attacking a French
JORDAN
diplomat in Mujib in March. Their lawyers stated that the case should be heard by a normal criminal court and alleged that their clients had been tortured by members of the gid and had confessed under duress.
In March the Court of Cassation overturned the judgment in the "Mu'ta" case, in which five military cadets and five others were accused of plotting to kill King Hussein bin Talal during a ceremony in Mu'ta University in June 1993 (see Amnesty International Reports 1994 and 1995). The Court found that the confessions of the accused were inadmissible because they had been made after torture. The defendants were released immediately. In the same month, the Court of Cassation refused to uphold the convictions of 25 people accused of conspiracy to carry out "terrorist" actions, known as the "Arab Afghans" case, as some of those involved had returned from fighting with Islamist forces in Afghanistan (see Amnesty International Report 1995). Eleven death sentences had been passed, three in absentia. The Court of Cassation ordered the State Security Court to hear further witnesses. In luly new judgments were given after a retrial. Ten death sentences (including two in absentia) were maintained.
There were a number of reports of torture in the gm headquarters in the capital, Amman, and in police stations. Thirteen members of an Islamist group known as Bay'a al-Imam, Allegiance to the Imam, were held for up to nine months in incommunicado detention and tortured in the gid headquarters before being charged with offences including manufacturing explosives. For instance, Muhammad al-Wasfi was reportedly held incommunicado in the gid headquarters for more th£m six months. He was allegedly tortured by being beaten and by being hung by ropes tied above the knees.
Marwan Thabet 'Ajuh and 'Uscima 'Adel Husni 'Abed were among a number of detainees arrested in October, apparently as a preventive measure before the Amman economic summit. They were held for over a month in incommunicado detention in the gid headquarters before being allowed irregular access to relatives. They were allegedly tortured by being beaten, including on the soles of the feet (falaqa), and were deprived of sleep for up to 22 hours a day while being forced to
scrub floors or stand in their cells. Mar-wan Thabet 'Ajuh was released without charge at the end of November. 'Osama 'Adel Husni 'Abed remained in incommunicado detention at the end of the year. He had been allowed to see his wife only once. The gid denied torture allegations and a medical report by a gid doctor stated that no marks of torture were found. However, no independent doctor's report was provided.
One extrajudicial execution was reported. Scores of members of the security forces, including the special forces and the royal guard, stormed the flat of Mahmud and Bashar al-Khalifah al-'Awamlah in June, using meissive fire-power. Mahmud al-Khalifah was killed and his brother, Bashar al-Khalifah, was severely wounded. After the attack there were over 100 bullet holes made by automatic weapons in almost every room of the brothers' apartment in Amman. The body of Mahmud al-Khalifah was examined by a forensic pathologist who found abrasions and at least four wounds caused by firearms, three on the left arm and a fourth which damaged the left lung. The victim died from this wound. The goverrunent stated that Mahmud al-Khalifah had been killed while resisting arrest with a pistol. However, no investigation was known to have been set up into the circumstances of the killing nor was any explanation given for the use of scores of armed men and massive fire-power.
At least 12 people were executed during the year for crimes such as murder. Those executed included Mohamed Nimr al-Rawahna and three others who had been convicted of sexually abusing and strangling a child.
An Iraqi asylum-seeker who had been active in the Iraqi opposition was forcibly returned to Iraq in Mcirch. Many members of his family had been executed by the Iraqi authorities and Amnesty International considered him at serious risk of execution. He was expelled before representatives of the un High Conunissioner for Refugees had the opportunity to examine his case, and without the fair and adequate procedure required under international law.
Amnesty International expressed concern about incommunicado detention and torture by the gid, lack of access to family, lawyers and independent doctors for
JOROAN/KAZAKSTAN/KENYA
detainees, and the use of Gid officers as special prosecutors to renew the detention of offenders without allowing them access to a judge. The organization called for an independent investigation into the circumstances of the death of Mahmud al-Khalifah. Amnesty International also called for the commutation of all death sentences and expressed concern at the refoulement of an Iraqi asylum-seeker at risk of execution in Iraq.
Amnesty International delegates observed one session of each of the three trials before the State Security Court and met military judges, the military public prosecutor and defence lawyers.
The authorities gave specific information on detention statistics but did not respond to letters from Amnesty International raising prolonged incommunicado detention or the refoulement of the Iraqi national.
