BURUNDI
Thousands of people were the victims of political killings committed by the security forces and by armed groups. Most were killed solely because of their ethnic origin or political affiliation. The authorities failed to investigate the killings or to bring those responsible to justice. Thousands of people were arrested for political reasons and detained without charge or trial. Political detainees were tortured and dozens of people "disappeared".
President Sylvestre Ntibantunganya continued to head a transitional government in which the Hutu-dominated Front pour la démocratie au Burundi (frodebu), Front for Democracy in Burundi, which won elections in 1993, shared power with Tutsi-dominated opposition parties. The Minister of Foreign Affairs resigned in June and went into exile, accusing the government of failing to protect its citizens. A National Debate on the country's future, scheduled as part of the power-sharing agreement, failed to take place during the year.
Tensions continued to escalate between the minority Tutsi ethnic group, which dominated the government until July 1993 and retained virtual control of the armed forces, and the majority Hutu ethnic group. Political killings by the Tutsi-domi-nated security forces and by both Tutsi and Hutu armed groups were reported with growing frequency. Some of the violence was blamed on inflammatory statements made by sections of the press, which published articles including lists of people to be killed, and a clandestine radio station owned by an armed political group.
In an apparent effort to end the violence, the Ministry of Justice created "mixed commissions", comprising representatives of the different police forces and the judiciary, to investigate crimes committed in the capital, Bujumbura, but these achieved little during the year. When one "mixed commission" ordered the arrest of six Tutsi youths in May, Tutsi militias brought Bujumbura to a standstill for three days.
The government failed to control the armed forces or to prevent Hutu and Tutsi extremists from arming themselves and fuelling tensions between the two communities. Responsibility for individual killings was difficult to ascertain. There were numerous claims that members of the security forces assisted groups of armed Tutsi and that leading members of frodebu supported armed Hutu, but the government took little or no action to establish the facts or to bring those encouraging political violence to justice. The Tutsi-dominated judiciary was largely inactive and viewed by the majority Hutu population as favouring the Tutsi community.
The un Security Council sent a further fact-finding mission in February. It recommended an international commission of inquiry into the October 1993 coup attempt and the subsequent massacres, in which some 50,000 people were killed (see Amnesty International Report 1994]. Following the un Secretary-General's visit to Burundi in July, the government informed the un Security Council in August that it was willing to cooperate with such a commission. A five-person commission of inquiry was appointed in September and began investigations in November. In a preliminary report to the un Secretary-General, the commission stated in December that its investigations were being hindered by insecurity and lack of resources. In March the un Commission on Human Rights appointed a Special Rapporteur on Burundi, who visited the country in June and July. The un Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions also visited Burundi in April. He recommended urgent measures to halt widespread politically motivated ethnic killings and bring an end to impunity. In September the un appointed the head of a human rights monitoring mission in Burundi, but he resigned when the un failed to deploy monitors.
BURUNDI
The Organization of African Unity (oAu) monitoring mission was strengthened but it did not report publicly on its activities. In June an oau soldier was killed in an ambush on a convoy in which the OAU Secretary-General's Special Envoy, the us Ambassador to Burundi and the Burundi Minister of Foreign Affairs were travelling. In September the mission suspended its activities for three days following an ambush on its staff. In December the oau extended the mission's mandate for a further three months.
No apparent progress was made in local investigations into human rights abuses and other crimes related to the 1993 coup attempt and subsequent massacres. Eighteen soldiers detained in Burundi on suspicion of complicity in former President Melchior Ndadaye's murder had still not been brought to trial by the end of 1995, The authorities said that three of them tried to escape and were shot dead in December. Eight soldiers suspected of involvement in the coup attempt and detained in Ugcinda were released without chcirge or trial, while one remained in custody without trial. Three other soldiers accused of involvement in the coup attempt and held without charge or trial in Zaire since late 1993 were returned to Burundi in August in unclear circumstances. One of them, Dominique Domero, was shot dead in Mpimba prison in December.
Extrajudicial executions by the security forces, sometimes assisted by Tutsi armed groups, continued unabated. More than 70 people, the majority of them women and children, were killed by soldiers, reportedly assisted by Tutsi from a nearby camp for displaced people, in Kayanza province in January. In late March and early April, at least 1,000 people were killed, most because of their ethnic origin. In the worst single incident. 400 or more Hutu villagers were shot, slashed and clubbed to death by soldiers and Tutsi civilians in Gasorwe in northeastern Burundi in early April. At the end of May the army surrounded Bujumbura's Kamenge suburb, a Hutu stronghold, ostensibly to disarm Hutu militia, and then forced its civilian population to flee. Observers reported finding the bodies of more than 30 elderly people and young children who had been shot or bayoneted to death. The President admitted on national television on 2 June that he had no details of what the army
had done in Kamenge between 31 May and 2 June.
Soldiers known as bérets verts (green berets) shot and killed several dozen people in July when they opened fire on Mabayi parish church in Cibitoke province. The soldiers then pursued people fleeing into the hills. Soldiers also killed people at a nearby trading centre and threw their bodies into the Nyamagana river: at least 21 bodies, including those of 14 Rwandese refugees, were subsequently recovered, Soldiers carried out further mass killings at the end of the year. In November they killed about 500 civilians in Gasarara, in Rural Bujumbura's Kanyosha district. About 300 more were killed in Bujumbura in December.
The segregation of the two communities into mutually hostile areas continued. In late March the last two ethnically mixed zones of Bujumbura - Bwiza and Buyenzi - were attacked by Tutsi youths, observed by soldiers who did not intervene. At least 100 people were reportedly killed and tens of thousands of Hutu fled across the border with Zaire.
Assassinations of prominent people, apparently by Tutsi armed groups and members of the security forces, also continued. Victims included Ernest Kabushe-meye, a government minister, who was gunned down in broad daylight in March, and Damien Ndabasambije, an official at the Burundi central bank, who was shot dead in August. Other victims included two members of the National Assembly, Juvénal Manirambona and Innocent Ndikumana, who were killed in December. It was unclear whether there were any formal investigations into most of these killings, although there were reports that several suspects had been detained in connection with the assassination of Ernest Kabushemeye.
Roman Catholic priests, bishops and other church leaders were targeted, apparently because of their influence within the Hutu community. For example, Father Anastase Bivugire, the parish priest of Cibitoke, and five other people were killed in July by a Tutsi armed group. Father Michel Sinankwa was shot dead in August at a church in Bujumbura.
Killings were also carried out by armed Hutu groups. For example, 11 displaced Tutsi from Gisenyi camp in Kirundo province were killed by an armed Hutu group
BURUNDI
in January. In March a retired Tutsi army colonel, Lucien Sakubu, was kidnapped and killed. Six members of one Tutsi family were killed, allegedly by Hutu gunmen, in Muhanga, Kayanza province, in early April. In August some 58 Tutsi, including 25 children, were killed when a camp for the displaced at Kaburantwa in Cibitoke province was attacked, apparently by a Hutu armed group. Only the killing of Lucien Scikubu was known to have been investigated, resulting in the detention of 12 people who were in custody without trial at the end of the year.
Attacks by school and university students increased. Tutsi students, using weapons acquired from the security forces or political groups, killed and injured unarmed Hutu colleagues with impunity. Hutu armed groups committed reprisal killings. Tutsi students killed at least 15 unarmed Hutu students at the University of Bujumbura in June, which led to the flight of all Hutu students from the university. Nine days later, the Hutu director of research at the university, Stanislas Ruzenza, was killed in his office, reportedly by a Tutsi assailant. In what appeared to be a reprisal attack, a Hutu armed group, apparently including Hutu students who had fled from the university, attacked the university's Kiriri campus in July, killing four unarmed Tutsi students and two employees.
Foreign nationals, including aid workers, accused of supporting either side to the conflict were fequently attacked. For example, three Belgians travelling in a convoy with government soldiers were killed in March by gunmen thought to be Hutu. Three Italians - two priests and an aid worker - were killed at the end of September by unidentified attackers.
Thousands of Hutu detainees arrested before and during 1995 were held without trial on suspicion of supporting armed groups. Most were detained at the Bujumbura headquarters of the gendarmerie's Brigade spéciale de recherche (bsr), Special Investigation Brigade, before being transferred to Bujumbura's Mpimba central prison. Among some 5,000 still held without trial at the end of the year was Balthazeir Ndimurwanko, a former provincial governor, who was arrested in August as he was leaving for Zaire and reportedly charged with involvement in killings in late 1993.
Political detainees were tortured. The most common form of torture was systematic beatings with indembo (police batons). The Commander of the bsr stated in March that a senior judicial official had authorized the use of "more or less violent means" to investigate high priority political cases, such as those of Jean Minani and Tharcisse Nzimpora, who were tortured by the bsr in March. They and 10 others arrested in March and accused of involvement in the assassination of Lucien Sakubu were still held without charge or trial at the end of the year.
Dozens of people detained by the security forces "disappeared" and were believed to have been extrajudicially executed. For example, Norbert Sambira and several other people "disappeared" in April after they were arrested by the gendarmerie's Second Battalion in Ngagara, Bujumbura. Several of those arrested were alleged to have been extrajudicially executed near the Ruzizi river outside Bujumbura.
Rwandese refugees in Burundi were also targeted by Burundi armed political groups. The motives for some of the attacks, such as the killing of 12 Rwandese Hutu refugees in March, allegedly by Hutu gunmen, remained unclear. "This and other attacks by armed groups prompted a mass exodus of refugees from camps. Thousands tried to enter Tanzania, but many were promptly forced back.
Some refugees forcibly returned to Burundi by the Tanzanian security forces (see Tanzania entry) were allegedly killed by Burundi soldiers immediately after their return. Tanzania closed its border with Burundi at the end of March, following an influx of Rwandese refugees fleeing the killings in Burundi. Representatives of the un High Commissioner for Refugees were denied access to the area. In April Tanzanian soldiers reportedly rounded up 1,500 Burundi refugees in Mugoma and forced approximately 300 of them back into Burundi. At least three were reportedly killed within an hour by Burundi soldiers who attacked them with knives and machetes. The Burundi authorities forcibly returned more than 500 Rwandese refugees, including many of those expelled from Tanzania, to Rwanda.
Throughout the year Amnesty International repeatedly appealed to the Government of Burundi, political leaders and the
BURUNDI/CAMBODIA
security forces to do everything in their power to stop human rights abuses. Amnesty International delegates visited Burundi three times during the year. In a report published in June, Burundi: Struggle for survival, Amnesty International called for immediate action to stop killings by the army and armed groups and to end impunity. Amnesty International published two further reports in September -Burundi: Targeting students, teachers and clerics in the fight for supremacy, which described the escalating violence in educational and religious establishments, and Rwanda and Burundi: A call for action by the international community, which called for effective and impartial investigations into human rights abuses to end the cycle of impunity in Burundi.
