ZAMBIA
Two journalists were briefly held as prisoners of conscience. There were reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners in police custody. At least 10 people were sentenced to death but there were no reports of executions.
A new draft constitution, published in lune, contained controversial citizenship provisions which appeared designed to disqualify the former head of state, Kenneth Kaunda, from standing in presidential elections scheduled for 1996. The ruling Movement for Multi-Party Democracy, led by President Frederick Chiluba, intensified pressure on Kenneth Kaunda in October by threatening to deport him on the grounds that he was not a Zambian citizen, but this threat was subsequently withdrawn. In September the Commission
ZAMBIA/ZIMBABWE
on Human Rights, established by the government in 1993 to investigate allegations of human rights abuses under both previous and current governments, reported its findings to the government (see Amnesty International Report 1995], but these had not been made public by the end of the year. Also in September, the government established an inquiry into the death earlier in the month of an opposition politician, Baldwin Nkumbula, amid unconfirmed reports that he may have been the victim of a politically motivated killing. The inquiry had not been completed by the end of the year.
In June Fred M'membe, managing director of The Post newspaper, and Masautso Phiri, its editor-in-chief, were briefly held as prisoners of conscience. They were detained for over 24 hours and charged with criminal defamation of the President in connection with an article which reported claims by a Zairian woman that she had been the lover of President Frederick Chiluba since 1983. The two men were released on bail cuid had not been tried by the end of the year.
There were new reports of torture and beatings in police custody. In October Daniel Nkonde was reported to have died in Lusaka Central Police Station cis a result of beatings by police officers. No inquest was known to have been held by the end of the year.
At least 10 people were sentenced to death during the year after being convicted of murder or aggravated robbery. There were no reports of executions.
In January Amnesty International published a report on several African countries, including Zambia, in which criminal charges such as defamation have been used to harass government critics, and called for an end to such practices (see Kenya entry). Amnesty International repeated this call in lune when Fred M'membe and Masautso Phiri were detained and charged with criminal defamation of the President. Also in June, Amnesty International called upon the government to ratify those international human rights treaties which it had not yet ratified. Amnesty International was also concerned about continuing allegations of torture and ill-treatment of people held in police custody.
