NEPAL
Eleven prisoners of conscience were held for most of the year. Hundreds of people, including possible prisoners of conscience, were detained for short periods during strikes and demonstrations. There were reports of torture and ill-treatment by the police and forest guards.
In June opposition parties in parliament called for a vote of no confidence in the minority government of the Communist Party of Nepal-United Marxist Leninist. At the request of Prime Minister Man Mohan Adhikari, King Birendra Bir Bikram Shah Dev dissolved parliament and called mid-term elections. The main opposition party, the Nepali Congress Party (ncp) and six other parties filed writ
NEPAL/NETHERLANDS
petitions in the Supreme Court claiming that the dissolution of parliament was unconstitutional. In August the Supreme Court ruled that parliament should be reinstated. Following the resignation of Man Mohan Adhikari, King Birendra appointed the leader of the parliamentary committee of the ncp. Sher Bahadur Deuba, as Prime Minister. A coalition government was formed comprising the ncp, the Rastriya Prajatrantra Party (National Democratic Party) and the Nepal Sadbhavana Party.
Eleven Christians, including a Nepali national, an Indian national and nine people from Bhutan, were convicted of proselytizing by the Ham District Court in August and sentenced to two years' imprisonment. They had been arrested in Danabari, Ham District, in September 1994 (see Amnesty International Report 1995). They were prisoners of conscience. They were released unconditionally after being granted amnesty in early November.
Hundreds of people, including possible prisoners of conscience, were detained for short periods during sometimes violent strikes and demonstrations by political parties and their student wings in protest at the dissolution of parliament and the Supreme Court judgment.
There were reports of torture in the custody of the police and forest guards, including the use of falanga (beating on the soles of the feet). Mansangh Magar, a 65-year-old basket weaver from Rajpur village, Dang District, was reportedly tortured by forest guards at the Rangers Office at Gadawa. He had been arrested in February on suspicion of illegally cutting down trees. He said he was stripped naked and beaten with lathis (canes); a stick was placed behind his knees and he
was forced to jump in a squatting position. No investigation was known to have been carried out into this incident.
Hari Bahadur Shrestha, who was arrested in June on suspicion of committing a robbery, was reportedly tortured for seven days at Sindhuli police station. He was reportedly subjected to falanga and two police officers stamped on his knees and chest to extract a confession. Two other people arrested in September in connection with the same case were reportedly kicked, beaten all over their bodies with lathis and subjected to falanga at the Mahadevsthan police post in Sindhuli District.
A number of people were reportedly tortured or ill-treated in police custody after more than 200 supporters of the United Peoples' Front were arrested in Rolpa District in November.
Amnesty International appealed to the government for the immediate and unconditional release of the 11 Christians. It expressed concern about reports of torture in the custody of the police and forest guards and urged the government to ensure that all reports of torture were promptly, thoroughly and independently investigated. The organization also asked to be informed of any action taken against the perpetrators. No response had been received by the end of the year. The government provided information on the progress of legal proceedings initiated on behalf of Pravakar Subedi and Theelu Ghale (see Amnesty International Reports 1994 and 1995]. In response to Amnesty International's inquiry in May about the torture of detainees in Khalanga, Pyuthan District (see Amnesty International Report 1995), police officials denied that the alleged human rights violations had taken place.
In May an Amnesty International delegation visited Nepal and met government officials in Kathmandu and in Dang, Pyuthan and Rolpa districts.
