CROATIA
Hundreds of political prisoners, almost exclusively Serbs, were detained on charges relating to the armed conflict; there were concerns that they would not
receive fair trials. Some detainees were ill-treated by police. Many Serbs who remained in the Krajina region añer the area was retaken by Croatian forces in August were tortured or ill-treated and many were in effect forcibly expelled. Scores of people were extrajudicially executed by Croatian armed forces in the Krajina region. Croatian Serb civilians were deliberately targeted by Croatian forces. Refugees from Bosnia-Herzegovina were forcibly returned there. Thousands of houses belonging to Serbs who had fled from Croatia were destroyed by Croatian forces. There were reports of arbitrary detention, torture and ill-treatment in Serbian-controlled areas. Rebel Serbian forces deliberately targeted civilians in a rocket attack.
In April, following a threat from the Croatian Government that it would not allow the mandate of the un peacekeeping force in Croatia, un Protection Force (unprofor), to be renewed, the un operation was renamed the un Confidence Restoration Operation in Croatia (uncro). Its mandate was extended until November, but was altered. Final details of the new mandate and its implementation, as well as the status of the un Protected Areas (unpas), were not fully agreed before it expired. In November an agreement was signed by the Croatian and Croatian Serb de facto authorities providing for the return of eastern Slavonia, the area of Croatia which remained under Serb control, to Croatian administration within a two-year period, under international supervision.
The Croatian armed forces undertook major military actions to take control of the areas controlled by rebel Serb forces -which largely coincided with the unpas - citing lack of progress in negotiations towards their peaceful reintegration. The Croatian Army also engaged in military operations in Bosnia-Herzegovina (see Bosnia-Herzegovina entry). In May Croatian forces took control of western Slavonia (the southern part of the former unpa, Sector West). This resulted in the flight of around 10,000 Serbian civilians and soldiers into the Bosnian Serb-controlled area of northern Bosnia-Herzegovina. In August the Krajina region (the former unpas, Sectors North and South), the largest Serbian-controlled area, was taken by the Croatian Army. Some 200,000 people, the majority of the population,
CROATIA
comprising Croatian Serb refugees and soldiers, fled into Bosnian Serb-controlled areas or into Serbia.
In May legislation allowing for the pardoning of individuals charged or convicted with crimes relating to the war which had been committed before 26 September 1992 was extended to include crimes committed up to 10 May 1995. It thus became applicable to some of the Croatian Serb men detained during the action in western Slavonia in May.
Following the Croatian Army's recapture of the Krajina region, President Franjo Tudjman called parliamentary elections which were held in October. The ruling Hrvatska Demokratska Zajednica (hdz), Croatian Democratic Union, increased its majority, but failed to achieve the two-thirds majority in parliament which it needed to implement constitutional changes. The elections were criticized by international monitors, particularly because the large number of Croatian Serbs who had left the country were not allowed to vote, while large numbers of ethnic Croats abroad were.
In October Croatia acceded to the (First) Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and its Second Optional Protocol, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty.
In November the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia issued indictments against three Yugoslav Army officers. It charged them with grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and other crimes relating to the beating and killing of 261 people taken from the Vukovar hospital in 1991.
In May, 1,494 people, mainly male Serbs, were detained by Croatian police after the military action in western Slavonia. Almost all men of military age (and some others) who remained in the area were detained. Most were quickly released, but some were held for investigation on charges which included war crimes and participation in armed rebellion. From August onwards, around 900 men and a small number of women, mainly Serbs, were detained after the Krajina region was taken. Some were quickly released. In December the authorities announced that 455 of the detained Serbs had been pardoned, although hundreds remained in detention. Criminal proceed-
ings against those remaining in detention led to concerns about lack of fair trial. For example, defence lawyers complained of restrictions on access to their clients and many individuals were detained for long periods before defence lawyers were appointed.
There were reports of ill-treatment in detention. Most of the victims were Serbian men who were beaten by police after being detained during the western Slavonia or Krajina military operations. There were also scores of reports of torture and ill-treatment of the remaining Serbian population by Croatian forces in the Krajina region from August onwards. Most of the victims were elderly people. For example, in August in the village of Gruboronice, a 68-year-old man was reportedly taken out of his house by soldiers who threatened him with a gun, beat him and stripped him naked while they looted his house.
In August Croatian military and civilian police in the town of Sisak stood by for some time while a group of around 15,000 fleeing Croatian Serbs, who were being escorted to the Serbian border by Croatian police, were attacked in their vehicles by Croatians who threw objects at them or attacked them with sticks. Many of the Serbs were injured and one woman died as a result. The police reportedly only took action after the arrival of un personnel.
There were a number of reports of rape and ill-treatment by soldiers in the course of illegal evictions from apartments formerly owned by the Yugoslav National Army. For example, in July a group of Croatian soldiers broke into an apartment in Zagreb and allegedly raped one of the occupants and reportedly beat and attempted to rape another. Military police officers entered the apartment during the incident but apparently took no action. Criminal investigations were opened, but by the end of the year no one had been charged in connection with the assault or rape.
Many Croatian Serbs were unaccounted for after the military operations in May and August. Although the exact circumstances in which the majority went missing were unclear, there were indications that some had "disappeared". For example. Nenad Dujkovié and Dragan Mirkovic, both reportedly civilians, were
CROATIA
taken from an apartment in Knin by Croatian soldiers in August. No information about their whereabouts or fate had been released by the authorities by the end of the year.
Some bodies of those who went missing or "disappeared" in 1991 were identified after mass graves in areas previously controlled by Serbs were exhumed by the Croatian authorities.
Scores of Serbs, many of them elderly, were extrajudicially executed in the Kra-jina region. For example, at least five people were killed in the village of Gru-bori in August, apparently by Croatian Special Police. An 80-year-old man was shot in the head at close range in his house. A 65-year-old man had his throat cut and another man and a woman were shot in the head at close range in a field. Buildings were also set on fire and the remains of a 90-year-old woman were found in the ruins of her partially burned house. The Croatian authorities claimed that the victims had been involved in an armed clash or had been killed in cross-fire, although the findings of un personnel contradicted this. In addition to the testimony of witnesses and other evidence, international observers reported at least 182 deaths during and after the operation in the Krajina region. In many of these cases there were strong indications that the victims had been unlawfiilly killed, such as gunshot wounds to the head or back. The victims were predominantly elderly people and few were dressed in military uniforms.
Many of the human rights abuses perpetrated by Croatian forces appeared to be aimed at causing the population to flee or to discourage return. For example, during the first two days of the August offensive, Croatian artillery deliberately targeted civilians in residential areas of the town of Knin. Artillery shells killed at least 20 people, possibly many more, including women and children.
Thousands of refugees, including some who may not have been citizens of Bosnia-Herzegovina, were forcibly returned to Bosnia-Herzegovina without any individual determination of whether they would be at risk of human rights violations there. Although many of the refugees who arrived in Croatia from Bosnian Serb-controlled areas were accepted into Croatia, restrictions were placed upon the
entry of Muslims in August. From September newly arriving refugees were immediately returned to other parts of Bosnia-Herzegovina.
More than 13,000 buildings belonging to Croatian Serbs were wholly or partially destroyed in the Krajina region in August and September, many of them by being set on fire. Most of them were believed to have been deliberately destroyed, with the involvement of Croatian forces, in order to discourage the return of Serbs who had previously fled.
There were reports of human rights abuses, including Eirbitrary detention, torture and ill-treatment, perpetrated by rebel Croatian Serb forces in the self-proclaimed "Republika Srpska Krajina" (rsk), "Republic of Serbian Krajina". For example, in March Mirko Buzuk, an aid worker who was a British citizen of Bosnian-Croat origin, was arbitrarily detained by rsk soldiers near Drni§. He was subjected to torture, including repeated beatings and electric shocks to the hands, feet and genitals. His interrogators attempted to force him to confess to "spying". In May, in retaliation for the Croatian Army offensive, rsk forces launched rockets against the centre of Zagreb which killed six civilians and injured 176 others. The International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia issued an indictment against the leader of the rsk de facto authorities, Milan Martié, after he publicly admitted ordering the attack.
Amnesty International repeatedly appealed to the Croatian authorities to take action to protect human rights. From August, Amnesty International called upon the Croatian authorities to protect the remaining Serbs in the Krajina region, to initiate thorough, independent and impartial investigations into reported human rights violations, and to ensure that suspected perpetrators were brought to justice. Amnesty International repeatedly appealed to the authorities to take action to end the forcible retiu-n of refugees and potential asylum-seekers to Bosnia-Herzegovina. The organization also called for investigations into incidents of torture and ill-treatment by soldiers in the course of illegal evictions. It appealed for measures to prevent human rights violations by soldiers in other similar incidents. In September it called for an investigation into the "disappearance" of two Serbs in Knin in August.
CROATIA/CUBA
From October it renewed calls upon the authorities in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and Croatia to take action to resolve the fate of individuals who had "disappeared" in Croatia between 1991 and 1993.
