KENYA
Over 100 critics of the government, including human rights activists, journalists, students. Catholic priests and opposition politicians, were detained for short periods. Many were prisoners of conscience. At least 11 possible prisoners of conscience remained held on non-bailable capital charges. Three prisoners of conscience were sentenced to prison
KENYA
terms and caning after an unfair trial. There were further reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners. Prison conditions were harsh and over 800 prisoners died during the year. Over 500 people were under sentence of death at the end of the year, including at least 15 convicted during 1995. There were no reports of executions. Hundreds of refugees were arbitrarily arrested and detained for short periods.
There were sporadic outbreaks of political violence during the year, although inter-ethnic clashes were on a lesser scale than in previous years (see Amnesty International Reports 1993 and 1994). There were continuing allegations that the violence was instigated by the government. In January around 1,500 internally displaced people, who had been among about 12,000 people displaced in 1993 and forcibly relocated to Central Province in December 1994, were again forcibly relocated within Central Province. In March security regulations restricting access to Eu^eas of the Rift Valley were lifted (see Amnesty International Report 1994). In May a private prosecution against the Minister for Local Government, accusing him of inciting ethnic violence, was ended when the Attorney General took over the case and dropped the charges. Scores of people were injured in violence which broke out during by-election campaigns during the year.
Human rights and other non-govem-mental organizations (ngos) and journalists were harassed by the authorities. In the first three months of 1995, Kituo Cha Sheria, a free legal aid centre which shares premises with the non-governmental Kenya Human Rights Commission, was fire-bombed six times. Two other human
rights ngos were banned; one, the Centre for Law and Research International, had recently produced a report on official corruption. In February the authorities banned Inooro, a Kikuyu-language publication of the Catholic church, and impounded 500 copies of The Economist, which contained an article on the treatment of internally displaced people, for four days. In March, three foreign correspondents were threatened with deportation after they had written articles critical of the government's human rights record.
Meetings orgemized by ngos were disrupted by police, sometimes violently. In April the office of the Mwangaza Trust was raided and five trustees and one employee were arrested. In August members of the new Safina opposition party, including its founder Richard Leakey and treasurer Njeri Kabeberi, and a number of lawyers and journalists, were assaulted in Nakuru. They were attacked by about 50 men armed with whips and clubs whom eye-witnesses identified as plainclothes Special Branch police officers and members of the youth wing of the ruling Kenya African National Union (kanu) party.
Over 100 people were detained for political reasons during 1995. Among them were at least 20 opposition members of parliament. The majority were held for short periods, but several were charged with political offences and detained for up to 12 weeks before being released on bail. Members of parliament were most often arrested after attempting to hold public meetings when the authorities denied licences or withdrew them at the last minute. For example, in March, six opposition members of parliament were detained briefly in Embu police station after a rally they had called in the town had been cancelled.
In January, three opposition members of parliament and 10 other people were arrested at a church service in Longonot held in memory of 10 people killed in political violence. Seven were released after four days and a further five after three weeks, but Njenga Mungai, member of parliament for Molo, was refused bail. He was charged with "uttering words with seditious intent". He was extremely ill and was held in hospital under armed guard, chained to the bed at night, He was eventually released on bail in May.
KENYA
In February opposition member of parliament Linus Alouch Polo was charged with sedition and detained for five weeks before being released on bail. The us Ambassador to Kenya. Aurelia Brazeal, was detained briefly by police in Naivasha, who reportedly believed she was planning to visit Maela camp for displaced persons with a group of opposition officials.
University lecturers and students were also arrested. For example, in June, eight Egerton University lecturers were detained for three days before being charged with illegal assembly and released on bail. In August Professor Kivutha Kibwana, Dean of the Faculty of Law at Nairobi University, and two former student leaders were arrested and questioned for several hours.
At least five journalists were arrested during the year, and several others were reportedly beaten by police. In March John Muganda, an East African Standard correspondent, was arrested and questioned in Bungoma. In May the publisher of Finance magazine, opposition member of parliament Njehu Gatabaki, was arrested and charged with publishing a seditious publication and released on bail. Police had earlier prevented production of the magazine by confiscating parts of the printing press. In June Jacob Wawera and Jacob Otieno were reportedly beaten by police when they took pictures of police officers beating a prisoner.
After the banning of the Catholic newsletter Inooro, anti-riot police disrupted a Catholic procession in February and detained Father Charles Kamori and three seminarians overnight. They were charged with incitement and possession of a banned publication and released on bail. In March Father Julius Murang'a was arrested, charged with incitement, and released on bail. The trials had not started by the end of the year.
In October Mbuthi Gathenji, a lawyer, was arrested and detained for four days before being charged with sedition and released on bail. The charges related to witness statements taken by police from his office which implicated senior government officials and others in ethnic violence in Narok district in 1993. Mbuthi Gathenji had been acting in the case against the Minister for Local Government which was stopped by the Attorney General in May.
At least one other prisoner of conscience and 10 other possible prisoners of conscience detained on robbery with violence charges in 1993 and 1994 remained in jail during the year. Robbery with violence charges, under which detainees may not be released on bail, appeared to be used by the authorities to keep their opponents in prison. Those held included Josephine Nyawira Ngengi, a member of the human rights group Release Political Prisoners and a prisoner of conscience, whose case was repeatedly adjourned (see Amnesty International Report 1995). Geoffrey Kuria Kariuki was released on bail in May when the charge against him was reduced to robbery. He was suffering from cranial bleeding after reportedly being tortured in detention (see Amnesty International Report 1995).
At least 40 people were arrested during the year and charged with belonging to an illegal organization, including Wang'ondu Kariuki, a former prisoner of conscience (see Amnesty International Report 1983), who was arrested in September. He was held incommunicado for seven days and tortured.
The trial continued of Koigi wa Wamwere, a human rights activist and former member of parliament, his brother, Charles Kuria Wamwere, his cousin, lames Maigwa, and G. G. Njuguna Ngengi, a local councillor. They had been arrested in November 1993 and charged with attempted robbery with violence, which is punishable by a mandatory death sentence (see Amnesty International Reports 1994 and 1995). All four were prisoners of conscience. Defence lawyers, two Norwegian journalists and a trial observer were arrested in May during an examination of the site of the alleged robbery, held overnight and charged on four counts of taking photographs in prohibited areas and interfering with police work by causing an obstruction. The lawyers' confidential notes were seized and not returned. These charges were dropped in November.
The trial ended abruptly in mid-July when both the defence counsel and the defendants themselves were denied the right to present their final submissions orally, although the prosecution had presented its case orally over 17 days. Judgment in the trial was given in October. Koigi wa Wamwere. Charles Kuria Wamwere and G. G. Njuguna Ngengi were
KENYA/KOREA (DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF)
each sentenced to four years' imprisonment cmd six strokes of the cane on the lesser charge of robbery, and lodged appeals. James Maigwa was acquitted. Observers from national and international legal and human rights organizations including Amnesty International attended the trial. Observers expressed serious concerns about the conduct of the trial, the major inconsistencies in the prosecution's evidence and the partiality of the court.
There were a number of other political trials in which defendants were reported to have been tortured. For example, 57 men detained in 1994 and accused of holding an illegal meeting were convicted in October and each sentenced to two years' imprisonment. At least 17 had reportedly been tortured. Four others were released uncharged in July; they had been permanently disabled by torture following their arrest and had been held under police guard in hospital for seven months. The authorities had apparently avoided bringing them to court to prevent evidence of torture coming to light.
At least 32 men arrested in Bungoma, Western Province, and detained by police between late 1994 and early February were reportedly tortured. They included Joseph Baraza Wekesa, aged 69, who, in his request for bail pending appeal, stated in court in February that he had been tortured. However, the judge refused to read his medical report. The government accused the men of belonging to an alleged illegal guerrilla movement based in Uganda - the February Eighteenth Movement. Joseph Baraza Wekesa and three others were given summary trials and sentenced to between five and six years' imprisonment. Two defendants were granted bail and immediately rearrested and charged with murder, together with eight others. At least 18 others were released.
At least four people died apparently as a result of police torture, including Na-hashon Chege, a street boy who died at Pangani police station in April.
There were no official investigations into any of these reports of torture.
Conditions remained harsh in many prisons, amounting to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. Over 819 prisoners died in 1995, mainly from infectious diseases resulting from severe overcrowding and frequent shortages of food, clean water and basic medication. In October
President Daniel arap Moi pardoned 10,898 prisoners, mostly petty offenders, in an effort to reduce overcrowding.
A police reservist charged with murdering a street boy was acquitted in March on grounds of insufficient evidence (see Amnesty International Report 1995), but at the end of the year he was being tried on charges of murdering four other street children in July 1994.
At least 15 people were sentenced to death, mostly for actual or attempted robbery. No executions were reported. Over 530 people were under sentence of death at the end of the year.
In November and December hundreds of refugees were arbitrarily arrested. Most were held for short periods but some were believed to be still held at the end of the year.
Amnesty International appealed to the government to stop the harassment and arrest of human rights activists, journalists and others. It urged the government to introduce safeguards against torture and to abolish the death penalty. In January Amnesty International published Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe: Attacks on human rights through the misuse of criminal charges, in June Women in Kenya: Repression and resistance, and in December Kenya: Torture, compounded by the denial of medical core.
Amnesty International representatives visited Kenya twice, in March and in November, and met the Attorney General, members of the government, opposition parties, lawyers, doctors, religious and human rights groups to discuss ways of increasing human rights protection.
