PARAGUAY
A protester was shot dead and several others were injured when police violently broke up a demonstration. Peasant leaders and their lawyers were threatened and intimidated in the context of land disputes. Four conscientious objectors were arbitrarily detained and tortured. There were reports that police had beaten or otherwise ill-treated criminal suspects
during arrest or in custody, and of harsh prison conditions amounting to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Prosecutions for past human rights violations continued although little progress was made in investigating recent abuses.
In January Paraguay acceded to the (First) Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
There were renewed reports of serious confrontations between hundreds of landless peasant families and specialist police units in several areas of the country. Peasant communities attempting to establish land claims were violently expelled from land they had occupied by police personnel, sometimes operating in conjunction with armed civilians reportedly paid by landowners. In many cases forcible expulsion was accompanied by mass arrests, sometimes without judicial order, and the ill-treatment of detainees. The majority of detainees were released without charge or trial after weeks or months in custody. Over 50 peasant farmers were arrested without judicial warrant when police violently expelled 500 families from land they had occupied in Puente Kyhá, Canindeyú department, in May. The detainees, many of whom were ill-treated, were released without charge days later.
In September Pedro Giménez, a peasant farmer, was shot dead when agents of the Ecological and Rural police attempted to brecik up a demonstration of peasant farmers in the locality of Santa Rosa de Aguaray, San Pedro department. Sixteen other demonstrators and three police agents were injured in the incident. According to eye-witnesses, the police first fired tear-gas and then opened fire on the protesters who were blocking a main road.
paraguay
Protesters responded by throwing stones and other projectiles at the police. The demonstration had been organized to support over 600 families who had occupied a property in Santa Bárbara, district of Nueva Germania, San Pedro department, in August. Alberto Alderete, a lawyer representing the peasant farmers in Santa Bárbara, received repeated anonymous death threats after he presented a formal criminal complaint accusing the Minister of the Interior, the Chief of Police and several other officials of responsibility for the death of Pedro Giménez.
Reports of torture and ill-treatment of detainees by the police continued. Although in several cases formal criminal complaints were lodged and judicial investigations opened in some cases, those responsible were not brought to justice.
Although conscientious objection to military service is a constitutional right, four conscientious objectors were among those arbitrarily detained and tortured. César Barrios, who was a member of the Movimiento de Objección de Conciencia (moc). Conscientious Objection Movement, was detained by army personnel on 4 November. At the time of his detention, César Barrios was travelling to the town of Pirapey, Itapúa department, to attend a meeting on conscientious objection in the home town of Victor Hugo Maciel, a conscript who had been killed on 2 October while completing his military service. César Barrios was taken to the III División de Caballería, 3rd Cavalry Division, in Ciudad del Este. He was held for 24 hours during which he was beaten and threatened with death while soldiers interrogated him about the moc's activities and the names of members. Three other conscientious objectors were briefly detained earlier in the year by members of the National Police and subjected to ill-treatment including having their heads shaved and forced labour.
Criminal suspects were frequently subjected to ill-treatment at the time of arrest. Esteban Ferreira was beaten by a local police commander and several police agents in February when police agents entered the bar he owned searching for three escaped criminals. According to Esteban Ferreira, he was kicked and beaten before being arbitrarily arrested, handcuffed and dragged 50 metres along the ground. A medical examination found injuries con-
sistent with Esteban Ferreira's claims of ill-treatment.
Conditions in some detention centres and prisons were reported to amount to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. For example, in the juvenile prison "Pan-chito López" in Asunción, minors were held in grossly inadequate conditions with insufficient food in severely overcrowded, insanitary cells with few washing facilities, little exercise or fresh air and lack of proper medical care. In March over 180 juveniles, the majority of whom were on remand, were held in "Panchito López", a one-storey building constructed as a residence for a family of eight.
Judicial investigations continued into torture and deaths in custody of political prisoners under the government of General Stroessner (see previous Amnesty International Reports). In April Pastor Coronel, the former head of the Police Investigations Department (dip-c), and former dip-c official Lucilo Benítez, were each sentenced to 12 years and six months' imprisonment for the attempted murder and torture of political opposition activist Alberto Alegre Portillo in 1975. Pastor Coronel and Lucilo Benítez were already serving three prison sentences for murder and other serious human rights violations.
An Amnesty International delegate visited Paraguay in March to assess the progress of human rights related reforms. The delegate held talks with representatives of the government and non-governmental organizations.
In September Amnesty International asked the government to institute a full and impartial investigation into the possible excessive use of force when police broke up the demonstration in Santa Rosa de Aguaray, resulting in the death of Pedro Giménez and the wounding of 16 other people. Amnesty International expressed concern at the death threats against lawyer Alberto Alderete and asked the government to take measures to guarantee his safety and to bring those responsible to justice.
In November Amnesty International appealed to the government to undertake a full and impartial investigation into the arbitrary detention and torture of conscientious objectors. No reply had been received by the end of the year.
