LIBYA
Hundreds of political prisoners, including possible prisoners of conscience, who were arrested in previous years continued to be held without charge or trial. Five prisoners of conscience held since 1973 continued to serve life sentences. Hundreds of people were arrested during the year in connection with their religious or political activities. Over 300 political prisoners were reportedly released in March. Torture and ill-treatment by the security forces continued to be reported. At least six people were executed.
The un sanctions against Libya (see previous Amnesty International Reports], imposed in 1992 in connection with the 1988 bombing of a us passenger airliner, remained in force.
In September and October thousands of Palestinians and Egyptian and Sudanese nationals working in Libya were forcibly expelled, allegedly because they were illegal immigrants. However, the expulsion of Palestinian workers, which included people working legally, was reportedly in protest at the peace agreement between the Palestinian Authority and the Israeli Government. In October the Libyan authorities stated that up to one million African workers would also be expelled.
Five prisoners of conscience, all suspected members of the prohibited Islamic Liberation Party, continued serving life sentences in Abu-Salim Prison in Tripoli (see Amnesty International Reports 1991 to 1995). They included 'Omar SaUh al-Qasbi and Mohammad al-Sadiq Tarhoun, both imprisoned since April 1973.
Hundreds of political prisoners, including possible prisoners of conscience, continued to be detained without charge or trial. Among them were members or supporters of banned Islamist groups who had been arrested in previous years. They included Dr 'Abd al-Mun'im Ibhiri al-Aw-jali. Hassan al-Suwayheli and Dr 'Omran
LIBYA
'Omar al-Turbi, who were arrested in 1984 (see previous Amnesty International Reports). At the end of the year they were still held in Abu-Salim Prison.
Scores of military personnel and civilians arrested following the alleged October 1993 army rebellion in Misrata and Bani Walid (see Amnesty International Reports 1994 and 1995) were still held at the end of the year, apparently without charge or trial. Among them were Colonel Miftah Qarrum al-Wirfali, who suffered from leukaemia, and Lt-Colonel Daw al-Salihin al-Jidiq. In August members of the Revolutionary Committees reportedly held a meeting in Bani Walid, eastern Libya, which the population was allegedly forced to attend and during which they were forced to sign a petition calling for the execution of Colonel Miftah Qarrum al-Wirfali, Lt-Colonel Daw al-Salihin al-Jidiq and seven others, most of whom were from Bani Walid. It was not known whether the executions were carried out.
Hundreds of people were arrested in lune and September after clashes between the security forces and armed Islamist groups which reportedly took place in Benghazi and several other cities in northeast Libya. Up to 50 armed Islamists and 20 security officers were allegedly killed, but no further details were available.
There were reports that 305 political prisoners were freed on the occasion of the 18th anniversary of the proclamation of "People's Power", which also coincided with 'Id al-Fitr, a religious holiday, on 1 March. The identities of those who benefited were not known at the end of the year, but at least some of them had reportedly been arrested in 1989.
As in previous years, torture and ill-treatment by the security forces continued to be reported. Twenty-four secondary school students arrested in Bani Walid in early September were reportedly tortured before being summarily tried. They were among a large number of school students arrested after demonstrations apparently protesting against being forced to attend a meeting and sign a petition calling for the execution of nine people including Colonel Miftah Qarrum al-Wirfali (see above). The arrested students were reportedly interrogated under torture, including by being beaten with fists, electric shocks on different parts of the body, falaqa (beatings on the soles of the feet) and being
threatened with dogs. Some were released, but 24 were reportedly summarily tried, in secret and without access to lawyers, in mid-December. Two, including Mohammad Hassan al-Barrani, were sentenced to nine years' imprisonment; 13, including 'Adel Mohammad al-Khazni, were sentenced to eight years' imprisonment; and nine were sentenced to prison terms of between two and a half and five years.
Mansur Kikhiya, a prominent Libyan opposition leader and human rights activist who "disappeared" in Cairo, Egypt, in December 1993 (see Amnesty International Reports 1994 and 1995), remained missing. At the end of October his wife, Baha Kikhiya, went to Libya and met government officials, including the Minister of Justice, who told her that the Libyan Government was in contact with the Egyptian authorities to find out about the fate of her husband. In July, two Amnesty International delegates met the Head of the Human Rights Unit within the Public Prosecutor's Office in Cairo and raised the case of Mansur Kikhiya with him. They were told that the official investigation was completed and Egypt had nothing to do with his "disappearance", and were given no further details on how the investigation was carried out or the outcome. No new information came to light regarding Jaballah Hamed Matar and 'Izzat Youssef al-Maqrif, both members of the Libyan opposition party, the National Front for the Salvation of Libya, who also "disappeared" in Cairo in March 1990.
At least six people were executed on 19 March, after having been convicted of murder. The executions were reportedly shown on Libyan television on 22 March.
A well-known opposition activist, 'Ali Mohammad Abu-Zeid, was found stabbed to death in his shop in London, United Kingdom, in November. Libyan opposition groups claimed that the Libyan authorities were responsible for the killing. At the end of the year the murder was still being investigated by the British police.
Amnesty International continued to appeal for the immediate and unconditional release of all prisoners of conscience and for the fair trial or release of other political prisoners and for the commutation of all death sentences. It also requested information about the fate of Mansur Kikhiya. The organization received no response to its inquiries.
