TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
At least 14 death sentences were imposed and at least 94 prisoners remained under sentence of death, but there were no executions. One prisoner died in suspicious circumstances. At least four sentences of flogging were imposed.
The International Commission of Inquiry into the hanging of Glen Ashby by the Government of Trinidad and Tobago published its report in March. Glen Ashby's execution in July 1994 was the first death sentence to be carried out in Trinidad and Tobago since 1979. His execution took place while legal appeals were still pending and a stay of execution had been issued by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council (jcpc) in London, the final court of appeal for Trinidad and Tobago (see Amnesty International Report 1995). Officials responsible for the execution refused to testify to the Commission. The Commission, which was composed of senior jurists from several Commonwealth countries, concluded that the hanging was illegal under the law of Trinidad and Tobago. The five members of the Commission also concluded that sufficient evidence existed to cite the Attorney General, the Registrar of the Court of Appeals and the Commissioner of Prisons for contempt of court. The Attorney General was dismissive of the Commission's conclusions and no action had been taken on the findings by the end of the year.
At least 14 death sentences were imposed for murder and at least 94 prisoners remained under sentence of death, but there were no executions.
In February Eustace Piper was found dead in his prison cell in suspicious circumstances. He had earlier been stabbed while struggling with guards during an escape attempt made while returning from court. His death appeared to have been caused by inadequate medical attention or further ill-treatment. Three of the guards were also injured in the incident.
At least four people were sentenced to corporal punishment. Among them was Multiza Ali who was sentenced in April to 25 years' imprisonment and 20 strokes of the birch for manslaughter. It was unclear whether any of the sentences of corporal punishment had been carried out by the end of the year.
In March Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of National Security expressing concern about the death in custody of Eustace Piper and sought further information about the circumstances of his death and the outcome of any investigation. In September Amnesty International wrote to the Minister of National Security stating that the imposition of
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO/TUNISIA
corporal punishment amounted to cruel, inhuman and degrading punishment, and calling on the government to abolish it. There had been no reply from the government by the end of the year.
