SRI LANKA
Thousands of people were detained without charge or trial, and dozens "disappeared" following arrest by the Sri Lankan security forces and by the Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF) deployed in the northeast. The fate of hundreds who had "disappeared" in previous years remained inadequately investigated. There were many allegations of torture. Emergency Regulations were amended to permit the disposal of bodies by the police. There were widespread reports of extrajudicial executions by Sri Lankan security forces, who were among those granted immunity from prosecution retroactively for offences committed "in good faith".
As a follow-up to the peace accord signed between India and Sri Lanka in July 1987, provincial council elections were held, although they were boycotted by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LITE),
ASIA AND THE PACIRC/ SRI LANKA
the Sri Lanka Freedom Party (SLFP) and the Janatha Vimukti Peramuna (JVP), People's Liberation Front. The LTTE and JVP engaged in violent action in opposition to the elections. The LTTE was generally considered responsible for many killings, including those of some 160 Sinhalese and Muslim civilians in Eastern Province in April and those of 45 other Sinhalese at Medawachchiya on 7 November. The JVP and the associated Deshapremi /anatha Viyaparoyo (DJV), People's Patriotic Front, were generally considered responsible for over 800 killings during the year. The victims included security forces personnel, members of the ruling United National Party (UNP), and members of opposition parties whit:h contested the elections. The ban imposed on the JVP in 1983 was lifted in May but the jVP leadership continued to operate clandestinely.
In December Prime Minister Rana-singhe Premadasa was elected tb succeed J.R. Jayawardene as President after an election campaign marked by widespread violence. In the run-up to the election, the JVP was reported to have attacked political rallies. It was also reported to have issued death threats to reinforce its calls for anti-government strikes and demonstrations and to prevent people from voting. The security forces were instructed to use "maximum force" to ensure that people could vote.
Emergency Regulations permitted the disposal of bodies without post-mortem or inquest on the direction of the Inspector-General of Police or his deputy, provided this had been approved by the Ministry of Defence. In November this regulation was amended to give these po{vers to police officers of the rank of Assistant Superintendent of Police or above, or those whom they authorized. At the same time, the security forces were ordered to shoot demonstrators and curfew-violators on sight. Reports indicated that these powers were immediately put to use and there were several incidents in which demonstrators were shot dead by the security forces. From late November eye-witnesses reported seeing many bodies being burned, allegedly by the security forces.
In November 1988 the Prevention of Death Threat Regulations were published under the Public Security Ordinance. These extended the application of the death penalty to cover various new of-
fences, such as threatening death or bodily harm to others in order to force them to join or resign from political parties. The regulations provide that possession of any document containing anything which might reasonably be construed as such a threat will be considered prima facie proof of an attempt to commit the offence. They also provide that incriminating statements made by a suspect "to whomsoever and in whatsoever circumstances" will be admissible as evidence in court, unless the accused can prove that they should not be admitted. The power of higher courts to supervise the conduct of such trials is removed (but not the right of appeal). The government announced it would introduce expeditious trials before a judge of the High Court to deal with these cases, but no such court had been constituted by the end of the year.
In December the Indemnity (Amendment) Act was passed, providing indemnity from prosecution for government and security force members, government servants and others involved in enforcing law and order, provided that their actions were done "in good faith". The act applies to the period from 1 August 1977 to 16 December 1988, almost the entire term of the last government.
Tamil prisoners continued to be released under the amnesty initiated in July 1987 as part of the Indo-Sri Lanka accord. However, by the end of the year approximately 250 Tamil political prisoners arrested before the accord remained in detention, despite accord provisions for all such prisoners to be released. The majority had been convicted of offences under the Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA) or Emergency Regulations, or were awaiting trial, and about 50 had not been charged with any offence. Many of those released complained of torture and some said they had witnessed others tortured to death. The cases against two groups of Sinhalese and Tamil suspects charged under the PTA with conspiracy to overthrow the government (see Amnesty International Report 1988) were discontinued and those in custody released.
Thousands of people in the south, including Buddhist monks and students, were held under provisions in the Emergency Regulations which authorize detention without charge or trial. In September the government released
ASIA AND THE PACIRC/ SRI LANKA
Shantha Bandara, a senior member of the JVP, who had been in detention for four months. In December 450 people, who had been among the many hundreds arrested in southern areas since early November, were released from Boosa army camp. At the end of the year, however, over 2,000 people from the south remained detained under Emergency Regulations.
In the north and east, hundreds of people were detained by the IPKF and screened for links with the LTTE. LTTE suspects continued to be arrested by the IPKF, and alleged members of certain other militant Tamil groups were also detained. It was not clear under what legal provision these prisoners were held. There were no reports of charges being brought against them, nor of any trials. Following the "disappearance" of Parameswaram Kenga after his reported arrest by IPKF personnel in April, his sister filed a habeas corpus petition on his behalf. The Officer in Charge at the IPKF camp at Vavuniya was summoned to appear before the court on several occasions but he failed to do so, and the Indian authorities did not supply the court with any information about the case. Contempt of court proceedings were brought against the officer but the case had not been resolved by the end of the year.
Many prisoners were kept incommunicado for long periods and there were scores of reports of torture inflicted by both the Sri Lanka security forces and the IPKF. Several deaths in custody as a result of torture were reported in both the northeast and the south. The death in police custody on 2 September of a lawyer, Wijedasa Liyanarachchi, provoked widespread public protest. A public inquest was held, which resulted in the prosecution of three police officers for murder. Other deaths in custody during 1988 are not known to have resulted in any public inquiries or criminal prosecution. However, four police officers were charged with the murder of a fisherman in 1985 who had been kicked and beaten to death in their custody.
There were numerous extrajudicial executions by security forces. There were also allegations of such killings by "death-squads" linked to the security forces. It was often difficult to attribute responsibility for individual deaths, but in some cases witnesses saw the victims being taken into security force custody before their bodies were found. Official investigations into
such killings were generally perfunctory and inadequate, if held at all. For example, when the burned and mutilated bodies of two schoolboys, Wasantha Weerasinghe and Prasantha Wanigasinghe, were found near Tangalle on 24 March witnesses claimed that they were last seen being arrested by men in Special Task Force (STF) uniform driving an unmarked jeep. In the face of protests about the killings they were investigated by the Tangalle police, who concluded that the boys had been killed by "subversives". This led to further protest and in April the Minister of Defence announced that a Select Committee of Parliament would be appointed to conduct an inquiry. However, by the end ofthe year there had been no news of its findings.
Security force personnel were accused of complicity in other politically motivated killings. On 23 October the partly-burned bodies of three young men, who are believed to have been JVP members, were found dumped in Wellawaya District. They had been shot in the head and bore injuries caused by blunt weapons. People claimed to have witnessed the abduction of these men by a candidate for the UNP who had unsuccessfully contested the provincial council election earlier in the year; he was arrested on 27 October. Several others were arrested soon after, including members of the Ratnapura police force. Further members of the security forces were reportedly wanted in connection with the deaths. At the judicial inquiry, it was alleged that weapons belonging to security force personnel were used in these killings. Investigations were continuing at the end of the year.
In November widespread protests against the government spread into prisons and at least two inmates died after security forces opened fire to quell disturbances at Welikade jail. Inquests were held into these deaths, but the findings are not known to Amnesty International.
Compared to 1986 and the first half of 1987 there were fewer reports of large-scale reprisal killings by the security forces in the northeast. There was no indication that the inquiry announced by government in 1987 into reprisal killings by the STF at Kokkaddicholai on 28 January 1987 had been held (see Amnesty international Report 1988). There were allegations that members of the Eelam People's Revolutionary Liberation Front (EPRLF)
and a group of Tamil militants called ' Tristar" aided the IPKF in identifying LTTE suspects, and that the IPKF was complicit in Tristar and EPRLF killings of LTTE suspects.
Several allegations of rape by members of the IPKF were made. In January four Indian soldiers were discharged and sentenced by an Indian court-martial to one year's imprisonment for rape, and there were further such allegations later in the year. The Indian Government announced in June that "the charges of rape and brutality made against the IPKF are fabricated and unfair" and said that "most of these charges have been found to be baseless". There were also allegations of rape by Sri Lankan security forces in the south, and in August, four police constables were charged with raping a 27-year-old woman near Rajagiriya.
Over five hundred habeas corpus cases were lodged during the year, the majority of which concerned arrests of people by Sri Lankan security forces.
By the end of 1988, 35 people were known to have "disappeared" in the south since the signing of the Indo-Sri Lanka accord, but the real figure is believed to be much higher. In the northeast, eight other "disappearances" following arrests by the Sri Lanka security forces and 35 following arrests by the IPKF were reported. In addition, there was uncertainty about the fate of all but six of the 685 people known to have "disappeared" in Sri Lanka security force custody between 1983 and July 1987. There was evidence that many of the "disappeared" had been tortured, that some had died as a result, and that others had been shot dead after arrest and their bodies disposed of in secret. Six are now known to have been released from custody between 1985 and 1987.
Relatives of JVP suspects wanted by the security forces, or already detained, were among those arrested and tortured, apparently solely because of their family relationship. In one case, a 16-year-oId giri whose two brothers were already in detention, alleged that she had been taken from her home on 9 March by plainclothes police officers and interrogated at Gampaha police station. She was beaten in front of one of her brothers, and was forced to watch while he was suspended from a rod and beaten. The girl filed a fundamental rights petition after her re-
ASIA AND THE PACIRC/ SRI LANKA
lease, alleging torture. The outcome of this case is not known.
Throughout the year Amnesty International urged the authorities to establish impartial investigations into "disappearances", reports of torture and deaths in custody, and extrajudicial executions, and to adopt adequate safeguards to prevent further such abuses. It also criticized new legislation granting the security forces and others immunity from prosecution and allowing the police to dispose of bodies.
Amnesty International opposed the extension of the scope of the death penalty. It also investigated the cases of many detainees who appeared to be possible prisoners of conscience and called for all such detainees to be brought to trial promptly and fairly on recognizable criminal charges or else to be released. Amnesty International also expressed concern to the Indian Government about abuses committed by the IPKF in northeast Sri Lanka. No replies were received.
In February Amnesty International criticized the Sri Lankan Government's inadequate response to the United Nations Working Group on Disappearances in an oral statement to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights.
Amnesty International sought to send a delegation to Sri Lanka to discuss its concerns with the government. In February President Jayawardene stated publicly in a British Broadcasting Corporation interview that Amnesty International could have "free access" to Sri Lanka. However, despite this public assurance the government continued to refuse to allow the organization's representatives to visit.
Amnesty International continued to oppose the forcible return of Tamil asylum-seekers to Sri Lanka on the grounds that they would be at risk of imprisonment as prisoners of conscience, torture or execution. In 1987 Amnesty International took up the case of a repatriated Tamil who had been arrested on arrival in Sri Lanka by the Criminal Investigation Department (CID). By the end of 1988 no charges had been brought against him and he had not been released, despite habeas corpus proceedings instituted by his father. There were reports of involuntarily returned Tamil asylum-seekers being intimidated by the CID on arrival at Katunaike airport, and being deprived of their identity cards.
ASIA AND THE PACIFIC/TAIWAN
