PANAMA
Critics and opponents of the government were detained without trial, most of them for short periods, and some, were reportedly tortured or ill-treated.
On 25 February President Eric Arturo Delvalle was dismissed from office by the Panamanian National Assembly, hours after he had unsuccessfully tried to remove General Manuel Noriega as head of the Defence Forces. President Delvalle went into hiding in Panama and Education Minister Manuel Solis Palma was appointed Acting President on 26 February.
In March there was an unsuccessful coup attempt by a group of armed forces personnel opposed to General Noriega. Supporters of the General accused the United States of orchestrating a campaign of demonstrations, attempted coups and economic sanctions to bring down his government. At least 20 soldiers were arrested for alleged involvement in the coup attempt. They were taken to El
Renacer Prison and to the island penal colony of La Coiba; at both they were reportedly ill-treated. They were still believed to be held without charge or trial at the end of the year and to be denied visits from relatives and lawyers.
Demonstrations followed the removal of President Delvalle in February and the coup attempt in March. Many people were injured and at least one youth was shot dead in March, apparently by plainclothes paramilitary forces supporting General Noriega. The government responded to the unrest on 18 March by imposing a state of emergency, which remained in force until 20 April. Under emergency legislation, the rights to freedom of expression, transit and public assembly were suspended.
Under Decree 26 also issued in March, activities deemed to interfere with public order were declared illegal. Radio stations and newspapers which attempted to report recent developments were closed down, and a number of local journalists were arrested.
Carlos Ernesto González de la Lastra, a businessperson and former editor of the opposition newspaper La Prensa, was among critics and opponents of the government detained under the March emergency legislation. He was arrested on 28 March in Panama City as he tried to obtain the release of a number of other opposition leaders. They had been detained earlier that day during a police raid at a hotel in which they had planned to hold a press conference. Several foreign journalists were also arrested. All of the detainees were released by the following day but Carlos González de la Lastra was held until 7 April, when the authorities gave him the options of detention without trial on La Coiba Island or exile. He left the country three days later. He had been in short-term detention in November 1987 and February 1988.
Others who faced short-term arrest in March included Enrique Mora, a political leader, and Geronimo Fischer, a school teacher who supported him. At the time of their arrest they were reportedly painting anti-military slogans. Both had reportedly suffered torture during detention in 1987. Enrique Mora was again arrested in September but was released before the end of the year.
In August 40 employees of the state power workers' union, including Secre-
##&&&&&&&&#%%%%%***)&
THE AMERICAS / PANAMA / PARAGUAY
tary General Isaac Rodriguez, were arrested and charged with offences against national security. Isaac Rodriguez was also charged with participation in the March coup attempt. Those held claimed that the real reason for their arrest was the power workers' participation in anti-government demonstrations. Although 39 of those arrested were released within days, Isaac Rodriguez was held until 24 August. After his release he sought the protection of the Papal Nuncio and then went into exile abroad. Further arrests of power workers took place in September. All were said to have been released by the end of the year.
About 30 members of opposition groups were also arrested in September. The authorities alleged during a news conference that the detainees had been involved in an armed conspiracy and that weapons had been found in their possession. Other sources denied this allegation, claiming the weapons had been planted at the time of the arrests. The detainees were denied visits from relatives for a month and denied access to lawyers. Most were reported released in December.
Those detained included Alberto Bolivar Conte Magdaleno, President of the National Journalists' Association. He was held in Modelo Prison and said to be in poor health owing to inadequate medical treatment. Carlos Paris Tack, a student arrested in September, was reportedly beaten in custody so badly that he required treatment in hospital, where he was chained to his bed. Both detainees were released in December. Alberto Conte was reportedly taken directly from prison to the airport and flown to exile in the United States. His lawyer denied official claims that he had left the country voluntarily. In the same month two other prominent opposition leaders were also deported.
After each wave of arrests Amnesty International appealed to the authorities to ensure that proper legal procedures were followed, that detainees' physical security was assured and that they were charged with a recognizably criminal offence, or released. In March Amnesty International published a report, Panama: Assault on Human Rights, and called for urgent government action to halt human rights violations. The report was based on a memorandum Amnesty International had submitted to the Panamanian authorities at the end of 1987. No government response to the
memorandum had been received by the end of 1988.
