MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA/ YEMEN (ARAB REPUBLIC)/ YEMEN (PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF)
YEMEN
(ARAB REPUBLIC)
Thirteen people were reportedly detained during the year, apparently on political grounds, and a group of alleged saboteurs arrested in 1987 remained in detention without trial. Prisoners continued to be ill-treated by being shackled. There were also reports of five apparently politically-motivated killings, including three in December 1987, all of which were said to have been carried out by the security forces. At least 24 ordinary criminal prisoners were executed.
Thirteen people were reportedly detained, apparently on political grounds. Twelve were arrested in the province of al-Bayda in February and April and one, a student, was apparently held for several weeks and then released. At the end ofthe year the authorities told Amnesty International that the 12 were in detention but said this was for "social" crimes and not for political reasons. They denied knowledge of the student's case.
A group of people whose arrest was officially announced in June 1987 remained in detention without trial throughout the year. At the time of their arrest the national media described them as saboteurs who were planning to disrupt security, and the authorities stated that they would be tried following interrogation. In December, however, the authorities stated that their case was still being investigated and that disclosure of further information would "affect the legal procedures".
In September the Ministry of Foreign Affairs informed Amnesty International that four suspected members ofthe opposition National Democratic Front (NDF) who were reported to have been arrested in June 1987 as they entered the country from the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen (see Amnesty international Report 1988) were not in custody. In December the
ministry informed Amnesty Internationa! that a Yemen Arab Republic diplomat said to have been arrested in late June or early July 1987 in Sana'a (see Amnesty International Report 1988) had been investigated on grounds of national security but had not been detained.
The fate of Colonel Sultan Amin al-Qirshi, a prominent official reportedly arrested in February 1978, remained unknown. He had apparently smuggled a letter to his family from his place of detention in October 1978 but no information about him has been available since. The authorities informed Amnesty International that following several inquiries from his family in 1978 they had investigated his case and concluded that he had been "detained at that time" but that they had "failed to find any explanation to his (subsequent) disappearance". They pointed out that in 1978 the country had been in a state of "turmoil".
Prisoners continued to be kept in iron shackles, usually attached to their ankles. Some may have been injured by chafing or while the shackles were hammered into place or prized apart. The use of chains as restraints or punishment is prohibited by the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners.
At least 24 people were executed during the year, in each case following conviction for murder. The executions took place in accordance with Qisas (retribution), an Islamic punishment whereby the family of a murder victim may demand the death of the murderer or may waive such a claim freely or by financial settlement.
Information was received early in the year about three apparently politically motivated killings which took place in December 1987. The victims, who were named as 'Abdu Saleh Ghanem, 'Ali bin 'Ali Saleh al-Ghurbani and Ahmad bin Ahmad al-Shawdhabi, were all believed to have had links with the NDF. They were killed when their car was attacked by armed men in the capital, Sana'a. Two other occupants of the car were reported to have been wounded - it was not clear what became of them.
Two further apparently politically motivated killings took place in March when 'Ali Hasan al-Mu'allem was killed with his nephew while driving in the proximity of a military camp near Ta'iz. Al-Mu'allem apparently intended to stand as a candidate in the legislative elections in July and was
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA/ YEMEN (ARAB REPUBLIC)/ YEMEN (PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF)
believed to be an opponent of the government.
Reports indicated that the killing of these five people had been carried out by government security forces. The authorities denied these reports and stated to Amnesty International that the killings were "social" crimes, in at least one case caused by tribal conflicts, and were being dealt with accordingly.
Amnesty International appealed for political prisoners to be tried or released and raised other matters with the authorities, including the fate of Colonel al-Qirshi and the cases of apparently political killing. It received regular responses.
Regarding the use of the death penalty, the authorities stated in September that "the claim for Capital Punishment is the exclusive right of the victim's relatives and no one can intervene". However, according to the code of criminal procedure death sentences may not be carried out unless ratified by the head of state, and Amnesty International continued to appeal for the commutation of all death sentences.
YEMEN
(PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF)
Over 40 people were reportedly arrested on account of their suspected opposition to the government. Several of them were released before the end of the year. At least two possible political detainees held since 1987 remained in detention without trial and one held without trial since 1985 was released. Eleven possible prisoners of conscience arrested in 1985 were amnestied and released. Three detainees were said to have died in custody and at least two death sentences were ratified by the Presidium of the Supreme People's Council.
Over 40 people were reportedly arrested on political grounds during the year, possibly on suspicion of supporting former head of state 'Ali Naser Muham-
mad. Most of them were said to have been arrested in al-Mukalla at the end of January. They reportedly included Hasan Saleh Ba'um, former candidate (non-voting) member of the Yemeni Socialist Party (YSP) Central Committee, as well as government employees and workers in the private sector. Several were believed to have been released in the following months.
Two people arrested in 1987, apparently for political reasons, remained in detention without trial throughout the year. 'Abd al-Karim Shamsan, a former candidate member of the YSP Central Committee, had been held since August 1987 in al-Fatah Military Camp in Aden. He was apparently detained in connection with the fighting in January 1986 between rival factions of the YSP, in which over 4,000 people were officially estimated to have been killed (see Amnesty Internationa] Report 1987). Despite assurances given by the authorities to Amnesty International in October 1987 that he would be granted prompt access to members of his family and to a lawyer, he was reported to have remained in incommunicado detention during most of 1988. Sa'id Aghabbari, a senior bank manager who had been arrested in mid-1987, also remained in detention without trial. The authorities stated in October 1987 that he was to be tried for financial crimes, but others claimed he was being detained for his opposition to the government. At the end of the year the authorities stated that 'Abd al-Karim Shamsan and Sa'id Aghabbari had been allowed access to their families and that both were to be brought to trial but did not specify the charges.
Mustafa 'Abd al-Rahim al-Saqqaf, a telecommunications engineer, was released in December. He had been held, possibly on political grounds, since June 1985 in al-Fatah Military Camp, apparently without charge or trial.
Eleven members of the pro-Iraq Ba'th Party, who may have been prisoners of conscience, were amnestied and released in April on orders of the Presidium of the Supreme People's Council. They had been convicted of treason by the Supreme Court of the Republic in November 1985 and were serving sentences of five to 15 years' imprisonment.
Three detainees believed to have been arrested for political reasons in al-Mukalla in January were said to have died in eus-
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA/ YEMEN (ARAB REPUBLIC)/ YEMEN (PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF)
tody in a detention centre in al-Mukalla or in al-Fatah Military Camp, possibly as a result of ill-treatment. Sa'id ba Mu'awwad ba Qarwan and Ahmad Barghash bin Dag-gar ba Qarwan were said to have died in May; 'Ali Sa'id al-'Amudi was said to have died at the end of June or in early July. The authorities apparently informed the families that the three had died of heart disease but did not return their bodies.
At least two death sentences, imposed for aggravated murder, were ratified by the Presidium ofthe Supreme People's Council, one in February and the other in April. It was not known whether the two prisoners were executed, although in the past prisoners have been executed shortly after ratification of their sentences.
Amnesty International repeatedly expressed concern to the government about the detention without trial of suspected government opponents and about the three reported deaths in custody. The authorities provided some information on cases of detention without trial and denied knowledge of others. They failed to confirm the three reported deaths in custody or to explain the circumstances in which they had occurred.
Amnesty International welcomed the release of the 11 members of the pro-Iraq Ba'th Party, who may have been prisoners of conscience, and continued to seek information regarding the fate of a number of prisoners arrested between 1967 and 1975 and of several people who were believed to have died or "disappeared" during and following the fighting in 1986.
o	' V^J	r-v Jí^
é'- '- i, l { V a. "'v -»"í >;>••
