SAOTOME AND PRiNCIPE
Forty-one people were arrested in March after entering Sáo Tomé and Príncipe illegally in an apparent attempt to overthrow the government. At the end of the year they had not been tried.
The arrests took place after 44 members of the Frente da fiesistência Nacional de Sôo Tomé e Principe - fle/ormada (FRNSTP-R), Reformed Sao Tomé and Principe National Resistance Front, disembarked from dinghies on beaches near the capital, Sao Tomé, on 8 March. They arrived carrying a few alarm pistols and propaganda leaflets, which suggested they expected to receive local support. Some were arrested almost immediately when the FRNSTP-R members approached the police headquarters; others were taken into custody during the next few days. Two FRNSTP-R members were killed while resisting arrest and the body of a third, who died in unexplained circumstances, was found later. About a week after their arrest some 20 of the detainees, including their leader, Manuel Afonso Rosario dos Santos, appeared on television to talk about their landing in Sáo Tomé. The face of one of those who appeared - Orlando Vera Cruz, known as "Zorro" - was badly bruised and swollen. There were reports that he and others had been ill-treated and that following their arrest none of the detainees had had access to relatives or defence counsel. The authorities said later that Orlando Vera Cruz had been injured when resisting arrest but that none of the detainees had been ill-treated in custody.
AFRICA/SÄOTOMÉ AND PRINCIPE/SENEGAL
The detainees were held incommunicado until June when, after a prison visit by the Bishop of Sao Tomé and Principe, relatives were allowed to see them. Their cases came under the jurisdiction of the Special Court for Counter-Revolutionary Acts set up in December 1975 to try political cases. Suspects under the jurisdiction of this court may be held for 30 days for interrogation before being released or charged. They must also be given access to legal counsel. During this period the FRNSTP.R detainees were held under the jurisdiction of the procuracy but their cases were investigated by a team from the poJicia judiciária, criminal investigation police, while another member of the same force was appointed to ensure they were not coerced. At the end of the year the 41 detainees were still awaiting trial.
After receiving reports that detainees had been ill-treated in custody, Amnesty International expressed concern to the government and received an assurance from the Minister of Foreign Affairs that no ill-treatment had occurred. By August, however, when Amnesty International delegates visited Sao Tomé at the government's invitation, the detainees had still not had access to legal counsel. Later, they were reportedly given permission to appoint legal counsel. Amnesty International informed the government of its concern that there had been inadequate safeguards to ensure the detainees had not been ill-treated, particularly as they had been held incommunicado for nearly three months. In Amnesty International's view it was not appropriate to entrust the protection of detainees undergoing interrogation to a member of the same force questioning them.
Amnesty International welcomed several significant moves to improve protection of human rights. The National Assembly began procedures to ratify the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and set up a commission to examine the UN Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment with a view to ratification. Laws to abolish the Special Court for Counter-Revolutionary Acts and the death penalty were also under consideration. In 1979 Sào Tomé introduced the death penalty for the offence of mercenarism - being a mercenary - but no death sentences have been imposed.
