KENYA
More than 20 prisoners of conscience and some 50 other alleged government opponents detained without trial or sentenced after unfair trials were imprisoned throughout the year. At least 20 suspected government opponents were arrested during the year; four were detained indefinitely without trial, 12 were sentenced to long prison terms. Most of these defendants had pleaded guilty to political offences after they had been held incommunicado, denied legal representation and reportedly tortured or ill-treated. Eleven long-term detainees held without trial, including Ave prisoners of con-
science, were released in February. Two of them were rearrested in September and served with indefinite detention orders. Some 170 people were under sentence of death, with over 25 new death sentences imposed, but it was not known if there were any executions.
In August the Constitution was amended by Parliament to extend from 24 hours to 14 days the period during which police could hold suspects for investigation into the capital offences of treason, murder or robbery with violence. This extension increased the risk of suspected government opponents being tortured or ill-treated under interrogation.
Seven political detainees held without trial under the Public Security Regulations since 1986 and 1987 - all prisoners of conscience - were freed in February. They were Paul Amina, a journalist; Ngotho Kariuki, Kariuki Gathitu and Katama Mkangi, university lecturers; Raila Odin-ga, a civil servant; Israel Otieno Agina, a businessperson; and Patrick Onyango, a teacher. Four other detainees - former airforce officers held in secret since a coup attempt in 1982 - were released without trial.
Several people were arrested for political reasons in the second half of 1988. Some were accused of involvement with a clandestine socialist organization, Mwa-kenya (Muungano wa WazaJendo wa fCukomboQ Kenya, Union of Patriots for the Liberation of Kenya). Most, however, allegedly belonged to one of two new opposition organizations, the Kenya Patriotic Front (KPF) and the Kenya Revolutionary Movement (KRM). The government accused these two organizations of send-
AFRICA/KENYA
ing some of their members to Libya for guerrilla training. However, no incidents of political violence by the KPF or KRM were reported. The government displayed considerable hostility towards human rights activists. Church leaders who criticized human rights abuses were threatened with arrest and the editor of a church journal was sent to prison. Two members of United States organizations concerned with human rights, who were sent to Kenya to observe an inquest into a suspicious death in custody, were arrested and interrogated for several hours.
Four detentions were ordered in September under the Public Security Regulations. These regulations permit the minister of state responsible for internal security to authorize the indefinite detention without charge or trial of anyone regarded as a threat to state security. Such detentions are not subject to court challenge. Those detained included Raila Odinga, son of former Vice-President Oginga Odinga, a prominent government critic, and Israel Otieno Agina, manager of a business owned by Oginga Odinga. Both detainees had been freed in February 1988. after detention without trial for six and two years respectively. The other two new detainees were former airforce personnel previously imprisoned for involvement in a coup attempt in 1982. Initially the police did not acknowledge the four arrests or inform detainees' families where their relatives were held. Only when habeas corpus applications were made by the families of Raila Odinga and Israel Agina did the authorities state in the High Court that they had been detained under the Public Security Regulations. The reasons for the detentions were not disclosed.
Maina wa Kinyatti, a prisoner of conscience and former history lecturer, was released in October after serving a six-year prison sentence; he had been accused of possession of a seditious publication. Three students jailed for sedition in 1982 and 1983 were also released after serving their sentences, as were some 20 prisoners arrested in 1986 and 1987. Most of the 20 were arrested for alleged links with Mwakenya; some of them received remission of one-third of their sentence. At the end of 1988 almost 70 political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, were serving prison sentences imposed after unfair trials.
Three prisoners of conscience detained in 1986 were still in prison at the end of 1988: Mirugi Kariuki and Wanyiri Kihoro, both lawyers, and Mukaru Ng'ang'a, a historian. Their continued detention appeared to be motivated by official displeasure about their action in suing the government for torture and illegal detention. In February Wanyiri Kihoro lost his case on the grounds that his injuries, said to be the result of torture, were not medically substantiated. A doctor was allowed to examine him only shortly before the hearing in January, some 18 months after he had been tortured. His appeal against dismissal of the case, and similar cases filed by Mirugi Kariuki and Mukaru Ng'ang'a, had not been heard by the end of 1988. All three were reportedly pressed to withdraw their cases in return for release from detention, but refused to do so.
Twelve people were tried for political offences and sentenced to prison. Most were charged with membership of Mwakenya or of possessing its publications, or with membership of the KPF or KRM. They included associates of Raila Odinga, whom prosecutors alleged to be the KRM leader, and relatives of Koigi wa Wamwere, a KPF leader in exile. A former member of parliament, Kimani wa Nyoike, began a 20-month prison sentence in October for failing to report an alleged KPF plot to overthrow the government. He was held incommunicado for a month before being brought to court, where he appeared without legal counsel and pleaded guilty. As in similar cases in previous years, it appeared that he and others convicted of political offences had been subjected to torture or duress in efforts to obtain guilty pleas. At least 10 other suspected government opponents arrested in late 1988, including six schoolteachers, had not been brought to trial or released by the end of the year.
Bedan Mbugua, the editor of Beyond, a publication of the National Christian Council of Kenya, which carried articles on human rights, was prosecuted for failing to submit annual sales returns to the Registrar of Books and Newspapers. The publication was banned in March. In August Bedan Mbugua was sentenced to nine months' imprisonment but released on bail pending an appeal. Three other people were jailed in late 1988 for two years on charges of possessing copies of Beyond.
AFRICA/KENYA
Reports alleged the torture or ill-treatment of political prisoners by Special Branch police who held them incommunicado. Prisoners were allegedly denied food, beaten and threatened with death. Some prisoners released from detention in early 1988 described in detail how they had been tortured by being placed in flooded cells and denied food for days.
The treatment of political prisoners continued to be harsh. Although Mirugi Kariuki was suffering from torture injuries sustained in 1986, the authorities would not allow his doctor to supervise his treatment. Maina wa Kinyatti told journalists after his release that he had been repeatedly stripped naked, beaten with canes and clubs and kicked by police attempting to extract a confession of membership of iVlwakenya. He was held in solitary confinement for a year and medical treatment was refused for two years. He had also been imprisoned with mentally ill patients, given poor quality food and had suffered both from stomach ulcers and severe deterioration of his eyesight.
Amnesty International investigated whether two political prisoners had died in 1988 as a result of ill-treatment or denial of adequate medical treatment. John Mun-gai Waruiru, a carpenter jailed in 1986 for distributing Mwakenya publications, reportedly died in prison on 5 May. No inquest was held. Titus Adongosi Oloo, a student union leader jailed in 1982 for supporting a coup attempt, died on 27 December from a stomach ulcer, according to the official report. Both prisoners had been serving 10-year sentences.
The inquest on Peter Njenga Karanja, a businessperson and rally-driver who died in custody in February 1987, ended in February 1988 after several days' hearing. Special Branch police had detained him for a suspected political offence. An observer from the American Association for the Advancement of Science and an observer from the New York-based Lawyers Committee for Human Rights were arrested in January while attending the hearing, held incommunicado for several hours and interrogated about their reasons for being in Kenya. The Chief Magistrate ruled at the inquest that "some offence" had been committed by the officers responsible for Peter Karanja's custody and directed that the ruling be sent to the Attorney General for further action. He
implied that he believed Peter Karanja had been tortured but police officers giving evidence refused to name his interrogators on the grounds of state security. No further action was known to have been undertaken against those responsible for Peter Karanja's death.
At the inquest in November into the death of Gregory Byaruhanga, a Ugandan schoolteacher who died in police custody in March 1987, the magistrate ruled that he had died of natural causes. Evidence from an autopsy, however, indicated that he had been assaulted in custody. No judgment had been given by the end of the year in the inquest into the death of Stephen Wan-jema, a political suspect who died in police custody in 1986, allegedly after being tortured. In the inquest into the death of Stephen Mbaraka Karanja, the magistrate rejected evidence from a fellow prisoner that he had been tortured, deliberately shot dead and his body burnt. The police failed to produce the body and the magistrate closed the case. The victim was a businessperson, held on criminal charges, whom the police said they shot dead while he was attempting to escape from custody in April 1987.
In the case of Taalu Kotela Kiombwe, a Zairian musician and robbery suspect who died in police custody in Mombasa in January, five police officers were charged with murder. Evidence was presented in court that the victim had been beaten and buried alive up to his neck in a grave. The trial had not been completed at the end of the year.
More than 25 death sentences were imposed by the courts for murder and robbery with violence, bringing to about 170 the number of prisoners believed to be held under sentence of death and awaiting the outcome of judicial appeals or petitions for presidential clemency. It was not known if there were any executions in 1988.
Throughout 1988 Amnesty International pressed for the release of prisoners of conscience and for fair trials, in accordance with international standards, for all political prisoners. Amnesty International also called for safeguards against torture and ill-treatment of prisoners and for impartial investigation of all allegations of torture. The Kenyan Government did not respond to the organization's appeals.
AFRICA/LESOTHO
