GERMANY, FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF
In West Berlin demonstrators were subjected to preventive detention. In some cases this may have been on account of their non-violent expression of opinion. There were further allegations of ill-treatment of detainees in the Republic.
In West Berlin protests in late September against a meeting of the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank resulted in the preventive detention of at least 552 people - some reports suggested over 850 were detained. Demonstrators were held for up to 32 hours under the provisions of the General Law on Security and Order (ASOG). Testimonies indicated that on occasions demonstrators and bystanders were detained whether or not they had been violent.
Legal safeguards contained in ASOG -including the rights to be informed of the reasons for detention, to have a prompt judicial decision on continued detention and to make an immediate appeal against detention - were allegedly breached. The demonstrations were accompanied by violence. However, Amnesty International was concerned that ASOG may have been implemented in an indiscriminate way that led to the detention of people for exercising their right to freedom of expression through peaceful demonstration. There were also allegations of ill-treatment of demonstrators and onlookers when arrested or in custody.
In Munich Alena Karvaiova, a Czechoslovak citizen, was detained by police in connection with petty crime in October 1987 when she was seven months pregnant. According to a criminal complaint lodged by her in January 1988 she was hit and kicked in the stomach by a police officer and two prison staff. Medical reports supported her claims. Amnesty International was informed that the Munich Public Procurator suspended investigation into her complaint after she returned to Czechoslovakia in April.
The practice continued of placing some prisoners arrested on terrorist-related charges under a special detention order which forbids contact with other inmates. Erik Prauss, for example, was arrested in December 1987 and detained for investigation under Article 129a of the penal code ("Formation of Terrorist Organizations"). His detention order stated that "In consideration of the subject of the proceedings the accused is to be strictly separated from other prisoners and from the outside world." In mid-August Erik Prauss was transferred from Bochum to Stammheim prison. Although in Stammheim he was permitted to exercise with other prisoners, as long as he was strip-searched both before and after, Amnesty International did not know how often or for how long.
EUROPE/ GERMANY, FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF / GREECE.
Other prisoners held under Article 129a also complained of isolation, although the authorities' view was that the isolation was self-imposed and was part of a strategy to achieve a special status so that they could continue to act as far as possible as a terrorist organization even while in prison. Such prisoners have often turned down offers of association with other inmates for a variety of reasons, such as the imposition of conditions they regarded as unacceptable (including repeated strip-searching), the frequent questioning by the authorities of prisoners who talked to terrorist convicts or suspects and the limiting of contact to specially selected prisoners unlikely to be compatible with them. Adelheid Schulz, imprisoned in Cologne, claimed not to have been allowed out in the open for two years because she refused to take communal exercise with someone whom she described as a neo-Nazi. Amnesty International was concerned that long-term isolation could cause serious damage to health and amount to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.
In September the Bochum Public Procurator replied to inquiries by Amnesty International about Reinhard Täuber who had hanged himself in Bochum Prison in October 1987. He had reportedly been tied up in a "pacification cell" after being returned to the prison on 7 October from psychiatric treatment. The procuracy stated that the prison authorities had been anxious to return Reinhard Täuber to a psychiatric institution as soon as possible. They said that tying him up had been justified by his extremely aggressive and dangerous behaviour. In reply Amnesty International asked why he had been returned to the prison rather than immediately transferred to a psychiatric institution. and reiterated its concern that his treatment might have been cruel, inhuman or degrading.
In August the organization wrote to the Bavarian Interior Ministry urging a full and impartial investigation into the allegations made by Alena Karvaiova. No reply had been received by the end of 1988.
Amnesty International sought details of Erik Prauss' conditions of imprisonment from the authorities, who stated in May that he was in good health. However, no information about his alleged isolation had been received from the authorities by the end of the year.
In December Amnesty International wrote to the West Berlin Interior Minister raising its concerns over arrests and ill-treatment during the iMFAVorld Bank protests.
Amnesty International and the Federal Minister of Justice exchanged correspondence relating to the international standards underpinning the right to refuse to perform military service. They debated to what extent political motives can be accepted as grounds for refusing to do military service. The FRG authorities maintained that there was no internationally guaranteed right to conscientious objection and took a narrow view of the grounds for recognition of conscientious objector status. Amnesty International's view is that people liable to conscription should have the right to object to military service for all conscientiously held beliefs, including political beliefs.
