MAURITIUS
One man was sentenced to death for drug-trafficking, bringing to five the number of prisoners under sentence of death. There were no executions. Three trade union officials were detained during an industrial dispute and later released conditionally.
Steven Francis, an Indian national, was sentenced to death in October after being
AraiCA / MAURITIUS / MOZAMBIQUE
found guilty of drug-trafficking. He gave notice that he wished to lodge an appeal but this had not been heard by the end of the year.
Four other prisoners were under sentence of death at the end of 1988 and were waiting for appeals to be heard by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in the United Kingdom, the highest court of appeal for Mauritius. Like Steven Francis, Mohammed Mukhtar Ali and Gulam Ras-sool had been sentenced under the Dangerous Drugs Act of 1986. Article 38 of this act prescribes a mandatory death sentence for trafficking in "dangerous drugs", including opium, heroin, cannabis and coca leaves. Unlike other serious offences in Mauritius, for which verdicts are determined by a jury of nine, people charged with trafficking under the Dangerous Drugs Act are tried by a judge sitting without a jury. The two other prisoners under sentence of death had been found guilty of murder.
In July police arrested three officials of the Mauritius Labour Congress - Rajpal-singh Allgoo, Mario Darga and Vijay Rama-naik - in the course of an industrial dispute at the Sinotex clothing factory. It appeared that the three might be prisoners of conscience, imprisoned for exercising the right to strike. They were released over a week later, after widespread international appeals on their behalf. A magistrate's court required them to pay a sum of money pending the completion of police investigations. No criminal case against them had been presented in court by the end of the year.
Amnesty International appealed to the government to commute the sentences of
those facing the death penalty and continued to urge it to amend the Dangerous Drugs Act to remove the death penalty. Amnesty International also appealed to the government to release the three imprisoned trade unionists if they were not to be charged with a recognizably criminal offence and brought promptly to trial.
