CHILE
Hundreds of people viewed as critical of the government were harassed and intimidated by armed clandestine groups linked to the security forces. Many were the subject of death threats and some were abducted or assaulted. A number of politicians, journalists and human rights lawyers were prosecuted, resulting in the imprisonment or banishment of some prisoners of conscience. Certain political detainees were tortured and kept incommunicado for long periods. There were many reports of judicial irregularities in the trials of prisoners charged with politically motivated offences. Most cases of human rights abuse brought to court re-
THE AMERICAS/CHILE
mained unresolved in spite of investigative efforts by some judges.
A plebiscite was held on 5 October, which resulted in a majority vote against General Augusto Pinochet continuing as President for the next eight years. General Pinochet was to remain in office pending presidential elections in December 1989. The plebiscite was the first occasion on which Chileans had been allowed to vote on his holding office since the military came to power in 1973. It was a key event in the transition towards an elected government, the mechanism for which is set out in the Constitution introduced by the military government in 1981. Although the voting itself took place in a calm and orderly atmosphere, in the months preceding it many people were detained briefly during demonstrations for the "No" vote or were harassed by death threats, being kept under surveillance and, in a few cases, being abducted. Numerous demonstrators or bystanders were beaten or suffered other injuries when police tried to disperse them, and three were killed by shots fired by police or unidentified armed civilians. There were similar abuses during opposition victory celebrations following the plebiscite.
Shortly before the plebiscite the main armed opposition group, Frente Patriótico Manuel Rodríguez (FPMR), Manuel Rodriguez Patriotic Front, declared a temporary truce. Throughout the rest of the year it continued a violent campaign which included bombing public installations.
In the six weeks leading up to the plebiscite the government took a number of steps to improve respect for human rights. It completed the lifting of the ban which had prevented many exiles from returning to
Chile; it ratified both the United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and the Inter-American Convention to Prevent and Punish Torture; and it lifted the state of emergency and the "state of danger to internal peace", which had given the administrative authorities wide-ranging powers of detention and banishment. It was the first time since September 1973 that there was no emergency legislation in force.
Despite these improvements there were continued human rights violations due to the authorities' misuse of other legislation and the illegal activities of the security forces and clandestine forces linked to them. These groups operated under such names as Acción Chilena Anticomunista (ACHA), Chilean Action Against Communism, and the Frente Nacionalista de Combate (FNC), Nationalist Combat Front, and maintained a campaign of harassment and intimidation against critics of the government and their families and friends. As in previous years death threats were the most common form of intimidation, but assault, abductions, ill-treatment and attacks on property were also reported. Carolina Fuentes Pereira, for example, said she was abducted by unidentified civilians on 17 August, interrogated about her trade union activities, then beaten, raped and abandoned in the street.
There were new reports of torture by the official security forces. Victims were mainly detainees suspected of belonging to armed opposition groups, such as the FPMR, awaiting transfer to prison. Under the "state of danger to internal peace", the Interior Ministry was empowered to order administrative detention in police custody for up to 20 days which was when torture was most likely to occur. These powers ceased when the state of danger was lifted in August. However, under anti-terrorist legislation the security forces could still hold detainees for up to 48 hours before placing them at the disposition of a judge, who could then order that they be kept in police custody for a further 10 days.
There were allegations that agents of the Central Nacional de In/ormaciones (CNI), state security police, had been involved in the torture of detainees held in the premises of investigaciones (criminal investigations police) and carabineros (uniformed police). In a few cases there were reports that the CNI
THEAMERICAS/CHILE
had held people in secret detention centres before handing them over to the duly authorized authorities, although this practice had been banned in 1987.
In October the Bishop of Copiapó, in Northern Chile, called for an end to torture after nine men in his diocese had been arrested by investigaciones, tortured with electric shocks, then released unconditionally. In deciding whether there should be a prosecution, the investigating judge ruled Üiat the detainees' statements taken by the police could not be used as a basis for charges because they had been extracted under torture. To Amnesty International's knowledge, such a ruling is unprecedented in Chile.
In October six people were arrested in Los Queñes, a village in southern Chile, following an armed attack on a police station in which a police officer was killed. The detainees said that they were bitten by police dogs and subjected to electric shocks and mock executions during their three days in police custody; one said his head was pushed into a beehive. They were then transferred to prison where they were held incommunicado and charged with belonging to the FPMR and participating in the attack. The incommunicado detention order was prolonged until 35 days after their arrest, a practice which often compounds the effects of torture.
Although there were some criminal investigations into torture complaints few convictions resulted, despite efforts by some judges. In October a judge charged six members of investigaciones with the torture of political prisoner Vasilly Carrillo, who had been arrested in November 1986 and charged with participating in an attack on General Pinochet. His torture included prolonged beatings and electric shocks. The investigaciones publicly criticized the judge's decision arguing that they were often hampered in their duty to protect the public from "delinquents" by the ease with which lawyers were able to present complaints of ill-treatment to the courts. The charges against the police officers were revoked by a higher court which ruled that there were insufficient grounds to proceed. Another judge, René García, who was investigating some 30 torture cases, was suspended in October for two weeks on half pay for stating to the Press that the CNI was responsible for torture. Three judges who expressed their
support for him were reprimanded by the Supreme Court.
Other human rights violations resulted from excessive use of certain nonemergency legislation, such as Article 284 of the Code of Military Justice which makes it an offence to "threaten, offend or defame" members of the armed forces. Legal proceedings were conducted against dozens of journalists, human rights lawyers and politicians for comments published mostly in the opposition press, and some of them were imprisoned for short periods before being released on bail. In December prisoner of conscience Juan Pablo Cárdenas, editor of Análisis magazine, completed his sentence of night-time imprisonment - 541 nights -for similar offences.
Clodomiro Almeyda, leader of one of the socialist parties, was released by a Supreme Court decision in October which reduced his sentence from 541 to 390 days. He had been convicted of being an "apologist for terrorism" for statements he had made in exile (see Amnesty international Report 1988). In September Manuel Bustos and Arturo Martínez, leaders of the Comando Nacional de Trabajadores (CNT), National Workers' Command, began serving a 541-day sentence of banishment to remote parts of the country. They had been found guilty of calling a national strike in October 1987. The sentence had been quashed but was later confirmed by the Supreme Court a few days before the two men were due to take part in a meeting of trade union delegates. The purpose of the meeting was the establishment of the first major trade union confederation since 1973.
There were continuing reports of judicial irregularities in the trials of several hundred prisoners charged with politically motivated crimes, most of whom were on trial by military courts. The majority were charged with membership of armed opposition groups or with arms offences under the Arms Control Law and Anti-terrorist Law.
Irregularities in the trials prompted a series of complaints to the higher courts. In July, for example, 16 defence lawyers petitioned the Supreme Court. They complained - unsuccessfully - of numerous malpractices, such as the inaccessibility of court officials, especially in urgent cases; long delays over judicial decisions; failure to hand over automatically formal notification of court decisions; threats
TKEAMERICAS/CMILE
and abusive language used by court officials against some detainees and witnesses; and the handling of guns by court officials in front of the accused. The impartiality of the military courts was also called into question.
Many of the complaints of serious irregularities were levelled at the Special Military Prosecutor, Fernando Torres, who was investigating several FPMR armed attacks. About 100 detainees were involved in these trials. In December, in an unprecedented ruling, the Military Appeals Court accepted a complaint against him submitted by lawyers for the Vicariate of Solidarity, a church human rights organization. The appeals court concluded that he had exceeded his powers as prosecutor by using investigations into an armed robbery to seek details of the activities of the Vicariate (a Vicariate doctor had treated an injured man who, it later emerged, had participated in the robbery; see Amnesty international Report 1988). The ruling resulted in the sudden retirement of several senior members of the military justice structure. Fernando Torres was promoted to the post of Advocate-General, the highest position in the military judiciary. The Supreme Court reversed the earlier ruling of the Military Appeals Court and thus rejected the complaint against Fernando Torres.
Long delays in trials continued to be reported. This was in spite of an April ruling by the Supreme Court, in response to a petition submitted by defence lawyers in September 1987, which ordered the Military Appeals Court to speed up the trials of those charged under the Arms Control Law and Anti-terrorist Law. Among those who complained about delays and were still awaiting sentence in December were eight political prisoners held since the early 1980s for whom the prosecution had recommended death sentences in 1984.
Three prisoners sentenced to death for killing the Regional Governor of Santiago had their sentences commuted to life imprisonment in August, after the Military Appeals Court failed to reach a unanimous verdict on upholding the death sentences. In an attempt to get the sentence restored the prosecution complained, unsuccessfully, to the Supreme Court about the dissenting vote of the court's president, Enrique PailUs. Three other political prisoners for whom the
prosecution had recommended death received life sentences in January.
Past human rights violations received considerable public attention, particularly in the debate on how they would be dealt with by future governments. Significant steps were taken by a few courts investigating human rights abuses. Several police officers, for example, were charged with causing deaths during demonstrations. They included a carabinero charged with "unnecessary violence resulting in the death" of Nelson Carrasco Rascuñan, who had been arrested, severely beaten and thrown into a canal during a day of protest in 1984. In another case, a judge visited a German settlement in southern Chile, known as Colonia Dignidad, at the request of a West German court investigating allegations by Amnesty International that it was used as a torture centre shortly after the coup in 1973. The case received considerable publicity and led to new witnesses coming forward, who maintained that they too had been held there in the mid-1970s.
Hundreds of cases of past abuses, including executions and "disappearances" which had occurred in the years following the coup, remained unsolved. Most were either closed for lack of evidence or greatly delayed. Amnesty International launched a campaign calling on the government to release information about the several hundred "disappeared" prisoners arrested between 1973 and 1977, believing that if the authorities were genuinely determined to uncover the truth, the fate of these prisoners could be clarified. There was no news of the five political activists who "disappeared" in September 1987 (see Amnesty international Report 1988).
Throughout the year Amnesty International called on the authorities to halt the activities of clandestine forces linked to the security forces and called for full investigations into these and other human rights violations. It frequently urged the government to allow access to lawyers and relatives for detainees held incommunicado for long periods. Amnesty International welcomed the ratification of international instruments prohibiting torture but expressed the need for further measures to end such abuses. The organization also urged the government to review the trials of political prisoners.
THE AMERICAS / COLOMBIA
