HAITI
Human rights violations continued throughout a year in which there were four changes of government. Widespread reports of torture, ill-treatment and deaths in detention were received from all parts of the country, particularly prior to a military coup in September. There were several reports of extrajudicial execu-tions. Arrests without warrant were routine and detainees were often held incommunicado and unacknowledged for weeks or months without charge or trial.
Armed civilians, commonly known as tonton macoutes, in many cases working with members of the security forces, were responsible for killings and attacks on known or alleged government opponents. There was little serious attempt to investi-gate human rights abuses that had occurred either in 1988 or in previous years.
Elections rescheduled as a result of the violent disruption of voting on 29 November 1987 (see Amnesty InternationaJ Report 1988) were held on 17 January and resulted in Leslie F. Manigat taking up office as President on 7 February. The new government took several steps to improve human rights: it established a senatorial human rights commission to receive and act on complaints, initiated official visits to inspect the National Penitentiary, and drafted legislation to separate the functions of the police and army in accordance with the Constitution. Several members of the security forces were arrested in connection with attacks on civilians. However, President Manigat was overthrown on 19 June in a military coup led by General Henri Namphy. General Namphy had headed the caretaker Conseil national du gouvernement (CNG), National Government Council, which had ruled Haiti after the departure of President Jean-Claude Duvalier in February 1986, until the formation of President Manigat's administration. The ousted President was flown out of the country. Some former ministers and other party members were detained for several days.
General Namphy immediately dissolved the National Assembly and announced that he would rule by decree, obviating the possibility of elections in the near future. He remained in power only until September but his period of office was marked by a significant increase in human rights violations, some of which were committed by former members of the tonton macoutes, a militia which had been responsible for widespread abuses under former Presidents François and Jean-Claude Duvalier. The most serious incident occurred on 11 September when dozens of armed civilians wearing red armbands, a common emblem of the tonton macoutes, attacked worshippers attending mass at St Jean Bosco Church, Port-au-Prince. They killed at least 12 people, wounded some 70 others and set the church on fire. Father Jean-Bertrand
THE AMERICAS/NICARAGUA
Aristide, who was conducting the mass, had previously suffered several attempts on his life because of his criticism of successive governments (see Amnesty International Report 1988). After the attack those responsible appeared openly on television but no action was taken to apprehend them. They were believed to be connected with Frank Romain, a former police chief who had become Mayor of Port-au-Prince.
One week after the attack on St Jean Bosco Church, General Namphy was overthrown by members of the Presidential Guard, apparently partly in protest against the government's human rights record. He was replaced by General Prosper Avril, formerly the chief of presidential security under President Jean-Claude Duvalier. General Namphy was allowed to leave for the Dominican Republic.
President Avril also rejected the 1987 Constitution but said he would abide by its spirit and respect human rights. He appointed a predominantly civilian administration and retired a number of senior army officers, some of whom had often been cited as responsible for past human rights abuses and were associated with the tonton macoutes. He announced that the police and army would be restructured, that Fort Dimanche - where many prisoners had been tortured in the past -would be closed, and that the Service des recherches criminelles, Criminal Investigations Service, was being renamed the Service d'investigation et de recherches anti-gang (SIRA), Anti-Gang Investigation and Research Service. However, detainees were reportedly still being held in unacknowledged detention at Fort Dimanche at the end of the year.
Fifteen members of the Presidential Guard, all of whom were said to have been involved in the September coup, were detained on 15 and 16 October and accused of planning a further coup. It appeared, however, that they were actually arrested for making demands which the new government considered too radical. They were held at the National Penitentiary and were permitted family visits in December but had no access to lawyers. Following an investigation by a special military commission, 12 were released without charge on 21 December. Sergeant Patrick Frantz Beauchard and two others were to be brought to trial but on 25
December President Avril announced that proceedings against them would be dropped in an "act of clemency" and they too were released; all 15 were dismissed from the army.
A national day of mourning was declared on 29 November, the first anniversary of the election day killings, and a new commission of inquiry to investigate the killings was announced. The commission was to comprise representatives of human rights groups, the Bar Association and the Association of Haitian Journalists, as well as members of the government and army. A previous inquiry had concluded that "it was possible to believe" that "Duvalier-macoute" forces were responsible for the killings, but it had failed to identify any of the individuals involved.
Despite some improvement, the human rights situation was uncertain at the end of the year. No effective attempt had been made to disarm known tonton macoutes or to prosecute human rights violators. On 10 October it was reported that legal proceedings in connection with the St Jean Bosco massacre would be brought against Frank Romain, who had taken refuge in the Embassy of the Dominican Republic at the time of the coup. However, on 31 December he was granted safe conduct to leave the country and others allegedly involved in the massacre were not arrested. Some had been lynched or burned to death by angry mobs shortly after the event.
There were new reports of deaths in detention as a result of torture, ill-treatment, malnutrition or disease. At least 22 people reportedly died in custody at Recherches Criminelles, and further deaths occurred at the Dessalines army barracks and at detention centres in the countryside. Most detentions were not acknowledged by the authorities, making it difficult to obtain information about conditions and the treatment of detainees, or to estimate their number at any one time.
In two cases the authorities took action against those allegedly responsible for torture but most deaths in detention did not result in any official action. Following the death of Lifette Fanfan, in La Gonave Prison on 12 February, reportedly after severe beatings, several soldiers were disciplined and the dead man's widow was paid $700 compensation. In September the
