SUDAN
There were numerous reports of extrajudicial executions carried out by government forces and armed civilian militia groups, particularly in the south. A number of people were imprisoned for short periods for political reasons. Six prisoners of conscience were held for their religious activities. At least one person was sentenced to amputation of a hand and more than 30 others remained under sentence of judicial amputation, although none of these sentences was carried out. Many people were flogged after being convicted of alcohol-related or sexual offences. Several hundred prisoners were under sentence of death for murder but no executions were reported.
The state of emergency declared in July 1987 remained in force throughout the year. Effectively in force since the overthrow of President Gaafar Nimeiri's government in 1985, it was renewed for a further six months in January 1988 and again in August. The composition of the government - a coalition of the Umma Party and the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP), headed by Prime Minister Sadiq el-Mahdi - was enlarged in May to include the National Islamic Front and the South Sudan Unity parties. The Communist Party and the United Sudanese African Parties remained in opposition in the Constituent Assembly.
Fifteen people were arrested in December following an alleged coup attempt. They included a number of politicians and retired high-ranking military officers who had supported former President Nimeiri.
In August the government coalition
AFRICA/SUDAN
presented to the Constituent Assembly a proposal for a new Islamic law-inspired penal code to replace the 1983 penal code - the so-called September Laws (enacted in 1983) by the government of President Nimeiri. The draft penal code contained many provisions which would lead to serious violations of human rights. These included the retention of the judicial penalty of limb amputation, the use of flogging as a penalty for a wide range of offences, stoning and crucifixion as methods of execution, and provisions which could lead to the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience. The new code also expanded the scope of the death penalty to include apostasy, and retained the death penalty for a number of political and ordinary criminal offences. However, by the end of the year the Constituent Assembly had not approved the draft code and the "September Laws" remained in force with some provisions not implemented.
There was continued armed conflict in the south of the country, where government forces were fighting the Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA). Consequently, many rural areas were either abandoned by their inhabitants or came under the control of the SPLA. Relief agencies estimated that up to half of the six million people who lived in the area had been displaced as a result of the fighting. More than 300,000 southern Sudanese refugees fled to Ethiopia; others went to Khartoum or towns in central or northern Sudan. Several initiatives to secure a political agreement to end the fighting, including some by Sudanese religious and political leaders, met with failure. In November the SPLA and the DUP signed a peace pact but this was rejected by other government parties, most notably the National Islamic Front.
Tens of thousands of civilians died in the south as a consequence of upheavals during the year, most of them through starvation as they sought to flee from the fighting. Hundreds of civilians were believed killed by members of the government army and armed civilian militia groups. Members of the Dinka ethnic group, from which the SPLA drew most of its support, were particularly vulnerable to this abuse. There were reports that Dinka children had been abducted by militia groups.
A number of people were imprisoned for political reasons, in most cases for short periods only. In February six Roman Catholic teachers of religion were tried in Lagawa, southern Kordofan region, for offences involving their peaceful, religious activities. The six - Simon Makur Kuol, Emanuel James, Mussa Osman Ghafi, James Tia, Bolis Meki and Butros Luka -were accused of opening a church without permission and raising funds for religious purposes. They were convicted and each sentenced to two years' imprisonment and a fine. They were also given 25 lashes, but the precise charges and legal basis for this were not clear. The teachers were believed to have been convicted under laws which restrict Christian activities in areas regarded as Muslim. All six were released by the end of the year.
Administrative detention without trial had been abolished in 1986 and 1987 but suspected government opponents were detained without trial for days or weeks in military custody without being charged or brought to court. There appeared to be no legal basis for these detentions.
There were reports that some of those detained without charge or trial were tortured. For example, 14 people were reportedly arrested and tortured in January by military personnel in Shalla, Darfur region. Thirty members of the General Union of Southern and Northern Funj were reportedly detained and tortured by military intelligence officers in the Kurmuk and Gissan areas in Southern Blue Nile Province in February. They were arrested during counter-insurgency operations which included interrogating people suspected of collaborating with the SPLA. No steps were known to have been taken by the authorities to prevent the arbitrary detention or ill-treatment of prisoners by members of the armed forces.
At least one person was sentenced to amputation under the "September Laws". In March Martin Anuel Agulik was convicted of theft and sentenced to amputation of the right hand by a criminal court in Khartoum North. There were other reports of amputation sentences being imposed, but none was carried out. By the end of the year over 30 people were believed to be imprisoned under sentence of amputation, some of them awaiting the result of their judicial appeals. The carrying out of amputation sentences had been effectively
AFRICA/SUDAN/SWAZILAND
suspended by a parliamentary resolution in August 1986.
A number of flogging sentences of a minimum of 25 lashes were passed for alcohol-related or sexual offences but the exact number was not known to Amnesty International. The floggings were inflicted in court immediately after sentencing. Amnesty International considers the punishment cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment.
The courts continued to impose death sentences on those convicted of murder. Several hundred people were believed to be under sentence of death at the end of the year, but no executions were reported. Some of those condemned to death were released on payment of "blood money" (diya) to the victims' relatives, as prescribed by the "September Laws". Five Palestinians were sentenced to death in October for bomb and machine-gun attacks on a hotel and a club in Khartoum in May in which seven people were killed. They are believed to have appealed against their sentences to a higher court.
Amnesty International wrote to the government in July urging it to investigate reports of extrajudicial executions of unarmed civilians by the armed forces, as well as two 1987 massacres in Ad-Daien and Wau (see Amnesty International Report 1988). The organization also appealed for the abolition of cruel, inhuman or degrading punishments such as amputation, flogging, stoning and crucifixion, and called for the "September Laws" to be replaced by a code which wbuld meet recognized international standards. Amnesty International urged the abolition of all laws under which people could be imprisoned or even executed for their beliefs or opinions. The organization received no response to its appeals from the government.
