FIJI
Dozens of people, including some prisoners of conscience, were detained for short periods under the Internal Security Decree (ISD), which was in force between June and November. Many alleged that they were severely beaten and otherwise ill-treated while in military or police custody.
In December 1987 Lieutenant Colonel Sitiveni Rabuka, who had taken poweras a result of military coups in May and
ASIA AND THE PACIFIC/INDIA
September 1987, stepped down, allowing a return to civilian rule. The former Governor General, Ratu Sir Penaia Ganilau, became Fiji's first President. Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara, leader of the Alliance Party which had ruled Fiji since independence until its replacement in April 1987 by a multiracial coalition led by Dr Timoci Bavadra, accepted the post of Prime Minister. Lieutenant Colonel Rabuka, having assumed the rank of general and the position of Commander of the Armed Forces, became Minister of Home Affairs.
In September the government issued a draft constitution which it said was intended to pave the way for a return to parliamentary government and would give a dominant role to indigenous Fijians, although they are slightly outnumbered by ethnic Indians. The draft constitution was criticized by opposition politicians including Dr Bavadra, who said that it contained articles which were discriminatory with regard to race, place of origin, political opinion and religion.
The ISD was introduced on 16 June after Australian customs officials intercepted an arms shipment bound for Fiji which was apparently intended for opponents of the government. On the grounds that other arms shipments were believed to have arrived earlier in Lautoka, in northwest Fiji, the ISD was made retroactive to 1 March and remained in force until 17 November. Based on similar legislation in Malaysia and Singapore, it empowered the Minister of Home Affairs to order the detention without trial of anyone suspected of "acting in any manner prejudicial to the security of Fiji". Detention orders could be imposed for renewable periods of up to two years but were subject to review by an Advisory Board at six-monthly intervals, commencing three months after arrest. The government was not bound by the board's recommendations.
Dozens of people suspected of involvement in arms-smuggling were detained under the ISD in June and July in the capital, Suva, in Lautoka and elsewhere. Some were held briefly but others were detained for several weeks. Many of those held in the Lautoka Military and Police Compound were reportedly beaten although the government denied reports of ill-treatment.
Those arrested included several people who appeared to be prisoners of conscience. Som Prakash, a university lecturer, was detained for two weeks following his arrest in June, during which time he was reportedly beaten and denied access to his family and to a lawyer. The authorities said that he was held in connection with the arms shipment but other sources claimed that he was detained because he had written a critical review of an official 1987 biography of General Rabuka.
Two lawyers were arrested on the same day in June, apparently because they represented people accused of arms offences; they were released after several hours of interrogation. Together with 20 other people, one of the lawyers still faced charges of unlawful possession of arms and ammunition at the end of the year. All 21 were released on bail but faced a maximum sentence of seven years' imprisonment if convicted. Defence counsel planned to challenge the admissibility of defendants' confession statements as evidence, on the grounds that they had been extracted under duress.
The trial of a group of 19 anti-coup protesters charged with holding an illegal meeting on 14 May had not concluded by the end of the year. Several members of the group were reportedly harassed and prevented from leaving the country although their lawyer claimed that there was no legal jurisdiction preventing their free movement. The trial of eight traditional chiefs from the island of Rotuma, charged with plotting a breakaway from the Republic of Fiji, began in December.
Amnesty International wrote to the government in January to propose that representatives of the organization visit the country to discuss measures for the protection of human rights. The government responded in April accepting this proposal. However, before arrangements for the visit had been completed the government said it should be postponed until
ASIA AND THE PACIFIC / FIJI / HONG KONG
early 1989 "due to the internal security situation". Amnesty International subsequently wrote to Prime Minister Mara to express regret at the postponement, particularly in view of its concern that some of those arrested following the discovery of the arms shipment had been detained for the non-violent expression of their beliefs. The organization called for allegations of ill-treatment of detainees to be investigated and criticized the lack of legal safeguards available to detainees held under the ISD. Amnesty International subsequently welcomed the lifting of the ISD in November.
