MALAYSIA
Some 40 prisoners of conscience who had been among more than ICQ critics and opponents of the government detained in the last three months of 1987 remained in detention without charge or trial at the beginning of 1988. Twenty-four were released but the others remained in detention throughout the year. They and eight other released long-term political detainees, who had been held without charge or trial since the 1970s, had severe restrictions imposed on their freedom of movement and association. At least four other long-term political prisoners remained in prison. There were reports of
torture and ill-treatment of prisoners and of at least three deaths in custody in suspicious circumstances. At least 16 people were executed, mostly for drugs offences, and at least 59 death sentences were imposed - a sharp increase over the previous year's figures.
In May the government took the unprecedented step of suspending Tun Sal-leh Abbas, the Lord President of the Malaysia Supreme Court, for alleged "misbehaviour" and "having displayed prejudice and bias against the government". He had written to the constitutional monarch, the Yang di-Pertuan Agong, expressing the concern of a number of judges about government interference in the work of the judiciary. He was found guilty of the allegations at a tribunal headed by the Chief Justice, before which he did not appear, and was dismissed in August. Five other Supreme Court judges, two of whom were later dismissed from office, were also suspended in July for "gross misbehaviour" after they had ruled in favour of a petition intended to prevent the inquiry by the Chief Justice proceeding. In July the Internal Security Act (ISA) and two other laws allowing preventive detention were amended: as a result the right of detainees to seek an effective remedy against unlawful detention was reduced.
In January those still detained from among the 106 critics and opponents of the government arrested in late 1987, in what the authorities had termed "Operation Lallang" (see Amnesty International Report 1988), were all served with two-year detention orders under the ISA. This act empowers the Minister of Home Affairs to authorize the detention without trial of anyone suspected of acting "in a
ASIA AND THE PACIFIC / MALDIVES / NEPAL
manner prejudicial to national security" for renewable periods of up to two years. Those held included Lim Kit Siang, a member of parliament and Secretary General of the opposition Democratic Action Party (DAP), and six other DAP members of parliament including human rights lawyer Karpal Singh and Secretary General of the Malaysian Trades Union Congress (MTUC) Dr Vethamuthu David. Arokia Dass and Mohamed Nasir bin Hashim of the opposition party Partai Sosiaiis Rakyat Malaysia, several members of another opposition party. Parti Isiam Se Malaysia, and two Malay Christian converts, Joshua Jamaluddin and Hil-my Mohamed Nor, were also among those detained.
Despite the imposition of two-year detention orders 24 of the detainees had been released by the end of the year. Several brought actions in the courts to contest their detentions. This led to the release in March of Karpal Singh, but he was rearrested almost immediately under a new ISA detention order and was still held at the end of 1988. Joshua Jamaluddin, however, was not redetained in October after he was set free by court order.
In June Dr David and six other detainees were released by order of the Minister of Home Affairs, and there were further releases in September, October and December. However, under the ISA, those released were subject to severe restrictions on their freedom of movement and association, such as confinement to their home between 10pm and 6am, or not speaking publicly at political, or trade union meetings.
Those still detained without trial at the end of 1988 included Lim Kit Siang and his son Lim Guan Eng, also a DAP member of parliament. In October they and other detainees went on hunger-strike for a week to protest about their continued detention.
Further information was received about torture and ill-treatment in Special Branch custody of those detained in late 1987 during "Operation Lallang". The ill-treatment included sleep deprivation for long periods, prolonged interrogation in deliberately over-cooled rooms and, in some cases, mock sexual assaults and beatings. Detainees were kept in incommunicado detention during the initial period of interrogation and were denied
access to defence counsel for the first 60 days, thereafter being allowed only very limited access to families and counsel. Procedures used for detention without trial entitle the Minister of Home Affairs, solely at his own discretion, to order the detention of individuals, including prisoners of conscience. The review of such cases by the courts and by the Advisory Board was inadequate because both persistently refused to examine the substantive reasons for detention under the ISA.
Several long-term political detainees were released during the year. They included Loo Ming Leong, a prisoner of conscience who had been held without charge or trial under the ISA since 1972, and at least seven other political prisoners, most of whom had been detained without trial since the mid-1970s. At least four others, however, who have been held for a similar period remained in detention at the Kamunting Detention Centre in northern Perak State. Those released were restricted in their freedom of movement and association.
Allegations of torture and ill-treatment in police custody were made by four prisoners of conscience in habeas corpus actions brought before the High Courts and by several defendants in other cases who testified in court that they had been tortured into making "confessions". In one such case in which the magistrate ordered a medical examination, the injuries and marks on the prisoner's body were found to have been caused by severe beatings while in police custody. In September the Inspector-General of Police issued a public warning to the police force that he would take "stern action" if it was found that physical force had been used on suspects during interrogation. In November the Ministry of Home Affairs acknowledged in parliament that it had received 145 complaints of police accused of what it called "rough treatment on detainees", and that nine cases of alleged torture by police officers were being investigated as of October.
At least three deaths in police custody in suspicious circumstances were reported during the year. In September a coroner ruled that the 1984 death in custody of Ng Chong Peng, a criminal suspect, was the result of a criminal act and not suicide as alleged by the police.
ASIA ANDTHE PACIFIC / MALAYSIA / MALDIVES
However, no charges relating to his death were reported to have been brought against the police officer allegedly responsible.
The government's policy of enforcing the mandatory death penalty, mainly for drugs and firearms offences, continued throughout the year. At least 16 people were executed, 12 after being convicted of drugs offences and four of murder. In May a total of 168 convicted drug offenders were reported to be on death row. They included 39 foreigners, many of them awaiting the outcome of appeals.
At least 59 people received mandatory death sentences. Fifty-five of these were imposed for drug offences (compared to 31 reported in 1987), three for possession of firearms and one for murder. At least 12 people had their death sentences confirmed by the Supreme Court, three of whom, all convicted of drugs offences, were executed within 10 days. According to statistics released by the police about 220 people were arrested under the Dangerous Drugs Act during 1988 and were charged under Section 39(B) which prescribes a mandatory death penalty. Other reports indicated that during the first 10 months of the year, 182 alleged drugs offenders were detained under the Act in the capital, Kuala Lumpur.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience, for other detainees held under the ISA to be brought to trial or freed and for clemency for prisoners under sentence of death. In October Amnesty International representatives visited Malaysia to discuss the organization's concerns with senior government officials. These were set out in a draft report, Malaysia: "Operation Lai-long": Detention without trial under the ISA, which was sent to the government in September. The report criticized the detention without trial of prisoners of conscience and the use of the ISA, and recorded allegations of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners. It also said new safeguards were needed against arbitrary detention and ill-treatment. The report was published in December, when Amnesty International again called on the government to release all prisoners of conscience, investigate torture allegations, introduce new safeguards against arbitrary arrest and abuse of prisoners and commute all death sentences.
In August Amnesty International referred to the widespread practice of administrative detention of polical prisoners in Malaysia in its oral intervention on this subject before the United Nations Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities.
