KUWAIT
Two people were convicted of political offences and imprisoned after trials before the State Security Court which fell short of international standards. At least one of them may have been a prisoner of conscience. Seven others who were sen-tenced by the State Security Court in previous years, and who may have included prisoners of conscience, remained in prison throughout 1988. At least four prisoners were sentenced to death and four others executed.
Ten people were tried by the State Security Court, one of them in absentia, in four separate cases. Isma'il Sayyid Hasan Sayyid Akbar, a Kuwaiti national, was
sentenced to three years' imprisonment in February after having been convicted of offences relating to the distribution of leaflets. The leaflets allegedly called for the violent overthrow of the government and defamed the Amir - who is head of state - and the state. The other nine were tried on charges relating to bomb attacks and other acts of violence carried out in recent years: one was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment; four were given noncustodial punishments; and four were acquitted, including the person tried in absentia.
Defendants who appeared before the State Security Court were legally represented but had no right of appeal against their conviction and sentence to a higher tribunal, contrary to international standards for fair trial.
At least two of these trials, including that of Isma'il Sayyid Hasan Sayyid Akbar, were conducted in camera, except for the introduction of the case and reading of the verdict. Such secrecy prevented an independent assessment of the proceedings. In the case of Isma'il Sayyid Hasan Sayyid Akbar, Amnesty International was unable to discover whether the leaflets he was found guilty of distributing advocated violence or what evidence linked the leaflets to the defendant. Consequently, it was not clear whether he was a prisoner of conscience.
Dr Khaldun al-Naqib, Dean of the School of Arts at Kuwait University, was arrested in March and reportedly held for the non-violent expression of his political beliefs in the custody of the State Security Intelligence Agency. He was apparently interrogated about the publication of a book he had written about socio-political issues in the Gulf. He was permitted legal counsel and was reportedly released uncharged after six days.
Seven political prisoners tried between 1985 and 1987 continued to serve prison sentences ranging from three to 10 years. The seven had been convicted by the State Se.curity Court on charges relating to the distribution of leaflets inciting violence after trials held mainly in camera and may have included prisoners of conscience. They had no right of appeal.
Of nine political prisoners under sentence of death in Kuwait Central Prison some were allegedly held in prolonged solitary confinement and denied access to
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA/ YEMEN (ARAB REPUBLIC)/ YEMEN (PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF)
the open air for a prolonged period. The nine had been convicted by the Stale Security Court between 1984 and 1987 for offences relating to bombings and to an attempt on the Amir's life.
At least four people were sentenced to death for premeditated murder by the Criminal Court but their cases may have been still under judicial review at the end of the year. Three death sentences passed by the Criminal Court were commuted by the High Court of Appeal or by the Court of Cassation. In September, two men and two women were executed. 'Awd Fayhan 'Awd, 'Abbas 'Aziz Wanan Shamkhi, Alice Nurban Barisi and Farida Taher Shaikh had been convicted of premeditated murder and other crimes.
Amnesty International sought and obtained information from the Kuwaiti authorities on several prisoner cases, although it was not able to examine the content of leaflets produced as evidence of advocacy of violence against defendants tried by the State Security Court, who may have included prisoners of conscience.
Amnesty International received from the authorities a copy of a forensic medical report on the death in custody of Abed Hussain Hajji Enayatullah, a Pakistani national found dead in March in the toilets of a police station in Shu'ayba two days after his arrest. The circumstances of his death as described in the report were consistent with the findings of the official investigation, which concluded that the detainee had hanged himself with his bootlaces. Amnesty International sought further clarification about aspects of this case and assurances that procedures took into account the risks of self-inflicted injury by detainees in police custody.
In correspondence with Amnesty International, the government defended the use of the death penalty, stating that it complied with relevant international safeguards. However, at least one such safeguard - the right to appeal to a higher tribunal against conviction and sentence -was not available to defendants before the State Security Court, the jurisdiction of which included death penalty cases. Amnesty International appealed for the commutation of all death sentences.
