HUNGARY
More than 150 people were imprisoned for refusing to perform military service on conscientious grounds but the identities of only 10 of them were known. One prisoner of conscience was jailed for criticizing the government but was released before the end of the year. At least one death sentence was imposed but it was not known if there were any executions.
Important political changes, which began in May with the nomination of Kâroly Grôsz as General Secretary of the Hungarian Socialist Workers Party, brought a relaxation of censorship laws and the formation of independent pressure groups. In September Hungary ratified the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. A draft law amending legislation on military service and allowing alternative civilian service was under discussion and was to be submitted to parliament in 1989.
Military service is compulsory in Hungary and the existing law did not provide for alternative civilian service. Article 336 of the criminal code provided up to five years' imprisonment - five years to 15 years in wartime - for refusing to perform
EUROPE/HUNGARY/ITALY
military service. Since 1977 members of some small Christian sects, including Nazarenes and Jehovah's Witnesses, have been allowed to do unarmed military service. However, the authorities refused to extend this to Roman Catholics on the grounds that their church does not expressly forbid the use of arms. According to a statement in April by the government's press spokesperson, Rezso B^ny^sz, there were 158 people in prison for refusing to perform military service. Of these, 146 were Jehovah's Witnesses, six were Roman Catholics, one was a Nazarene and one a Seventh Day Adventist; the remaining four were non-religious conscientious objectors. The spokesperson also said that 49 soldiers were under investigation for refusing to perform military duties but gave no details. However, in May, G^bor Finta, a labourer, was convicted under Article 336 for refusing to obey call-up to three-day reserve service and sentenced to six months' imprisonment, suspended for two years. He had performed military service before but refused to do reserve service on religious grounds. In November, L4szl6 Almdsi, a Roman Catholic and member of a "basis community" which advocates strict adherence to the teachings of the Bible, stood trial for refusing to perform military service. He was given a one-year, eight-month sentence but remained free at the end of the year, pending appeal.
In April Gyula Krist^ly, a retired steel-worker from 6zd, was sentenced to three years' imprisonment for "incitement" under Article 148 of the Hungarian Criminal Code. He was alleged to have written, printed and distributed about 200 leaflets in which he criticized the government's economic policy for having caused high unemployment in the area around Ozd. The leaflets also contained poems which reflected his frustration with the political and economic situation. During the 1980s underground publications have become commonplace in Hungary. Although homes have been raided and people have had to pay heavy fines, this was the first case in recent years known to Amnesty International in which a prison sentence was imposed for producing and distributing such material. Short prison sentences have been imposed for nonpayment of fines - see Amnesty InternationaJ Report 1988. After an appeal hearing in August, Gyula Kristdly's sentence
was reduced to two years, suspended for four years.
One person convicted of murder was sentenced to death in April but it was not known whether he was executed.
In September Amnesty International was able to express its concerns in Hungary directly to government ministers for the first time when the Secretary General visited Budapest. Throughout the year Amnesty International continued to call for the release of all people imprisoned for refusing on conscientious grounds to perform military service. The organization sent representatives to Hungary on three occasions to observe the trials of G^bor Finta, Ldszl6 Almasi and Gyula Krist^ly. It also wrote to the authorities urging them to ensure that the length of proposed alternative service would be comparable to that of the military service and stressed that longer alternative service could be deemed punitive.
