JORDAN
At least 65 suspected opponents of the government, who may have included prisoners of conscience, were arrested during the year. Some were detained without charge or trial, others were put under town arrest or were tried by the Martial Law Court in trials which were unfair, and some were released. Over 100 other political prisoners, who may have included prisoners of conscience, remained in prolonged detention without trial or were serving prison sentences imposed by the Martial Law Court. There were new reports of torture of political prisoners. The death penalty was extended to apply to rape and drug-related offences; at least six people were sentenced to death during the year and seven executions were reported.
Emergency legislation introduced in 1939 through implementation of the 1935 Defence Law, and strengthened in 1967 by the declaration of martial law, remained in force throughout the year. It empowered the authorities to order the detention without charge or trial, or restriction under town arrest, of people considered a threat to security, and provided for their prosecution before the Martial Law Court. This court was not bound by the code of criminal procedure or the law on evidence applicable in other Jordanian courts.
Many of the 65 people arrested during the year on political grounds were university students - some of them were believed to have helped organize peaceful activities in support of the Palestinian uprising in the Israeli Occupied Territories, others were teachers and trade union-
ists. They may have included prisoners of conscience.
'Adnan al-Asmar, Hilmi al-Dirbashi and Bassam al-'Azza, residents of the Ba-qa'a refugee camp, were reportedly arrested in June and restricted to Ma'an under one-year town arrest orders, apparently in connection with a demonstration in support of the Palestinian uprising. They may have been prisoners of conscience. Adnan al-Asmar had previously lost his sight apparently because of torture suffered while detained from early 1978 to mid-1980.
About 40 people arrested for political reasons in previous years, who may have included prisoners of conscience, were still being detained without charge or trial, mostly on suspicion of belonging to illegal organizations such as the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (FFLP), al-Fatah, and the Islamic Liberation Party (ILP). They included Ahmad Fares al-Khatib, held since August 1983; Adib 'Afnan, arrested in January 1987; Munir 'Atiq and Saleh Sha'watah, arrested in February 1987, and Muhammad Yasin Zallum, arrested in October 1987. All were held in the General Intelligence Department (GID) Headquarters in Amman. In addition, 21 suspected FFLP members arrested on 31 December 1987, and another, Ahmad Dahbur, arrested on 15 January 1988, were still held without charge or trial in al-Swaqa Prison at the end of 1988. A further suspected PFLF member, Munir al-Sharayhah, also arrested in December 1987, was released in October.
There were further trials before the Martial Law Court of people charged with membership of illegal organizations. Many of those accused may have been prisoners of conscience. Early in the year nine alleged ILP members were sentenced to three years' imprisonment. Later Fu'ad al-'Utt and Usama al-Zayn received sentences of four years' imprisonment. Usama al-Zayn had served an 18-month prison sentence on a similar charge in 1985-1986. As in previous years, defendants who appeared before the Martial Law Court were not tried in accordance with international standards of fair trial; the court was not bound by procedures applicable in other Jordanian courts and those convicted had no right of appeal to a higher tribunal.
At least five prisoners of conscience
