TOGO
Two prisoners detained without charge or trial since 1982, apparently for political reasons, were freed in October. Nineteen prisoners convicted of violent political offences in December 1986 were reportedly still in incommunicado detention. Two
others convicted in absentia at the same trial were apparently abducted from Ghana and returned to Togo in 1987. They were held incommunicado until October 1988, when their cases were referred to the judicial authorities. The two had allegedly been tortured after their return to Togo. At least two other suspected government opponents were reportedly abducted from Nigeria and detained on arrival in Togo. A refugee was forcibly repatriated to Chad, where he was killed.
In March Togo acceded to the Optional Protocol of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
The National Commission of Human Rights, established by the government in 1987, published its first report in October. The 13-member body was formed to investigate alleged human rights violations, miscarriages of justice and other abuses. The commission's report detailed its efforts to investigate human rights violations and to promote human rights.
Emmanuel Foli Attivi and Silvestre Kankarti were released in early October. They had been arrested in 1982 and detained, apparently for political reasons, without charge or trial. In September Amnesty International submitted the case of Emmanuel Foli Attivi to the National Commission of Human Rights.
Lawo§ Folly Sossou and Kubah Otsiguey, who had been abducted from Ghana and forcibly returned to Togo in 1987 by Togolese security agents, were held incommunicado in police custody until October, when their cases were finally referred to the judicial authorities. Although Togolese law requires that all those arrested be brought before a judicial authority within 48 hours, both men were detained incommunicado and were allegedly tortured while in Togolese police custody. In December 1986 they had been convicted in absentia on charges of possessing arms and sentenced to eight years' imprisonment.
According to some reports, in February Togolese security personnel abducted lohn Pass, another suspected opponent of the government, from Ghana, and tortured him. The Togolese authorities stated that John Pass had never been in their custody and had been killed in Ghana by Ghanaian border guards.
In early October Aballo C6lestin Zekpa and Richard Ahiable were reportedly
AFRICA/TOGO/UGANDA
abducted from Nigeria and forcibly returned to Togo, where they were detained on arrival. Aballo Célestin Zekpa had been sentenced to death in absentia in December 1986 for offences against state security. He was reportedly tortured in police custody in Lomé, the capitaL Both men had escaped arrest in September 1986, following a coup attempt, but Richard Ahiable had not been tried in his absence. Nineteen others who were convicted by the State Security Court in December 1986 on charges related to the attempted coup were reportedly subjected to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. They were held incommunicado at Tokoin military camp in Lomé.
In September the Togolese authorities forcibly returned Bichara Chaïbo, a Chadian refugee. He had been recognized as a refugee by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and appeared to be at risk of torture or extrajudicial execution in Chad. He had been arrested in Togo in August, apparently because an Interpol warrant alleged that he was wanted for murder in Chad. On his arrival in Chad he was reportedly detained at the President's headquarters and extrajudicially executed 10 days later.
Amnesty International sought information from the National Commission of Human Rights about the cases of Lawoé Folly Sossou and Kubah Otsiguey, which were subsequently referred to the judicial authorities, and about Emmanuel Foli Attivi, who was released in October. The organization also expressed concern about reports that 19 other prisoners convicted in December 1986 were held in total isolation. In response to Amnesty International's inquiry about the alleged abduction and torture of John Pass the commission stated that he had been killed in Ghana.
The commission provided Amnesty International with information concerning one reported case of torture but had not responded by the end of the year to inquiries from the organization about reports that Lawoé Folly Sossou and Kubah Otsiguey had been tortured.
Amnesty International raised with the authorities its concern about the forcible repatriation of Bichara Chaïbo to Chad, expressing fears that he risked torture or extrajudicial execution.
