GAMBIA
A number of people accused of conspiring to overthrow the government were tried in April. Two of those convicted claimed that statements used as evidence against them had been made after torture while they were in pre-trial custody. In a separate case, a newspaper editor who had written an article alleging corruption by government ministers was imprisoned briefly and charged with libel.
In January the authorities announced that a conspiracy to overthrow the government had been discovered and that 20 people suspected of involvement had been detained. The leader of the plot was alleged to be Kukoi Samba Sanyang, who had led a coup attempt in 1981 and subsequently escaped arrest when he fled into exile. Ten of those detained were freed the following day, others were released over the next two months. Some were freed on bail, although it seems that eventually charges were dropped against all except four, who were kept in custody.
In March the four still held were charged with treason. They were Adrien Sambou and Amadou Badjie, both from the Casamance area of neighbouring Senegal,
and Musa Sanneh and Ousman Sanneh, both Gambian nationals.
In April the four went before the Supreme Court in a trial that lasted until late June. The main evidence against them consisted of some letters and a cassette tape, which they had allegedly received from Kukoi Samba Sanyang. In addition, the prosecution cited statements which the defendants had made in custody, which allegedly indicated that they had partially confessed their involvement. Defence counsel contested the admissibility of these as evidence, claiming that they had been made after torture including the use of electric shocks. Some discussion about these allegations took place in court but the prosecution did not seek independent evidence about the defendants' treatment in custody. Defence counsel's objections were overruled and the statements were admitted as evidence.
Three of the four were convicted of treason: two were sentenced to 30 years' imprisonment with hard labour and one to nine years' imprisonment. Adrien Sambou was acquitted for lack of evidence.
In October Sana Manneh, the editor of The Torch newspaper, was arrested and held for 24 hours. He was interrogated about an article he had written about the government, which implicated three of its members in acts of corruption. He apparently refused to retract his allegations in any way and a government commission was set up to investigate the allegations. Nevertheless, in November, soon after the commission was set up, and before it had announced any conclusions, Sana Manneh was charged with libel and required to report regularly to the police. His trial started in December and focussed on the validity of his allegations. Meanwhile, the head of state, President Dawda Jawara, reportedly declared that if the allegations were true the ministers concerned would be punished; otherwise, the author of the article would be punished in accordance with the law.
In June the Gambian Government acceded to the Optional Protocol of the United Nations international Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
AFRICA/GHANA
