ASIA AND THE PACIHC / CHINA
On 4 October China ratified the United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, which it had signed in December 1986. A member of the Chinese delegation at the United Nations General Assembly stated in November that "China will implement in good faith its obligations undertaken in the Convention." She acknowledged that "As a vast country with a large population, China still has much to do with regard to the prohibition of torture and other inhuman treatment or punishment."
There were renewed disturbances in Tibet which resulted in hundreds of arrests. On 5 March, at the end of a major religious festival, there were violent clashes between police and demonstrators calling for the release of a Tibetan lama and shouting slogans for Tibet's independence. One police officer and a large number of demonstrators were killed during the clashes. These included at least 11 Tibetan monks and a 13-year-old novice who were reportedly beaten to death by police inside Jokhang Temple in Lhasa, when police attacked with clubs anyone in the temple they thought was Tibetan. The bodies of the dead were later taken away in trucks by the police.
Many people were arrested in Lhasa during and after the 5 March demonstration, including Tibetan monks. In April official sources reported that about 200 people, including 60 monks, were currently detained. Other sources, however, suggested a figure of between 700 and 1,200, including over 100 monks. There were further demonstrations in the following months by small groups of nuns and monks. Although most were peaceful and involved shouting slogans calling for Tibet's independence, they almost always resulted in the participants' arrest.
In July the government announced the release of 52 Tibetans who had been detained without charge since 5 March; other releases followed. However, arrests of demonstrators or people suspected of involvement in pro-independence activities continued throughout the second half of 1988. At the end of the year over 100 people were believed to remain in detention, most of them without charge or access to relatives or lawyers.
Yulo Dawa Tsering, a lama arrested in December 1987, was among those who
remained in prison at the end of 1988. In early March he was charged with "spreading counter-revolutionary propaganda and agitation", for making "reactionary statements in favour of Tibet's independence" and having contact with foreigners. The news of his indictment was believed to have sparked off the 5 March demonstration. He had not been tried by the end of 1988.
On 10 December arrests in Lhasa followed a demonstration held there on the occasion of Human Rights Day. Police reportedly shot peaceful demonstrators without warning, killing at least two Tibetan monks. According to some sources, as many as 18 demonstrators and bystanders were killed. Nineteen demonstrators were reportedly arrested.
Unrest among Muslims was reported from the Xinjiang Autonomous Region in northwest China, where in June students demonstrated against ethnic discrimination and "big Han Chinese nationalism". There was also discontent at government plans to introduce new birth control policies. In August police reportedly arrested large numbers of Muslims of the Kazakh ethnic group in Yili, an area in northern Xinjiang along the Soviet border, apparently after discovering one or more clandestine organizations seeking independence for Xinjiang. Local Communist Party leaders subsequently named seven "foreign organizations" accused of instigating protests and of encouraging "split-tist activities" in Xinjiang. There was no further information about the number arrested or what had become of them.
Public protests by groups of peasants, university students and workers were also reported in various areas. Arrests were carried out during such protests, usually after violent clashes with police, but little was known about the exact circumstances or number of these arrests.
Various church groups continued to be harassed and some of their members were arrested for carrying out religious activities without official approval.
In several provinces the local authorities were reported to have issued regulations restricting religious activities. Such regulations were published in May by the provincial government of Guangdong in southern China. They made clear that all religious activities should be carried out only under the control of the local govern-
ASIA ANDTHE PACIFIC / CHINA
ment. They also stated that anyone contravening the regulations could face arrest on criminal charges.
Reports of Christians arrested in northern and central China in late 1987 were received in early 1988. Some were said to have been in detention for several months. In April Xu Yongze, a Protestant evangelist from Henan province in central China, was arrested in Beijing where he had gone to try to meet the US evangelist, Billy Graham. A number of Xu Yongze's co-workers in Henan province were also reportedly detained around the same time. The charges against Xu Yongze were not made public, but he was believed to have been arrested for establishing numerous independent "house churches" (private homes used for religious gatherings) in opposition to official religious policies. After his arrest Xu Yongze was transferred to a prison in Zhenping, in southern Henan province. He was later reported to be suffering from tuberculosis and gastric trouble. No further news of him or his whereabouts was available at the end of the year.
New information came to light about prisoners of conscience arrested in previous years. Wang Milu, a Roman Catholic bishop from Gansu province in northern China, was reported to have been sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment in 1985 on "counter-revolutionary" charges. He was accused of secretly ordaining priests and criticizing the government's interference in religious affairs. Huang Xiang, a poet from Guizhou in southern China, who was in Beijing at the time of the student demonstrations there in late 1986, was reported to have been sentenced to three years' imprisonment. Although apparently charged with "disturbing public order", he was not known to have participated in any violent demonstrations.
Xu Wenli, a member of the democracy movement who has been serving a 15-year prison sentence since 1981 in Beijing Prison No. 1, was reported to have been confined for three years in a cell measuring five square metres, with a ceiling too low to allow him to stand up straight. He was said to be under constant surveillance by closed-circuit television and to have been denied visits from his wife and daughter since October 1985 when a testimony he had written in prison was published outside China (see Amnesty international Report 1986). He was apparently in poor
health and had lost his teeth. During interviews with foreign journalists in November, the prison governor confirmed that Xu Wenli had been kept in solitary confinement for several years and was not allowed to work with other prisoners. He said that Xu Wenli had "not confessed well".
Wei Jingsheng, another leading activist of the democracy movement serving a 15-year prison sentence (see Amnesty InternationaJ Report 1988), was reported to have been moved from a remote labour camp in western China to Beijing Prison No. 1, although in November the prison governor denied that Wei Jingsheng was there. According to a press report, Wei Jingsheng was in solitary confinement and was allowed out of his cell only briefly twice a day. He remained in bad health.
There were persistent reports of torture and abuse of detainees by police in Tibet. Tenzin Sherab, a young truck driver from Lhasa, was believed to have been tortured to death in detention. Arrested after the 5 March demonstration, he was reportedly taken to one of the prisons in the vicinity of Lhasa. On 23 March his relatives were asked to come to one of the municipal morgues to collect his body. His face was said to have been badly battered, with one eye hanging out of its socket. A person who later assisted with the funeral found that most of his bones had been broken.
Tibetan detainees released during the second half of 1988 reported that the beating of prisoners after arrest had been routine. They said that detainees were usually beaten during interrogation, when put under pressure to make confessional statements or to denounce people alleged to have taken part in pro-independence demonstrations or activities. They also reported that assault with electric batons, normally used by police in crowd control, was a common method of abuse. Some ex-prisoners said that electric batons had been pushed into their mouths, causing severe swelling of the tongue, others that the batons had been pressed against their chests or the soles of their feet.
Other methods of torture and ill-treatment reportedly used on Tibetan detainees included being stripped naked during interrogation; being forced to stand on tiptoe for prolonged periods, or to lie down "in a gutter" while being stamped on and beaten; beatings with wooden truncheons or iron bars; assault by guards
ASIA ANDTHEPACinC/CHINA/FIJI
wielding chairs or other objects; burning with cigarettes; assault by guard dogs; threats of death with pistols pointed at the head; and being suspended by the arms from the ceiling, including the "hanging aeroplane", which causes intense pain and can result in dislocation of the shoulders.
In August Mao Rubai, Vice-Chairman of the Tibet Autonomous Regional Government, was reported to have "denied allegations that prisoners had been tortured with electric cattle prods or by being suspended by ropes from the ceiling" (Washington Post, 26 August 1988). However, torture in other parts of the country was acknowledged by Chinese official sources and the sentencing of several police officers for acts of torture was reported in the official media. In July, for example, six police officers were brought to trial in Henan province and convicted of torturing a suspect to death with electric batons, shovel handles and metal bars. One received a life prison sentence and the others received terms of up to 15 years.
The death penalty continued to be used extensively. During 1988 Amnesty International recorded 177 death sentences and 126, executions. However, it believed the true totals to be much higher.
In February 20 people were executed in Beijing, Shanghai and Canton in the two weeks preceding Chinese New Year. The executions, which received wide media coverage in China, followed a call by the Supreme People's Court for a crackdown on crime in preparation for the New Year festival. In early February the Supreme Court had issued an "emergency circular" to the country's courts, asking them to punish "severely" serious criminal activities. The circular said that "typical cases" should be widely publicized so as "to warn criminals and educate the people".
Large public rallies were held to parade condemned prisoners before their execution. In February six people were executed after being paraded at a public rally in Guangzhou. In May a "public meeting" was held in Guiyang, in southern China, to announce the judgment on 33 prisoners, 12 of whom were sentenced to death.
The authorities called for a new crackdown on serious crimes after announcing in July that they had increased substantially since 1985. This was despite extensive use of the death penalty to punish such crimes.
In January Amnesty International sent a memorandum to the government expressing concern at the detention without charge of large numbers of people in Tibet following pro-independence demonstrations in Lhasa in September and October 1987 (see Amnesty International Report 1988). The memorandum called on the government to make public its information about all those detained in connection with the Lhasa protests. It also urged the government to set up a public inquiry into allegations of torture of detainees and police shooting of civilians during a riot on 1 October. Amnesty International made similar requests in communications to the government in May and December after further demonstrations and arrests in Lhasa, but received no reply.
Amnesty International also inquired about people arrested for political reasons in other areas of China and urged the release of all prisoners of conscience. It sought the commutation of all death sentences reported.
Amnesty International included China in several statements it made at the United Nations Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR) and the United Nations Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities. In a statement to the UNCHR in February, Amnesty International cited information contradicting the government's denial that police had opened fire on demonstrators in Lhasa during a riot on 1 October 1987. The government later admitted that police had opened fire but denied they had deliberately aimed at demonstrators. In August Amnesty International drew to the Sub-Commission's attention the practice of administrative detention in China.
