SOMALIA
Large numbers of unarmed civilians were extrajudicially executed in the north by government forces after opposition attacks in May. Hundreds of Issaq clan members living in the north, whom the government suspected of opposition activities or sympathies, were arrested and detained without trial. Many other suspected government opponents arrested before 1988, including prisoners of conscience, remained in prison throughout the year. One of them had been held for virtually all the government's 19 years in power. At least 30 death sentences were imposed but it was not known if there were any executions. Two former members of parliament
and six others were sentenced to death after an unfair trial before the National Security Court. Although these sentences were commuted, the two, and four other former members of parliament acquitted of capital offences, were placed under house arrest until their release in October. Torture of political prisoners was widespread and prison conditions were extremely harsh.
Early in the year the opposition Somali National Movement (SNM) launched several attacks against government forces from bases in Ethiopia. In April a peace treaty was signed by the Ethiopian and Somali Governments which led to an exchange of prisoners of war. Nearly 3,000 Ethiopian civilians were freed and returned to Ethiopia or allowed to go to a country of their choice. They had been abducted by Somali forces during the 1977-1978 war and detained secretly in the Hawai camp near Barawe and in other Somali prisons, in extremely harsh conditions. The freed Ethiopians included about 800 women and some 400 children.
In May SNM forces captured the northwest town of Burao and parts of the northern capital of Hargeisa but both were regained by government forces in mid-1988. The fighting continued at the end of the year and there were heavy casualties. There were many reports of civilian extrajudicial executions by government troops and both sides were alleged to have summarily executed captured combatants. Estimates of deliberate killings of unarmed civilians by government planes and artillery varied from 15,000 to 50,000. Most of Hargeisa's half million population fled the city. Another million and a half people were displaced or sought asylum in Ethiopia.
AFRICA/SOMALIA
Extrajudicial executions of suspected government opponents and SNM supporters were widespread in the north, particularly after the SNM offensive in May. Foreign aid workers who left Hargeisa a few days after the fighting began said that they had seen the bodies of many execution victims in the areas of the city controlled by government troops. Thousands of civilians fleeing Hargeisa were deliberately killed by government artillery bombardment. Hundreds of other civilians, including prisoners, were reportedly extrajudicially executed in the north over the following months, particularly in the Burao and Berbera areas.
In June at least eight people from the Issaq clan in the north, who had been deported from Saudi Arabia for illegal residence, were reportedly arrested on arrival in Berbera and extrajudicially executed. In El Afwein district, about 300 kilometres east of Hargeisa, more than 300 civilians were extrajudicially executed in October and December by government troops.
Political opponents were detained without trial throughout the year. Members of the Issaq clan - which the government apparently viewed as linked to the SNM -were especially vulnerable to this abuse. Thousands were detained after mass arrests in Mogadishu, Berbera and Hargeisa. Those arrested included civil servants, relief agency employees, Somali Airlines staff and army and police officers. Most of the arrests seemed to be arbitrary, and to lack evidence that the detainee supported the SNM or engaged in armed opposition. By the end of the year some had been released without charge but more than a thousand others remained in detention without charge or trial.
Hundreds of school students, teachers and others were also arrested and detained without charge or trial in Hargeisa after demonstrating against President Mohamed Siad Barre during his visit there in late March.
In Gebileh, a small town near the Ethiopian border, the army rounded up hundreds of elders, farmers and nomads in mid-March after SNM attacks in the area. Many were reportedly tortured for suspected links with the SNM. Twenty-two of them were summarily tried, condemned to death and immediately executed.
Five army and navy cadets who had applied for asylum in Egypt and were training there, were forcibly returned to
Somalia by the Egyptian authorities in August. All Issaq clan members, they were detained by the Somali authorities on arrival in Mogadishu. They remained in military custody at the end of the year.
In November wounded government soldiers took part in a peaceful protest against their inadequate medical treatment in Mogadishu. Military courts reportedly handed down long prison terms to several demonstrators, who may be prisoners of conscience.
After the SNM's capture of Burao and Mandera in May, they released hundreds of political prisoners and those under sentence of death held in these towns. They also released numerous political prisoners held in Hargeisa by the National Security Service and military police. The Central Prison of Hargeisa, however, remained under government control. Political prisoners still held there at the end of the year included Fahima Dahir Jama, sentenced to life imprisonment for political reasons, after an unfair trial in 1986.
Two presidential amnesties declared in November resulted in the release of 103 political detainees held without charge or trial, most of whom were Issaq clan members arrested in mid-1988. Other prisoners were released during the year without public announcement, allegedly after their families paid large sums of money to the security officers responsible for their detention.
Numerous political prisoners arrested in previous years continued to be detained without charge or trial throughout 1988. They included Yusuf Osman Samantar ("Berda'ad"), a lawyer and former member of parliament, who had been held since 1975 and for most of the six years previous to that. Another was Sheikh Mohamed Moallim Hassan, a religious teacher detained in 1986 for criticizing the government's restrictions on religious activities.
Twenty-two political prisoners detained since 1982 were brought to trial in February before the National Security Court in Mogadishu. They were not charged or given access to their lawyers until shortly before trial. Among them were six former members of parliament -including former Vice-President Ismail Ali Abokor and former Foreign Minister Omer Arteh Ghalib - Abdi Ismail Yunis, a former university dean, and Suleiman Nuh Ali, a leading architect. All 22 were
AFRICA/SOMALIA
charged with forming a subversive organization, the SNM, and with armed opposition to the government. Observers from international organizations, including Amnesty International, foreign journalists and diplomats were denied entry to the trial.
A number of factors - including insubstantial evidence and allegations of torture while under interrogation - led Amnesty International to conclude that the trial was grossly unfair and that those convicted, who were all from the Issaq clan, were prisoners of conscience held for peacefully criticizing the government. Eight defendants, including Ismail Ali Abokor and Omer Arteh Ghalib, were convicted of treason and sentenced to death. These sentences were commuted by President Siad Barre following international appeals for clemency. Five others received long prison terms. Of the remaining nine defendants who were acquitted, the four other former members of parliament were placed under house arrest. These included Mohamed Aden Sheikh, former president of the Somali Academy of Sciences. There was no right of appeal.
The six former members of parliament were released on 21 October, the 19th anniversary of the present government. Ten others in the case remained in prison at the end of the year.
Many prisoners serving sentences imposed after unfair trials by the National Security Court in previous years were held throughout 1988. They included prisoners of conscience, such as the former director of Hargeisa hospital. Aden Yusuf Abokor was sentenced in 1982 to 20 years' imprisonment for organizing a community self-help organization which the government considered "subversive". Sheikh Nur Barud Gurhan and eight other teachers of Islam were serving indefinite prison sentences - after their death sentences imposed in 1987 were commuted - on account of their religious activities.
There were reports of systematic torture of political prisoners by the National Security Service and military police. Evidence indicated routine torture at the Be-nadir Region headquarters of the security service in Mogadishu, known as Godka ("the hole"). Prisoners arrested in 1988 in Hargeisa, Mogadishu and other places were reportedly subjected to torture such as the "Mig" - victims were beaten while
bent over at the waist and tied hand-to-foot - electric shocks and submersion in water until near suffocation.
Conditions for long-term detainees and convicted political prisoners were harsh, particularly in the maximum security prisons of Lanta Bur and Labatan Jirow. Prisoners there were held incommunicado and denied medical attention. Safia Hashi Madar, a relief agency official and former biochemistry lecturer, was sentenced after an unfair trial in 1986 to life imprisonment. She was reportedly suffering from injuries resulting from torture, an untreated kidney infection, and severe depression. Tsehai Negussie. an Ethiopian woman, reportedly died in Mogadishu Central Prison in February after more than 10 years of ill-treatment, including rape. She had been abducted from Ethiopia and imprisoned in Somalia since the 1977 war.
Throughout 1988 Amnesty International continued its appeals for the release of prisoners of conscience arrested because of their alleged beliefs or clan origin. The organization called for immediate measures to stop torture and prevent extrajudicial executions by the army. It criticized use of the death penalty as well as executions by opposition forces.
Amnesty International delegates seeking to observe the major treason trial in February were denied entry into the country. After eight death sentences were imposed at this trial, the organization urgently appealed for commutation. Amnesty International also called for the release of those imprisoned or placed under house arrest after the trial, all of whom it considered to be prisoners of conscience.
In May the organization submitted information about its concerns in Somalia to the United Nations procedure (under the Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728F/1503] for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations. The submission was also sent to the government, together with recommendations for measures to halt abuses but no response was received.
In September Amnesty International published a 52-page report entitled Somalia: A Long-Term Human Rights Crisis. The report detailed serious human rights abuses over many years and the crisis marked by mass extrajudicial executions in mid-1988. It contained evidence of torture provided by doctors who had ex-
AFRICA / SOMALIA / SOUTH AFRICA
amined former prisoners, and details about unfair political trials. The government issued a statement denying the abuses. However, the President invited Amnesty International to visit the country and at the end of the year a mission was planned for early 1989.
