TURKEY
Thousands of people were imprisoned for political reasons, including hundreds of prisoners of conscience. The use of torture continued to be widespread and systematic, in some cases resulting in death. Civilian and military courts passed at least 18 death sentences. In November 228 death sentences were awaiting ratification by parliament, all legal remedies having been exhausted. Iranian asylum-seekers were returned to Iran without their claims for asylum having been asses-sed by the competent authorities. Recognized refugees awaiting resettlement in third countries were also forcibly returned to Iran, where some were reported to have been executed despite the Turkish Government's stated commitment to the principle of non'refoulement.
In November the government lifted emergency legislation in Istanbul. At the end of the year a state of emergency was in force in eight provinces in southeastern Turkey where the security forces had been
EUROPE/TURKEY
engaged in counter-insurgency operations against Kurdish secessionist guerrillas. The guerrillas were reported to have carried out attacks on the civilian population and to have taken prisoners, some of whom they tortured and killed.
In February Turkey signed and ratified the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and in August it ratified the United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
Some prisoners of conscience were released but many others remained in prison and arrests and trials of prisoners of conscience continued throughout the year. Among several hundred prisoners of conscience were members of political organizations, trade unions and illegal Kurdish groups, journalists and religious activists.
A number of people were prosecuted during the year for membership of illegal political parties which did not espouse violence. They were tried on charges brought under Article 141 of the Turkish Penal Code prohibiting "membership of an organization trying to establish the domination of one social class over the others". Five alleged members of the Turkish Socialist Workers' Party (TSIP) who had been detained since July 1987 were released in March. In April Izmir State Security Court acquitted them, together with two other defendants who had also been released earlier (see Amnesty International Report 1988). Alleged members of the Turkish Communist Party (TK?) were also prosecuted under Article 141. The trial of 13 alleged TKF members who had been detained in August and September 1987 ended in November at Izmir State Security Court. At that time six defendants were still in prison. Ali Ugur received a sentence of six years, eight months' imprisonment and remained in Buca Prison; the other five were each sentenced to four years', two months' imprisonment but were released pending appeal. Another defendant who had been released earlier received the same sentence. Six defendants were acquitted (see Amnesty International Report 1988).
The trial of Haydar Kutlu, the TKP's Secretary General, and Dr Nihat Sargin, Secretary General of the Turkish Workers' Party (TIP), both imprisoned since November 1987, started in June in Ankara State
Security Court and was still continuing at the end of the year.
Some TIP and TKP members who had been convicted by Istanbul and Ankara Military Courts but had been released pending appeal were reimprisoned after the Military Appeal Court confirmed their sentences. In June three of 45 TIP defendants in Istanbul facing reimprisonment were taken to high-security prisons for political prisoners in order to serve the remaining 22 to 24 months of their sentences. In Ankara eight out of 75 TKP defendants facing reimprisonment were taken to various prisons to serve between seven and 24 months. Amnesty International adopted all these prisoners as prisoners of conscience.
Aziz Qlelik, educational director of Kristal-Is, the glass-workers' union, and Hiiseyin Has, a former official of Maden-Is, the banned mine-workers' union, were detained in the first week of May in Istanbul and charged with membership of the TKP. When their trial began in September in Istanbul State Security Court they were released from custody although their trial continued.
In November the Minister of the Interior announced that during the first nine months of the year 2,120 people had been detained in southeastern Turkey, where most of the population is of Kurdish origin. Of these, 593 had been charged and formally arrested. Most of the Kurdish activists known to Amnesty International were charged with violent offences but they included prisoners of conscience imprisoned on account of their non-violent political or cultural activities.
Mehmet (Sehmuz) Cibran had been detained in October 1986 on return from exile. In July 1987 Diyarbakir Military Court convicted him of membership of the Kurdistan Workers' Party (KIP) and sentenced him to 14 years' imprisonment under Article 171 of the penal code for membership of a "secret association formed in order to commit crimes". Three separate trials have reportedly since started in which he has faced charges such as making separatist propaganda in his oral and written defence and shouting in court. During one of the hearings in August he was expelled from the courtroom when he tried to defend himself in Kurdish.
Trials of religious activists charged under Article 163 with "attempting to
EUROPE/TURKEY
change the secular nature of the state" continued. In May Hasan Damar, who had been in prison since October 1986, was sentenced by Ankara State Security Court to four years, two months' imprisonment under Article 163(4) for anti-secular propaganda. In September the same court sentenced him to another four years, two months' imprisonment under Article 163(2) for membership in the Federal Republic of Germany of an anti-secular organization, Milli Gdriis, National View, which is legal there. He remained in Ankara Closed Prison as a prisoner of conscience (see Amnesty international Report 1988).
Writers, publishers and journalists were prosecuted or remained in prison under provisions of the penal code including Article 142, "making communist propaganda"; Article 159, "insulting the State authorities"; and Article 312, "incitement to commit a crime". In June five people were detained in Ankara and charged under Articles 142,311 and 312 in connection with articles they had written for the political journal Topiumsal Kurtu-lus, Social Liberation. After 10 days in incommunicado detention one was released. Of the remaining four, Dr Yalgin KiiQiik and Hiisnii Ondill - a defence lawyer in many political trials - were freed in August and the other two defendants in September. The trial of the five continued at Ankara State Security Court.
Political prisoners were sentenced to imprisonment or death after trials which did not meet internationally recognized minimum standards of fairness. Although martial law was lifted in 1987 trials before military courts have continued. In April the Ministry of Justice disclosed that 5,309 defendants-1,392 of whom were in prison - were being tried by such courts; some had been in pre-trial detention for more than seven years. A total of 61,220 people had been sentenced by military courts between December 1978 and April 1988. Since May 1984 political prisoners have been tried in state security courts established in eight Turkish cities. Both military and state security courts have failed to investigate allegations of torture and in some cases have permitted statements extracted under torture to be used as evidence. Most defendants have not been granted facilities for an adequate defence.
There were many new allegations of
torture of political and criminal detainees and prisoners. In June Mustafa Dilmen, President of the Mersin branch of Kristol-Is, the glass-workers' union, was arrested and taken to Ankara. He alleged that he was tortured by being stripped and hosed with ice-cold water, suspended by his hands and given electric shocks. Even children were among the reported victims. In June OzgurCemTas, aged 13, was taken to Diyarbakir Police Headquarters and interrogated for two hours about the whereabouts of his cousins, who were suspected of supporting Kurdish guerrillas. He alleged that he was blindfolded and handcuffed, and then beaten on the soles of the feet. Later he was suspended from hooks and electric shocks were applied to his penis.
In most cases torture was said to have occurred while victims were held incommunicado in police stations but allegations of torture and ill-treatment also came from high-security prisons for political prisoners known as E- and L-type prisons. Some 60 political prisoners in Gaziantep L-type Prison and around 70 in Bursa E-type Prison were reported to have been injured in September following arbitrary beatings by prison guards and members of the security forces.
In some cases people were reported to have died in custody as a result of torture. Mustafa Giilmez was detained in June by Istanbul Political Police while doing his military service, suspected of being a TKP member. After two days he was taken to Edirne, where he was found dead in his cell. The official explanation was suicide by hanging with a bedsheet, an article not usually provided in detention centres. Relatives and lawyers claimed the death had been caused by torture and made an official complaint. Sadik Qelebi, who died in November, had been detained on 16 November and taken to Mardin Gendarmerie Station. When, after 10 days, his corpse was handed over to his family, they were told he had died in an armed encounter with guerrillas. His family claimed that the body had been bruised and that a hospital official had told them the corpse had been brought to the hospital one day before the clash with the guerrillas.
At least 18 people were sentenced to death by military and civilian courts. Other death sentences, among over 700 imposed during the previous nine years.
EUROPE/TURKEY
were confirmed by appeal courts with the result that, by November, the number of people under sentence of death who had exhausted judicial appeals had reached 228.
Throughout the year Amnesty International continued to call for the release of prisoners of conscience, for fair and prompt trials for all political prisoners, and for an end to torture and the death penalty. In November Amnesty International published a report, Turkey Briefing: Human Rights Denied, detailing its concerns, launched an international campaign for an end to human rights violations in Turkey, and pressed the Turkish Government to take effective measures to protect human rights.
The campaign followed a long period during which Amnesty International had sought to raise its concerns with the Turkish authorities and to obtain effective action by the government to end torture, deaths in detention, the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and other human rights abuses. In June an Amnesty International mission visited Turkey and met the Minister of Justice, the Minister of the Interior and other government officials. Before the mission Amnesty International submitted a list of 229 names of prisoners who had reportedly died in custody between September 1980 and April 1988. The organization asked to be informed of the cause of death in each case, as it appeared that some of the deaths might have been the result of torture. At the end of the year replies on 56 cases had been received, acknowledging torture in 13 cases.
The Turkish authorities also responded to a number of specific torture allegations raised by Amnesty International. In some cases they stated that investigations were still in progress, in others that there were no grounds for prosecution of police officers allegedly responsible for torture because medical reports had shown that torture had not been inflicted. In most cases no response was received. The number of responses increased after the publication of the Turkey Briefing and the launch of the campaign calling on the Turkish Government to stop human rights abuses.
In June Amnesty International observers attended the trial of Dr Nihat Sargin and Haydar Kutlu, and in December
attended the trial before Ankara Criminal Court of 11 leading members of the Human Rights Association in Turkey who had been charged after their campaign in 1987 for a general amnesty and the abolition of the death penalty - the prosecutor had viewed this campaign as political activity proscribed by the Law on Association. All the defendants were acquitted.
Amnesty International appealed in a number of individual refugee cases and sought clarification from the government of a report published in the Turkish press that at least 40 of a group of 58 Iranians forcibly returned to Iranian border guards by Turkish police in July had been executed in Iran. No response was received. The organization was also concerned by the forcible return (refoulement) of refugees recognized by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), some of whom had apparently been accepted for resettlement in countries other than Turkey. In July and December it issued reports which described shortcomings in procedures for Iranian asylum-seekers and the serious lack of protection from refoulement. In November Amnesty International also made an oral statement about these concerns to the Committee on Migration, Refugees and Demography of the Council of Europe. It called for improvements in the situation of refugees and asylum-seekers in Turkey faced with refoulement and urged the international community to assist in the resettlement of Iranian refugees in countries in which their protection from refoulement would be assured.
In April Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Turkey to the United Nations procedure (under Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728F/1503) for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations and also referred to torture in Turkey in one of its oral statements to the 44th session of the UN Commission on Human Rights.
