ARGENTINA
Investigations into human rights violations which occurred during the period of military government from 1976 to 1983 continued in 1988 but were severely limited by legislation absolving all but the highest-ranking armed forces and police personnel. Two political prisoners sentenced after unfair trials during that period remained in prison. Several incidents of police violence were reported, including beatings of detainees and shootings of criminal suspects in disputed circumstances.
Further steps were taken to investigate human rights violations committed during the so-called "dirty war" in the late 1970s and to prosecute those alleged to be responsible. These were severely limited by legislation introduced in 1986 and 1987. Law 23.492, known as the Punto Final or Full Stop, required new prosecutions to be initiated within 60 days of its promulgation on 26 December 1986; the Law of Due Obedience, enacted on 5 June 1987, conferred immunity on all but the most senior officers on the grounds that lower-ranking personnel were automatically presumed to have been acting under superior orders. Amnesty International considers that all human rights violations should be judicially investigated, even after a change of government. The organization was concerned that these laws limited opportunities to bring to justice those suspected of human rights violations and that their effect was to impede investigations into those violations.
The judicial authorities interpreted the new laws as exempting many high-ranking officers from liability if they had not been commanders-in-chief or commanders of military zones and sub-zones - jurisdictions in which they were responsible for security operations - or commanders of the security, police or penitentiary forces. In 1988 some sub-zone commanders were also exempted.
In February the Supreme Court upheld a 1986 ruling which absolved Alfredo Aztiz, a former member of the Escuela Mecánica de la Armada (ESMA), the Navy Mechanics School, of the kidnapping and wounding of a 17-year-old Swedish-Argentine girl in 1977, on the grounds that the statute of limitations had run. Since the ruling he had also been absolved of responsibility in the
THEAMERICAS/ARGENTINA
case by the 1987 Law of Due Obedience.
In May former General Carlos Guillermo Suérez Mason, commander of the First Army Corps from 1976 to 1979, was extradited from the United States to Argentina on 39 murder charges and a forgery charge; additional kidnapping charges were dismissed by the US Federal Court for the purposes of extradition on the grounds that the statute of limitations had run. At a hearing before the Federal Appeals Court in Buenos Aires on 12 May the former general denied all responsibility for human rights violations committed by his subordinates during the "dirty war". He claimed he had simply transmitted orders from his superiors to those responsible for carrying them out and that the sub-zone commanders had had direct and total responsibility, which could not be delegated, for places of detention within their jurisdiction and for the fate of those detained.
At the end of the year the trial of General Suârez Mason was pending before the Federal Appeals Court in Buenos Aires, together with the cases of the former sub-zone commanders of the First Army Corps and the cases of Admirals Vanek and Torti, formerly of ESMA, and other former ESMA officers. In August it was announced that the Supreme Court had decided that all remaining trials of military personnel on charges of human rights abuse should be heard in the first instance by the relevant regional Appeals Courts rather than by the Supreme Court itself
In early December about 400 soldiers seized the Campo de Mayo military complex in Buenos Aires and Magdalena Military Prison, where Colonel Aldo Rico, who had led two previous military uprisings, and several former junta members were being held. The rebels demanded an end to the trials of officers accused of past human rights abuses, an amnesty for those already convicted, and the restructuring of the army high command. Several of these demands had been met by the end of December. However, in a statement before a joint session of Congress, President Alfonsin expressly rejected the possibility of any amnesty or further curtailment of remaining human rights trials.
Further efforts were made to find out what had become of children who had "disappeared" with their parents or who had been born while their mothers were held in clandestine detention centres dur-
ing the period of military rule. Some of these children were given illegally to couples connected with the military, to be brought up as their own. Two such children were reported to have been identified in 1988, bringing to 49 the number identified. More than 150 others have not been accounted for. The National Genetic Data Bank, established by the government in 1987 to facilitate identification of missing children by means of genetic testing, was unable to contribute fully to this process owing to insufficient funding, with the result that in a number of cases the courts were unable to determine the parentage of children whose identity was in doubt. The process of identification was rendered more difficult in cases in which families ordered to undergo genetic tests to determine a child's identity had taken refuge in Paraguay.
Tomás Cormack and Fermín Angel Núñez, two prisoners who received unfair trials and were sentenced for politically motivated crimes of violence during the period of military rule, were still held in Villa Devoto Prison, Buenos Aires, at the end of 1988. Four others were conditionally released during the year: Jorge Fuentes in September and Francisco Carrizo, Martín Paz and Rubén Emperador in December. Fermín Angel Núñez, who had been released conditionally in 1987 with five others, was rearrested on 2 February and returned to prison after the Public Prosecutor appealed against the 1987 decision of the Tucumán Federal Criminal Court to order his release. His appeal to the Supreme Court against his reimprisonment was pending at the end of 1988.
Amnesty International wrote to the Governor of Entre Ríos province asking for information about an incident in which a man was reportedly held unacknowledged in police custody for several hours and badly beaten in August. The organization was also concerned about reports of harassment and intimidation of witnesses of alleged police violence. Between 1985 and 1987 over 400 fatal shootings by police were reported in the capital and in Greater Buenos Aires. Most were described as "shoot-outs" between police and criminal suspects, but in some cases the circumstances were disputed by the victims' families or witnesses of the incidents. Fewer incidents were reported in 1988 but Amnesty International was concerned that there
THE AMERICAS / ARGENTINA / BOLIVIA
appeared to be little progress in investigation of disputed incidents and that some witnesses were reportedly still threatened and occasionally assaulted. The organization expressed concern to the authorities about the situation of Noemi Diz de Rivas, a witness to one such shooting, who had reportedly faced repeated threats and suffered at least three attacks since May 1987.
