BRUNEI DARUSSALAM
Two leading members of the Brunei National Democratic Party (BNDP) were arrested and detained without trial in January and were still held at the end of the year. Both were prisoners of conscience. Five other prisoners of conscience held on account of their alleged connection with a rebellion against the
Sultan of Brunei in 1962 also remained in prison - four of them had been detained without charge or trial for over 25 years, one for 13 years. One long-term prisoner of conscience was released in February and another died in custody in June; he had been held without charge or trial since 1975. Some 37 other political detainees who had been held in unacknowledged detention for up to 20 months were also released. Two people were sentenced to death but there were no executions.
Since Brunei Darussalam became independent in January 1984 at least 69 political prisoners have been released, including four prisoners of conscience detained without charge or trial for more than 20 years. In January, the government cancelled the registration of the BNDP, so withdrawing its legal status. The party had been formed in May 1985 as the country's then sole legal political organization.
The state of emergency imposed at the time of the 1962 rebellion led by the Partai Rakyat Brunei (PRB), Brunei People's Party, and since continuously in force, was believed to have been renewed for a further two years in September. An amendment to the Criminal Procedure Code which took effect in January required all offences carrying the death penalty to be tried by two High Court Judges; before January such cases had been tried by one judge sitting with assessors. The penal code was also amended, with effect from September, to make whipping the mandatory punishment for 42 offences ranging from rape to "mischief to an animal".
Abdul Latif Hamid and Abdul Latif Chuchu, respectively President and Secretary-General of the BNDP, were arrested in Bandar Seri Begawan, the capital, in January. They were detained under the Internal Security Enactment (ISE), which permits the Minister of Home Affairs to authorize indefinite detention without charge or trial of anyone "acting in a manner prejudicial to the security of the state". Both men had described the aim of the party as to "peacefully try to achieve a system of parliamentary democracy under a constitutional monarchy", and had made several public statements in 1986 and 1987 urging general elections and the lifting of emergency regulations.
ASIA ANDTHE PACIFIC / BRUNEI DARUSSALAM / BURMA
At the end of the year it was believed they were still detained at Gadong Police Headquarters.
Five other prisoners of conscience were detained without trial throughout 1988. They included Sheikh Nikman bin Sheikh Mahmud, who has been held since 1975 on account of his alleged role in the 1962 rebellion, and four others who were in their 26th year in detention without trial. These four - Sarponin bin Sarpo, Suhaili bin Badas, Tinggal bin Muhammad and Baha bin Mohammed - were all arrested in 1963 on account of their links with the PRE, but at no time have they been charged or brought to trial. It appeared that the authorities might release them if they signed statements admitting their participation in the 1962 rebellion but they apparently continued to refuse to do so.
Two other prisoners detained without charge or trial since 1962 and 1975 respectively were still held at the beginning of 1988. Abdul Hamid bin Munap was released in February after he had undergone a 10-day "rehabilitation programme" and had pledged his loyalty to the Sultan. Sheikh Mohammad bin Sheikh Mahmud died from a heart ailment in June while still in detention.
In July Amnesty International learned of the release of 37 detainees who had been held unacknowledged for up to 20 months. No other information about their identity or the legal basis for their detention became available during the year.
Two men were sentenced to death in August after they were convicted by the High Court of murder and robbery. This was believed to be only the second time the death sentence had been imposed in the past 20 years. No executions are known to have taken place since 1957.
Amnesty International adopted the cases of the BNDP leaders detained in January and continued to press for the release of the other prisoners of conscience. In November Amnesty International wrote to the government to express concern about the amendment to the penal code which introduced whipping as a mandatory punishment for certain offences.
In June Amnesty International submitted information about imprisonment and detention without trial of prisoners of conscience in Brunei Darussalam to the
United Nations procedure (under Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728F/ 1503) for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations. It also wrote to the government requesting its comments on the submission. No response to this or any other communications sent to the government was received during 1988.
ASIA ANDTHE PACIFIC/BANGLADESH
were announced. On 29 July retired Brigadier General Aung Gyi and nine of his associates were arrested in Rangoon, apparently in connection with several open letters he had written during the preceding months to former BSPP Chairman, General Ne Win. The letters had severely criticized the government's economic and human rights records. In August, during the period of Dr Maung Maung's government, Amnesty International was informed of the release of these 10 prisoners. This was the first occasion on which the organization had received a response from the Burmese Government. The government also informed Amnesty International of the release of 2,750 prisoners arrested in connection with the August demonstrations.
At the end of September the government announced that 1,376 people had been arrested since the military resumed power earlier that month. Although it said that none of them were political prisoners, other sources claimed that the majority had been detained for their participation in the protest demonstrations. By December most detainees had been released after initial investigations had been conducted but a few remained in custody, including possible prisoners of conscience.
Between October and December the official radio station reported the arrest of at least 70 political activists, some of whom may have been prisoners of conscience. They included Za Gana, a dentistry student and humorist, who was arrested in October, apparently in connection with satirical performances given at mass rallies organized in August and September in favour of multi-party democracy. Like Za Gana, Nay Min - a lawyer accused of sending false information to the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC ) -was still in detention at the end of the year. Official reports also suggested that Aung Thet, Maung Maung Nyunt, Saw Phet Nyi Nyi and Ne Win were arrested while participating in a peaceful demonstration at Shwedagon Pagoda in Rangoon. They were also still in detention at the end of the year.
Ill-treatment in prisons and detention centres was said to be widespread. Some of those held after the March protests were allegedly beaten by prison staff. Victims included several dozen factory workers of Indian descent held in Tharawaddy.
Several female students confirmed after their release that they had been raped and at least four detainees reportedly died from suffocation after several dozen of them were crammed into a small cell at Insein Prison.
Human rights violations were also committed by counter-insurgency troops deployed in remote and mountainous areas where armed opposition groups were active. Army units executed and tortured civilians suspected of supporting the opposition. Most of the victims were members of Burma's ethnic minorities. In April some 60 soldiers from the 77th Light Infantry Division allegedly surrounded and opened fire on villagers attending an ordination ceremony in Shan State, killing eight of them. The soldiers apparently suspected the Shan villagers of supporting insurgents. Soldiers also seized villagers to work as porters or guides and sometimes executed or tortured those whose work they considered unacceptable. In March members of the 49th Regiment beat to death three Shan porters they had seized who had collapsed while carrying heavy loads.
Riots at Insein Prison resulted in the alleged deaths of at least 73 inmates in two incidents. In April, 16 detainees were allegedly killed by security forces during disturbances. In August, when the prison may have held as many as 10,000 inmates, several hundred were reportedly killed when prison staff and army personnel opened fire on them. Sources said that during the incident some victims were shot in custody and others were prevented from leaving burning prison buildings. A few days later the government said that 57 prisoners had been killed, 106 had been wounded and 513 had escaped. According to foreign news reports, official sources privately admitted that the government had grossly under-estimated the number of deaths resulting from gunshots and from fire that engulfed the prison during the riot. Shortly afterwards the government announced the release of 4,806 prisoners, most of them criminal offenders, from the prison. Other prison disturbances in the towns of Sittwe and Bassein reported in the official press resulted in the deaths of seven inmates and the release or escape of 1,700 others.
In September military operations and house-to-house searches for political
ASIA AND THE PACIFIC / BURMA / CHINA
activists were followed by the flight of up to 7,000 dissidents who said they feared arrest and ill-treatment. The majority were students who fled to border areas controlled by opposition insurgents: some joined armed resistance groups. Government officials estimated that by late December 2,000 students had returned to their homes.
In February, in a letter addressed to the United Nations Special Rapporteur on summary or arbitrary executions, the government categorically rejected allegations of unlawful killings in frontier areas. It asserted that, "It is entirely inconceivable that summary or arbitrary executions have taken place in Burma." In May and August Amnesty International published two reports - Burma: Extrajudicial execution and torture of members of ethnic minorities and Burma: Extrajudicial execution, torture and political imprisonment of members of the Shan and other ethnic minorities. The reports described the long-term pattern of gross human rights violations against civilian members of ethnic minorities in Kachin, Karen, Kayah, Mon and Shan States. Based on over 150 interviews with victims of human rights violations and witnesses to abuses, the reports documented 106 cases of unlawful killings and 180 cases of torture or ill-treatment since 1984. In April Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Burma to the United Nations procedure (under Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728F/1503) for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations. In August the organization also raised its concerns in a statement delivered to the UN Working Group on Indigenous Populations.
Between August and December Amnesty International sent a series of urgent appeals to the Burmese authorities. The organization expressed concern that security forces assigned to quell protests appeared to have instructions allowing use of lethal force even when such force was not permitted under international law. Amnesty International urged the government to implement substantive safeguards to protect detainees from execution by security forces and to prevent security forces deliberately shooting unarmed and peaceful demonstrators. It also urged the government to investigate all alleged killings of demonstrators by the security
forces and sought assurances that all detainees arrested on political grounds would be either promptly charged with recognizable offences and fairly tried, or released. The organization sent several appeals to the government on behalf of Za Gana and Nay Min.
In August Amnesty International raised its concern about the killing of demonstrators with the UN Human Rights Sub-Commission.
In November Health Minister Pe Thein responded to an appeal by Amnesty International on behalf of nine detained doctors, saying that they had all been released after initial questioning. He denied allegations that they had been arrested for providing medical care to people shot by troops.
Several hundred people, including prisoners of conscience, were detained after street protests in the Tibet Autonomous Region. Arrests of demonstrators or people involved in religious activities which had not been approved by the authorities were also reported in other areas. Some were released after being held without charge or trial for up to several months; others were charged and remained in custody. New information emerged about prisoners of conscience arrested in previous years. There were persistent reports of torture of detainees in Tibet. Official sources denied these but acknowledged the occurrence of torture in other areas. The death penalty continued to be used extensively and the authorities called for a "crackdown" on crime after recording an increase in major crimes.
