BENIN
At least 80 prisoners of conscience arrested during the previous four years remained in detention without trial throughout 1988 and there were new arrests of non>vioIent opponents of the government. Some 100 people were arrested in connection with alleged conspiracies against the government in March and June and were still held with* out trial at the end of the year. A new State Security Court was set up with jurisdiction over political offences but no trials were reported. Political detainees were tortured while held incommunicado and one prisoner of conscience died in ¡an* uary, apparently as a result of torture. Six people were sentenced to death during the year; four of them were sentenced in absentia.
In March it was announced that a conspiracy to overthrow the government by force had been discovered. According to some reports as many as 150 people, mostly members of the armed forces, were arrested as a result. However, the government did not disclose information about the number and identity of those detained. Among those arrested and still held at the end of 1988 were Lieutenant-Colonel Hilaire Badjogoumé and Captain Jean-José Hountondji, a member of the Presidential Guard. Although most of those arrested
AFRICA/BENIN
were apparently suspected of involvement in a conspiracy, it seemed that some soldiers may also have been detained because of their suspected links with non-violent opposition groups. The detainees were held in military camps in northern Benin and some were transferred to Camp Séra Kpéra in Parakou to be questioned by a government commission, the Permanent National Commission of Inquiry into the Security of the State - an administrative body empowered to question political detainees about their activities and to decide whether they should remain in custody. The commission is directly responsible to the President and in 1988, as in previous years, it apparently functioned outside the legal framework, although it effectively exercised powers of administrative detention.
In June there were reports that the government had discovered another plot, apparently to oust President Mathieu Kérékou while he was out of the country. There were no official statements about the discovery of the plot or about the arrests which followed. Those detained apparently included many people close to the government who were suspected of involvement in the plot or whose names appeared on a list allegedly drawn up by the conspirators of those who were to form a new government. For example, Michel Bamenou Toko, a former minister of justice who had been imprisoned for political reasons in the early 1980s and was apparently one of those named on the list, was arrested in July and was still held at the end of the year.
At least 80 prisoners of conscience arrested between 1984 and 1987 remained in detention without trial throughout the year. Although no charges were brought against them, most were questioned soon after their arrest by the Permanent National Commission of Inquiry about alleged links with left-wing student groups in Benin or abroad or about alleged membership of the banned Parti communiste de Dahomey (PCD), Dahomey Communist Party. The authorities referred to these detainees as "leftist anarchists" and on a number of occasions during the year suggested that they would be brought to trial. However, shortly before the end of the year foreign lawyers seeking information about their cases were told they were in administrative detention and would not
be brought to trial. The detainees were held at two remote detention centres: the Civil Prison in Segbana and the Séro Kpéra military camp in Parakou (see Amnesty InternaiionaJ Report 1983]. In August, those held at Segbana mounted a protest against the authorities' refusal to allow them to receive visits with the result that some of them were allowed to see relatives for the first time in more than two years.
At least three of the prisoners of conscience accused of left-wing sympathies were imprisoned on account of the views or political activities of close relatives. Marcellin Glélé Akpokpo and Bah Bagni-kan Yaya Maléhossou were arrested in 1987, apparently in an attempt to make them reveal the whereabouts of their sons or to coerce their sons into giving themselves up to the authorities. In fact their sons were arrested in December 1987; Rémy Glélé Akpokpo died in police detention in Abomey in January, reportedly as a result of torture, and Bouraïma Maléhossou was still detained without trial at the end of the year, when he was reportedly ill as a result of torture. The two fathers were released in early 1988.
Antoine Yeiomé was arrested in February and detained until 31 August, apparently because the authorities were seeking his son, Léon Yélomé, who was detained in October and was still held at the end of the year. Léon Yélomé was taken to Camp Guézo in Cotonou where political detainees have frequently been interrogated and tortured. He had previously been detained without trial as a prisoner of conscience from 1979 to 1984.
Another former prisoner of conscience. Moussa Mama Yari, was arrested on 24 October. He was first held at a police station in Sémé but in early November was moved to Camp Guézo in Cotonou. He too had been detained without trial between 1979 and 1984 as a prisoner of conscience on account of his left-wing views.
There were fresh reports of torture during the year. Rémy Glélé Akpokpo and Bouraïma Maléhossou, who were both arrested on 24 December 1987, were reported to have been severely tortured at Abomey's central police station, where Rémy Glélé Akpokpo died on 18 January, reportedly as a result of his injuries. According to the country's legislation, his death in custody should have been fol-
AFRICA / BENIN / BURKINA FASO
lowed by a judicial investigation; no such investigation is known to have been carried out by the end of the year.
Some of those arrested in connection with the alleged conspiracies against the government were reported also to have been tortured. For example, soon after his arrest in April, Captain Jean-José Houn-tondji was said to have been in a coma for a time as a result of torture, prompting suggestions from some sources that he had died. He was held incommunicado at the end of the year but was apparently in poor health due to torture and lack of medical attention.
On several occasions during the year the authorities asserted that political prisoners would be brought to trial but no trials took place. In January, the Central Committee of the ruling party - the Parti de la Révolution Populaire du Bénin, People's Revolutionary Party of Benin -announced that it had reviewed the cases of "anarchist and left-wing" prisoners and concluded that they posed a serious threat to the country's stability. The Central Committee referred their cases to the Permanent Committee of the country's parliament, the National Revolutionary Assembly. The Permanent Committee was apparently expected to order whatever further steps were to be taken against the prisoners. The legal status of this procedure is unclear. In April it passed a law establishing a State Security Court to try prisoners charged with offences against the security of the state. The government then indicated that the first cases to be tried by the new court would be those linked to the banned PCD. Judges and court officials were appointed and the State Security Court was officially inaugurated on 30 September. Some of the judges appointed were members of the armed forces or members of the Central Committee of the ruling party. Those brought before the court have the right to appeal against conviction and sentence; if the appeal is upheld, the same court, differently constituted, hears the case again. By the end of the year no trials had started and it seemed that pre-trial judicial investigation of cases which might be tried by the court had not begun.
During the year, six people were sentenced to death after conviction for murder. Two were sentenced in June by a special criminal court, four in absentia in
July by an Assize court. The penal code allows those sentenced in absentia to be retried if they are arrested and Amnesty International urged the Benin authorities to respect this provision in the event of their arrest.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience and for an end to the indefinite detention without trial of political prisoners. The organization also tried repeatedly to get the government to agree that an Amnesty International delegation should visit Benin to discuss the organization's concerns with the authorities. On several occasions senior government officials made public statements suggesting that an Amnesty International delegation had been invited. However, by the end of the year no formal invitation had been received. In August Amnesty International published an 11-page report entitled: Benin - Political Imprisonment and Torture. The Minister of Information described the report as "inaccurate", although neither he nor other members of the government provided any substantive response to the concerns described in the report.
In November the government organized a national human rights seminar and announced that a national human rights commission was to be established. Its exact terms of reference and the role it was to play were not made clear.
In April, Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Benin to the United Nations procedure (under Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728F/1503) for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations. The submission was also sent to the Benin Government, which was invited to comment but without response.
