AFRICA/MAURITANIA
However, according to some reports they remained under restriction.
The military government of President Maaouya Ouid Sid'Ahmed Ould Taya, which took power in December 1984, maintained its ban on all political activities. In contrast to 1986 and 1987 when most political prisoners had been black Mauritanians critical of the government's alleged domination by Arabs and Berbers, in 1988 the majority of political arrests and the only political trial reported involved suspected supporters of the Ba'ath Arab Socialist Party. The party advocate closer links with the Arab world, particularly Iraq. Although it was not specifically banned, membership was effectively illegal as a result of the government's restrictions on all political parties and activities.
More than 100 suspected members of the Ba'ath party were detained in August. Some were released uncharged but 12 were tried in September by a special court - the State Security Section of the Special Court of Justice - at J'reida army barracks, near the capital city of Nouakchott. Four of the detainees were tried in absentia. The defendants were held incommunicado for more than a month and were allowed access to defence counsel of their choice only a few days before the trial began and after pre-trial inquiries had been completed. The charges were based on two prosecution allegations: that the defendants had received money clandestinely from Iraqi government sources to finance their political activities, and that they had been recruiting members of the police and armed forces into the Ba'ath party. The prosecution claimed that by enrolling police and soldiers into the Ba'ath party, the defendants had undermined the security of the state.
At the end of the five-day trial, 13 defendants were convicted and three acquitted. The most severe sentences, of five years' imprisonment, were imposed on an army officer and on the four civilians tried in absentia. Two other officers received suspended sentences of five years each. The other six received sentences of between two and four years.
Several of those later convicted told the court that statements which they had made in custody and which were presented as prosecution evidence had been extracted under torture. Three gave details of this and showed the court scars caused by
torture. The presiding judge told them that the court would not admit their statements as evidence. However, there were no investigations into their allegations, nor, apparently, was any action taken against those allegedly responsible. The court's final verdict did not indicate the evidence on which it had reached its conclusions and so it was not clear whether it had been influenced by the statements in question.
A number of those detained in August had been imprisoned previously, in the early 1980s, on account of their membership of the Ba'ath party. They included Memed Ould Ahmed, convicted despite his claims that he was no longer a member of the party and a lack of evidence to prove that he was still active in it.
Four political prisoners at Oualata Prison in the southeast of the country died in August and September as a result of disease and malnutrition. They were members of the black Toucouleur ethnic group and were transferred to Oualata in December 1987 with about 30 other convicted prisoners. Oualata is a desert town where the climate is marked by extremes of hot and cold. Prisoners were forced to do hard labour and were kept in chains much of the time.
Two of the prisoners - the writer, Tène Youssouf Guèye, and former Minister of Health and Social Affairs, Djigo Tafsirou -were among a group of people tried and sentenced in September 1986 for their involvement in writing and distributing the Mani/este du Négro-Mauritanien opprimé, the Manifesto of the Oppressed Black Mauritanian (see Amnesty International Report 1987). The other two prisoners - Warrant Officer Alassane Oumar Bâ and Lieutenant Abdoul Ghoudouss Bâ - were among a group of 35 soldiers convicted in December 1987 of conspiring to overthrow the government by force.
Conditions in Oualata were harsh and all prisoners suffered from ill-health as a result of the abnormally heavy rainfall in mid-1988. Medical attention was virtually unavailable and meals were poor. Tène Youssouf Guèye and Djigo Tafsirou were reported to have died as a result of vitamin deficiencies and diarrhoea. Government sources said that Lieutenant Abdoul Ghoudouss Bâ died from a heart attack. Other sources say that he had been severely beaten before his death.
AFRICA/MAURITANIA/MAURITIUS
After the deaths 31 civilian prisoners were transferred from Oualata to a prison in Aioun El Atrouss. It is also a desert town but is equipped with medical facilities. As at Oualata, prisoners were not permitted visits from relatives or lawyers and were effectively held incommunicado throughout the year. After the Oualata deaths received publicity, however, journalists and a representative of the Mauritanian Human Rights League were allowed to talk to some of the prisoners in the presence of Ministry of Interior officials.
Some prominent members of the black community - including the trade unionist Diouf Mamadou, Sow Mohamed El Habib, who was a researcher at the National Languages Institute, lecturer Issahka Korregha and Kass6 Mamadou - were released in mid-1988. They had been arrested in December 1987 following the protests after the execution of three black military officers. They were reportedly severely tortured while in police custody.
During 1988 more information became available about trials held at Zouerate, Rosso, Kaedi and Selibaby in late 1986 and early 1987. The trials involved black Mauritanians arrested after protests against the September 1986 convictions of the authors of the Manifesto of the Oppressed Black Mauritanian. More than 30 people were tried before local courts on charges of distributing tracts and attending meetings which had not been given the official authorization required by law. In most cases those convicted were sentenced to four or six months in jail and freed in 1987. Some, however, were given one-year sentences. They appeared to be prisoners of conscience imprisoned for peacefully exercising their basic human rights.
More details were also received about the torture of those arrested and tried in Nouakchott and Nouadhibou in connection with the distribution of the Manifesto. Under interrogation, some of the detainees - including Mamadou BS, Fara Ba and Abdoul Aziz Kane - had been forced to spend a night in ditches filled with human excrement and to hold heavy bricks above their heads while remaining in an uprigHt position until they collapsed. Another form of torture was the "jaguar" - a suspect is suspended upside down from a metal bar attached to the legs and wrists and the soles of the feet are then beaten, sometimes
for several hours. The feet of some detainees still had open wounds on the day of the trial, five months after the torture.
Torturers at Nouadhibou were said to be police officers from Nouakchott. Suspects were interrogated in an empty house. They were kept naked and subjected to intense light. The methods of torture included bringing a naked flame close to the genitals, electric shocks and pricking with needles.
In September an Amnesty International observer attended the trial of suspected Ba'athists before the Special Court of Justice. It was not clear whether those convicted were prisoners of conscience but the organization was concerned that many of them had been tortured and that the trial may have been unfair. It investigated the case of Memed Ould Ahmed, accused of being a Ba'athist, to establish whether he was a prisoner of conscience.
Amnesty International continued to investigate the cases of prisoners convicted in 1986 and 1987 to establish whether they were prisoners of conscience. It expressed concern about aspects of their trials which did not meet internationally recognized standards.
When news of the deaths at Oualata Prison became known in September, Amnesty International called on the government to take steps to ensure that adequate food and medical attention was available to prisoners held there. No response was received and further deaths were reported. In November Amnesty International publicized its concerns about the four deaths and its fears that three others might also have died. The Minister of Information responded that the three were still alive.
In October the Minister of the Interior visited prisoners held at Oualata.
