YUGOSLAVIA
At least 200 prisoners of conscience were held, of whom over 40 were convicted during 1988 of non-violent political crimes under the federal and republican criminal codes. Many more were summarily jailed for up to 60 days for minor political offences. Political prisoners were often denied a fair trial and there were allegations that political detainees had been ill-treated during pre-trial proceedings. Conditions in some prisons where political prisoners were held were harsh. At least five people were sentenced to death and two others executed. All had been convicted on murder charges.
Economic conditions and relations between ethnic groups further deteriorated during 1988. There were mass demonstrations by Serbs protesting that the authorities failed to safeguard Serbs and Montenegrins in the autonomous province of. Kosovo from persecution by ethnic Albanians, the majority population in the province. Protesters demanded constitutional reforms to give the republic of Serbia greater control over the province. In November ethnic Albanians in Kosovo demonstrated in opposition to such change.
Official sources stated that in 1987, 302 people were charged with political crimes, of whom 128 were ethnic Albanians, and that in the first nine months of 1988 police reported 184 people for such crimes. According to official statistics, between January 1981 and September 1988, 1,750 ethnic Albanians were convicted in regular courts of political crimes. In addition, an estimated 7,000 were summarily jailed for minor political offences. The military stated
that in the same period 241 illegal groups composed of 1,600 ethnic Albanians had been discovered in the army; these would have come under the jurisdiction of military courts. The press reported the trial and conviction of at least 80 people on political charges, of whom almost 60 were ethnic Albanians. Most were accused of activities in support of the demand that Kosovo province be granted the status of a republic and cease to be part of the republic of Serbia, or that a republic should be created within Yugoslavia composed of Kosovo and other regions with large ethnic Albanian communities, with a view to its eventual unification with neighbouring Albania.
In September at least 42 ethnic Albanians were arrested in Kosovo on suspicion that they were members of illegal nationalist organizations and had painted slogans and distributed pamphlets. They had not been brought to trial by the end of the year. There were demonstrations by ethnic Albanians in the town of Kumanovo in the republic of Macedonia in August in protest against the closure of high-school classes in which Albanian was the language of instruction. The Macedonian authorities stated that 128 people were summarily jailed for up to 60 days for taking part in these demonstrations, in the course of which nine police officers were injured. By the end of the year Macedonian courts had imprisoned a further 12 ethnic Albanians for between four and 11 years for their part in these demonstrations and similar protests in the town of Gostivar in October.
Prisoners of conscience convicted in 1988 included the ethnic Albanians Ibush Llapashtica and his six co-defendants, who in March were sentenced to between six months' and six years' imprisonment by the district court of Pristina. They were found guilty of having founded a "hostile" group in 1981, when they were minors. The group had allegedly discussed nationalist demonstrations that had taken place in Kosovo earlier that year, written and distributed pamphlets with "reactionary contents" and made plans to call for further demonstrations. In December Ajradin Kaza, Nazif Sinani, Imerli Bekteshi and Zylqyfli Dalipi and four unnamed minors received prison sentences of between four and 11 years after a court in Skopje convicted them of having founded an organization which promoted Albanian nationalist views. They were said to have organized demonstrations - de-
EUROPE/YUGOSLAVIA
scribed in the press as "peaceful" - in the town of Gostivar in October. With the exception of Zylqyfli Dalipi, who was charged with having proposed the formation of armed groups in case there might be conflict with the police, they were not accused of having used or advocated violence.
As in past years, people continued to be imprisoned for the non-violent exercise of their right to freedom of expression, generally under Article 133 of the federal criminal code, which deals with "hostile propaganda". In June Xhemail Qerimi and Riz-van Xhaferi, both ethnic Albanians, were sentenced to three years' and two years' imprisonment respectively by a court in Skopje. They had allegedly "glorified" the state anniversary of Albania during a family celebration of this occasion. In October the Supreme Military Court imposed a one-year prison sentence on Kosta Jolic, who had been convicted of telling two Serb soldiers that there was no democracy in Yugoslavia and that Serbs were discriminated against, for which he blamed former Yugoslav leaders.
Kosta Jolic, Xhemail Qerimi and Rizvan Xhaferi were among 27 people convicted under Paragraph 1 of Article 133 who were pardoned by the Yugoslav state presidency at the end of December. This pardon did not include people convicted under other paragraphs of Article 133, among them Ramadan Tahiri, an ethnic Albanian sentenced under Paragraph 3 to three years' imprisonment in January for bringing "hostile" pamphlets into Yugoslavia. Among those summarily jailed for exercising their right to freedom of expression was Idriz Sutaj, who in May was imprisoned for 60 days after police found a rug embroidered with an eagle - the Albanian national symbol - in his home.
At least eight prisoners of conscience were serving sentences of between two years and three-and-a-half years for refusing, on religious grounds, to perform military service. Most were Jehovah's Witnesses; several had already served a sentence for the same offence. Among those sentenced in 1988 were BranimirTrbojevic and Djuro Zegarac, both ft-om Croatia.
Many political prisoners did not receive fair trials. Four Slovenians tried by Ljubljana military court in June on charges of leaking military secrets were denied civilian lawyers of their choice and proceedings were closed to the public. It was not uncommon for courts to refuse to examine witnes-
ses or other evidence presented by the defence. This was reportedly the case at the closed trial in January of Naser Krasniqi and eight co-defendants, all ethnic Albanians. The Skopje military court convicted them on charges of "association for the purpose of counter-revolutionary activity" and "planning murder motivated by hostility to the Yugoslav state".
Both at this trial and that of Ibush Lla-pashtica and co-defendants, as well as at other trials, there were allegations that state or military security officers had put pressure on defendants or witnesses to make false statements, by use of threats or physical force. Karoly Vicei, an ethnic Hungarian was in February sentenced to two and a half years' imprisonment for "inciting racial hatred" by a court in Subotica. According to the court record, a witness at his trial stated; "They [the state security police] compelled me to give a statement against Vicei... I think that the statement... is more their statement than mine." In December the newspaper V/esnik noted the comment of a Croatian judge working in Kosovo that courts in the province trying political cases tended to disregard the principle of the presumption of the innocence of the accused. Amnesty International believes this practice was not confined to Kosovo province.
There were also allegations that defendants had been physically ill-treated during investigation proceedings. At her trial by the district court of Prizren, which in February sentenced her to two years' imprisonment on charges of bringing "hostile propaganda" materials into the country, Lema Bytyqi, an ethnic Albanian, alleged that during investigation she had been hit by police. Zef Preni, a co-defendant of Naser Krasniqi, alleged at his trial that before being questioned by military security officers he was given an injection, as a result of which he was not fully aware of what he was saying. In neither of these cases did the court investigate the allegations; indeed, in Zef Preni's case the court dismissed his allegations as a "tale for small children".
Ethnic Albanians in the province of Kosovo suspected of political offences were frequently denied access to their lawyers during investigation proceedings which were carried out by state security officials and it seemed that the resulting lack of legal safeguards facilitated human
EUROPE/YUGOSLAVIA
rights abuses against defendants. In particular, several allegations were received during 1988 from ethnic Albanians who stated that following arrest on political charges they had been detained in Pec, Kosovo, where they were beaten, punched and tortured with an electric baton.
There was little evidence of improvement in prison conditions. During the year Goli Otok Prison was closed but accounts by former prisoners indicated that conditions remained poor in prisons such as Zenica and Lepoglava, where some prisoners of conscience were detained.
At least five people were sentenced to death for murder. Two others were executed; in each case they had been convicted of the rape and murder of a young girl. In April, Djordje Adamovic, who had been sentenced to death for the murder of four people in 1985, died in Belgrade Prison hospital after going on hunger-strike to protest his innocence.
During 1988 Amnesty International worked for the release or fair trial of more than 200 people, the majority of them prisoners of conscience, and raised with the authorities allegations of ill-treatment of prisoners. It also pressed for the commutation of death sentences. Amnesty International observers attended the trials of Karoly Vicei and Lema Bytyqi in February. The organization received no response from the government to its appeals and inquiries.

'h-
áí ¡¿'r
sHiribfKl to-t^ fNMk m **ptitmÊàir ^ JH/t-^m iaOoMOT. WlIkihirMii»-tiou	DiUiil. I.tw W iriMNI
wttb iMwiAi p(<(9aMfta A». liMMiiK Iiniiiiilfli I Ilm IMlìmilii^lhi mllit. with tb« fiSÀk», tiiqr won ktviat mêd
M te imty«^, prngßi^mißmtämim
*iár rW 16 tenner «■Uy laMcocb.

■a*/. M-
¿.iir:
I

«M} thiw-«jid-à-4i(jar'>w» Ini^ M rsligtoo» ymmih. te» ^«if^m «li-iUfíf.ÍÉtrír^_.UoÉi mn. ^é^^'t w»-OMM; M>va«*i M iltl^iif? MTtvtl MÛ' Mac* for tb* mn»» «^Mi». a»«m# ùm« «BitpAçvdJa «>irpi|l>i.i>iiwii ÎHy^k «bA
Mr trials. ÍPotar StovotúMc	J^^
miUtary court in Mv« mlUt«ry «»cfeta iwm»
mmcloMd toth« public. »«mMaM» rfpc^fcir(Matto td-Û^ »\>illlWlllM> jutHl) .
wi- I
* to .•WlWti» ëkmûy
hOeitimûm
taifa NikUfit l>4 natimi.
^ JCoite XbMOftU QkIIM «ttAIO^ IdMCni wm» «ttong sr pmptpb t of
YttfMiw iHi^ imtiiiMKf »nb«r- Thi* pwia*it|»ei uwknitojujii il». «^fTttfcth— Hmmánii
MI'tmi^ráosiMaJ i0 ^tkcwttk" pannihiot» tÌKm «uitiäuMSh* te^flcdoBi af
QlriMito». «^'Ü^	in Mjiy.wM
fWti^tMIDd»
«n	- Um
hm trtiiOMM'.;!! WK» MTving WUfiiiiii <¡¿ M >'üg|i. -tipo
............................ttrnw «Mr).
áHHii	;
iMkiék ita
tik» MWMctflijlbH^ttvA-tiàtf^r
(^úin^liiáa^ioiiT i^ktmái^mMKi^
aoeAH'
Uuok ÜMt
A"
mimáiti
iQvefitiititim.	A^
the ¿ifUtct Guuit of PeIzi«^^


prison ro4MUuophii7ge4< _ pntpftsuu}«"	into (iiA oocnlty,.
LÇBM	«BMbjaic AttwoiAn. alìiini(>
áüti og iAv«»tlciitkui ibt bv iwttoft. SUf Prenir^* co-<bif»Q4«i^ tlum Ktwiüqi. slieged. at hit trijil timr bfffcm ^ug questioned by mlHtvjf MUV' iiy	bft wm gty^ aa iaiacUoa. m
a«ult of wtáfili bj^MK Aot fslly Awm ^ wb^ té úm, («j^ns^lft .B9Uh«r <Â Umm;^ c«nM tb* cmm ÍIKWSUS^ tW «Ii««» tioat: to^Mid, La 2ef Pr«ui'« di«sü«i»«d lU^ sUeg^gs as » ' (ai« fatr
eimic AJtb«maiu M .Ü>t ptovinc» f^ ICsiiova iu«p«Gl^ ^^iiticd off«ac9»
iIMÍP
UM^WI draing inv«sti||BUoA procMs^Naíl ^tiM'.h c«Ti«d out by «t«te i^ctaU citd it «««CDod lb«t üw rosuUi«^ s4if»gunds ÍM-ilitiitad hum^.
'isiij