RWANDA
One prisoner of conscience serving a 10-year sentence and a number of detainees who were held without trial and who may have been prisoners of conscience remained in prison throughout the year. In another case, a teacher who belongs to the minority Tutsi community may have been imprisoned because of her ethnic origin and her application for a passport to leave the country. She was released before the
end of the year. A number of asylum-seekers from neighbouring Burundi were also detained for political reasons throughout 1988. Six asylum-seekers were forcibly returned to Burundi in January, despite fears that they would be tortured. One of them was said to have died later in a Burundi prison. Courts imposed several death sentences, and more than 200 prisoners were reportedly under sentence of death at Kigali Prison alone. However, no executions were known to have taken place.
Donat Murego, the one remaining prisoner of conscience among a group of people convicted by the State Security Court in 1981 (see Amnesty international Report 1982), continued to serve a 10-year sentence for distributing documents judged to be seditious. He was held in a high security unit in Ruhengeri Prison.
A number of political detainees held without charge or trial throughout the year may have been prisoners of conscience. Innocent Ndadaye, a student, had been held since October 1986, apparently for criticizing the government. Claude Bahi-tansi and Callixte Sinaruhamagaye were arrested in December 1987, reportedly because they had family connections with a government opponent living in exile. In late 1987 and early 1988 rumours circulated that this opponent, former government minister Alexis Kanyarengwe, the opposition leader who left the country in 1980 to avoid arrest, had returned secretly to Rwanda. The precise reason for his relatives' detention was unclear and no charges against them were announced.
A long-term political detainee was released without charge in January. Apollinaire Bikolimana was detained in June 1986, only two months after completing a prison sentence imposed in 1981 for distributing seditious documents. In late 1986 the authorities indicated that he was suspected of subversion but no further explanation of the reasons for his detention had been given by the time of his release.
Emerite Mukamasabo, a teacher at Mabuga Technical School, was arrested in April. The authorities charged her with subversion for allegedly favouring students of the Tutsi community, to which she belongs. According to unofficial reports, she was arrested after applying for a passport to join her fiancé in Europe. She was tried in May and sentenced to a year's
AFRICA/RWANDA/SÂOTOMÉ AND PRINCIPE
imprisonment. In August she was released, after serving a third of her sentence.
Eighteen asylum-seekers from neighbouring Burundi, all of whom were recognized as refugees by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, were detained throughout the year, apparently for political reasons. They were among 24 Burundi nationals arrested in December 1987 in Rwanda, apparently because the authorities suspected them of conspiring against the Burundi Government. Six of them, who had recently gone to Rwanda from Burundi, were returned in January and promptly arrested by the Burundi authorities. One of the six was later said to have died in custody as a result of beatings. The 18 others were held in Rwanda throughout the year. The charges against them initially were not made public, but the authorities said later that charges had been dropped and the detainees were undesirable aliens awaiting resettlement to a third country.
Five prisoners sentenced to death in 1985 were still awaiting a review of their sentence by the Appeal Court at the end of 1988. They had been convicted of participating in the extrajudicial killing of political prisoners during the mid-1970s. Th6on6ste Lizinde, former head of the national security service, was among those sentenced to death. Other defendants convicted with them received prison sentences. All of the convicted prisoners were reportedly held in harsh conditions in the high security unit in Ruhengeri Prison and were denied visits.
Courts reportedly imposed death sentences on a number of people convicted of criminal offences without legal counsel at either their initial or appeal hearings. By mid-1988 some 200 prisoners were reportedly under sentence of death at Kigali Prison alone. All death sentences confirmed on appeal, however, had been commuted by the head of state only a year earlier.
During 1988 Amnesty International continued to urge the Rwandese authorities to release Donat Murego, a prisoner of conscience, and either promptly try or release other political detainees.
