COTE D'IVOIRE
Twenty trade unionists who had been forcibly conscripted into the army for political reasons were released in July.
The conscripted trade unionists had all been arrested in 1987. Three had been arrested in September of that year, later charged with embezzling union funds and sentenced to short terms of imprisonment; on their release from prison they were
conscripted into the armed forces. More than 10 others had been detained after protesting at these arrests; they were released uncharged in November 1987 and immediately conscripted.
The arrests in September 1987 had followed disputed elections in July 1987 to the executive committee of the Syndicat national des enseignants du second degré de Côte d'ivoire (SYNESCI), a secondary school teachers' trade union (see Amnesty InternationaJ Report 1988). Two union leaders, Laurent Akoun and Yaya Traoré, were subsequently sentenced to six months' imprisonment and a third, Stéphan Vangah, to a four-month prison term. In all three cases charges appeared to be politically motivated. They completed their sentences in January and March 1988 but were then sent for an indefinite period of military service to Séguéla military camp, where they joined 11 other members of SYNESa who had been conscripted in November 1987. While at Séguéla, they were compelled to undertake military training, although they were separated from other conscripts. They were not allowed visits from lawyers or from their families and slept in a dormitory said to have been infested with insects. While the trade unionists were at Séguéla, other members of SYNESCI were arrested and conscripted. The last such arrest took place in June when Léopold Kouaho was detained in Abidjan; he was taken to Séguéla in July, four days before all the trade unionists were released. In each of these cases, the authorities claimed the reason for conscription was to provide the trade unionists with a "civic and moral education". However, it appeared that conscription was a way of punishing the trade unionists and depriving them of their freedom of movement by use of methods which fell outside the terms of the ordinary criminal law, on account of their peaceful political activities. They were considered by Amnesty International to be prisoners of conscience. In the past, journalists and students who participated in demonstrations or criticized the government have also been forcibly conscripted, effectively as a form of restriction and punishment.
Anaky Innocent Kobena, a businessman and leading member of the Front populaire ivoirien, Ivorian Popular Front, an opposition political party, was arrested
4429814299
AFRICA/CÔTED'IVOIRE/DJIBOUTI/EQUATORIALGUINEA
in November and detained for a month without charge before being remanded in custody in December on charges of failing to make a series of payments for which his company was liable. It appeared that he was detained outside the framework of the law, initially at a house belonging to the head of state and later at the National Security Service headquarters. Although the charges eventually brought against Anaky Innocent Kobena did not concern a political offence. Amnesty International was concerned that he might be imprisoned on account of his non-violent political activities and views.
Amnesty International appealed repeatedly for the release of the conscripted trade unionists, all of whom were adopted as prisoners of conscience. At the time of their release, the authorities announced that the trade unionists would remain subject to military discipline, which could have the effect of limiting their trade union activities. However, they were all allowed to resume their teaching jobs.
