PERU
Over 300 people "disappeared" after arrest by army and navy counter-insurgency forces in zones under a state of emergency. Hundreds more were victims of extrajudicial execution. In July attacks of a new kind began against critics of the government and the armed forces. These were said by the authorities to have been carried out by an independent anti-
terrorist revenge group. People whose roles in public life may previously have protected them - including journalists, lawyers, academics and human rights activists - were threatened or killed. In the emergency zones evidence emerged that linked these attacks directly to armed forces "political-military commands" effectively responsible for local adminis* tration. Torture continued to be reported in both criminal and political cases. An estimated 630 political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, were being held at the end of the year, all charged with terrorism, although few had been convicted. Others, including prisoners of conscience, were held for short periods.
Inflation of almost 2,000 per cent, proliferating violence and recurrent rumours of an imminent military coup contributed to a situation of extreme political tension. President Alan Garcia Pérez resigned his position as head of the ruling Alianza Popular Revolucionaria Americana (apra), American Popular Revolutionary Alliance, in December after calls from his own party that he step down from the presidency and bring forward elections scheduled for April 1990. The human rights situation deteriorated as a longstanding pattern of "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions extended beyond the mountain areas to which it had been confined. These practices, first reported in 1983 in seven provinces, extended to other regions as they too came under armed forces' control. By the end of the year 56 of Peru's 181 provinces were under state of emergency, with all but the provinces of Lima and Callao administered by armed forces political-military commands.
730404090908060404090906710808050909100804
THEAMERICAS/PERU/STVINCENTANDTHEGRENADINES
The Partido Comunista deí Perú "Sendero Luminoso", Communist Party of Peru "Shining Path", continued to wage a nationwide campaign of attacks on government property, on the communications and electricity network, on state-run cooperative farms and on private businesses. It carried out scores of execution-style killings, some after torture and mutilation of those it had seized. The Senate Commission on National Pacification, citing Defence Ministry statistics, reported 289 police and military personnel killed in political violence in 1988, many of them after capture or while incapacitated by wounds. The number of "subversives" killed was put at 667, although some may have been non-combatant civilians. The Commission reported that 1,030 civilians were killed in 1988. The total toll of 1,986 dead was nearly three times that in 1987.
Most "disappearances" and killings continued to be reported from remote emergency zones, with 257 "disappearances" reported in Ayacucho department and 66 in Apurimac. The first "disappearances" in San Martin were reported after it was put under military control in November 1987: 54 people reportedly "disappeared" after arrest there in 1988. The fate of at least 322 prisoners detained throughout the country was still unknown at the end of the year. At least 2,350 prisoners reported to have "disappeared" since 1983 remained unaccounted for.
Extrajudicial executions in rural areas sometimes targeted individuals and groups, were sometimes random,.and were sometimes apparently directed against entire communities. On a single patrol in September troops from the army's Ayahuanco- base reportedly moved through four Huanta communities where they assembled villagers, checked names against their lists, tortured and executed six suspects and took away four others whose fate was still unknown at the end of the year. Two others — Mariana Morales Ruiz, aged 78, and Juliana Cusiche Noa -were reportedly killed only because they had demanded that the patrol return stolen livestock. In May reprisal killings reportedly followed a guerrilla ambush that killed four soldiers near the village of Cayara, Ayacucho. Next day troops raided Cayara and summarily executed at least 28 men, women and children.
Apparent extrajudicial executions.
threats and bombings, for which armed forces personnel were believed to be responsible, occurred in a new pattern in urban areas. Here the authorities attributed unprecedented attacks on journalists, lawyers, academics and others to a clandestine "death squad", which sometimes mimicked Shining Path methods. In September a dead dog was left at the home of journalist Luis Morales bearing a placard declaring that the journalist would be killed "like a dog" for "collaborating" with Shining Path. Placards threatening others said they would be "shot down or burned alive".
Threats and attacks on government critics and opponents active in public life were first attributed to an ostensibly independent group after a communique issued in Lima in July announced the creation of the Comando Rodrigo Franco (crf), Rodrigo Franco Command. It said the crf had been created to "revenge" murdered military and civilian officials and claimed responsibility for the killing that day of Dr Manuel Febres Flores, defence lawyer of the man alleged to be second-in-command of Shining Path. Mimeographed and telephoned death threats, slogans painted on walls and bombing attacks using the name crf followed in much of the country, particularly those areas under tight military control.
Evidence emerged that actions attributed to the crf may have been carried out by a range of security force units. In Ayacucho and San Martin departments there was evidence pointing to the direct responsibility of regional political-military commands. However, the killing of two apparent militants of the Movimiento Revolucionario "Tupac Amaru" (mrta), "Tupac Amaru" Revolutionary Movement, in Lima in September, also using the name of crf, occurred after they were last seen alive in the custody of agents identified as members of the Dirección Contra eJ Terrorismo (dircote), the Anti-Terrorist Division of the Policía de Investigaciones del Perú (pip), Peruvian Investigative Police. In other cases in Lima and elsewhere apra officials were alleged to be responsible for crf threats and bombings.
Other apparent extrajudicial executions were attributed by the authorities to Shining Path guerrillas. In November Hugo Bustios Saavedra, a radio journalist
THE AMERICAS/VENEZUELA
and correspondent for the magazine Core-tas, who had received death threats for his human rights reporting, was killed by masked gunmen near Huanta. However, statements from eye-witnesses suggested the attack had been carried out by members of the armed forces or by civil defence forces under their command.
Evidence of the use of torture as a tool of interrogation, as punishment, and as a possible cause of death was received from many parts of the country. Torture methods reportedly included beatings, sexual abuse, near-drowning, hanging by the arms and threats that prisoners would be killed or would "disappear". Former prisoners released after they had "disappeared" while in military custody alleged that torture during interrogation was common. In Ayacucho it was said that detainees' treatment improved once they had been transferred from secret military custody to that of the PIP but in Lima detainees were reportedly tortured at DIRCOTE headquarters.
Since March 1981 almost all political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience. have been accused of terrorism. The terms of the penal code as it concerns terrorism under Article 288 were modified by Law 24,953 of December 1988, which introduced more severe penalties and defined "inciting" or "defending" terrorist acts, and association with two or more people for terrorist purposes, as punishable offences. Prisoners of conscience included trade unionists, community leaders and activists in legal opposition parties held on false charges, although they were generally held for short periods. Human rights activists and clergy were also arrested and held for short periods in areas under military control. Among them were representatives of the Roman Catholic Episcopal Commission for Social Action and of national human rights organizations, who were detained briefly in Ayacucho in July.
Some prisoners of conscience were held for longer periods. They included Presbyterian pastor Agripino Quispe Hilario, who was detained in 1985 at his home in Huancavelica, reportedly forced to sign incriminating statements under torture, and sentenced to six years' imprisonment for terrorism. He appeared to have been detained solely because of his community leadership role in an area in
which Shining Path was active. Irregularities in his case and others included prolonged delays and the courts' acceptance of statements produced under torture as evidence.
Although prohibited by the Constitution, incommunicado detention before prisoners were brought before a magistrate remained the norm. The requirement that prisoners should appear before a magistrate within 15 days of arrest was also frequently disregarded. In the emergency zones a prisoner's isolation was absolute and could be prolonged indefinitely, as such detentions were not acknowledged. Although in law the right to habeas corpus remained in force even under a state of emergency, if only as a safeguard against abuse of the rights to life and personal security, in practice access to detention facilities was routinely denied to magistrates in emergency zones and few invoked the measure. The Supreme Court is obliged to support examining magistrates obstructed in the execution of habeas corpus but, as in previous years, it failed to do so.
Although the Supreme Court could grant jurisdiction over military personnel to the civil courts it had not done so since 1985. It made no rulings on jurisdictional disputes in 1988 and the civil courts did little to hold the armed forces accountable for human rights abuse. The military court system claimed exclusive jurisdiction over police and military personnel but persistently dismissed charges stemming from counter-insurgency operations. In June it ended court hearings on a massacre at Parcco Alto, Ayacucho, which had taken place in October 1986. because the killings were "the result of a military operation . .. in compliance with internal norms . . .and consequently did not constitute the crime of homicide". A Senate inquiry had confirmed that the victims had been detained and executed and that their bodies had been burned. Nor was there significant progress in military court proceedings concerning deliberate killings by the security forces in June 1986 after they had quelled revolts by political prisoners at three prisons in the Lima area. In August a military prosecutor requested a 25-year sentence for a Republican Guard general for ordering the summary execution of all 124 prisoners in a wing of Lima's Lurigan-cho Prison, but no further progress in the trial was reported.
THEAMERICAS/PERU/STVINCENTANDTHEGRENADINES
The Public Ministry, headed by the Attorney General, was in a position to play a major role in the defence of human rights through its public prosecutors, who were empowered to investigate complaints. In the emergency zones they were the only civilian authorities who regularly asked the military to account for people reported to have been detained and played a key role in the investigation of reported extrajudicial executions. In the latter part of 1988, however, the investigative role of the Public Ministry was significantly curtailed when the Attorney General closed its Ayacucho office, which had been set up to investigate "disappearances" in Ayacucho, Apurimac and San Martin. This office, headed by a Special Commissioner, had been investigating "disappearances" in the area since 1987, and since May 1988 had also been investigating the killing of 28 villagers at Cayara (see above). In carrying out the Cayara investigation, the prosecutors had faced persistent obstruction by the military: troops secretly removed corpses from common graves in order to prevent forensic examinations; eight of the witnesses who testified to what had occurred were killed or "disappeared"; and investigators were threatened by army officers and in the name of the CRF. In mid-November the investigators recommended that the Ayacucho zone commander be prosecuted for murder. The Attorney General then halted the inquiry, disbanded the investigative team and eliminated the post of regional Special Commissioner on "disappearances". The Special Commissioner was ordered to close the team's Ayacucho office within 24 hours and suspend inquiries into 850 "disappearances". The Cayara case was provisionally "archived" by the Public Ministry in November.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of prisoners of conscience and investigated cases of possible prisoners of conscience and of prisoners reported to have "disappeared" while in custody. The organization expressed concern about reports of torture and extrajudicial execution and submitted information to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and to the appropriate mechanisms of the United Nations. In April and June Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Peru to the United Nations Procedure (under Econ-
omic and Social Council Resolutions 728F/1503) for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations.
An Amnesty International delegation visited Peru from 7 November to 3 December and discussed human rights issues with the Prime Minister, the Minister of Justice and other officials. The visitors travelled in the Apurimac, Ayacucho and San Martin emergency zones but were unable to meet the zones' military commanders. They also met local officials and interviewed prisoners and former prisoners - including survivors of torture and "disappearance" - relatives of victims, and human rights workers.
ST VINCENT AND THE GRENADINES
Two prisoners were hanged on 21 November. The two men, Wilkie Jessup and his son Everold Buttler, had been convicted of the murder of a farmer during a land dispute in 1985. The most recent executions before these were in March 1987, the first to be carried out for nine years. Although Wilkie Jessup and Everold But-tler's appeal was dismissed by the Eastern Caribbean Court of Appeal, they do not appear to have appealed to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in England which acts as the final court of appeal for St Vincent and the Grenadines.
Amnesty International wrote to the authorities expressing its regret at these executions and asking whether the prisoners had been given the opportunity to appeal to the Privy Council.
THE AMERICAS / SURINAME
