MALAWI
Prisoners of conscience were among at least 30 political prisoners known to be held throughout the year, most of them without charge or triaL The total number of political prisoners was believed to be much larger. There were reports of serious overcrowding in prisons and police cells and of severe ill-treatment of convicted criminal prisoners.
Jack Mapanje, Malawi's best known poet, was still held without charge or trial in Mikuyu Prison, near Zomba, at the end of 1988. He had been arrested in September 1987 on account of his non-violent expression of views critical of the government and possibly in an attempt to pre-
empt publication of a volume of his poetry which the authorities believed would be similarly critical. The authorities gave no reason for his detention nor did they explain its legal basis but it appeared that he was held under the Public Security Regulations of 1965, which allow indefinite administrative detention without trial of those regarded as a threat to national security. His relatives were not allowed to visit him and were not informed officially of his place of detention.
Two other prisoners of conscience serving life sentences - Orton and Vera Chirwa - also remained in prison throughout 1988. They were convicted of treason and sentenced to death in 1983 after an unfair trial before a "traditional court" - one in which there is no right to legal representation and in which the rules of evidence observed in higher courts do not apply. Their sentences were later commuted (see Amnesty international Report, 1983-1988). There was particular concern about their health following their transfer from Mikuyu Prison to Zomba Central Prison in 1987.
Four other uncharged political detainees appeared to be prisoners of conscience. L.E. Chaloledwa had been detained continuously in Mikuyu Prison since 1977, apparently because of his friendship with a cousin of Life-President Kamuzu Banda who fled from Malawi over 10 years ago and who was suspected of being an opponent of the government. Lister Muwamba, another detainee held at Mikuyu, was arrested in 1986 in Blantyre and held under the Preservation of Public Security Regulations as a suspected supporter of Orton Chirwa. John Malesa, a further supporter of Orton Chirwa, was also detained without trial throughout 1988 following his arrest in Machinga district in December 1987. Goodluck Mhango, a veterinary surgeon arrested in September 1987, was still held without charge or trial at the end of 1988. He was detained at Dzeleka Prison, near Dowa, apparently because his brother, a journalist living in exile, was considered an opponent of the government.
Other uncharged political detainees held throughout 1988 included Daniel Paul Chunga, detained since May 1982 as a suspected supporter of the opposition Socialist League of Malawi, LESOMA, and Ian Felix Mbare, a clothing company em-
AFRICA/MALAWI/MALI
ployee in Lilongwe who had been detained since he returned in January 1981 from a visit to Zambia, where he was alleged to have met members of LESOMA. Both he and Daniel Paul Chunga were held in Mikuyu Prison.
Aleke Banda, a former secretary general of the ruling Malawi Congress Party, was also reported to be still detained without trial in Mpyupyu Prison near Lake Chilwa. He had been arrested in February 1980, apparently after he made statements interpreted as criticizing President Banda. No official reasons for his detention have ever been given. It also appeared that two senior Reserve Bank officials, Dr Bandawe and Chakakala Chaziya, who were arrested in early 1987 and reportedly taken to Chichiri Prison in Blantyre, might also be detained for political reasons. There had been reports that they sought to resist improper interference in the affairs of the Reserve Bank by senior politicians.
There were reports of serious overcrowding and ill-treatment of prisoners in both prisons and some police stations. At Blantyre Police Station, for example, between 20 and 30 prisoners awaiting trial on criminal charges were said to be held in cells measuring no more than two metres square, making it impossible for them to lie down and sleep. Relatives of prisoners brought in food, as police reportedly only fed them once a week. Inmates were not provided with blankets or water to wash in. Prisoners awaiting trial were reported to be assaulted regularly by police officers with hosepipes, wooden batons or their fists - a form of ill-treatment known as "panel-beating". Police officers were also reported to have threatened criminal suspects with death or further beatings if they refused to confess to crimes of which they were suspected.
There were reports during the year that some convicted criminals were ill-treated and subsequently died. These were prisoners who had been convicted on more than one occasion of crimes such as burglary or robbery with violence and whom the authorities called "hardcores". According to reports by former detainees these prisoners were held at ordinary prisons but were transferred shortly before the end of their sentences to Nsanje Prison in the far south of the country, where they were said to have been stripped naked and chained to the floor of their cells for a month.
During this period they were apparently not given food and it is alleged some died of starvation or diseases. A section of Dzeleka Prison may have been converted for use in this "hardcore program". Prison officers from around the country were reportedly required to spend a month every year there and at Nsanje Prison.
Amnesty International investigated reports of ill-treatment and deaths at Nsanje and Dzeleka prisons. It urged the Malawi Government to release all prisoners of conscience and to release or promptly and fairly bring to trial all other untried political prisoners. The government did not reply to these appeals.
