SPAIN
Allegations of torture and ill-treatment were made by detainees held under anti-terrorist legislation. Numerous judicial inquiries which had been opened into such claims in previous years remained unresolved. A small number of conscien* tious objectors to military service were imprisoned.
Nineteen people were killed by the armed Basque group Euskadi Ta Askata-suna (ETA) reflecting a decline in activity by armed groups compared with the previous year, when 50 people were killed. In October newspaper reports quoted police statements that for the year to August the number of serious incidents involving explosives or incendiaries had also been lower.
Anti-terrorist legislation introduced in 1984 was repealed and in May new Organic Laws were introduced incorporating major powers of the previous legislation and some other reforms into the penal code and the Criminal Justice Law. As envisaged in the 1987 draft, the maximum period of incommunicado detention was reduced from 10 days to five, but detainees held incommunicado under this legislation were still denied the right to designate lawyers of their own choice to attend and represent them at preliminary police and judicial declarations. The National Court in Madrid retained the right to investigate and try all cases of alleged terrorism.
A law establishing alternative service for conscientious objectors to military service was introduced in January. The length of alternative service was fixed at 18 months, compared to 12 months' military service, to consist of work in the public interest run by charities and public administrations. Approximately 1,000 objectors were expected to start alternative service in early 1989. However, under the new arrangements those who apply for conscientious objector status after incorporation into the army will continue to be denied the possibility of performing alternative service.
In July José Manuel Fierro Conchouso was arrested and charged with desertion from military service, even though he had already submitted an appUcation for conscientious objector status to the competent authorities. He had begun military service in January but after two months decided it could no longer be reconciled with his ethical and pacifist beliefs. He had been unaware of the possibility of applying for
EUROPE/SPAIN/SWEDEN
conscientious objector status at the time of his registration for mihtary service and therefore left his barracks to seek information about alternative civilian service and in April applied for conscientious objector status. He stayed away from his barracks pending a decision on his application. In September Amnesty International adopted José Manuel Fierro as a prisoner of conscience on the grounds that individuals should be able to seek conscientious objector status at any time, both up to and after incorporation into the armed forces. José Manuel Fierro was released in December after the military prosecutor withdrew the charge of desertion but was ordered to complete his military service. He had not complied with the order by the end of the year.
According to unofficial estimates there was a reduction in the number of people detained incommunicado under the provisions of the anti-terrorist law compared to 1987.
This reported decrease was accompanied by a significant change in the content of the allegations of torture and ill-treatment made by such detainees. In previous years complaints were usually of ill-treatment containing a major element of physical abuse. Increasingly complaints reported in 1988 alleged prolonged, systematic use of disorientation techniques such as hooding and deprivation of food, drink and sleep, accompanied by persistent interrogation during, incommunicado detention. Judicial inquiries into such allegations have frequently been very protracted and often abandoned for lack of sufficient evidence even in cases in which there has been strong medical evidence.
Little or no progress appeared to have been made in a number of judicial inquiries into allegations of torture or ill-treatment made in previous years, such as those made by José Luis Lekue and brothers Emilio and Julio Ginés (see Amnesty international Report 1988).
In August Amnesty International wrote to the authorities concerning reports it had received of allegations of torture and ill-treatment made in October 1987 by losé Askasibar Aperribai, a Basque who was expelled from France and charged with terrorist activities. He was acquitted in June. He alleged that he had been hooded, beaten and threatened, given electric shocks to his shoulders and testicles, and had his head
forced into a bath filled with water. A forensic doctor who examined him during detention noted injuries to his wrists and signs of bruising. The authorities replied to Amnesty International giving details of his acquittal but made no comment on his allegations of torture, nor did they give information requested by Amnesty International regarding a judicial inquiry.
In December an Amnesty International observer attended the trial of Jean-Philippe Casabonne and two others in the National Court at Madrid. All three were convicted -two for violent political offences and Jean-Philippe Casabonne for "collaborating with a terrorist organization". A French student, he had denied knowledge of the true identities of his two co-accused and of their involvement in violent political activities. The defence entered an appeal against the sentence and the conduct of the hearing.
Amnesty International appealed for the release of José Manuel Fierro as a prisoner of conscience and expressed concern about reports that, as a result of his refusal on conscientious grounds to wear military prison uniform, he had been held in solitary confinement and denied family visits, correspondence and reading material.
