EGYPT
Thousands of political and religious activists, including prisoners of conscience, were arrested and detained under state of emergency legislation. Some of them were allegedly subjected to torture or ill-treatment during incommunicado detention. Political trials took place before (Emergency) Stale Security Courts with no right of appeal. Forty-four police and security officers were acquitted of inflicting torture on political detainees. At least 18 death sentences were passed following convictions of murder, drug-trafficking, or abduction and rape. Several asylum-seekers and other foreign nationals were forcibly returned to their countries of origin despite fears that they could be liable to imprisonment as prisoners of conscience, or could face torture or execu> tion.
Thousands of people were arrested during the year and administratively detained under state of emergency legislation for periods varying from several days to several months. The state of emergency had been in force without interruption since October 1981 and was extended by presidential decree at the end of March until the end of May 1991. Some of those detained under the emergency law were subsequently charged with specific criminal offences but most were released without charge or trial.
The year began with protests and demonstrations in support of the Palestinian uprising in the Israeli Occupied Territories, leading to mass arrests in Cairo and arrests of students throughout the country.
The number of arrests rose sharply in the second half of the year. In August and December there were violent clashes between the police, and members of islamic groups and residents of the Ain Shams district of Cairo, a poor and overcrowded area considered a stronghold of the groups. The conflict began with a raid on the Adam
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA / EGYPT
mosque by police apparently searching for leading members of the groups. The ensuing clashes, during which police used live ammunition, reportedly resulted in five deaths and many wounded. The violence in December followed night raids on the homes of Islamic activists in the same area. Two police stations and a number of police vehicles were set on fire, and a plainclothes police officer died as a result of stab wounds. Hundreds of arrests were made; some of those arrested had taken no part in the violence.
The majority of those detained on political grounds during the year were members of, or sympathizers with. Islamic groups but others included over 100 textile workers arrested in the northern city of Mahalla A1 Kubra in September. They had protested against government plans to cease payment of an annual subsidy to workers in the public sector, and against price rises. More than half the workers were released within hours but 46 remained in detention for several weeks and eight were still imprisoned under emergency provisions at the end of the year.
In April the trial resumed of 33 people accused of participating in assassination attempts in 1987 on two former interior ministers and a magazine editor (see Amnesty International Report 1988). The prosecution sought death sentences for 15 of them. In a separate trial, still in progress at the end of the year, 20 others were charged in connection with the banned Egypt Revolution Organization (see Amnesty International Report 1988). The prosecution sought death sentences for 11 of the accused, including Khalid Abdul Nasser, son of the former President, who was being tried in absentia. Strict security measures were enforced in both trials, which took place before (Emergency) Supreme State Security Courts whose verdicts are not subject to appeal but under state of emergency legislation must be approved by the President of the Republic.
In August 15 people, including a businessman and two lawyers, were acquitted of all charges relating to acts of sabotage and collaboration with Libya, and membership of an armed Nasserist organization. The prosecution had called for the death penalty for 15 of the 16 accused in the case. Only one, Gamal Munib, was convicted. He was sentenced
to five years' imprisonment for obtaining explosives without authorization. Some of the accused said they had been subjected to physical and psychological torture while held incommunicado during pretrial detention and produced forensic medical reports in court which appeared to corroborate their allegations.
In June the authorities announced the discovery of a Shi'a Muslim cell which was allegedly planning acts of sabotage on Egyptian territory. Eighteen Egyptians and 11 people of other, mainly Arab, nationalities were accused of involvement in the group. Some of the accused had reportedly been subjected to physical and psychological torture or ill-treatment during months of detention. All were eventually released for lack of evidence but a number of foreign nationals were forcibly expatriated.
Forty-eight followers of the Baha'i faith, who had been sentenced to three years' imprisonment in May 1987 (see Amnesty Internationai Report 1988), appealed successfully against their convictions and sentences in February. The Court of Appeal overturned the first court's judgment on the grounds that none had been found guilty of the specific acts punishable under Decree Law 263 of 1960, which ordered the dissolution of Baha'i assemblies. All had been at liberty pending the appeal.
Dr Abdul Rahman Muhammad Abdul Ghaffar, believed to have been held without trial since October 1986 for having converted from Islam to Christianity, was released in August.
There was also evidence during the year of the detention of relatives of a number of suspected political or religious activists who had evaded arrest. These included wives and young children, as well as male relatives, apparently held to persuade the activists to surrender to the police.
Forty-four security and police officers were acquitted in July of all charges relating to the torture of political detainees held in connection with the banned Jihad organization between 1981 and 1983. Detainees alleged that they had been subjected to torture including burning with cigarettes, suspension by the wrists or ankles and beating with a whip or thick stick. They presented corroborating forensic medical evidence to the court. All the
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA / EGYPT /1 RAN
accused were at liberty for the duration of the trial. Although it acknowledged that torture had occurred, the Cairo Criminal Court decided that there was insufficient evidence to identify the perpetrators, since detainees had been blindfolded throughout their torture. It also rejected victims' claims for compensation. Some sessions of the trial were attended by an Amnesty International observer.
At least 18 death sentences were passed during the year, five of them in absentia. Nine were imposed for murder, five on people convicted of drug-trafficking, and four for abduction and rape. No information was available on executions during 1988.
Three Iraqis and a Bahraini were forcibly repatriated in August despite fears that they would be at risk of imprisonment as prisoners of conscience, of torture or execution in their countries of origin. Arrested in connection with the alleged formation of a Shi'a Muslim cell planning acts of sabotage, they were repatriated by order of the Minister of the Interior after charges against them were dropped. One of the four was arrested and detained for several weeks following his forcible return to Bahrain but the fate of the three others after their enforced return to Iraq remained unknown.
Five Somali asylum-seekers were also forcibly repatriated in August. All were believed to have been detained on their arrival in Somalia and one was reported to have died in custody as a result of torture in September or October.
After each wave of arrests Amnesty International appealed to the authorities, requesting information about the legal situation of those detained, seeking assurances that they were being granted prompt access to a lawyer of their own choosing as well as to members of their families, and calling for the immediate and unconditional release of prisoners of conscience. On each occasion there were fears that there were insufficient safeguards to prevent those detained being tortured or ill-treated, particularly during prolonged incommunicado detention.
In the cases of forced repatriation of asylum-seekers Amnesty International appealed to the Egyptian Government to respect its international human rights commitments and to ensure that these and other foreign nationals not be compelled to
return to their countries, where they could become prisoners of conscience and face torture or execution.
There were two Amnesty International missions to Egypt to discuss human rights with the government. The first took place in December 1987 and January 1988. and the second in March. Meetings were held with, among others, the Ministers of Interior and Justice, the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs and the Prosecutor General. Discussions focussed on Amnesty International's concerns in the country in the light of Egypt's ratification of international human rights treaties. In June Amnesty International sent a 40-page memorandum to the government for consideration and comment. It examined arrest and detention procedures in security cases under emergency legislation and the lack of safeguards against arbitrary arrest and torture. Amnesty International asked to send a further mission to Egypt to discuss the implementation of its recommendations with the government but this had not taken place by the end of the year.
