KAMPUCHEA (CAMBODIA)
Some 430 people were detained for political reasons in 1988 and during the year it became clear that others had been detained in 1987. It was also alleged that several people had been tortured after their arrest in 1987. It remained difficult to monitor human rights due to the diplomatic isolation of the People's Republic of Kampuchea (PRK) and the government's unwillingness to accept international scrutiny of its human rights record. The little information about human rights matters that emerged from the country mostly did so after considerable delay.
Fighting continued throughout the year between the PRK Government headed by Hun Sen and supported by Vietnamese troops based in Kampuchea, and local guerrilla forces, including the Partie of Democratic Kampuchea (PDK - known as the "Khmer Rouge") and Prince Norodom Sihanouk's National United Front for an Independent, Neutral, Pacific and Cooperative Cambodia (FUNCINPEC). These and a third opposition force constituted the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea (CGDK), which continued to receive United Nations recognition.
There were several rounds of peace
ASIA ANDTHE PACIFIC/ KAMPUCHEA / KOREA (DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF)
negotiations. After Prince Sihanouk, Hun Sen and CGDK Prime Minister Son Sann had held peace talks in November, Prince Sihanouk and Son Sann proposed that a joint communique should include a pledge to respect human rights. However, Hun Sen refused to endorse the communique unless it also mentioned past human rights violations by the former Government of Democratic Kampuchea, and the communique was issued without the proposed pledge.
There were reports that the PDK tortured and killed a number of prisoners. For example, on 24 April PDK security forces are alleged to have summarily shot Neuan Meuan, a soldier who had gone absent without leave to the PDK-administered "Site 8" camp in Thailand. In September Amnesty International wrote to PDK President Khieu Samphan urging an investigation of the killing.
During the year Amnesty International received transcripts of official PRK radio broadcasts reporting that 619 people had been arrested on political grounds in Siem Reap-Utdar Meanchey, Posât and Prey Veng provinces in 1987 and 1988. Most were accused of being "agents" of the CGDK or of assisting it but others were described merely as "political enemies". For example, a broadcast on 27 October said that during the first nine months of 1988 police officers in Angkor Chum district of Siem Reap-Utdar Meanchey arrested 266 "hidden enemy elements", of whom 263 were allegedly involved in underground CGDK political activities. The official news media did not say what happened to those arrested, and there have been no reports of political trials since October 1986. In May the Council of State granted an amnesty to "reformed prisoners" but the official announcement did not indicate whether it included political prisoners.
Information was received during the year about five people who had been arrested after accusations of involvement with the CGDK in Siem Reap-Utdar Meanchey and Kracheh provinces in 1987 and 1988. They were reportedly held without charge or trial in provincial prisons. Four of them were alleged to have been beaten or tortured with electric shocks during interrogation about their suspected activities in support of Prince Sihanouk's forces. Three were farmers from the majority Khmer ethnic group, the other a rubber
plantation worker from the Muslim Cham ethnic minority.
In another case, a 56-year-old farmer, Le Chan, was reportedly arrested on political grounds. He was said to be suffering from chronic tuberculosis and to be at risk of death if subjected to harsh conditions in detention.
Amnesty International expressed concern to the PRK Government about Le Chan's case and repeatedly urged it to provide details about the fate of people reportedly arrested on political grounds, and to ensure that they were not held for long periods without charge or trial and were not ill-treated in custody. Amnesty International sought more information from the government about the amnesty for "reformed prisoners" announced in May and frequently repeated its longstanding request to visit Kampuchea to discuss its human rights concerns. None of the organization's requests received a response.
In September Amnesty International wrote to the PRK authorities and to opposition leaders, including those involved in the peace negotiations, suggesting ways in which effective human rights protection mechanisms could be included in a political settlement of the Kampuchean conflict. The organization suggested that a peace agreement should commit Kampuchea to abide by international human rights treaties and to permit international human rights investigators access to the country.
