CUBA
At least two prisoners of conscience and about a dozen others who may have been prisoners of conscience were imprisoned throughout the year. However the majority of prisoners convicted of state security crimes, including nine known prisoners of conscience, were released. Several people, including three former political prisoners, were sent to prison on public order charges which may have been politically motivated. Some were alleged to have been assaulted at the time of their arrest. At least nine people were believed to be under sentence of death or facing charges carrying the death penalty but no executions were known to have been carried out.
The revised version of the 1979 penal code, which had been adopted in 1987 as part of a process of "rectification", came into effect in April. It reduced maximum sentences for some offences and increased the number of offences for which punishments other than imprisonment might be imposed. However the articles under which prosecution most often resulted in
imprisonment of prisoners of conscience were not substantially amended. These included Article 103, covering "enemy propaganda", and Articles 216 and 217, relating to "illegal exit" from Cuba. The number of capital offences was reduced but the death penalty continued to be an option in 23 articles.
In April the President of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) visited Cuba; as a result for the first time the ICRC received permission to visit people detained for reasons of state security. In September, a delegation from the United Nations Commission on Human Rights visited the country at the invitation of the Cuban Government. In March the Secretary General and two other staff members of Amnesty International visited Cuba at the invitation of Vice-President Carlos Rafael Rodriguez, and many other visiting delegations were given access to prisons and prisoners throughout the year.
In accordance with an agreement made in June 1987 between the Cuban Government and the United States Catholic Conference, a process began in January whereby over 300 political prisoners were to be released and permitted to go to the United States. They included prisoners of conscience as well as some of the so-called plantados históricos, historical plantados - political prisoners held since the 1960s and 1970s who had refused to obey certain prison regulations - whose conditions of imprisonment had given cause for concern in the past. Other convicted political prisoners were released as a result of a review of cases carried out following the revision of the penal code, after completing their sentences, or after being granted parole.
In March the authorities told the Amnesty International visitors that they were still holding 455 prisoners (including eight regarded by Amnesty International as prisoners of conscience and 68 "plantados históricos") convicted of state security crimes, the only category of prisoners whom they acknowledged to be held for political reasons. However, in May President Fidel Castro told the Roman Catholic Archbishop of New York that all but 44 of these state security prisoners would be released. By the end of the year those still held reportedly numbered between 100 and 200, including about six "plantados históricos".
Ten prisoners of conscience were released during the year, including Pablo
THEAMERICAS/CUBA
Andrés Betancourt, Eduardo Crespo Govea, Dr Domingo Jorge Delgado Fernández, Ariel Hidalgo Guillén, Andrés Solares Teseiro and Julio Vento Roberes. Gustavo Arcos Bergnes - a prisoner whose case Amnesty International was investigating - was also released (see Amnesty international Report 1988).
In March the authorities told Amnesty International that 140 people were in prison after being convicted of trying to leave the country illegally. However, they provided no details and the identities of most of those held, who appeared likely to include prisoners of conscience, were not known.
Reports of Jehovah's Witnesses and Seventh Day Adventists being imprisoned for offences connected with the free exercise of their religious beliefs and of young men refusing to undertake compulsory military service for reasons of conscience were received but details were mostly impossible to obtain. It was also impossible to determine the numbers and identity of those held on charges that were not overtly political but may have had a political motivation, such as those applied to some prisoners held under the State of Dangerousness legislation (see Amnesty International Report 1988).
Two prisoners of conscience were still in prison at the end of the year. Amado Rodríguez Fernández was serving a sentence of 15 years, six months' imprisonment imposed in 1985 for rebellion, "enemy propaganda" and speculation. The charge of "enemy propaganda" was based on his possession of anti-govemment leaflets of a non-violent nature, which had not been distributed at the time of arrest, and there was reportedly no evidence at his trial to substantiate the charge of rebellion. He had previously served a long prison term after being sentenced in 1961 for "counter-revolutionary offences".
Fernando Villalón Moreira, the other prisoner of conscience held at the end of 1988, had been arrested in October 1986 in Santiago de Cuba and sentenced to a three-year prison term for desacato - contempt for authority (not a state security crime) - for shouting insults against President Fidel Castro during local Popular Power elections. He had previously been arrested in 1980 and sentenced on a charge of "enemy propaganda" to three years' imprisonment. An additional year was later added, apparently without trial, on a charge of desacato.
Several new arrests took place between September and November which appeared to be politically motivated and to have resulted in the imprisonment of possible prisoners of conscience. The first of these occurred while a delegation from the UN Commission on Human Rights was visiting the country at the invitation of the Cuban Government. Several people were arrested while they were queuing to meet the delegates and some were reportedly beaten by security officials at the time of their arrest. Four, of whom three were former political prisoners, were charged with public order offences and sentenced to three to six months' imprisonment.
Five members of the unofficial Asociación Pro-Arte Libre (APAL), Association for Free Art, an offshoot of the unofficial Cuban Committee for Human Rights, were jailed on public order charges, and a sixth was placed under house arrest, after they were arrested in October as they were placing a wreath at a monument to José Martí, a national hero, and reading out a declaration. The five received sentences of between seven months' and one year's imprisonment. Five other APAL members were arrested separately at about the same time and taken to State Security headquarters where, at the end of the year, they were reportedly still being held without charge or access to lawyers.
In November Tania Diaz Castro, President of the unofficial Cuban Human Rights Party, her son Guillermo Rivas, and his wife Aymé Lladó, were arrested outside Combinado del Este Prison, where they had gone to visit political prisoners, after being accused of getting into a fight with prison officials. They were reportedly arrested, tried and sentenced on the same day on charges of disorderly conduct and denied the opportunity to consult a defence lawyer. Tania Diaz and Guillermo Rivas were sentenced to one year's imprisonment, Aymé Lladó to three months.
In March representatives of Amnesty International visited Cuba for the first time in 11 years. They met Vice-President Carlos Rafael Rodriguez, the Minister of Justice, and other officials, and visited two prisons. They also interviewed over 40 political prisoners in private and met representatives of the Cuban Committee for Human Rights and the Cuban Commission of Human Rights and National Reconciliation.
The authorities told Amnesty Inter-
THE AMERICAS / CUBA / DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
national that a review of all judicial procedures had been in progress since 1984 and that prison conditions were being improved in accordance with the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners.
New information was obtained from prisoners about conditions at both Combinado del Este and Boniato Prisons, where beatings of prisoners had been reported. One prisoner serving 20 years for espionage said he had been held virtually incommunicado in Destacamento 47, the maximum security area of Combinado del Este Prison, from 1981 to 1985. He had been left naked in a small, dark and poorly ventilated cell and had received little or no medical attention. When the Amnesty International visitors toured Combinado del Este Prison, it appeared that improvements were being made to lighting and ventilation. However, it was reported that in May some of the "plantados históricos" were beaten by prison guards.
The Amnesty International visitors also had access to State Security headquarters at Villa Marista in Havana, where allegations of ill-treatment had been reported. The director denied that prisoners had been abused and stated that torture or ill-treatment of detainees would not be tolerated.
Problems relating to fair trial were also raised by the Amnesty International visitors, in particular the frequent denial to prisoners of access to defence lawyers before their trial and the limited role of the latter, who often confined themselves to pleading for clemency rather than presenting a proper defence. Government officials said that steps were being taken to resolve such deficiencies, notably in the context of a review of the Law of Penal Procedure, but no news of the progress of such a review had been received by the end of 1988.
Five prisoners were under sentence of death at the time of the Amnesty International visit and were awaiting a decision by the Council of State, which has the power to grant clemency. They included Arturo Suárez Ramos, who had been convicted on state security charges in connection with the attempted hi-jacking of an aircraft. Four others had been sentenced to death in the first instance and were awaiting the outcome of appeals to the People's Supreme Court. The sentence on Arturo Suárez Ramos was later commuted to 30
years' imprisonment by the Council of State but no news had been received of the other eight cases by the end of 1988. In November news was received of a death sentence passed on Evangelisto Almaguer Guillén for double murder and by the end of December it was believed to be pending a decision by the Council of State. No one was known to have been executed during 1988.
In March the Minister of Justice informed Amnesty International that 237 people had been sentenced to death between 1959 and 1987, of whom 206 had been executed. Since 1984,11 people convicted of criminal offences had been executed but there had been no executions of people convicted under state security legislation.
The findings of the Amnesty International visit in March were included in a document - Recent Developments af/ect-ingthe Situation of Political Prisonersand the Use o/the Death Penalty-published in September. Following the visit, Amnesty International continued to urge the government to release the remaining prisoners of conscience, to ensure that all prisoners were protected against ill-treatment and to commute all death sentences. Amnesty International also sought information from the authorities concerning an incident in Combinado del Este Prison in May when a number of "plantados históricos" were reportedly injured by prison guards, as well as about people imprisoned on public order charges later in the year. Little substantial response to any of the matters raised after the March visit had been received by the end of the year.
