ALGERIA
Hundreds of people were killed and thousands arrested in the wake of wide» spread unrest in Algerian towns and cities in early October. Some of those detained may have been prisoners of conscience. Many were subjected to torture or ill-treatment by police and security forces. Over 180 political prisoners, some of them possible prisoners of conscience, remained in prison following unfair trials in 1987. There was at least one death sentence but no executions were known to have been carried out.
In the wake of the October unrest, President Chadli Benjedid proposed a number of constitutional changes which were accepted in a national referendum in November. Their main effect was to make the Prime Minister and the government answerable to the elected Assemblé populaire nationale, the National Assembly.
Widespread civil unrest broke out in October in protests against social problems including falling living standards. Rioting began in the Bab El-Oued district of Algiers and quickly spread to the city centre and the districts of Belcourt and El-Harrach. Government buildings and other state-owned property were attacked but privately owned shops and residential buildings were left largely unharmed. Rioting spread to other urban centres and there were violent clashes between police and demonstrators. Martial law was imposed on 6 October and army units were deployed in support of the police. Between 6 and 12 October, when martial law was lifted, mass arrests took place and hundreds of demonstrators were killed.
According to the government, 176 people were killed, most between 6 and 12 October, but unofficial sources suggested that the number of deaths may have reached 500. Women and young children were among the victims, many of whom died from gunshot wounds. In some cases
there was evidence that explosive bullets had been used by the security forces.
Some suspected opponents of the government, including suspected members of the illegal Parti de I'avant-garde socialiste (P.AGS), Party of the Socialist Vanguard, were arrested in the week before the riots. However, most arrests occurred during the rioting when thousands of people were detained. Many were demonstrators but many others were arrested at home or at work and may not have been involved in the disturbances. Police informants, in Some instances hooded to conceal their identity, were said to have been widely used to identify suspects. Arrests continued after the rioting.
By 16 October many of those detained were reported to have appeared in groups of 30-40 at trials in Algiers and five other urban centres using summary procedures. These were marked by serious inadequacies and may not have been fair. In many cases defendants did not have legal representation or were able to consult with lawyers only in court. Evidence apparently often included statements extracted under duress. Sentences of up to 10 years' imprisonment were imposed although the Courts of First Instance which tried these cases were only entitled to hear charges carrying a maximum five-year sentence.
On 20 October orders were issued for the release of all prisoners under the age of 18 and on 2 November President Chadli ordered the provisional release of all those arrested in connection with the October events, including those tried and convicted.
Although it appeared by the end of the year that all those detained had indeed been released, there were reports that several people who had last been seen by their families during the period of the riots were still unaccounted for.
Two alleged members of the Mouvement pour la Démocratie en Algérie (MDA), the Movement for Democracy in Algeria, one of them Daghnoush Abdelrahman, were believed to have remained in prison throughout 1988. They had been sentenced in June 1987 by the State Security Court of Medéa to terms of imprisonment of up to five years on charges including possessing subversive leaflets and violating currency regulations (see Amnesty international Report 1988). Both had benefited from a presidential act of clemency
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA/ ALGERIA/ BAHRAIN
of July 1987 which reduced their sentences by six months and one year respectively.
A group of 188 Islamic activists, convicted in 1987 by the same court on charges including plotting to overthrow the government, sabotage, murder and armed robbery were held throughout the year at Berrouaghia, Chleff and Lambèse prisons. Four of them had been sentenced to death (see Amnesty International Report 1988).
In both the case of the MDA members and that of the Islamic activists, convictions followed trials which fell short of international standards. Many defendants had been held incommunicado in police or military custody beyond the maximum eight-day period permitted by Algerian law. Most alleged that they had been tortured by police and military security agents and that their contested confessions had been used as evidence against them. The courts failed to investigate torture allegations adequately and there was no right of appeal.
Many people arrested in connection with the October riots were tortured. President Chadli Benjedid acknowledged this publicly on 27 November in a speech to the Congress of the ruling Front de libération nationale (FLN), National Liberation Front. He also stated that those responsible would be punished, although it was unclear at the end of the year whether any security personnel had been disciplined or prosecuted in connection with the use of torture.
It appeared that at first torture had been used to extract confessions from known political activists but later it was apparently used as a form of punishment or intimidation. Accounts of torture indicated that it was carried out in the Greater Algiers region at the military security headquarters at Bouzaréah, at the parachutists' barracks at Sidi Ferruch and at Lapérouse, and at the police Camp du Khammis where as many as 2,000 people are reported to have been held. Local police stations and unidentified villas and garages were also reported to have been used by the security forces to detain and torture suspects. In other towns, such as Mostaganem, torture reportedly occurred at the main police station.
Methods used - in many cases on children — included burning with cigarette lighters, electric shocks and sexual abuse.
Some victims, including children, are reported to have died under torture.
New information became available about an inquest into the death of Nabil Oumerzoug, a criminal suspect who died in custody in 1987 (see Amnesty international Report 1988). In July 1987 the inquest found that he had hanged himself. However, inquest documents made available to Amnesty International by the Minister of the Interior did not explain how the deceased apparently sustained severe head injuries and a ruptured spleen before his death.
At least one person was sentenced to death but it was not known if there were any executions. In February a Criminal Court sentenced Fatima Mefred to death for a murder said to have been committed for the purpose of witchcraft. Her appeal was still under consideration at the end of the year.
Amnesty International sent a memorandum to the Minister of Justice in July detailing the organization's concerns about a number of irregularities which occurred before and during the two trials before the State Security Court in Medea in June and July 1987. Amnesty International urged the authorities to establish an impartial inquiry into what had occurred and to initiate a full judicial review of the verdict and of the sentence passed on those convicted. Amnesty International also appealed for the commutation of all death sentences.
In October Amnesty International expressed its concern to the government at the widespread allegations of torture of people arrested in connection with the disturbances and at the high incidence of civilian deaths at the hands of security personnel, some apparently caused by the excessive use of force.
In November an Amnesty International delegation visited Algeria to investigate alleged human rights violations. It met the Minister of Justice, representatives of local human rights organizations and others, and received eye-witness and other accounts and testimonies relating to recent arrests, torture and killings. Subsequently, Amnesty International made known its findings in a communication to President Chadli. It welcomed his condemnation of torture and requested information on what steps were being taken to identify those responsible and bring them to justice.
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA/ ALGERIA/ BAHRAIN
Amnesty International urged that impartial commissions of inquiry should be established into the killings and the use of torture and recommended measures to prevent torture and ill-treatment.
