KOREA
(DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF)
Some 40 university staff and students were reportedly detained and two Japanese nationals who may be prisoners of conscience remained in prison. As in previous years, authorities and media in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) rarely provided information about arrests, political trials, imprisonment or the death penalty and assessment of human rights was extremely difficult. Some sources reported that thousands of political prisoners remained in prison camps.
Former prisoners now living abroad reported that suspected dissenters are subject to long terms of imprisonment in corrective labour camps either without
ASIA ANDTHE PACIFIC / KOREA (DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLICOF) / KOREA (REPUBLIC OF)
trial or after trials which bar a defence plea of innocence. According to these sources, a wide range of minor social misdemeanours are regarded as political offences punishable by internal exile to a remote area or by imprisonment. One unpublished, apparently authoritative report, based on information from visitors to the DPRK, claimed that at least eight major labour camps held over 100,000 prisoners, most of whom had been imprisoned for political reasons. One camp is reportedly near Sariwon, another near Yodok.
Isamu Beniko and Yoshio Kuriura, both Japanese seafarers, remained in prison throughout 1988. They were arrested in
November 1983 on arrival in the DPRK. During a previous voyage from the DPRK to Japan, a DPRK army sergeant had stowed away in their ship and subsequently sought asylum in Japan. The DPRK Government demanded the sergeant's return but he was permitted to remain in Japan. The two Japanese seafarers were held without trial until December 1987, when the Nam-po City Court tried them on espionage and abduction charges and sentenced them to "reformation through labour" for 15 years. Amnesty International investigated the cases of the two men, who may be prisoners of conscience, and continued to seek precise information about their trial, detention conditions and treatment. The organization received no response to its inquiries from the authorities. However, in 1988 the wives ofboth men received letters and photographs from them for the first time since their imprisonment began.
In June and July 40 academic staff and students at the Kim Chaek University of Technology and the University of Pyongyang were reportedly arrested in the capital, Pyongyang, following the appear-
ance of wall posters criticizing the government's economic policies. Amnesty International expressed concern about the reported arrests and asked for the immediate and unconditional release of the professors and students if they were detained for their peaceful criticism of economic policies. There was no response from the authorities and it was not known at the end of the year whether they were still in detention.
