IRAQ
Large numbers of Kurds and other government opponents were extrajudicially killed by Iraqi Government forces. Among the victims were whole families, including children. Thousands of political prisoners, among them prisoners of conscience, continued to be arbitrarily arrested and detained. Many were held for long periods without trial or following summary trials. Torture of political prisoners remained widespread, as did the "disappearance" of large numbers of people, many of whom, it was feared, had
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA/ IRAQ
been killed. Hundreds of people were reportedly executed; in most cases it was difficult to ascertain whether they had been tried and sentenced to death or extrajudicially executed.
In July the Iran-Iraq war came to an end. In the months before the ceasefire Iraqi Government forces had carried out a series of attacks on Kurdish civilians, including in areas in which the Kurdish armed opposition was active. In the weeks following the ceasefire there were similar sustained attacks on Kurdish civilians, thousands of whom fled Iraq to neighbouring countries.
In January an amnesty was declared for army deserters and for those who failed to report for military service, and in April there was a further amnesty for detainees convicted of certain economic and political offences and. under certain circumstances, of robbery and desertion from the army. Three amnesties were declared in September for detainees convicted of certain criminal and political offences, for all Iraqi Kurds sought for crimes committed before 6 September 1988, and for Egyptian nationals convicted of criminal offences excluding drug-traffieking and premeditated murder. In November a general amnesty was declared for those wanted for or convicted of political offences. It was not known how many people benefited from these amnesties.
Over 6,000 people, the majority unarmed civilians, were reported to have been deliberately killed by government forces and information was received about the deliberate killing of hundreds of others in 1987. Many were victims of extrajudicial execution; the great majority were Kurdish civilians, including whole families, killed as a result of large-scale military attacks on civilian targets. Amnesty International believed these killings were part of a systematic and deliberate policy on the part of the Iraqi Government to eliminate large numbers of Kurdish civilians, both as punishment for their imputed political sympathies and in retaliation for the activities of Kurdish opposition forces, which have included armed attacks on Iraqi Government targets.
Some 400 Kurdish civilians, among them women and children, were reported to have been executed on 2 April at Tanjaro Military Garrison, Sulaimaniya province. The victims were said to have been
wounded as a result of chemical weapon attacks on villages in the Qaradagh region in March, and to have been apprehended as they made their way to the city of Sulaimaniya to seek medical treatment. Information was also received that in April 1987 some 360 people from the village of Shaikh Wasanan, Arbil province, had been detained, reportedly after seeking medical treatment in hospitals in the city of Arbil for wounds inflicted as a result of chemical weapon attacks in the Balisan Valley in mid-April 1987. The majority were civilians said to have "disappeared" after being moved to an unknown destination outside the city. There were allegations, which Amnesty International was unable to confirm, that they had been executed.
On 16 and 17 March an estimated 5,000 people were deliberately killed and thousands wounded as a result of chemical weapon attacks by Iraqi forces on the town of Halabja, Sulaimaniya province, reportedly after Kurdish opposition forces had entered the town. Most of the victims were civilians, many of them women and children. The government denied responsibility for the incident and stated that Iranian forces had carried out the killings. In August hundreds of unarmed Kurdish civilians were deliberately killed and thousands wounded when Iraqi Government forces attacked Kurdish villages in the north. Thousands of Iraqi troops were reported to have launched attacks using tanks, helicopter gunships, artillery and chemical weapons on hundreds of villages in the provinces of Duhok, Mosul and Arbil. The offensive came in the wake of the Iranian Government's acceptance of a ceasefire in its conflict with Iraq. On 28 August Iraqi Government forces reportedly entered several villages near the town of Duhok and arrested over 1,000 people, some of whom were suffering from wounds sustained in chemical weapon attacks. Those detained were allegedly summarily executed and then buried in mass graves nearby.
In late August and early September tens of thousands of villagers fled the affected areas to seek refuge in Turkey and Iran. On 1 September the Turkish Government announced that it would grant temporary refuge on humanitarian grounds to some 57,000 Kurdish civilians. The Iraqi Government denied that chemical weapons had been used against Kurdish civilians
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA/ YEMEN (ARAB REPUBLIC)/ YEMEN (PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF)
and refused a United Nations team permission to travel to Iraq to investigate reports that such weapons had been deployed.
In January the Shi'a opposition leader Sayyid Mahdi al-Hakim was assassinated by a gunman in the lobby of the Khartoum Hilton Hotel, Sudan. The Sudanese authorities began an investigation into the killing amid allegations that Sayyid Mahdi al-Hakim was killed by an agent working for the Iraqi Government. According to a Sudan News Agency (SUNA) dispatch of 22 July, the investigation revealed that the escape car used by the gunman belonged to the Iraqi Embassy in Khartoum, and that eye-witness descriptions of the suspect implicated a diplomat at the embassy. The SUNA dispatch went on: "In view of this suspicion, the Public Prosecutor addressed a letter to the Iraqi Minister of Justice on 13th January 1988 requesting him to lift the immunity on the diplomat concerned so he could be interrogated." In February this request was refused and Iraq later recalled its Ambassador to Sudan in protest at the allegations.
As in previous years hundreds of executions were reported but it was not possible to ascertain the precise number. Those executed were said to have included members of banned political parties, other suspected government opponents, and army deserters. Many were reported to have been executed without charge or trial, among them five members of the Kurdistan Socialist Party-Iraq (KSP-I) executed in Arbil between^ November 1987 and lanuary 1988. The bodies of four of them were returned to their families bearing marks of torture. The body of the fifth, was allegedly buried secretly in a cemetery in Arbil. In December some 80 people were reported to have been executed in the Koi Sanjaq region of Arbil province. The majority of the victims were said to be army deserters arrested in mid-1988. It was not known whether they were brought to trial before execution.
Thousands of political prisoners, including possible prisoners of conscience, continued to be detained without charge or trial, or after summary trials. They included actual or suspected members of prohibited political parties such as al-Da'wa al-Islamiyya, Islamic Call; the Iraqi Communist Party (ICP); the Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP); the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK); the Kurdistan
Socialist Party-Iraq (KSP-I); and the Kurdistan Popular Democratic Party (KPDP). Others included army deserters and draft resisters. Relatives of such people were arrested as hostages in lieu of suspects being sought by the authorities. The children of political opponents were also arbitrarily arrested and detained as hostages in order to compel their parents or relatives to "confess" to alleged political offences.
Mirza and Mardan Rasho, two brothers arrested in July 1985 in al-Shaikhan when they were aged six and 13 respectively, were believed still to be in detention at the end of the year. They were reportedly arrested because of their father's suspected membership of the Pesh Merga forces (armed Kurdish units). In mid-December some 200 military personnel and Ba'th Party officials were reportedly arrested, most in Baghdad and Mosul, on suspicion of plotting a coup. They included two brigadier generals - 'Abd al-Ghani Shahin and Taleb 'Ali al-Sa'dun. At the end of the year their fate was unknown.
Routine torture and ill-treatment of prisoners continued to be widely reported. The victims included political prisoners tortured in order to force them to sign "confessions" or to renounce their political affiliations. Some political prisoners were reported to have been tortured shortly before being executed. The victims included detainees below the age of 18, who were said to have been beaten, whipped, sexually abused, given electric shocks and deprived of food. According to the testimony of a former prisoner released from Abu Ghraib Prison in 1988, female prisoners have also been hung upside-down by the feet during menstruation. Objects have been inserted into the vaginas of young women, breaking the hymen. Another detainee released from Abu Ghraib in September testified that he was tortured during 14 months spent in detention. Arrested on suspicion of working with the KSP-l Pesh Merga, he was allegedly beaten, given electric shocks and made to face a mock execution.
The fate of some 178 people who "disappeared" while they were in detention between 1980 and 1985 was still unknown at the end of the year (see Amnesty International Report 1988). Among them were 17 children aged between 12 and 17. Most belonged to Shi'a families from regions such as Baghdad, Karbala' and Najaf who
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA/ YEMEN (ARAB REPUBLIC)/ YEMEN (PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF)
were declared by the authorities to be of Iranian descent. The fate of some 8,000 Kurds, among them 315 children, who "disappeared" following their arrest in August 1983, was still unknown. All were male members of the Barzani clan, arrested in Arbil and sent to unknown destinations. It was believed that the arrests had been carried out in retaliation for the KDP's military activities: the detainees included close relatives of Mas'ud Barzani, leader of the KDP. It was feared that many had been executed.
Amnesty International repeatedly appealed to the government for an end to the deliberate killing of unarmed Kurdish civilians. It also expressed concern about the imposition of the death penalty and about allegations that some of those executed had been tortured before their death. In January Amnesty International urged the government to investigate reports of the security forces' use of thallium poison against political opponents (see Amnesty international Report 1988). There was no response from the government on the poisonings but in press reports Iraq's Ambassador to the United Kingdom described the allegations as "false" and "bizarre". In August, the government replied to appeals by Amnesty International regarding the reported execution and deliberate killing of some 360 people - including 17 children - in November and December 1987 (see Amnesty International Report 1988). The government confirmed the execution of 12 people among the 116 victims whose names were submitted by Amnesty International. One of the 12 was 16-year-old Ribwar Muhammad Karim 'Aziz, a Kurd from Sulaima-niya who had been arrested when he was 13. He had been sentenced to death by a special court and executed in Abu Ghraib Prison in December 1987.
In an oral statement delivered to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in March, Amnesty International drew attention to reports of the execution and deliberate killing by Iraqi forces of some 360 people in November and December 1987. In another oral statement delivered in August to the United Nations Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, Amnesty International explained its concern about the deliberate and systematic killing of unarmed Kurdish civilians by
government forces. An Iraqi Government representative responded: "with respect to the town of Halabja, my delegation makes clear that this town was the site of military operations, and that it was occupied during these operations by Iranian troops which used various weapons, including chemical weapons, against its Iraqi civilian inhabitants".
In September Amnesty International appealed to the UN Security Council to act immediately to stop the massacre of Kurdish civilians by Iraqi forces. The appeal was issued following the reported killing of hundreds of unarmed civilians in Kurdish villages at the end of August. In October Amnesty International called on the Turkish Government to allow international protection for thousands of Iraqi Kurdish refugees in Turkey who had fled the August offensive. The call followed an Amnesty International fact-finding visit to refugee camps in southeastern Turkey in early October and reports that some refugees had been threatened with forced repatriation to Iraq. Some 1,900 Kurds were reported to have returned from Turkey to Iraq after the Iraqi Government's announcement of an amnesty for Kurds on 6 September. At the end of the year their fate was unknown.
In May Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Iraq to the United Nations procedure (under Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728F/1503) for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations. A copy of the communication was also sent to the Iraqi authorities with an invitation to comment. At the end of the year no response had been received from the Iraqi Government.
ISRAEL AND THE OCCUPIED TERRITORIES
More than 25,000 Palestinians were arrested in connection with the intifada (uprising) which began in the Occupied Territories of the West Bank and Gaza in December 1987. More than 5,000 of those arrested were held in administrative detention without charge or trial; some were prisoners of conscience. Hundreds of
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA/ YEMEN (ARAB REPUBLIC)/ YEMEN (PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF)
other Palestinians were summarily tried and imprisoned. At least 40 Israelis were imprisoned as conscientious objectors for refusing military service in the Occupied Territories and others, possible prisoners of conscience, were brought to trial on political charges. Thousands of Palestinians were victims of beatings while in the hands of Israeli forces; at least nine were reported to have died as a result. There were also many incidents in which Palestinians were shot in circumstances suggesting that Israeli forces had deliberately used excessive force. In a number of cases Palestinians were reported to have died as a result of deliberate misuse of tear-gas. Several political detainees died in custody in suspicious circumstances. One death sentence was imposed but there were no executions.
Throughout the year Palestinians protested against the Israeli occupation of the West Bank and Gaza through demonstrations in which stones and other missiles were often thrown, and through strikes and tax boycotts. They also set up popular committees to coordinate activities and to create alternative structures to the Israeli Civil Administration. The Israeli authorities responded with measures such as widespread arrests and the use of force, which was often excessive and indiscriminate and resulted in the death or injury of thousands, including many children. The populations of entire towns and villages were often restricted by prolonged curfews, apparently as punishment. Monitoring human rights violations became increasingly difficult as journalists and human rights workers were detained, newspapers and press services were closed, and access to villages and towns was often restricted.
More than 25,000 Palestinians, including children, were arrested in connection with the inti/oda. In the first few months of the inti/ada hundreds of teenagers and young people were summarily tried, often
without legal representation, and sentenced to several months' imprisonment for disturbing public order. Many others were detained for several days and then released without charge.
More than 5,000 Palestinians were administratively detained without charge or trial on the grounds that they posed a threat to state or public security. They included many prisoners of conscience and possible prisoners of conscience. In March military orders for the Occupied Territories extended the power to issue administrative detention orders and suspended existing automatic and periodic judicial review of such orders. In June, after further changes, detainees could challenge their detention by appealing to a single Military Court judge and thereafter by petitioning the High Court of Justice. Appeals were held after delays of weeks or months, and were often the first opportunity - sometimes the only opportunity -detainees had to learn about the reasons for their detention. In almost every case detainees and their lawyers received information about reasons for detention insufficient to enable them to exercise effectively the right to challenge a detention order.
The vast majority of administrative detainees, including prisoners of conscience, were held in Ketziot, a new detention centre in a remote area of the Negev desert. Conditions at Ketziot were harsh: accommodation was in crowded tents which provided little protection from desert temperatures; medical services were inadequate; there were no family visits; and access to lawyers was restricted. Detainees were reported to have been beaten on the way to the detention centre and during detention, and subjected to arbitrary punishment. A high level of tension in the camp often erupted into clashes between detainees and the Israeli military. In the context of one such clash in August two detainees were shot dead.
Those detained under administrative orders included Ghazi Shashtari, a field-worker for the West Bank human rights organization al-Haq, who was arrested in December 1987. A former political detainee, he was held under successive six-month detention orders until December, when he was released. Raji Sourani, a lawyer in Gaza, was also administratively detained. He was held from March to
MIDDLE EASTAND NORTH AFRICA/ISRAEL-OCCUPIED TERRITORIES/JORDAN
September and was allegedly ill-treated while in custody. Ghazi Shashtari and Raji Sourani were among the prisoners of conscience held in administrative detention.
At least 40 Israelis were imprisoned as prisoners of conscience for periods of between 14 and 35 days for refusing to carry out military service in the Occupied Territories. Many others were said to have refused service in the Occupied Territories but to have been offered alternative postings by their commanding officers.
In July four Israelis were fined and sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment, of which 12 were suspended, for meeting officials of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) at a conference in Romania in 1986. They were convicted by a Magistrates' Court under Article 4(h) of the Prevention of Terrorism Ordinance, which makes it an offence to have contact with an official of an organization declared to be "terrorist" by the Israeli authorities. The court decided that the six months of their sentences would take the form of community service. On appeal their sentence was upheld by a district court. A further appeal to the Supreme Court was scheduled for 1989.
Four Israeli editors of the newspaper Derech Hanitzoz/Tariq al-Shorara were arrested between April and May and brought to trial on charges which included membership of and providing a service for an illegal organization. They appeared to be prisoners of conscience. Their trial was still continuing at the end of the year.
In March Mordechai Vanunu, a former technician at Israel's nuclear research centre, was sentenced to 18 years' imprisonment after conviction on charges which included treason, for having disclosed confidential information about Israel's nuclear capability to a British newspaper in 1986. His trial was held in camera. He continued to be held in solitary confinement with severely restricted access to visitors - circumstances which may have amounted to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. His appeal to the Supreme Court was scheduled for 1989.
In January, in what appeared to be endorsement of indiscriminate beatings, the Minister of Defence announced that the Israeli Defence Force (IDF) would prevent violent demonstrations with "force, power and blows". At about the same time
commanding officers were reported to have given orders to break hands and feet. Later the Minister of Defence said there were orders to avoid beatings as punishment or after arrest. The Attorney General wrote to him in February saying that he had received enough complaints about excessive use of force to convince him that the irregularities were not exceptional cases. He said that beating demonstrators in order to punish or humiliate them was illegal, and that it was illegal for soldiers to obey orders to do so. Also in February the Chief of Staff sent a letter to all IDF commanders in the Occupied Territories containing guidelines on the use of force. He said that these were not new but because there had been "aberrations" by soldiers it was necessary to "emphasize and clarify existing orders". He stated that force was not to be used as punishment or after people had been apprehended.
Despite these statements beatings of Palestinians while in the hands of Israeli forces continued on a large scale throughout the year. In many instances this was clearly intended to punish or intimidate. Victims were kicked and hit with fists, clubs and rifle-butts. They included children and elderly people, as well as wounded Palestinians forcibly removed from hospitals. Many suffered multiple fractures and other severe injuries and at least nine were reported to have died as a result. According to eye-witnesses, Khad-er Tarazi died in February after he was severely beaten by four soldiers in a house in which he had been apprehended. A doctor who examined the body said that Khader Tarazi had a fractured spine, right frontal skull fracture, fractures of each arm and right hand, and multiple lacerations of the back, stomach, face and limbs. Internal injuries could not be assessed.
Between December 1987 and the end of 1988 about 300 Palestinians were shot dead by Israeli forces. Thousands of others were shot and injured, many critically. Many of those who died were killed during violent disturbances but others were killed even though they appeared not to have been involved in any violent activities at the time they were shot. The IDF initially made extensive use of lethal high-velocity bullets which were supposed to be fired only in life-threatening situations after warning procedures had been followed. In August special types of plastic bullet were
MIDDLE EASTAND NORTH AFRICA/ISRAEL-OCCUPIED TERRITORIES/JORDAN
introduced with the stated aim of injuring more people but reducing fatalities. It was claimed that they were not lethal and therefore were usable in non-life-threatening situations within specific limits. However, several deaths were attributed to their use.
Palestinians in the Occupied Territories also died apparently as a result of deliberate misuse of tear-gas by Israeli forces, who were reported to have used it in excessive concentrations or to have thrown canisters into houses, clinics, schools and mosques despite manufacturer's instructions not to use the gas in confined spaces as it was potentially lethal. Between December 1987 and the end of the year over 40 people reportedly died following tear-gas inhalation. Among them were particularly vulnerable people such as babies and the elderly. In May Khaled al-Najjar, aged 55, was reported to have died after exposure to tear-gas from two canisters which landed in his house.
According to the authorities, investigations were to be carried out following every fatal shooting incident involving Israeli forces and could lead to disciplinary measures or courts-martial. Investigations of beatings were to be carried out apparently only upon complaint. By the end of the year official figures indicated that since the beginning of the inti/ada investigations into human rights abuses by the IDF had resulted in legal action against 45 officers and soldiers. With less than half of the cases completed 15 people had been found guilty. By the end of the year two soldiers were known to have been convicted of manslaughter for having shot dead two Palestinians; one soldier received a suspended sentence of one year's imprisonment and the other a sentence of 18 months' imprisonment. Seven soldiers were brought to trial in two separate cases of alleged beatings resulting in deaths; their trials were continuing at the end of the year. A few others were found guilty in cases of punitive beatings, the heaviest sentence reportedly being two and a half months' imprisonment. In cases of apparently deliberate misuse oftear-gas no action was known to have been taken.
A number of Palestinians held in detention centres were reportedly ill-treated and at least five died in suspicious circumstances. The official cause of their deaths was apparently suicide. In October
Ibrahim al-Matur died in the Dhahiriya detention centre, allegedly by hanging himself. He was reported to have been ill-treated in the days before his death, including by exposing him to tear-gas from a canister thrown into his cell.
In April John Demjanjuk was convicted of war crimes and sentenced to death. He was identified by the court as "Ivan the Terrible", a guard accused of having tortured prisoners and operated gas chambers at the Treblinka camp during the Second World War. His appeal to the Supreme Court was due to be heard in 1989.
Amnesty International was gravely concerned about a wide range of human rights violations by Israeli forces since the beginning of the intifada, and repeatedly called for adequate measures to be taken to stop abuses. In view of the scale and severity of such abuses, the organization also called for a comprehensive, independent judicial inquiry to look into, among other things, the guidelines on use of firearms and use of force in general; the apparent government encouragement of punitive or deterrent beatings and the legality of orders given to soldiers; all deaths at the hands of Israeli forces; and the methods of investigating alleged abuses by Israeli forces.
During the year Amnesty International published reports detailing its concerns about the use of firearms, beatings and the apparently deliberate misuse of tear-gas against Palestinians. In February an Amnesty International delegation discussed the organization's concerns with Israeli officials in the country. During the visit Amnesty International discussed a memorandum - submitted to the authorities in 1987 - concerning the legislation under which people could be imprisoned in violation of their right to freedom of expression.
In February Amnesty International delivered an oral statement to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights outlining its concerns since the outbreak of the inti/ada. In August it drew attention to its concerns about administrative detention in the Occupied Territories in an oral statement to the UN Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, and throughout the year submitted relevant information to other UN bodies.
Amnesty International continued to be
MIDDLE EASTAND NORTH AFRICA/ISRAEL-OCCUPIED TERRITORIES/JORDAN
concerned about the detention without trial and treatment of detainees held by the South Lebanon Army (SLA) in the Khiam Detention Centre in Lebanon, in view of the IDF presence in South Lebanon and its close relationship with the SLA.
