NAMIBIA
Suspected opponents of South African rule in Namibia, including possible prisoners of conscience, were detained without charge or trial, sometimes for months at a time. Many of those detained were held incommunicado in solitary confínement for weeks or months and some were tortured. There was evidence of security personnel complicity in extrajudicial executions. In March the South African State President intervened to prevent the prosecution of six South African armed forces officers accused of the murder of a former political prisoner in 1986. At least six people were sentenced to death and there was at least one execution.
There was continued armed opposition to the South African administration in Namibia by guerrillas belonging to the military wing of the South West Africa People's Organisation (SWAPO). They were involved in a number of clashes with South African forces, particularly in northern Namibia. SWAPO's external leadership was based in Angola but an internal wing, a number of whose members were detained during the year, continued to function as a legal political party in Namibia.
Long-running negotiations to terminate South Africa's occupation of Namibia under the terms of United Nations Resolution 435 of 1978 culminated in December in an international agreement according to which the UN was to monitor arrangements for Namibia's transition to independence from April 1989 onwards. The agreement provided for the release of political
AFRICA/NAMIBIA
prisoners and for all refugees from Namibia to be allowed to return with full guarantees for their protection. This was believed to include detainees held in Angola by SWAPO.
At least 100 people were known to have been detained for political reasons during 1988, including some who were probably prisoners of conscience. Some detainees were accused of assisting SWAPO guerrillas, while others were arrested on account of their non-violent opposition to South African rule. Few were charged or brought to trial. In February the authorities disclosed that 45 people had been detained during the previous two months in connection with security operations against SWAPO. By the end of the year, more than 60 people arrested for political reasons in 1987 or 1988 had been released. At least 38 others remained in custody, but the real number may have been considerably higher.
Those detained included prominent members of SWAPO's internal wing, students, trade unionists and a newspaper editor. A number of school students were detained in the north after they began a boycott of schools in March in protest against the siting of South African military bases near schools. In June Ignatius Shihwaameni, the Secretary General of the Namibia National Students' Organization (NANSO), and others were detained for up to three weeks after further protests in Katutura township, Windhoek. Trade unionists who took support action were similarly detained.
In response to the school boycott campaign, the South African-appointed Transitional Government of National Unity (TGNU) introduced the Protection of Fundamental Rights Act in July. This made incitement to participate in strikes or boycotts of educational establishments an offence punishable by up to 10 years' imprisonment. The new act took effect in early August and within weeks it was used to bring charges against Ignatius Shihwaameni and other students for participating in a boycott at Windhoek Academy. The detainees challenged the constitutional validity of the new act in an action before the Supreme Court, whose judgment was still awaited at the end of the year.
Others detained in 1988 included several people involved in monitoring or
reporting abuses by the security forces. They included Gwen Lister, editor of The Namibian newspaper, who was detained in Windhoek and held without charge for four days in June, apparently in connection with an article she had published suggesting that sweeping new powers were to be given to the police. In August two researchers collecting information about atrocities against civilians allegedly committed by the security forces in northern Namibia were detained for several days. These short-term detentions and other harassment of human rights activists monitoring abuses in northern Namibia added to the difficulty of obtaining information about the human rights situation.
Most political detainees were held under Proclamation AG. 9 of 1977 or Section 6 of South Africa's Terrorism Act of 1967. The former, an administrative decree issued by the South African Administrator-General in Namibia, confers wide powers of arbitrary arrest and detention without charge or trial on all security force personnel in areas designated as "security districts", and grants them immunity in advance for any acts committed in "good faith". "Security districts" encompass virtually the entire northern half of the country. Most AG. 9 detainees are held incommunicado for the first 30 days, but thereafter have right of access to legal counsel according to a Supreme Court ruling in 1986 (see Amnesty International Report 1987).
Apparently as a result of this ruling, increased use has since been made of Section 6 of the Terrorism Act, which permits indefinite detention without charge or trial and requires that detainees are held incommunicado and in solitary confinement. The Terrorism Act was retained by the South African authorities in Namibia when it was repealed in South Africa itself in 1982 and replaced by other security legislation.
Those detained under Section 6 during the year included Jason Angula, a leading member of SWAPO's internal wing. He was arrested in October 1987 and initially held under Proclamation AG. 9, but when his lawyer sought access to him after 30 days he was immediately transferred to detention under Section 6 of the Terrorism Act, and access was denied. The authorities suggested that he would face serious
AFRICA/NAMIBIA
charges but none was in fact brought against him. He was eventually released on 5 December, having spent more than a year in detention, the whole of which was passed in solitary confinement. He said after his release that he had been held in a small corrugated-iron cell at Osire, a former secret detention camp in Otjiwarongo district. He had been kept in his underwear and denied exercise outside his cell. He said he had not been tortured but had heard screams from other cells which he took to be the cries of torture victims.
Other released detainees alleged that they had been tortured or ill-treated in detention. Franz Hango, who was detained incommunicado and without charge from 14 April to 11 May by security police at Oshakati, was said on his release to be psychologically distressed as a result of having been tortured. He alleged that he had been tortured with electric shocks, had had a noose tied around his neck, and during interrogation had been made to wear a hood into which a liquid was sprayed through a tube intermittently, causing him to vomit. He had previously been detained without charge or trial between February 1985 and February 1986. After his release in May he initiated a court action for damages alleging unlawful arrest, detention and assault.
Security force personnel were charged in connection with a number of civilian deaths in previous years. However, in March South African State President P.W. Botha intervened to prevent the prosecution of six South African officers, including two colonels, who had been indicted in connection with the murder in 1986 of a former political prisoner, Immanuel Shifidi (see Amnesty internafionaJ Report 1988). Using powers under South Africa's Defence Act, State President Botha ruled that they could not be prosecuted because they had been acting "in good faith". An action contesting this decision was brought in the Windhoek Supreme Court, which ruled in a separate judgment before the end of the year that a similar decision taken in a previous case was invalid. In that case, four security force personnel had been given immunity against prosecution on charges of beating a political detainee to death. The South African authorities appealed against the Windhoek Supreme Court ruling to the South African Appeal Court. Its judgment was still awaited at the end of 1988.
At least six people were sentenced to death for murder, which carries a mandatory death penalty unless there are extenuating circumstances. In one case in April the court concluded that there were such extenuating circumstances but, nevertheless, the defendant was sentenced to death. There was at least one execution following a conviction for murder.
Over 100 SWAPO members were reported to be held prisoner by SWAPO at their bases or other detention centres in Angola. Most were apparently accused by SWAPO of spying for South Africa and had been detained since between 1983 and 1986. No information was made available by SWAPO during the year concerning their whereabouts or conditions of imprisonment, but in October a spokesperson for the organization suggested that those detained would eventually be released. In some cases it seemed that detainees had been detained elsewhere before being transferred to Angola. For example, among the detainees were reportedly two people who had worked for SWAPO's radio station — Kakune Kandjavera and Ben Motinga, the second of whom was apparently detained in Lusaka in 1985. Similarly, Bience Gawanas, a London-based barrister and SWAPO member, was reportedly detained on her arrival in Zambia from London in August and subsequently transferred to custody in Angola. SWAPO did not issue any information about the reasons for her detention. Amnesty International inquired about Bience Gawanas and others, but received no reply from the relevant authorities in Angola or from SWAPO.
Amnesty International appealed to both the TGNU and the South African authorities administering Namibia on behalf of individual detainees. It called for the release of prisoners of conscience, for all other political detainees to be brought to trial promptly and fairly on recognizably criminal charges or released, and for all detainees to be safeguarded against torture. It also urged an end to the use of the death penalty.
