UGANDA
In early 1988 there were more than 4,000 political detainees. Many of these were released during the year, including a prisoner of conscience who headed a local human rights organization. Until October there were fewer reports of human rights abuses by the army than in recent years, but in the last three months there were frequent and credible reports of extrajudicial killings of civilians in northern Uganda. Torture by intelligence organizations appeared to increase.
Throughout the year the government continued to face armed opposition in the north and east of the country. In April it concluded a peace agreement with the largest of the rebel groups, the Uganda People's Democratic Army (UPDA], which led to a significant improvement in security in the north. However, another rebel group, the Holy Spirit Mobile Force, continued to be active, as did a dissident faction of the UPDA. Rebels carried out frequent killings of civilians, particularly those involved in locally elected Resistance Committees. In February Holy Spirit rebels attacked Koch-Goma, near Gulu, killing more than 40 civilians, most of whom were chopped to death with pangas (large knives). Those killed included bedridden patients in the dispensary. In Teso, in northeastern Uganda, the government initiated peace talks with the Uganda People's Army (UFA) opposition group and succeeded in gaining the support of some local UFA commanders. Security in Teso remained precarious.
Large numbers of people from northern and eastern Uganda, detained since late
AFRICA/TOGO/UGANDA
1986 in tlie course of counter-insurgency operations by the government's National Resistance Army (NRA), remained in prison. Although sometimes referred to by the government as "prisoners of war", it appeared that the majority were not members of armed opposition groups but villagers suspected of supporting rebels. These prisoners were held without charge - indeed, without any legal status - in civil prisons under the authority of the military. The government informed Amnesty International in February that there were 4,183 such prisoners, nicknamed "lodgers". Although many were released following the April peace accords, nearly 3,000 remained in detention at the end of the year.
At the beginning of the year there were approximately 200 children among the "lodgers", some of them less than 10 years old. Many had been held for a year or more, suggesting that the government was making little effort to review their cases speedily. Children at Luzira Upper Prison and Luzira Remand Prison slept separately from adult prisoners but otherwise mixed freely with them, including with convicted criminals at Upper Prison. At Mur-chison Bay Prison juvenile prisoners were not segregated at all, in breach of the requirements of the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. In April 94 children were released but an unknown number remained in detention at the end of the year.
In March President Yoweri Museveni ordered the release of Lance Seera Muwan-ga. Secretary General of the Uganda Human Rights Activists, imprisoned since February 1987 for criticizing the conduct of the NRA. He was the only person detained solely under the provisions of the Public Order and Security Act which permits indefinite detention without charge, and he was released only when diagnosed as suffering from cancer. Also released in March was Charles Ogwal-Engola, who had been arrested in December 1986 after he had stood surety for his cousin, an alleged political opponent of the government charged with a criminal offence. Charles Ogwal-Engola had been severely tortured by soldiers and remained unlawfully detained without charge. The High Court granted several writs of habeas corpus in his favour but these were ignored by the NRA until March 1988 when he was finally presented in court and released.
A number of journalists faced criminal charges for publishing reports which displeased the authorities. Francis Odida, editor of the Sunday Review, was charged with treason in January after he had published an article alleged by the government to be sympathetic to the Holy Spirit rebels. It appeared that the main reason for his being charged with treason rather than the lesser offence of sedition was to prevent him being released on bail. However, in August he was granted bail on special grounds of age and ill-health, although surety was unusually high. The case had not been heard by the end of the year.
In April John Kakooza - already on police bond for sedition - and Joseph Kiggundu, editor and deputy editor respectively of The Citizen, were arrested on sedition charges and released on police bond. They had published an article criticizing delays in bringing to trial four men charged with the murder of former Energy Minister Andrew Kayiira in March 1987. Later in the year John Kakooza was informed that the state was not proceeding with charges against him, though those against Joseph Kiggundu remained.
Charles Kagenda-Atwooki, information secretary of the Uganda People's Congress (UPC), the party of former President Milton Obote, had been arrested by police in December 1987 and immediately handed over to military intelligence, which has no powers of arrest or detention. He was held unlawfully until March 1988 when he was charged with terrorism - for which courts may not grant bail - and possession of seditious publications. The terrorism charge was later dropped and he was released on bail. His trial began in November when it emerged that his alleged offence was to be found in possession of two publications by exiled opposition groups.
In March the trial concluded of seven people arrested in October 1986 and charged with treason (see Amnesty international Report 1988). Three of the accused were found guilty and sentenced to death; the other four were acquitted. One of those released. Major Fred Mpiso, was promptly redetained and he apparently remained in military barracks at the end of the year. The authorities were not known to have stated the legal basis for his imprisonment.
In August the High Court acquitted four members of the minority Uganda Freedom
AFRICA/TOGO/UGANDA
Movement (UFM) on charges of murdering their leader, former Minister Andrew Kayiira. The four were promptly rede-tained and apparently remained in detention without charge at the end of the year. The lack of a conviction revived fears that Andrew Kayiira may have been killed by members of the NRA.
Reports of the torture of prisoners in the custody of the NRA continued, the most persistent coming from the north and east. In early 1988 there were reports of systematic torture at Bishop Kitching College in Ngora, which had been commandeered by the NRA as a barracks. In January and February a number of people were alleged to have died as a result of being beaten there. They included Hannington Odeke, a carpenter, a teacher named Isenged, Julius Oluka and Mohammed Otim.
In October a senior official of the Internal Security Organization (ISO), Mwana-womuntu Katsigazi, and six of his subordinates were arrested after a prisoner in their custody in Kampala died, apparently as a result of torture. There were a number of other reports of torture by the ISO, including one case in which a prisoner is alleged to have received electric shocks to his genitals and had his testicles stapled. Military intelligence headquarters at Basiima House in Kampala also figured in reports of torture. Joseph Lusigazi is alleged to have been killed there in March by having a 15-centimetre nail driven into his head.
In January Johnson Adya and C.P. Obonyo were both reported to have died in Makindye military barracks, Kampala, as a result of torture. They are said to have been among a group of 30 prisoners arrested a few weeks earlier at Akalo, near Lira in northern Uganda.
There were intermittent reports of extrajudicial executions by the NRA throughout the year. In August, for example, soldiers are reported to have killed a group of civilians after guerrillas had attacked a local army detachment near Minakulu in Apac District. Those killed were alleged by the army to have collaborated with the guerrillas. From late October, when the NRA launched a major offensive against rebels in Gulu District, there were persistent accounts of army killings. In the course of the NRA operation tens of thousands of local people were displaced from their homes and sought refuge in camps near
Gulu town. Their huts, granaries and crops were burnt, ostensibly to prevent them from falling into rebel hands. A number of killings appear to have occurred when soldiers forced villagers to remain in their huts while they were burnt. In several cases reported to Amnesty International entire families are said to have been killed in this way. In December the NRA commander, Major-General Elly Tumwiine, responded to Amnesty International appeals by announcing an inquiry into allegations of army killings. This inquiry was to be composed both of soldiers and representatives of the local Gulu community.
At least 10 death sentences were imposed for offences that included murder, armed robbery and treason. In June Cris-pus Rwakasiisi, a former Minister of State under President Milton Obote, was sentenced to death along with a former official of the National Security Agency. The High Court had found them guilty of kidnapping with intent to murder seven men in 1981. The seven included some whose "disappearance" had been investigated by Amnesty International.
At least three soldiers were publicly executed after being found guilty of murder or armed robbery by NRA disciplinary tribunals. Soldiers accused before such tribunals had no automatic right to be defended by a lawyer or to appeal against sentence or conviction.
Amnesty International urged the government to release all political detainees unless they were to be charged and brought promptly to trial, and to give particular priority to detained children. The organization pressed for inquiries into reports of torture and extrajudicial executions and for clear public instructions to be given to soldiers and security officials forbidding such abuses. Amnesty International urged the government to commute the sentences of all those facing the death penalty as a first step towards eventual abolition of the penalty. In February Amnesty International representatives visited Uganda to gather information, visit prisoners in the Luzira prisons and meet government representatives.
AFWCA/ZAIRE
