NIGER
In a trial which appeared not to conform to international standards, four people were sentenced to death in absentia and 16 others received prison terms. They had been convicted in connection with an unsuccessful coup attempt in 1983. Thirteen of the 16 had been acquitted on the same charges only two months before. The whereabouts of a number of political prisoners arrested in 1985 remained unclear.
During the year the head of state. President AH Saïbou, appointed a commission to prepare a new constitution - the previous constitution had been suspended in April 1974. He also announced the formation of a new political party, the Mouvement national de la société de développement (MNSD), National Movement for the Development of Society, and proposed that Niger should become a one-party state. Membership of any other political party remained illegal but no new arrests of suspected government opponents were reported.
In April the Minister of Justice announced that the government was to create a National Human Rights Commission whose members would be appointed by the government, trade unions and official religious and women's associations. However, the commission had not been established by the end of the year.
In August 28 people charged with involvement in an unsuccessful coup attempt in October 1983 - 24 of whom had already been in custody for five years -were brought to trial. Four of the defendants had not been arrested and were tried
AFRICA/NIGER
in absentia. These included the former security adviser to the head of state. Amadou Oumarou - known as "Bonkano" -and the head of the presidential guard. Lieutenant Amadou Idrissa. In bringing the 28 people to trial the government was fulfilling a public commitment made in late 1987, when other untried political detainees were released.
The trial, which took two days, was held in camera before the Cour de sûreté de J'Etat. State Security Court, in an army barracks near the capital city of Niamey. Two defendants were sentenced to life imprisonment, one received a nine-year prison term and the four defendants tried in absentia were sentenced to death. The remaining 21 were acquitted. However, the day after their release, they were rede-tained. Shortly afterwards the government announced that the prosecution was appealing to the highest judicial body in the country, the Cour d'Etat, State Court, to annul the August verdict and sentences and to order a retrial. The exact legal procedure invoked by the authorities was unclear.
The August verdicts were eventually annulled on the grounds that certain legal procedures had not been respected. All 28 defendants were retried by the State Security Court in October, again in camera, but this time only eight were acquitted. The four tried in absentia were again sentenced to death. Fifteen prisoners received sentences of between five and 10 years, and one. Commandant Amadou Seydou, was sentenced to 20 years. No details of the charges on which the 20 defendants were convicted were disclosed but the authorities indicated that they concerned offences against the security of the state. It was also unclear whether the defendants had been allowed counsel of their own choice and whether the court's procedures met international standards. Members of the armed forces had served as judges. This, and the fact that the reasons and legal basis for the prosecution's August appeal against the acquittals had never been explained in public, suggested that the defendants' right to trial by an independent and impartial court had not been respected.
One prisoner of conscience, Moustapha Souleymane Lié, was released in February. He had been arrested in 1985 on account of his suspected involvement in drafting a manifesto for the opposition Parti socialiste
AFRICA/NIGER/NIGERIA
r^voJutionnaire, Revolutionary Socialist Party. Soon after his arrest, he was subjected to torture, including electric shocks, which resulted in serious damage to his hands. He was held without trial until his release.
The fate of five political prisoners arrested in 1985 remained unknown and by the end of the year the authorities had not responded to requests to account for them. The prisoners were among a group of 12 people sentenced to death in 1985 in connection with an attack on government buildings in Tchin Tabaraden. The sentences on seven of them were commuted to life imprisonment in 1987 and in July 1988 they were reduced to 30 years. However, the fate of the remaining five was unknown and it seemed they might have died in prison, possibly as a result of torture in 1985.
Amnesty International sought information from the government on several occasions about the five political prisoners who remain unaccounted for. The organization also requested information about the procedures followed in the trials in August and October. It had received no response by the end of the year.
