URUGUAY
Two naval officers were detained for signing a petition calling for a referendum on a law limiting prosecutions for past human rights violations. The Supreme Court ruled in May that the law, under which more than 40 cases of alleged human rights violations had been closed, was constitutional. An official investigation into the case of a man who "disappeared" in 1973 exonerated the armed forces of responsibility.
Captain Bernardo Gastón Silbermann Victoria and Sub-lieutenant Sergio Re-tamoso, both serving naval officers, were detained by order of the Ministry of Defence because they had signed a petition seeking a referendum on the Ley de Caducidad, Expiry Law. This law, passed in December 1986, ended state powers to prosecute military and police personnel for human rights violations committed during the period of military government (see Amnesty International Report 1988). Bernardo Gastón Silbermann was held between August and October in the navy detention centre in Montevideo. In September Sergio Retamoso was placed in military detention for 42 days. Amnesty International considered the two officers to be prisoners of conscience, detained for
the peaceful expression of their views.
Under the Constitution, serving military personnel may not participate in political activity, "with the exception of voting". Supporters of the imprisoned officers argued that, as voters, they were entitled to sign a petition for a referendum. The Constitution allows a legislative referendum if called for by "25 per cent of all those registered and qualified to vote". In 1987 opponents of the law had collected 634,000 signatures and submitted them to the Electoral Court for verification.
Throughout the year there was controversy over the Electoral Court's procedures but in December, after more than 35,000 disputed signatures were confirmed, the court declared that the required number of signatures - 555,000 -had been validated. The referendum is due to take place in 1989.
An official investigation into a longstanding "disappearance" was concluded in January but failed to account adequately for the fate of the victim, Roberto Julio Gomensoro Josmàn, a university professor. He had "disappeared" on 12 March 1973, about three months before military rule began. The government nevertheless ruled that the case fell within the scope of the Expiry Law and should be investigated by a military prosecutor. The prosecutor concluded that there was no clear evidence of Roberto Gomensoro's detention. However, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and an armed forces communiqué stated in 1973 that the professor had been detained on 13 March 1973 and later escaped. Moreover, a joint statement by the Ministries of the Interior, of Defence and of Education on 24 November 1973, which was published in the national press at the time, named Roberto Gomensoro among a number of university staff and students who had been committed for trial on subversion charges. When investigating the case, the prosecutor had sought information from the armed forces, the Ministry of the Interior and the Ministry of Defence but all denied that they had any record of Roberto Gomensoro's arrest. The prosecutor's conclusion - that evidence did not support police and military personnel responsibility for Roberto Gomensoro's "disappearance" -appeared to be inconsistent with the government's Expiry Law ruling that the case involved violations by such personnel.
At the end of the year five other cases of
THE AMERtCAS/URUGUAY/VENEZUELA
"disappearance" were under investigation by another military prosecutor. Ricardo Alfonso Blanco Valiente. Juan Manuel Brieba, Oscar Tassino Asteazu, Lorenzo Julio Escudero Mattos and Eduardo Bleier Horovitz "disappeared" after detention between 1975 and 1978. Eduardo Bleier, a dentist, had been arrested in Montevideo on 28 October 1975. For several months his family delivered clean clothes for him to the military authorities, although the family was not told where he was held. Several released prisoners later testified that he was severely tortured in an army barracks and may have died in custody.
Opponents of the Expiry Law continued to argue that it contravened the Constitution because there is no constitutional provision for ceasing to punish certain crimes except the mechanisms of amnesty or pardon. However, in May the Supreme Court of Justice ruled, by a three to two majority, that the law was constitutional. This ruling was based on the judges' finding that the legislators responsible for introducing the Expiry Law had intended to declare an "authentic amnesty". Similar rulings were delivered by the Supreme Court during the year on 40 cases of human rights violations committed under military rule. Victims, their relatives or investigating judges had initiated these cases.
In June Amnesty International published a paper expressing its concern that the Expiry Law had failed to ensure full, independent and impartial investigations into past human rights violations. The organization said that victims or their relatives had been denied the legal redress provided under international human rights law. It also stated that, by granting immunity from prosecution, the law might contribute to the recurrence of similar violations.
