CONGO
Many political detainees arrested in 1986 and 1987, including several prisoners of conscience, were believed to be detained without charge or trial throughout the year. There were new arrests of suspected government opponents, who were also detained without trial. Some long-term detainees were released. In August the head of state, Denis Sassou-Nguesso, com* muted a death sentence imposed follow-
AFRICA/CONGO
ing a major political trial two years earlier and shortened the prison sentences of three others convicted on the same occasion.
Four prisoners of conscience who had been held without trial since 1986 were reported to have been released during the year. Georges Mafouta-Kitoko, Florent Kihoulou and Christopher Samba had been detained since April 1986, apparently on suspicion of meeting to discuss the political situation in the country. Jean-Felix Demba-Ntelo had been held since December 1986, apparently because he was suspected of producing a leaflet in support of a former senior ruling party official who had been tried earlier in 1986 (see Amnesty International Report 1987]. When they were released - Demba-Ntelo in January and the others in October - the four had been detained continuously by the state security service since their arrest in 1986. None had been charged or had their cases referred to an examining magistrate, although this is required by Congolese law.
Former President Joachim Yhombi-Opoango and a number of his suspected supporters continued to be detained without trial throughout 1988. They included four military officers arrested in July 1987; a civilian, Lecas Atondi Monmondjo, arrested in August 1987; and some of the 60 to 70 people arrested in September 1987 in Owando, in the northeast of the country. All the arrests appeared to be connected with government suspicions of a conspiracy - its belief that members of the Kouyou ethnic group were planning to restore the former president who had given himself up to the authorities in September 1987.
Lecas Atondi Monmondjo had been Director of the Office national des librairies populaires (ONLP), National Office of the Peoples' Bookshops, at the time of his arrest, and appeared to be a possible prisoner of conscience detained for criticizing government policy. Following his arrest, he was held first at the Cité des 17, an estate of government-owned villas in Brazzaville often used to hold political prisoners, but in mid-1988 he was moved to a military camp in Brazzaville, where he continued to be held incommunicado. He reportedly went on hunger-strike for a time to protest against both this move and his continuing detention without trial.
Some of those arrested in Owando in September 1987 were reported to have been released in April but an unknown number of others remained in detention without trial despite indications by the authorities in 1987 that some might be brought before a court, and in contravention of the Code of Penal Procedure. This requires that all people who are arrested should be formally remanded in custody and have their cases referred to an examining magistrate within three days of arrest. Some of those arrested in Owando were kept in custody by branches of the security forces, including the armed forces.
They were held incommunicado and had no opportunity to challenge their detention before a court or any other review body.
Those detained included Father Joseph Ndinga, a Roman Catholic priest, who appeared to be a prisoner of conscience, and Thérèse Okouli, whose brother, Pierre Anga, was said by the government to be one of the ringleaders of the alleged conspiracy. Father Ndinga was held in Owando Prison; Thérèse Okouli at a military camp in Brazzaville. Both were in prison throughout the year.
Pierre Anga had escaped arrest in 1987 but in early July 1988 the authorities announced that he and two others had been killed by security forces, and that his brother, William Issambo, had been seriously wounded. William Issambo received treatment, but was reportedly still held at the end of the year. Pierre Anga's wife, 16-year-old daughter and other close relatives and associates were detained, although his wife and daughter were released after a few months. However, at the end of the year at least four of the
AFRICA/ CONGO / CÔTE D'IVOIRE
others arrested at the same time remained in detention for reasons that were unclear but appeared to be connected with their family ties to Pierre Anga. Those detained included two of Pierre Anga's brothers — Julian Issambo and Emanuel Apoya.
Claude-Ernest Ndalla, a prominent political prisoner sentenced to death after an unfair trial in August 1986 (see Amnesty InternationaJ Report 1987], had his sentence commuted to life imprisonment in August. Three others sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment at the same trial - two of whom had made self-incriminating statements after being tortured while in pre-trial custody - had their sentences reduced by five years.
Amnesty International urged the authorities to release Georges Mafouta-Kitoko and other prisoners of conscience and expressed concern about long-term detention without charge or trial of other suspected government opponents, some of whose cases it investigated as possible prisoners of conscience. The organization also made inquiries about the circumstances in which Pierre Anga and others were killed in July; it received no response from the government.
