BURKINA FASO
About 20 associates and supporters of former President Thomas Sankara, all arrested after a military coup in October 1987, were held without charge or trial throughout the year. Others suspected of opposition to the government of President Blaise Compaor^ were also arrested; most were soon released but six students and school-children arrested in connection with peaceful demonstrations in May
AFRICA/BURKINA FASO
were held for several months before being released. There were some reports of torture. Political prisoners sentenced after unfair trials in 1984 and 1986 were released in an amnesty in August. In December seven soldiers were executed for murder.
Captain Blaise Compaoré came to power on 15 October 1987 following a military coup in which President Thomas Sankara and 12 others were killed. The ruling Conseil nafionaJ de la révolution (CNR), National Revolutionary Council, was dissolved and replaced by a Front populaire, Popular Front. More than 40 people associated with the Sankara government, including former government ministers and officials and military personnel, were arrested immediately after the coup or in November and December 1987. They included Valère Somé and Basile Guissou, both former ministers in the Sankara government and members of the Union de lutte communiste - reconstruite (ULC-R), Union of Communist Struggle - Reconstructed, which was accused by the new administration of producing and distributing leaflets criticizing President Compaoré's government. Both men were among a number of detainees reported to have been beaten and ill-treated following their arrest in 1987. Other detainees were accused of financial improprieties but appear to have been held for political reasons. In March President Compaoré said that former members of the CNR would be brought to trial before Tribunaux populaires de Ja révolution (TPR), Revolutionary People's Tribunals. None of the detainees had been brought to trial by the end of 1988.
Valère Somé, Basile Guissou and 12 others arrested in 1987, including Ous-seini Compaoré, former head of the Gendarmerie nationale, were released in late March and five others were freed on 17 May. However, at least 18 people connected with the Sankara government remained in detention without charge or trial and were still held at the end of the year. Ernest Nongma Ouedraogo, former Minister of the Interior and of Security, was held in the Conseil de l'Entente building in Ouagadougou. Others, mostly former military personnel, were also held in the capital at the Gendarmerie nationale. Two more former ministers, Eugène Talata Dondasse and Juste Tiemtoré, and Etienne Zongo, formerly a security adviser to President Sankara, were held under house arrest.
There were more political arrests in March. Pascal Kinda and Hortense Sankara - a cousin of former President Sankara - were alleged to be in possession of pamphlets criticizing the Popular Front. They were arrested at the end of March and accused of subversion but no formal charges were brought against them and they were released on 14 April. There were further arrests in May in connection with demonstrations in Ouagadougou by students and school-children to commemorate the arrest of Thomas Sankara five years earlier, before he became head of state. Demonstrators had planned to march to Thomas Sankara's grave on the outskirts of Ouagadougou. Students and schoolchildren were arrested, as were two former ministers - Valére Somé and Moussa Michel Tapsoba - both of whom were said by the government to have helped plan the demonstrations. They and most of the others detained were released after a few days, although at least two students and four school-children remained in detention without charge until August. Some of those detained were beaten after their arrest while they were held at the Direction de la sûreté nationale, Security Service Headquarters, in Ouagadougou. Guy Yogo, a medical student, sustained severe head injuries and was admitted to hospital shortly after his arrest.
On 4 August some 30 prisoners, including a number of political prisoners convicted after unfair trials, were released in an amnesty to mark the fifth anniversary of the coup which had brought Thomas Sank-
AFRICA/ BURKINA FASO / BURUNDI
ara to power in 1983. Among those released were Paul Rouamba, Lieutenant Boukary Tapsoba, Ambroise Norgo and Yembi Barthélémy Kaboré, all of whom had received long prison sentences in June 1984 after an unfair trial in which they were convicted of a plot to overthrow the government. Nine other prisoners convicted in August 1986 were also released under the amnesty. They had been tried, under circumstances which may not have been fair, in connection with explosions in Ouagadougou and Bobo-Dioulasso the previous year.
In December seven soldiers were convicted by a military court in Bobo-Dioulasso of the murder in November of army officer Captain Guy Lamoussa Sayogo and his wife. The seven were executed by firing-squad the next day without an opportunity to appeal against conviction or sentence. These were the first reported judicial executions since President Compaoré came to power.
In January Amnesty International appealed to the government for the fair trial or release of those detained after the coup. The government responded publicly with a denial that any detainees were being held because of their political opinions and claimed that those in custody had been arrested in connection with offences they had committed while holding public office under the Sankara government. However, no charges were brought against any of the detainees. The authorities also denied that anyone had been tortured.
Amnesty International continued to investigate the cases of detainees who remained in prison after the releases in March and May. Following the new arrests in May Amnesty International called for the release of those held as prisoners of conscience and expressed concern about allegations that some of those held had been tortured or ill-treated.
In October Amnesty International published a 10-page report, Burkina Faso: Political Imprisonment and the Use of Torture /rom 1983 to 1988, giving accounts of the imprisonment of political opponents and torture under the present and preceding governments.
