LIBYA
About 400 political prisoners, including prisoners of conscience, were released in March, but as many as 90 were believed still to be held and some others remained unaccounted for at the end of the year. Changes in legislation on arrest and detention, trial procedures and the treatment of prisoners were discussed or enacted. In June the abolition of the death penalty was proclaimed as an aim of the Jamahiri society and Libyan leader Colonel Mu'ammar Gaddafi intervened to commute all death sentences. The policy of "physical liquidation" of political opponents was officially said to have ended. No executions in Libya or killings abroad were reported.
Colonel Gaddafi took responsibility for the release of political prisoners in March and proposed improvements to legislation on human rights, including abolition of the death penalty. In speeches and interviews he acknowledged that abuses had been committed in the past, particularly by the Revolutionary Committees set up in 1978. He specifically referred to the imprisonment and sentencing to death of innocent people and to deaths of prisoners under interrogation. He asserted, however, that
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA/ YEMEN (ARAB REPUBLIC)/ YEMEN (PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF)
such abuses had been an inevitable consequence of efforts to transform Libyan society.
In June an emergency session of the General People's Congress (gpc), Libya's supreme political body, adopted a constitutional document entitled The Great Green Document of Human flights in the Era of the Masses. It proclaimed the right to fair trial, outlawed degrading punishments and ill-treatment of prisoners, and restricted the scope of the death penalty, setting total abolition as an aim of the Jamahiri society.
In a speech to the same gpc session Colonel Gaddafi announced that Libya would ratify two major international human rights instruments - the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. In November Libya informed the United Nations General Assembly that ratification of these two instruments was being studied and that the periodic reports which Libya had to submit to international bodies monitoring human rights implementation but which were overdue were being prepared by a special committee.
In March a number of political prisoners - officially said to total 400 -were released from Abu Salim Prison in Tripoli. Among them were many prisoners of conscience arrested between 1973 and 1980 who had been convicted of belonging to banned political organizations. They had been tried, sometimes more than once, before courts such as the People's Court, set up in 1969, and revolutionary courts. In all these bodies proceedings had often fallen short of basic standards for fair trial. Some prisoners had been under sentence of death or were serving life sentences, others were reported to have been held despite acquittal or after the end of their sentences.
Prisoners of conscience who were released included Farid Ashraf and two others convicted of membership of the Ba'th Party. Farid Ashraf had been sentenced to death in 1983 by the Permanent Revolutionary Court, together with Mustafa al-Nawari, who is believed to have been executed, and Muhammad Hilal, whose fate was still unknown at the end of 1988. Other prisoners of conscience released
included alleged members of a Marxist organization arrested in 1973, students arrested in 1976 and writers and journalists arrested in 1978.
Musa Ahmad and other military officers accused of attempting to overthrow the government in 1969 and 1970 were among those released in March, as were the brothers of exiled political opponents of the authorities who had been arrested in 1982 and 1984. Several Berbers who had been in prison since 1980, apparently because they were believed to be associated with the ethnic club al-Baruni, were also among those freed. Others freed included political detainees who had been held without trial, and sentenced political prisoners who had remained in prison after the end of their sentences. Among those released there may have been prisoners of conscience who had not been identified by Amnesty International.
Announcing the release of political prisoners in March Colonel Gaddafi stated that "fewer than 100 persons" who had been involved in "treason and connections with foreign quarters" would remain in custody. At the end of the year it was believed that there were as many as 90 political prisoners, including at least five prisoners of conscience who had been arrested in 1973 and convicted of belonging to the Islamic Liberation Party (ILP). One alleged ilp member, Hasan al-Kurdi, was reported to have been executed before 1988 and the fate of another, 'Abd al-Qader al-Ya'qubi, was still not known at the end of the year.
Political prisoners still detained at the end of the year included possible prisoners of conscience such as Rashid al-'Urfiyah, a law graduate, and 'Umran al-Turbi, a dentist, held without trial since 1982 and 1984 respectively. Several people arrested following an armed clash near Bab al-'Aziziyah Barracks in May 1984 and others arrested in subsequent years on suspicion of involvement in armed opposition also remained in prison. Some were held without trial, others had been sentenced to death after unfair trials by revolutionary courts.
Regular visits by relatives to political prisoners who had been held in incommunicado detention since 1984 were allowed to resume in March. Colonel Gaddafi stated that families should be informed of the arrest and subsequent situ-
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA/ YEMEN (ARAB REPUBLIC)/ YEMEN (PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF)
ation of their relatives, including those who had been executed. However, full details concerning prisoners released and those in detention were not made public and the fate of a number of people who were not released was still not known.
All special courts and special prosecutors were abolished by May, except for the Permanent Revolutionary Court. However, this court was officially said to function only as a disciplinary body for members of the Revolutionary Committees; in the past, this and other revolutionary courts had convicted political prisoners after unfair trials which had sometimes resulted in death sentences and executions.
A new People's Court with its own special prosecutor was established in May with the aim of "strengthening freedom" and looking into cases of human rights abuse. However, it was also entitled to try political cases under laws such as Law No. 71 of 1972, under which all political parties and organizations are banned and which has been used in the past against prisoners of conscience. Cases before this court were due to be tried in two stages by different sections of the court - a section of first instance and one of appeal - with the possibility of final review by the Supreme Court. The People's Court was bound by the code of criminal procedure.
Following calls by Colonel Gaddafi for abolition of the death penalty, this became the declared aim of the Jamahiri society in the document adopted by the GPC in June. In an apparent reference to televised hangings in 1984 Colonel Gaddafi said that the sight of those executions had "disgusted" him and led him to change his views on the death penalty. In June he stated publicly that he deeply regretted that the death penalty had not been abolished by the GPC and he undertook to work for its abolition. He also intervened in June to commute all outstanding death sentences and indicated that the policy of "physical liquidation" of political opponents had ended.
Amnesty International welcomed the release in March of a number of prisoners of conscience and other prisoners whose cases had been of concern to the organization. It continued to press for the release of remaining prisoners of conscience and for prompt and fair trials for all other political prisoners, if they were not to be released. Amnesty International also wel-
comed the positive human rights initiatives announced in March.
In June, an Amnesty International delegation visited Libya and had discussions with a range of political, judicial and security officials. The delegates observed the GPC emergency session in al-Bayda and were invited to address the congress, to which they appealed for abolition of the death penalty. During the visit Amnesty International also appealed for the commutation of all death sentences and obtained assurances from the Libyan authorities that they had ended the policy of "physical liquidation" of political opponents. Amnesty International also called for review of all cases of remaining political prisoners, for information about the fate of several people said to have been arrested in previous years and whose whereabouts were not known, for the. adoption of safeguards against torture, and for the ratification of international human rights standards.
Following the GPC session in June, Amnesty International told the authorities of its regret that the death penalty had not been abolished. The organization welcomed the fact that abolition had been set as an aim: it also welcomed Colonel Gaddafi's commitment to continue working for abolition and the commutation of all existing death sentences. Amnesty International reiterated its appeals for an urgent review of all cases of remaining political prisoners and, in light of Libya's document on human rights, called for a review of existing death penalty and other legislation - such a review to be aimed at application of international human rights standards.
