BANGLADESH
Thousands of prisoners, including hundreds of prisoners of conscience, were released, but more than 100 people were arrested and detained without trial accused of anti-state activity. There were renewed allegations of torture of criminal suspects in custody and of extrajudicial executions of non-combatant villagers in
ASIA ANDTHE PACIFIC/BANGLADESH
the Chittagong Hill Tracts by government security forces. The death penalty was extended to cover trafficking in women and various drug offences. At least 46 people were sentenced to death.
There was a high level of political violence during the run-up to local elections in February and elections to the National Assembly in March. A number of demonstrators were killed when security forces opened fire on a crowd of Awami League (AL) supporters and others in Chittagong in January. Following the Chittagong incident, President Hossain Mohammad Ershad appointed a judicial committee of inquiry but its findings had not been published by the end of the year. The authorities, who asserted that the security forces had opened fire in self defence, stated that eight people had been killed, but the Bangladesh Medical Association put the total at 17 and the opposition at not less than 22. Some reports alleged that one man died as a result of a beating inflicted by police officers and that some bodies were cremated before relatives could collect them, although these allegations were denied by the authorities. At least 150 people were reported to have been killed in fighting between rival political groups in the local election period.
The National Assembly elections were held while the country remained under a state of emergency imposed in November 1987. They were contested by the ruling Jatiya Party (JP) and 76 small opposition parties, who together formed the Combined Opposition Group. However, the elections were boycotted by the main opposition groups - the AL and the seven parties allied to it, and the six-party alliance led by the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP), which jointly called a three-day strike to begin 24 hours before election day. The JP obtained 251 of the 300 seats amid widespread allegations of vote-rigging and intimidation.
Shortly after the elections the government released a number of people who had been detained without trial as prisoners of conscience for several months under the Special Powers Act (SPA) of 1974. They included Shamsul Huq Chowdhury, President of the Supreme Court Bar Association, who had been arrested in November 1987 and was released on 7 March. On 15 March AL General Secretary Begum Sajeda Chowdhury and AL leader Abdul Manan
were released, together with BNP leaders Oli Ahmed and Akbar Hossain. AL members of parliament Rashed Mosharraf and A.K.M. Feroze were also released. The high court ordered the release of Nirmal Sen and Mainuddin Khan, leaders of the five-party alliance, after petitions for habeas corpus were filed on their behalf Retired Brigadier Hanan Shah of the BNP was also released after a court ruling on a habeas corpus petition. Two leaders of a faction of the Jatiya Samajtantrik Dal (JSD], National Socialist Party, were also released in March. Hundreds more political prisoners who had been similarly detained without trial were released over the next two months.
After the inauguration of parliament in April, the state of emergency was lifted. A constitutional amendment making Islam the state religion was passed in June. No changes to legal procedures had resulted from this amendment by the end of the year.
In December over 100 people in the Hindu majority area in the southwest of the country were arrested under the SPA accused of having links with a Hindu separatist organization based in India. Among those arrested were opposition leaders and journalists.
The SPA permits local authorities to detain without formal charge or trial for up to 30 days anyone alleged to have committed a "prejudicial act" likely or intended "to endanger public safety or the maintenance of public order". If approved by the Ministry of Home Affairs, detention orders under the SPA may be renewed indefinitely. The SPA does not distinguish between activities which "threaten the life of the nation" and those which do not, nor between violent and non-violent actions. The broad formulation of the SPA allows derogations by the government from the rights to freedom of expression and assembly in circumstances which differ from those envisaged by international legal standards.
There were renewed reports of torture of criminal suspects in police custody, several of whom were alleged to have died as a result. Abu Sayed Moksedul Huq Rintu, a student from Barisal, had died in November 1987, reportedly as a result of beatings in pre-trial detention in Barisal Jail. A post-mortem found that he had died of head injuries, noting evidence of blows
ASIA ANDTHE PACIFIC/BANGLADESH
on his neck, head and back. Although the government said in September that this case was under investigation no findings had been made known by the end of the year. In September, following a private prosecution, police officers were convicted of the murder of Shafiqul Islam, a 17-year-old school student who had died in police custody in October 1986 after he had been held for three days in a Dhaka police station (see Amnesty International Report 1987). The police officers were sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment and a fine in the first case known to Amnesty International in which police have been prosecuted in connection with the death of a prisoner in custody. The case was under appeal at the end of the year. A case was also brought against a police officer from Babuganj district, who was sentenced to two years' imprisonment and a fine for torturing a woman in custody.
In July a bill introducing the death penalty for growing, selling or possessing more than 25 grams of narcotics was passed followed by an amendment to the Cruelty to Women Act which introduced the death penalty for trafficking in women.
At least 46 people were sentenced to death during the year, a considerable increase over the previous year. Of these, 41
-	of whom three were tried in absentia -were sentenced for murder. The other five were sentenced to death for smuggling drugs after being convicted by a special tribunal on charges brought under the SPA. The number of executions was not known but following appeals for mercy made on behalf of Mohiuddin (see Amnesty International Report 1986) andof AltafHussain
-	both of whom were sentenced to death following trials by Special Martial Law Courts which failed to meet international standards - President Ershad commuted both sentences to life imprisonment.
In the Chittagong Hill Tracts there were further attacks on law enforcement personnel and others by the armed tribal opposition Shanfi Bahini (Peace Forces) which resulted in a number of deaths and other casualties. In August the security forces and non-tribal settlers assisting them were alleged by the /ana Samhati Samiti (ISS), People's Solidarity Association, the political wing of the Shanti Bahini, to have killed over 300 people in Baghai Chari sub-district in retaliatory raids. They were also alleged to have raped several women
and girls and to have burnt the houses of suspected supporters of the Shanti Bahini. The government informed Amnesty International that an official inquiry into the incident had found that strife between tribal and non-tribal communities in the area had been exacerbated by "inept handling of the situation" by the local administration following an attack on the Security Forces by the Shanti Bahini. It said that some insurgents had been killed in an exchange with the security forces, that "a few tribals" were injured during the "civil commotion" which followed, and that one tribal person later died in hospital as the result of an injury. The government said that compensation would be paid to tribal people affected by the strife. No mention was made of anyone being held criminally responsible for the death. Amnesty International was not able to gather independent information on this incident.
Following negotiations between the government and some tribal leaders new arrangements for the district administration of the Chittagong Hill Tracts were announced in November and were due to be implemented in 1989. The JSS opposed the agreement and a tribal leader who had been involved in negotiations with the government was killed in December, allegedly by the Shanti Bahini.
At the end of the year tens of thousands of tribal refugees from the Chittagong Hill Tracts remained in India, and negotiations between the governments of India and Bangladesh on procedures for their repatriation continued without result. The Bangladesh press reported that small numbers of tribal villagers had returned voluntarily during the year.
In January an Amnesty International delegation visited Bangladesh and discussed human rights violations in the Chittagong Hill Tracts with President Ershad and other members of the government as well as with the authorities directly responsible for security in the Chittagong Hill Tracts. In particular, Amnesty International sought information about official investigations into past reports of human rights violations by the security forces, including arbitrary arrests of people suspected of political offences, torture and extrajudicial executions. The organization stressed the need for all such inquiries to be both impartial and independent. During the visit, the authorities undertook to pro-
ASIA AND THE PACIftC / BANGLADESH / BRUNEI DARUSSALAM
vide Amnesty International with further information about six specific incidents which had been reported; subsequently the government informed Amnesty International that three of the six incidents had not occurred and that the others were a result of communal conflict, not security force action. However, no details of the investigations into these incidents were provided. Some information was provided about the investigation into the alleged killings in the Chittagong Hill Tracts in August but the detailed findings of this inquiry were not published.
Amnesty International continued to express concern about deaths in custody allegedly following torture and asked the government to hold impartial judicial inquiries into all such cases, to make the findings public and to prosecute anyone found to have been responsible.
Amnesty International also expressed concern at the extension of the death penalty to new offences.
The organization urged the release of all prisoners detained for the non-violent expression of their political beliefs and continued to express concern at the broad formulation and application of the SPA.
