AFGHANISTAN
Many hundreds of real or suspected oppo-nents of the government were believed to be imprisoned, including possible prisoners of conscience. In September the government announced that they were holding 2,125 political prisoners, and that more than 7,600 others, most of whom had been held for political reasons, had been released since the beginning of 1988. Amnesty International could not confirm these figures but received reports suggesting that many of those released were transferred directly to military service. Some political prisoners were sentenced after trials by Special Revolutionary Courts which did not conform to international standards. There were reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners, although on a lesser scale than in previous years. There were also reports of extrajudicial executions by Afghan security forces and Soviet troops.
On 14 April the Geneva accords to settle the Afghan conflict were signed by the governments of Afghanistan, Pakistan, the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. The accords provided for the withdrawal of half the Soviet troops in Afghanistan by 15 August and the remainder by 15 February 1989. They also required the governments of Afghanistan and Pakistan to refrain from using force and engaging in subversive activities across each other's frontiers. The Afghan armed opposition groups, the Mu-jahideen, however, were not a party to the accords and refused to be bound by them. Consequently, despite the phased withdrawal of Soviet troops, the conflict continued unabated with arms supplied to the Mujahideen by the USA and Pakistan, and
to the Afghan Government by the USSR. Between January and luly over 100,000 Afghans were reported to have fled the fighting and entered Pakistan, although the government said almost 40,000 returned to Afghanistan between January and August under the official policy of national reconciliation. At the end of the year, over five million Afghans remained in exile, mostly in Pakistan and Iran. They constituted the largest refugee group in the world.
Information about human rights violations continued to be difficult to obtain and corroborate as a result of the war and social dislocation. However, Professor Felix Ermacora, the United Nations Special Rapporteur on human rights in Afghanistan, was allowed to visit a number of detention centres and prisons, including Pul-e-Charkhi Prison in Kabul, during his two visits to Afghanistan in lanuary and September. The visits formed the basis of a report submitted to the UN Human Rights Commission in March and of an interim report to the UN General Assembly in October.
The Mujahideen reportedly carried out a number of attacks which resulted in civilian deaths. They were also alleged to have killed several prisoners. For example, three wounded Soviet soldiers, captured during an attack on a military convoy near the village of Dila in Kandahar province, were reported to have been summarily killed.
Among the political prisoners released by the government were 23 members of the A/ghan MelJat, the Afghan Social Democratic Party, who had been held since 1983 and who may have been prisoners of conscience. Seven other members, however, were believed to be still held at the end of 1988 and reportedly included Abdullah Aziz and Ghulam Azam, both of whom have been held since 1983. A blind woman prisoner held since 1982, whose health had been of concern, was reported in August 1988 to have been released.
The situation of some prisoners, such as Dr Mohammad Younis Akbari, a nuclear physicist under sentence of death since 1984, remained unclear. The government did not respond to repeated requests by Amnesty International for information about the place and conditions of his detention. The government also failed to respond to requests for clarification of the
ASIA ANDTHE PACIFIC / AFGHANISTAN / AUSTRALIA
situation of two Afghans, Syed Abdul Samad and Mohammad Nazar, who were convicted in January of spying and counter-revolutionary activities after entering the country illegally with Alain Guillo, a French journalist. They were sentenced to 16 years' imprisonment. Alain Guillo, who had been sentenced to 10 years, was pardoned by President Najibullah and released in May in response to an appeal by President Mitter-and of France.
New information came to light about Shams Rahman, a 15-year-old schoolboy who had "disappeared" some months after his arrest in Kabul in June 1979. In November the Minister of Public Health informed Amnesty International that he had been executed in 1979 by the government of President Hafizullah Amin. However, there was no new information about the fate of other people who had reportedly "disappeared" in detention, such as Zia-ul-Haq, a young army lieutenant who "disappeared" in early 1983 after being arrested in September 1981.
Special Revolutionary Courts continued to impose sentences, including the death penalty, after summary trials conducted without defence counsel. Witnesses were rarely produced and the accused were allowed only 15 to 30 minutes to defend themselves.
There were reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners at security police interrogation centres, Sarandoi paramilitary police headquarters, prisons and Soviet military posts. In one case, a former government employee said that after his arrest in October, as a suspected Mujahi-deen supporter, he was kept in a cage for 20 days at the Sarandoi headquarters in the Shar-e-Nau locality of Kabul. During the first three days, he was punched, kicked in the stomach, beaten with sticks and rifle-butts and threatened with death by Sarandoi personnel. He was later released but at the end of the year he was still suffering from injuries inflicted during his detention. Another prisoner, a member of the Mujahideen who was captured in combat in May, was reportedly taken to Soviet military headquarters at Soor Khala in Parwan province. He was denied food for three days and then tortured repeatedly for three weeks. He was kicked, punched and beaten with sticks and rifle-butts during interrogation by Soviet military personnel.
He was still suffering from psychological and physical injuries in October when he was at last able to obtain medical treatment.
There were reports of extrajudicial executions by Afghan Government forces and Soviet troops. One incident occurred at Kolalgu village in Paktia province where, according to survivors and eyewitnesses, Soviet and Afghan troops extrajudicially executed nine captured Mujahideen on 16 January. They forced 12 of them into the village mosque, placed explosives inside, then detonated them by means of a cable. Nine of the 12 prisoners were killed. The explosion also caused the deaths of seven children when an adjacent house collapsed on them.
In May Amnesty International published a report, Afghanistan; Unlawful Killings and Torture. It described the Kolalgu incident and other extrajudicial executions of civilians in 1987, including some who were attempting to seek refuge abroad, reportedly committed by Afghan and Soviet forces. The report also detailed cases of alleged torture of prisoners by Afghan and Soviet personnel in 1987.
In April Amnesty International appealed to President Najibullah and to the Soviet authorities to ensure that allegations of torture and extrajudicial executions would be fully and impartially investigated and that those found responsible be brought to justice.
