THEAMERICAS/PERU/STVINCENTANDTHEGRENADINES
police announced that an army lieutenant was to be prosecuted for the death of Schubert Jean-Baptiste, who had been arrested in August and died during torture in the Dessalines barracks.
Torture and ill-treatment were widespread. Among the methods used were repeated beatings with fists and sticks and the technique known as djak - a baton is wedged under the thighs and over the arms of the victim who is then beaten repeatedly. One prisoner, René Pierre Louis, who had apparently been arrested in late 1987, was reported to be seriously ill in May when wounds caused by beatings inflicted on him at Recherches Criminelles became infected by worms. He was subsequently transferred to the National Penitentiary and was released in September.
Sergo Joseph, a possible prisoner of conscience, was arrested without warrant by soldiers at Les Cayes on 5 August, accused of writing anti-government slogans in connection with a visit to the town by General Namphy. He was beaten so severely that he required hospital treatment. Soldiers then sought to remove him by force from the hospital against medical advice, but he collapsed and was returned to the ward under guard until his release in September.
Many victims of attacks were labelled communists by their assailants. Victims included peasants, young people, priests and journalists. Many such attacks occurred in the capital, Port-au-Prince, the Artibonite, the Plateau Central and Jean-Rabel. In one incident on 14 August, four members of the Mouvement des jeunes de Labadie (MJL), Labadie Youth Movement, were shot dead and two others wounded by armed civilians and uniformed soldiers at Labadie, near Petite Rivière de I'Artibonite, as they were ending a peaceful meeting. Survivors of the attack said they recognized local security officials among the assailants, some of whom formed part of the team designated to investigate the incident. The latter accused the MJL of being a communist organization and ordered the destruction of a training centre the group had set up. No attempt was made to apprehend those responsible for the killings.
On 11 July the badly mutilated body of Lafontant Joseph was found in Port-au-Prince and it was feared he may have been extrajudicially executed. He was a lawyer,
former prisoner of conscience, co-founder of the Haitian Human Rights League and Executive Director of the Centre for the Promotion of Human Rights. He had received persistent death threats, including during the week prior to his death, and his name had been among the more than 100 on a so-called death list circulating at that time. The Ministry of Information announced an official investigation into his death but Amnesty International was not aware of any further developments by the end of the year.
In Port-au-Prince on 27 November, Michelet Dubréus and Jean Félix were reportedly shot dead in cold blood by armed men. including a soldier in uniform. A third man. Rock Mondésir, was detained and taken to a local police station. He was later moved to the SIRA headquarters and then to Fort Dimanche before being transferred to the National Penitentiary. He was reportedly accused of being involved in reprisal attacks against those responsible for the St Jean Bosco massacre but by the end of the year he had not been formally charged. He and the other two were said to be members of the Federasyon Asosyasyon Site Soley (PASS), Federation of Associations of Cité Soleil, which had publicly identified some of those said to be responsible for the St Jean Bosco massacre.
Throughout the year Amnesty International sought to obtain information about prisoners of conscience and other political detainees, and urged successive governments to take action to protect human rights. In September Amnesty International expressed concern to General Namphy's government about the St Jean Bosco killings and urged the immediate establishment of an independent and impartial inquiry in order to identify the perpetrators and bring them to justice.
Amnesty International continued to urge thorough and impartial investigations of past human rights abuses. A number of such inquiries had been established in 1986 and 1987 but only one had resulted in prosecution. Amnesty International made reference to past abuses, and to the continuing failure to resolve various "disappearance" cases which have occurred since 1981, in calling on General Avril to take steps to protect human rights after he came to power.
Amnesty International submitted in-
THE AMERICAS / HAITI / HONDURAS
formation to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, the United Nations Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances, the UN Special Rapporteurs on torture and summary or arbitrary executions and to the UN Expert on Haiti.
