COLOMBIA
Widespread and systematic violations of human rights continued against a background of escalating civil conflict. Over 1,500 apparent extrajudicial executions were carried out and 250 people were reported to have "disappeared". There were scores of multiple killings by paramilitary "death squads" which resulted in the deaths of hundreds of civilians. Further evidence emerged that "death squads" responsible for the majority of killings acted as part of or in coordination with regular armed forces. There were renewed reports of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners, particularly detainees arrested under new anti-terrorist legislation and held illegally in military installations. Hundreds of people, many of whom were believed to be prisoners of conscience, were detained under special decree laws and tried by summary procedures which failed to conform to international standards of impartiality and fairness.
Armed forces counter-insurgency operations were intensified to combat the country's increasingly active guerrilla groups. Such groups were responsible for an increasing number of bomb attacks and ambushes of government forces, some of which resulted in civilian deaths. The government ceded civilian authority in several areas of the country, which were placed under the control of senior army commanders appointed by decree laws issued under the state of siege legislation in force since 1984. The principal victims of political violence continued to be the civilian population.
Several guerrilla groups were reported to have killed people they had kidnapped and civilians in rural areas whom they suspected of passing information to the military. Peasant and Indian leaders who refused to submit to guerrilla control were also killed. At least three of the scores of multiple killings reported during the year were attributed to an armed opposition group, the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia, Colombian Revolutionary Armed Forces.
Following the assassination in January of Dr Carlos Mauro Hoyos, the Procurator General, apparently because of his efforts to combat drug-trafficking, the government introduced new anti-terrorist legislation under state of siege provisions. Decree Law 180, the "Defence of Democracy" statute, increased penalties for crimes against members of the government and for certain offences committed "with terrorist intent". It also conferred new powers on the armed forces and judicial police to search property and to arrest suspects without a judicial order but in March these were declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court of Justice. Nevertheless, in the following months there were many reports of arbitrary arrests being carried out by military and police personnel without judicial orders.
An alarming development during 1988 was a series of multiple killings of non-combatant civilians apparently suspected of having left-wing sympathies or of supporting anti-government guerrillas. Amnesty International received information on over 30 massacres carried out by paramilitary "death squads" in which some 350 people died. Many of these killings occurred in zones under stringent army control in the northern departments of Antioquia and Córdoba and the southern department of Caquetá. There were, however, no reported clashes between army patrols and "death squads", which passed unhindered through numerous army roadblocks in these areas. Although military authorities frequently attributed multiple killings to anti-government guerrillas, in several cases judicial investigations established that particular killings had been carried out or coordinated by army personnel and financed by landowners or drug-traffickers.
The banana-growing region of Urabá in Antioquia Department was one of the areas
THE AMERICAS / COLOMBIA
most affected. In March some 30 heavily armed men entered the Honduras plantation, and summoned 18 workers from a list; the men were lined up against a wall and shot dead. The gunmen proceeded to the nearby La Negra plantation where three more workers were killed. All 21 victims were affiliated to the left-wing plantation workers' trade union SINTAGRO. The killers, who wore plain clothes, moved freely through the region, unobstructed by a force of some 6,000 soldiers and police.
A civilian court judge was appointed to investigate the killings. She issued arrest warrants against three officers of the B-2 army intelligence division attached to the local Voltigeros Battalion and against two alleged leaders of the country's largest narcotics ring but left the country in September after her life was threatened. Warrants were also issued for the arrest of eight civilians alleged to be members of the "death squad", and for the arrest of the Mayor and police chief of Puerto Boyacà, Magdalena Medio Region, where the "death squad" - which had apparently been formed through an alliance of major drug-traffickers, landowners, and members of the armed forces - was said to be based. The Procurator General, Dr Horacio Serpa Uribe, stated that the killings had "the characteristics of political crimes carried out to punish party adhérences, ideological solidarity or to terrify entire communities". However, despite the issuing of arrest warrants, by the end of the year no arrests had been made.
Other mass killings appeared to be the result of indiscriminate attacks on communities targeted for their perceived political allegiances. For example, on 11 November 12 heavily armed men drove in trucks into the town of Segovia, Antioquia Department, opened fire and threw grenades indiscriminately, killing 43 people including three children and wounding over 50 others. The regular garrisons of police and military stood by while the killers moved freely through the town for over an hour. Their entry appeared to have been facilitated by the removal of military checkpoints normally stationed on the road into the town. Local army spokesmen immediately attributed the killing to left-wing guerrilla groups, but after the army version was challenged by survivors the Minister of the Interior said a "right-wing
paramilitary group" was responsible. The killings occurred after a series of death threats were made against residents of Segovia in the name of Muerte a Revolucionarios del Nordeste (MRN), Death to Revolutionaries of the Northeast, and Los Realistas, The Realists, apparently because a majority voted for the left-wing Union Patriótica (UP), Patriotic Union alliance, in municipal elections in March. Preliminary judicial investigations established that not only had the armed forces failed to protect the townspeople from attack but that army and police personnel, including the battalion commander, had directly participated in preparations for the killing.
In addition to these multiple killings, there was a dramatic increase in the number of apparent extrajudicial executions, over 1,500 of which were reported to Amnesty International. The victims appeared to have been targeted because they were active in left-wing political parties, trade unions and community movements. Many victims had previously been threatened in the name of "death squads". In the case of Beatriz Monsalve, a sociologist and leader of the Frente Popular. Popular Front - a legal left-wing political organization - and her assistant Luzmila Collantes, the victims left their home in Bogotá for their office on the morning of 11 August; neither arrived. Their bullet-ridden bodies were found the following day 12 miles north of Bogotá. Beatriz Monsalve, who was six months' pregnant, had moved to Bogotá from Medellin, Antioquia Department. earlier in the year after receiving numerous death threats.
The bodies of other victims were discovered in mass dumping grounds in remote rural areas. The existence of hundreds of bodies dumped on a rubbish tip in Miro-lindo, Tolima Department, was revealed publicly by the Regional Procurator of Iba-gué in October. This occurred after victims who had been left for dead, survived, and alleged that members of the national police had been responsible for their abduction and attempted murder. However, investigating magistrates were unable to enforce arrest warrants against police personnel, who were routinely transferred from the district or were reported by their superiors to have "deserted". The Regional Procurator of Ibagué reported having received death threats from police under investigation.
THE AMERICAS / COLOMBIA
There was also a significant increase in "disappearances". The bodies of some people initially reported to have "disappeared" reappeared days or weeks later, many showing signs of torture. According to local human rights groups, over 200 people who "disappeared" after detention in the first 10 months of 1988 remained unaccounted for. The Procurator General informed Amnesty International in November that the Public Ministry was investigating 917 outstanding cases of "disappearance". In some cases investigations by the Public Ministry had identified members of the armed forces responsible for "disappearances". However, none of the police and military personnel identified in the investigations conducted by the Procurator's office were convicted when the cases passed to the military court system, which continued to claim jurisdiction in the majority of such cases.
Tarcisio Medina Gharry, from Neiva, Huila Department, was last seen on 19 February when he was arrested by members of F-2, Police Intelligence Division, together with other students. At the main police station in Neiva, Tarcisio Medina was separated from the other detainees, who were later released. Eight of them later testified that they saw Tarcisio Medina inside the police station. Police authorities, however, have persistently denied responsibility for his "disappearance".
In November the Procurator General and the Minister of Justice presented a draft bill to Congress designed to incorporate "disappearances" into the Colombian Penal Code. In a public statement the Ministry of Defence expressed its objection to the proposed legislation, which it considered would "undermine the power of the authorities . . . who have as their principal priority the re-establishment of public order". At the end of the year the bill had not been debated by Congress.
Several political prisoners charged under the new anti-terrorist statute alleged that they had been tortured while held illegally in military installations. Nelson de Jesús Alzate Sanchez was arrested in June by military personnel in the Desquebrada municipality of Risaralda Department. He alleges that he was taken to the San Mateo battalion in Pereira where he and other prisoners were tortured before being transferred to prison and formally charged. Nelson Alzate claims that he was hung for long periods by his arms, which were tied behind
his back, and was beaten with sticks. As a result he suffered severe shoulder and arm injuries which were still evident when he was medically examined later. He was provisionally released on medical grounds in September.
In October three labour confederations called a national strike to press demands for wage increases and the right to life. The largest organization. Centrai Uniiaria de Traba/adores (CUT), the United Federation of Workers, estimated that 150 of its members and leaders were killed in the first 10 months of the year. After negotiations with the government to avert the strike had failed, President Virgilio Barco introduced special decree laws under state of siege provisions which declared the strike illegal, suspended the legal status of unions that promoted illegal stoppages, and allowed detentions of 30 to 150 days for those who promoted or participated in illegal strikes. Over 800 people, many of whom appeared to be prisoners of conscience, were arrested and tried by administrative and police authorities in summary procedures under which the defendants' rights were not adequately protected. Most detainees were released within two weeks, although at the end of the year charges against some were still pending.
In April Amnesty International published a report entitled Colombia, a Human Rights Emergency, focusing on the dramatic increase in "disappearances" and extrajudicial executions since the early 1980s. The report concluded that there was convincing evidence that the Colombian armed forces had adopted a policy of repression designed to intimidate and eliminate opponents without recourse to law.
The Colombian authorities rejected the report's findings as "biased" and "exaggerated" and described a series of measures announced by the government to improve respect for human rights, including judicial reforms, education programs and the appointment of regional ombudsmen. Amnesty International expressed concern to the Colombian authorities on numerous occasions that despite these measures human rights violations continued to be reported on a massive scale.
In his response to Amnesty International's report the Procurator General revealed that in a 16-month period the Public Ministry had initiated over 5,000 investigations into alleged abuses com-
THE AMERICAS / COLOMBIA/ CUBA
mitted by members of the armed forces and had applied disciplinary measures in scores of cases. However, Amnesty International received information on only one case in which such investigations had led to members of the armed forces being charged and convicted by a military court of a killing which was possibly politically motivated.
In April Amnesty International submitted information about its concerns in Colombia to the United Nations procedure (under Economic and Social Council Resolutions 728F/1503) for confidentially reviewing communications about human rights violations.
