UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
The Soviet authorities continued their 1986 policy of granting early releases and by the end of 1988 more than half of the 300 prisoners of conscience imprisoned in January had been freed. New principles of criminal taw were published, which would restrict the scope of the death penalty and give precedence to interna-tional standards over domestic law. Respect for human rights appeared to gain ground but against this background of fundamental reform fresh violations were also committed. There were new political arrests. At the end of the year around 140 prisoners of conscience were thought to be imprisoned, in internal exile, or confined in psychiatric hospitals against their will. At least 15 people were sentenced to death and seven were executed.
Mikhail Gorbachov was elected Chairman of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet in October. At the United Nations General Assembly in December he recommended that the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice should be binding on all states and announced that the USSR intended "to expand its participation in UN human rights monitoring agreements". The USSR had never before recognized the competence of UN bodies to investigate complaints brought against it by other states, or individual Soviet citizens.
On the same occasion. President Gorbachov also said that "in places of confinement there are no people convicted for their political or religious beliefs". It was hard to assess the meaning of this claim. Soviet authorities have never acknowledged that they imprison people for their beliefs. In 1988, however, they began to issue figures - often contradictory
- for people convicted under specific laws restricting religious or political activity. They did not answer requests for clarification, making it difficult to compose an accurate picture of political arrests and releases over the year. Of the approximately 140 prisoners of conscience thought to be still held at the end of 1988, most were would-be emigrants who had tried to leave the USSR without permission, or young men who had objected to military service on conscientious grounds.
Some 106 prisoners of conscience were granted early release in 1988, bringing to at least 374 the total freed since February 1987, when the authorities announced they were reviewing prisoner cases. In an unusual case, Valéry Belokopytov was released after his conviction for "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda" was quashed by a higher court. He had been sentenced in 1985 to seven years' imprisonment for trying to cross the border into Finland with notes for a book. To Amnesty International's knowledge, this was the first time that a conviction for "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda" had ever been quashed.
Three Baptists were freed for good conduct under a system of remission introduced experimentally in 52 labour camps. Another 14 prisoners of conscience were discharged from psychiatric hospitals, including Hanna Mykhaylenko, a Ukrainian librarian who had spent eight years in a maximum security institution. The majority of prisoners, however, were freed by pardon, enabling the authorities to release prisoners but avoid acknowledging that they should not have been imprisoned in the first place. Those pardoned included leading human rights campaigners who had been held in a special regime camp in Perm - the harshest camp regime - and at least 33 religious believers, whose release coincided with official celebrations of the Millenium of Russian Christianity.
The year was marked by political and legislative changes, which led at times to considerable social turmoil. In July the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet adopted decrees which created new armed security units to combat "public disorders", and further regulated the holding of public meetings. The measures were introduced without public discussion. Official commentators, as well as human rights advocates, widely criticized the way
EUROPE / UNION OFSOVI ET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
they were used to ban some peaceful meetings, forcibly disperse others, and detain their organizers.
In December izvestiya published new draft principles of criminal law, which would replace legislation in force since 1958 and lay the basis for new criminal codes in each of the republics of the USSR. The draft laws reduced the number of capital crimes from 18 to six - treason, espionage, sabotage, terrorist acts, rape of minors, and aggravated homicide - and exempted men over 60 and all women from the death penalty.
The draft principles provided that future criminal laws should comply with all international agreements the USSR had signed, including the human rights treaties. In 1988 the authorities apparently suspended the use of four laws that had traditionally been used to curb human rights. There were no prosecutions reported for "engaging in anti-social religious activity"; "violating the laws separating church and state"; or "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda". Of four people arrested for "circulating anti-Soviet slander", one was acquitted and three were released without trial. However, one of them, Paruir Airikyan, an Armenian former prisoner of conscience, was stripped of his citizenship and forced to leave the USSR.
At least 41 people were prosecuted after their conscience led them into conflict with the authorities. The largest single group was people arrested in December in connection with an unofficial "Karabakh Committee", including 14 members who had publicly criticized the official relief effort in Armenia after the earthquake. The exact charges against them were not known. Ten young men who refused on conscientious grounds to do military service, or refresher training, were also prosecuted and imprisoned for up to three years. During the year information emerged about conscientious objectors serving sentences imposed before 1988, so it was likely that the true number imprisoned was higher than the 24 known to Amnesty International.
Current laws did not provide a civilian alternative to military service and individuals who objected to conscription more than once faced repeated imprisonment. The case of Dmitry and Aleksey Togushev illustrated the harshness of the existing procedure. True Orthodox believers from Voronezh, their religion forbade them to
bear weapons or swear an oath of allegiance to a secular state. They were arrested in 1985 and sentenced to two years' imprisonment for "evading regular call-up to active military service", then given three more years on the same charge a few months after their release in 1987. In 1988 Dmitry Togushev lost an eye in an industrial accident at his labour camp in Semiluki.
Although in 1987 the Soviet press had criticized psychiatric malpractice, abuses on political grounds appeared to continue. At least nine people were suspected to have been forcibly confined in psychiatric hospitals solely for their non-violent political activity and six of them were believed to be still confined at the end of 1988. They included Anatoly Ilchenko, a Ukrainian mathematics teacher who was put in Niko-layev psychiatric hospital in December after he joined an unofficial human rights group and protested against official policy on nuclear power in the republic. He had previously been confined for three years after criticizing what he saw as Russian cultural dominance in the Ukraine.
In March a new law on "Conditions and Procedures for Providing Psychiatric Care" was adopted which, for the first time, gave people like Anatoly Ilchenko - those forcibly and indefinitely confined without charge - the right to contest their confinement with legal aid. The new law also dismantled the network of special psychiatric hospitals formerly run by the Ministry of Internal Affairs and integrated them under the Ministry of Health. Although these innovations were welcome, Soviet legal scholars criticized several aspects of the new law, which gave courts no role in the confinement procedure except as a very last resort and did not provide people already confined with any means for regular, independent review. The law also included among the grounds for compulsory psychiatric examination "breaking the rules of socialist society", even when the people involved had not otherwise committed any crime. Amnesty International feared that political or religious non-conformists would still be vulnerable to wrongful confinement.
In practice it was not clear how effectively the reforms were implemented during the year. At least one person, Aleksandr Pono-marenko, was reportedly refused his right to a counter-diagnosis when he was confined in a Moscow psychiatric hospital in July.
EUROPE / UNION OFSOVI ET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
Other prisoners of conscience who were freed from former special psychiatric hospitals said there had been no change in their conditions, nor even in the staff running the hospital after the law was introduced. Soviet officials still denied that psychiatry had been used to punish dissent but in an interview with the weekly newspaper Novoye Vremya (New Times) in October, the Chief Psychiatrist of the USSR Ministry of Health, Aleksandr Churkin, acknowledged that two former prisoners of conscience had been "misdiagnosed". They were Hanna Mykhaylenko, released in May, and Nizametdin Akhmetov, who was released in 1986 (see Amnesty InternaiionaJ Report 1987).
At the end of 1988 most known prisoners of conscience were serving their sentences in corrective labour colonies of ordinary or strict regime. Under a July decree of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet, prisoners in punishment ceils were to be provided with hot food every day, rather than every other day. In September Izvesfiya published a series of articles which censured the Soviet corrective labour system and echoed many criticisms that had been made by Amnesty International. It said prisoners were made to work long hours in primitive conditions with little regard for their health or skills. It was common for prison staff not to inform prisoners of their rights and duties and they could subject them to arbitrary treatment and even acts of sadism with impunity. In December the new draft principles of criminal law recommended the wider use of non-custodial sentences to "reform, re-educate and deter offenders".
There was no stay on executions while proposals to restrict the death penalty were being discussed. At least 15 death sentences were impKDsed and seven executions were carried out, mosüy for murder. This brought to at least 66 the number of people sentenced to death since the authorities said in February 1987 that they were re-examining the death penalty, and to 14 the number of people executed. In December a bookkeeper from Turkmenia, Red-zhep Durdyyev, was sentenced to death for embezzlement, even though abolition of the death penalty for economic crimes had already been proposed. It was not clear if he appealed against his sentence.
These figures were probably only a small percentage of the true number of death
sentences passed and carried out. In November, for instance, the weekly newspaper Argumenty i Fakty (Arguments and Facts) revealed that more than 18,000 people had been convicted of premeditated murder between 1986 and 1987. It did not say how many of them had been sentenced to death but it seemed likely that the number exceeded the 20 death sentences known to Amnesty International during the corresponding period. Statistics on the use of the death penalty remained an official secret in 1988.
After Mikhail Gorbachov became Soviet President, Amnesty International wrote welcoming his public commitment to UN human rights standards and encouraging the USSR to ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Throughout the year the organization continued to appeal for the unconditional release of all prisoners of conscience and for the commutation of each death sentence of which it learned. It also referred to the USSR in an oral statement concerning violations against those working in defence of human rights, made to the UN Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in August.
In May representatives of Amnesty International met in Paris members of an official Soviet human rights group - the Public Commission for International Cooperation in Humanitarian Affairs and Human Rights. The aim was to discuss, among other issues, ways to encourage the ratification and observance of international human rights instruments worldwide to mark the 40th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. In July Amnesty International wrote to Aleksandr Sukharev, the new Procurator General, supporting an appeal by the Public Commission to abolish the death penalty and to release people imprisoned for their religious activities. In a letter to the Legislative Proposals Commission of the Supreme Soviet in December, Amnesty International urged that a civilian alternative to military service be introduced in law. with a fair procedure for applying it. In December the USSR Academy of Sciences invited an Amnesty International delegation to visit Moscow for substantive discussions in 1989.
