ROMANIA
At least 18 people were known to be prisoners of conscience but up to several hundred others, whose identities were not known, were believed to be in prison either for non-violent exercise of their right to freedom of expression or for attempting to leave the country illegally. At least 16 prisoners of conscience were released after an amnesty announced in January. At least one person was reportedly ill-treated while under house arrest after she had publicly criticized Romania's human rights record.
Political trials were not reported in the official press and government censorship severely restricted information about indi-
EUROPE/ROMANIA
vidual prisoners. As a result Amnesty International learned of only a fraction of the cases in which people were imprisoned for their conscientiously held beliefs.
An amnesty decree was issued on 27 January following a less sweeping decree approved in October 1987 (see Amnesty International Report 1988). It was the 17th such amnesty of President Nicolae Ceausescu's 23 years as Romanian leader. The decree contained three main provisions: all offenders serving prison sentences of up to 10 years were to be amnestied; prison sentences longer than 10 years were to be halved; and death sentences were to be commuted to 20 years' imprisonment. It was not clear, however, whether the amnesty also applied to individuals sentenced to corrective labour instead of prison. A person sentenced to corrective labour is obliged to work for reduced wages and faces severe restrictions on his or her freedom of movement. Amnesty International considers that such restrictions constitute a form of physical restriction analogous to imprisonment.
Among the prisoners of conscience released under the January amnesty were Ion Draghici and Heinrich Wolf (see Amnesty International Report 1988). Ion Draghici had served five years of a 10-year sentence for "propaganda against the socialist state". Heinrich Wolf had served nine months of a 10-month sentence for attempting to leave Romania illegally.
Most of the prisoners of conscience known to Amnesty International were imprisoned for attempting to leave the country without official permission. Some Romanians are permitted to leave the
country legally each year but the right to emigrate is severely restricted. Those who apply to emigrate risk harassment, loss of employment or demotion and, in some cases, imprisonment. Those who attempt, or show an "intention", to make unauthorized border crossings face prosecution under Article 245 of the criminal code and a prison sentence of between six months and three years.
Among those imprisoned in 1988 for attempting to leave the country illegally were Marin Istoc and his cousin Mihai Bogonas, both from Resita. They and their families had applied to the authorities for permission to emigrate in order to join relatives in Canada but were repeatedly refused. According to reports, they were eventually told that they would be arrested if they continued to apply for permission. The two men and their families attempted to cross the border into Yugoslavia without permission on 18 April and were arrested. The women and children were allowed to go free but Marin Istoc and Mihai Bogonas were sentenced in May to 10 months' imprisonment and to pay a monthly fine for the duration of the sentence.
At least one person was in prison throughout the year after conviction of contravening Article 166 of the criminal code, which prohibits "propaganda against the socialist state" and carries a sentence of from five to 15 years' imprisonment. Dumitru luga, an electrician from Bucharest, was sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment in 1983 for organizing a group of students and young workers who were dissatisfied with the policies and leadership of President Ceausescu. They reportedly planned to publicize their dissatisfaction but were arrested before they could do so.
Amnesty International continued to seek information about at least 67 people sentenced to corrective labour after a large-scale demonstration in Brasov in November 1987 (see Amnesty International Report 1988). Werner Sommerauer, an ethnic German, was sentenced to three years' corrective labour in the town of Tulcea in the Danube delta. Sixty-six others arrested at the same time, whose identities are not known, were convicted on unknown charges apparently relating to the demonstration, sentenced to between six months' and three years' corrective labour and sent
EUROPE/ROMANIA/SPAIN
to various places throughout the country. Werner Sommerauer did not benefit from the January amnesty, possibly because he was sentenced to corrective labour and therefore not officially considered a prisoner.
In August Doina Cornea, a former university lecturer, was placed under house arrest at her home in Cluj after writing an open letter to the Romanian authorities. The letter called for the full application in Romania of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights and criticized a government campaign to destroy thousands of Romanian villages and resettle the inhabitants in "agro-industrial" complexes. Doina Cornea had been detained briefly in late 1987 after giving interviews to foreign journalists about the demonstrations in Brasov.
In November, while still under house arrest. Doina Cornea was reportedly taken from her home and beaten by members of the securitate, state security police. She was then returned to her home and again placed under house arrest. Two foreign journalists who tried to visit her home after this incident were refused entry by the police and later expelled from Romania.
Amnesty International welcomed the release of prisoners of conscience and the commutation of all death sentences under the January amnesty. Throughout the year it pressed for the release of all prisoners of conscience.
