VENEZUELA
A number of prisoners charged with politically-motivated offences, among whom there may have been prisoners of conscience, were released by presidential order but 10 others were still held at the end of the year. There were new arrests of individuals suspected of subversion but all were released after the courts failed to
find evidence of armed or other illegal activity involving government opponents. Members of the security forces were sent for trial in at least two cases of killings reported in 1987 but other investigations into alleged arbitrary killings made little or no progress. There were new reports of killings by police in circumstances sug-gesting they were extrajudicial executions. At least three people were reported to have been killed while in police cus-tody, two of them allegedly as a result of torture.
Arbitrary detention and ill-treatment were again reported in connection with police operations against alleged subversives. In August, following an armed robbery of a bank in Los Teques, Miranda state, as many as 100 people were detained in police raids in various parts of the country. Official sources said that members of a left-wing group they called Venceremos had participated in the robbery and that 31 people would be tried by military tribunals for "military rebellion", the charge normally used to prosecute suspected guerrillas. Witnesses to some of the arrests alleged that police had raided homes violently, without search or arrest warrants, and sometimes wearing hoods. All those arrested, including students, workers, community activists and teachers, were later released uncharged.
The August detentions followed a pattern that has developed in recent years when, on several occasions, social unrest has been followed by the detention of community and political activists who have been accused of "military rebellion". Sometimes charges have been dismissed by the courts or withdrawn by presidential
THE AMERICAS/VENEZUELA
order within weeks but in other cases those held have remained in prison for longer periods. Of 17 people sent for trial following anti-government protests in mid-1987 (see Amnesty International Report 1988) all were gradually released but eight had spent more than a year in prison before being freed by presidential order in December 1988. Many of these 17 cases involved the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience and violations of the right to a prompt and fair trial.
Seven of 15 prisoners arrested between 1978 and 1984 and accused of "military rebellion", who were still in prison at the beginning of 1988, were released between February and September. They included Carlos Báez, a prisoner of conscience who had been held for 10 years, and Eder de Dios Puerta Aponte, who had been in prison for five years and was not released until eight months after his acquittal in 1987. Amnesty International had repeatedly criticized the extremely protracted proceedings before military tribunals and had raised questions about irregularities in the handling of evidence. At the end of the year eight prisoners still faced charges of "rebellion" brought by military tribunals and two other long-term prisoners were still on trial for other offences before criminal courts.
The Law of Vagrants and Crooks continued to be used widely for security operations which involved thousands of short-term detentions and hundreds of cases of long-term administrative imprisonment of individuals said by police to be "dangerous to society", although there was no evidence of their involvement in criminal activities. Protesters in anti-government demonstrations were also threatened with this procedure, and Víctor González, a journalist tried under this law in 1986 (see Amnesty International Report 1988), continued to serve a three-year sentence of internal banishment.
There were more reports of police killings - especially in poor urban neighbourhoods and in police stations - in circumstances which suggested that they were extrajudicial executions. Progress was reported in the investigation of some cases from previous years but other judicial investigations were closed or appeared to have stalled, giving rise to allegations of judicial complacency. Three police officers were detained, released and then rearrested in
October in connection with the death in December 1987 of José Ramón Cuacarán, a student shot with a police gun. Another four police officers were brought to trial on charges of homicide in connection with the death of Elias Avila Bogado (see Amnesty International Report 1988). However in March charges against two police officers accused of killing Freddy Dugarte Rondón in 1985 were dropped. Freddy Dugarte Rondón had been injured by police, taken away and then found dead, shot in the head. No progress was reported in the military tribunal investigation into the death in 1987, allegedly as a result of torture, of José Luis Palomares, a 16-year-old military cadet (see Amnesty International Report 1988).
Two deaths were alleged to have occurred as a result of torture or execution in police custody. In February Rawson Salazar Franco was reported to have died of a cerebral oedema hours after his release from police detention and in November William Oroño Betancourt died in the custody of the criminal investigations police in Ciudad Ojeda, Zulia. It was alleged that both men had been tortured. In January, in another case, José Luis Méndez Astudillo was reportedly shot dead while in police custody.
In October, 14 fishermen were shot dead near the border with Colombia by a joint force of soldiers and police officers. At first the military authorities said the victims were members of a 50-strong group of Colombian guerrillas and had been killed in an armed confrontation but this was contested by two survivors and by local people. An investigation was opened by a military court; this accepted the patrol's version of the events despite statements made by the two survivors, who were detained for "military rebellion". The military court's ruling was overturned when it became known that autopsy results contradicted the military's version of events. Nineteen members of the patrol responsible for the killings were then sent for trial on charges of intentional homicide, unnecessary use of firearms, and simulating criminal events. At the end of the year no verdict had been reached.
In July Amnesty International submitted a memorandum to the government detailing its concerns about arbitrary arrests, delays and irregularities in the trials of political prisoners, reports of torture and ill-treatment in police stations and prisons, and apparent extrajudicial
THE AMERICAS / VENEZUELA
executions of civilians. It noted that Venezuela has adopted laws and created institutions for the protection of human rights, but that measures were needed to make them effective in practice. The memorandum was published in October with a reply from the Venezuelan Government, in which the Minister of Foreign Relations relayed the view that the tone of the document was "exaggerated and out of proportion". He said that "efforts are constantly being made to implement remedial measures when necessary, and to correct operational shortcomings such as may be present in any public administration".
V
•
'y >
0; • •<- . • -M
