GUYANA
Four men were executed in April. The inquest into the death of opposition leader Or Walter Rodney in 1980 took place in February. Thore were allegations that ill-treatment of prisoners had led to two deaths.
Two men were hanged on 19 April and two on 26 April; all had been convicted of murder. These were the first executions for almost two years and brought to nine the number of hangings carried out since 1985, when executions resumed after a 13-year break. New death sentences were imposed and at the end of the year some 25 prisoners were on death row.
In February the inquest took place into the death of Dr Walter Rodney, an opposition political leader killed by a bomb in 1980. At the time of his death the authorities claimed that Dr Rodney had known he was carrying the bomb when it accidentally exploded. Donald Rodney, the dead man's brother, who had been with him at the time of the explosion, alleged that the device had been concealed in a walkie-talkie given to Dr Rodney by a member of the Guyana Defence Force. At the time of the inquest the latter was reported to be living in French Guiana; neither he nor Donald Rodney, who had obtained political asylum in the United Kingdom, attended the hearing. The coroner did not admit in evidence a statement by Donald Rodney or grant requests to adjourn proceedings to allow him time to attend the hearing. This led to the withdrawal of the lawyers representing Dr Rodney's family. The final verdict was "death by accident or misadventure".
THE AMERICAS/GUYANA/HAITI
There were a number of allegations about deaths in police custody. Rajkarran Mangra, a farmer, reportedly died in custody after being beaten by a police officer at his farm. Dornell Codrington died at Georgetown Hospital four days after he was shot by police in a street in Georgetown. According to press reports, an investigation into the death of Rajkarran Mangra was initiated but at the end of the year Amnesty International knew of no report on the case having been produced.
In January three women were allegedly raped by members of the Quick Reaction Squad, a branch of the police force, while they were in police custody at Eve Leary, the Criminal Investigations Department headquarters. In July the Guyana Human Rights Association (GHRA) issued a report -Brie/ on Police Violence - giving details of instances of police brutality including that involving the alleged rapes. As a result members of the executive of the GHRA have been issued with writs for libel by the Director of Public Prosecutions, and by two senior officers and 20 members of the Quick Reaction Squad.
Amnesty International communicated with President Hoyte in April to urge him to commute the death sentences.
