UNITED ARAB EMIRATES

A number of people were detained without trial, including a 14-year-old boy. Several criminal suspects were reported to have been tortured, including being caned. Two executions were carried out.
A 14-year-old Somali national, Mah-mud Sulaiman 'Abdi, who had been arrested by plainclothes police in December 1987, was still detained without trial in al-Wathba Central Prison in Abu Dhabi at the end of 1988. He was reported to have been severely caned while in detention and to have fainted and required medical attention as a result. No reasons were given for his detention but it appeared to be politically motivated.
Two Iraqi nationals were detained, apparently for reasons related to the authorities' investigations into the activities of Iraqi political groups. 'Ala' 'Abd al-RasuI Judi, a driver who had worked in Abu Dhabi since 1977, was arrested in May after being summoned by officials for questioning relating to his residence permit. He was detained incommunicado without charge or trial for six weeks at the Ministry of Interior's Department of Immigration and Passports. He was said to be in poor health and in need of medical treatment and there were fears that he may have been tortured following his arrest. He was released in June and deported from the United Arab Emirates (UAE). Another Iraqi national, Isma'il al-Nouri, who also worked as a driver in Abu Dhabi, was arrested in
late October" or early November and was still held incommunicado at the end of the year. His whereabouts were not known.
New information was received during 1988 about alleged torture of criminal prisoners in previous years. Jamed Ahmed Khan, a Pakistani national sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment in 1986 on charges of drug-smuggling, was reportedly tortured for several days following his arrest. According to the testimony of a detainee released in October, Jamed Ahmed Khan was initially held at a police station near the British Embassy in Abu Dhabi. The former detainee said that Jamed Ahmed Khan "was subjected to days of torture, lashing with canes and brutal kicks to his body by six police at the same time as he was tied down on top of blocks of ice, and had electrodes attached to his genitals". In May Jamed Ahmed Khan reportedly went on hunger-strike after being denied family visits and communication with anyone outside Abu Dhabi's Central Prison.
Edward Zacharia, a Lebanese national, was also reported to have been tortured between 1984 and 1987 while serving a nine-year sentence. He was allegedly caned severely and hung by his arms for several hours.
Other detainees held in al-Wathba Central Prison were reported to have been caned. According to the testimony of a former detainee, they included a Somali national who received 200 strokes of the cane on 3 August after being convicted of raping a minor; another Somali national who received 40 strokes of the cane on 6 August after being convicted of alcohol consumption; and a UAE national who received approximately 200 strokes of the cane on 6 August after being convicted of having premarital sexual intercourse.
Two executions were carried out, both by firing-squad in May. Saif Sa'id Maher al-Mahri was publicly executed near the Central Prison of al-'Ain in the emirate of Abu Dhabi; the place of execution of Zarat Khan Ahmad Khan, a Pakistani national, was not known. Both had been convicted of murder.
Amnesty International expressed concern to the UAE authorities about reports of detention without trial and possible torture or ill-treatment of detainees, of threats of forcible repatriation of Iranian nationals, and of executions. No responses were received from the authorities.
