NEPAL
Members of political parties or groups, teachers, students, editors and journalists were detained under laws permitting imprisonment for up to three years without charge or trial. Most were detained for short periods but others, including several prisoners of conscience, were held for longer periods. There were reports that political prisoners were beaten in police custody and in prison.
The country's non-party panchayat (assembly) system, headed by the king, prohibits all political organizations including the main opposition group, the Nepali Congress Party, and the factions of the Nepali Communist Party. During 1988 the head of state. King Birendra, did not pursue the discussions he had initiated in 1987 with some opposition leaders about reforms to the panchayat system and their demands for its abolition continued.
Although the government allowed some political leaders limited freedom to express their views in private meetings, it penalized others. During the year the government continued to arrest and detain editors, journalists, politicians and teachers. Bhesh Raj Paudel, editor of )aya Nepal weekly, was detained in September, shortly after publishing an editorial suggesting that people in Nepal should learn from recent civil unrest in Burma. At the end of the year he was still in prison.
Krishna Prasad Shivakoti, editor of Jwala weekly, was held for six weeks without charge or trial under the Public Security Act (PSA) and released in October. Other PSA detainees were released after a few days or weeks in custody but many were held for long periods. Tirtha Ram Dangol, a member of the Nepali Congress Party and Vice-Chairman of Kathmandu town panchayat, was detained without trial under the PSA for eight months. He had been suspended from office and arrested after he and other Nepali Congress Party members boycotted an official meeting in December 1987 to protest against continuation of the partyless panchayatt system.
The PSA permits up to three years' detention without charge or trial on broadly based grounds such as "disturbing the peace and tranquillity of the country". The Ministry of Home Affairs can impose an 18-month detention period, renewable for a further 18 months. Zonal Commissioners can do the same for a maximum nine-month period which can be extended to 18 and which can also be renewed for a second 18-month period on confirmation from the Ministry. However, Amnesty International knows of cases in which prisoners have been detained for more than three years under the PSA. Bhola Bohra, a student, was arrested under the PSA in January 1984 and was still held at the end of 1988. In cases in which the Supreme Court has ordered the release of political detainees, such prisoners have sometimes been rearrested immediately. One of the victims of this procedure was Krishna Bahadur Thapa, who was released and redetained in August.
Teachers belonging to or supporting the Nepal National Teachers Association (NNTA) - an unofficial organization which opposes the government's policy of having separate organizations for primary and secondary teachers - were also detained. In April several of them were arrested in Taplejung district, apparently under section 2 of the Organizations and Associations (Control) Act, which prohibits people establishing or joining a group or party "motivating political party objectives" - an offence punishable with up to three years' imprisonment. Most of those arrested in April were released within days or weeks of arrest, but one NNTA member, Sushil Chandra Amatya from Lalitpur, who was suffering from a kidney
ASIA AND THE PACIFIC/TAIWAN
illness and who had been arrested in June 1987 before the start of an NNTA conference, was detained without trial under the PSA until his release in December. Sita Ram Maskey, a teacher and trade unionist was also detained under the PSA. He had been arrested in May 1987 for demonstrating against the sale of milk powder feared to be contaminated by radiation. He was held without charge or trial until the end of October.
Dozens of students belonging to the Independent Student Union and the All Nepal National Independent Student Union were also detained, it is believed under the PSA, for distributing leaflets, preparing conferences, and for organizing or participating in the unofficial distribution of relief among victims of the 21 August earthquake - the government had stated that only authorized persons should distribute relief. Some of these students were released after short periods but others were still held at the end of the year. Several members of the Nepali Congress Party and of the Human Rights Protection Forum - an unofficial organization of human rights activists - were also among those arrested for participating in the unofficial distribution of relief.
In contravention of internationally recognized standards, the Nepaleselegal code forbids propagation of "Christianity, Islam or any other faith so as to disrupt the traditional religion of the Hindu community in Nepal or to convert any adherent of the Hindu religion to these faiths". In August arrests included several people charged with propagating Christianity who were released after conviction and payment of a fine.
In October the press reported that peasants had been detained for opposing the clearing of public forests.
As in previous years there were reports that political prisoners were held in overcrowded conditions. In October Narayan Khadha, one of 12 people arrested early in the year for listening to tapes of songs about the Ghorkaland elections and detained under the Treason Act, complained that he had been held for three weeks in handcuffs and fetters for opposing conditions in Nakkhu Prison. Prisoners in Ham Prison, which apparently holds twice the number of inmates officially permitted, began a hunger-strike in December in protest against overcrowding and lack of
medical, sanitation and visiting facilities. Such protests occurred in several other prisons, including those in Pokhara and Birganj.
Several students and other political prisoners complained that they were kicked, beaten with clubs or tortured by other methods in prison or while in police custody, and several complained that they were not allowed visits, even from members of their family and lawyers. There was no new information about the whereabouts of six people who "disappeared" after they were arrested in June 1985 following bomb explosions in Kathmandu which killed several people.
Amnesty International continued to press for the release of all prisoners of conscience, investigated the cases of over 30 other political prisoners and called for a review of the PSA. In March the government's International Law and Treaty Division wrote to Amnesty International to say that officials were bound to inform detainees held under the PSA of the grounds of detention and that detainees or their representatives could approach the Supreme Court or Zonal Courts to set aside any unlawful detention orders. Amnesty International replied saying it was concerned that the detention orders served were unspecific and were worded in such broad terms that effective recourse to the courts was difficult. The PSA does not provide for independent review of the legality of detentions and specifies that orders issued under it cannot be questioned in a court of law. Courts have thus tended to limit their role to consideration of whether the detention order was imposed according to procedure, regardless of whether the facts of the case justify detention. Amnesty International asked that in all cases a judicial authority should promptly examine the lawfulness of detention in its broadest sense. By the end of the year, the organization had received no further response from the government to these and other concerns raised in its 1987 report Nepal, A Pattern Of Human Rights Violations (see Amnesty InternationaJ Report 1988).
ASIA ANDTHEPACiFIC/PAKISTAN
