NICARAGUA
There was considerable public debate about human rights, particularly in the context of new legislation to detain asylum-seekers and New Zealand's hosting of the Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation (APEC) summit in September, which coincided with calls for UN intervention in East Timor. In elections in November, a Labour Party-Alliance minority government under Prime Minister Helen Clark replaced a National Party-led government
Human rights law
In October, amendments to the Human Rights Act 1993 came into effect which gave the government until December 2001 to resolve inconsistencies between certain grounds of discrimination prohibited by the Act and existing legislation, policies and administrative practices. According to a policy statement, this period "is intended to provide a reasonable amount of time in which to consider the complex issues relating to the extent and scope of Government compliance with the Act". The amendment requires the Minister of Justice to report to Parliament at six-monthly intervals on progress in remedying significant areas of inconsistency, and on relevant comments by the national Human Rights Commission. The government had undertaken to ensure that all new regulations, policies and practices complied with the provisions of the Human Rights Act from 1 January 2000, unless an exemption had been authorized by legislation.
Refugees and asylum-seekers
In October a comprehensive reform package of laws, policies and regulations on refugees came into force. It allowed for the indefinite detention in prisons of people arriving in the country without proper travel documents, including asylum-seekers. Q In September, at least 12 asylum-seekers who arrived without proper travel documents were detained on the grounds of security requirements during the APEC summit in Auckland. Most of them were not released until December after they successfully appealed to the High Court and District Court against their continuing detention. Q A group of 16 asylum-seekers held for several months at Mount Eden Prison, Auckland, were routinely detained alongside criminal suspects. The asylum-seekers claimed they were harassed and
REPUBLIC OF NICARAGUA
Head of state and government: Amoldo Alemán Lacayo
Capital: Managua
Population: 4.6 million
Offícial language: Spanish
Death penalty: abolitionistforall crimes
1999 treaty ratifications/signatures: Protocol to the
American Convention on Human Rights to Abolish the
Death Penalty
One student was killed and several were injured when police fired rubber bullets at students demonstrating in April. Reports of torture and ill-treatment in police custody continued.
Background
Allegations of corruption at all levels of government continued and those who denounced it were threatened. The economic situation deteriorated further and was aggravated by natural disasters. Crime levels continued to rise and government measures to combat crime led to further police abuses.
Political agreements
The ruling Partido Liberal Constitucionalista (PLC), Constitutionalist Liberal Party, and the Frente Sandinista de Liberación Nacional (FSLN), Sandinista National Liberation Front, the main opposition party, came to an agreement in August on more than 30 issues, including possible amendments to the electoral process, the Constitution and the Supreme Court of Justice. Implementation of the agreement could lead to the establishment of a seat-for-life in the National Assembly for the outgoing President of the Republic, and the potentially debilitating replacement of the Comptroller General's post with a five-member collegiate office. The existing Comptroller General, Agustín Jarquin, had been instrumental in exposing some serious corruption cases. He was subsequently threatened, prompting a request to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights to issue precautionary measures. He was arrested on charges of fraud in November, but was released on 24 December after the Criminal Court in Managua dismissed the charges.
Amnesty International Report 2000
179
NIC
In December the National Assembly approved reforms to i6 articles of the Constitution.
President Amoldo Alemán indicated his intention of calling a constituent assembly to draw up a new Constitution. Some administrative measures were also taken which could curtail freedom of expression. These included taking away the licences of smalt television companies and proposing that the "discovery and disclosure of secrets" be punished with a prison sentence instead of a fine.
PLC member Benjamin Pérez Fonseca was elected Human Rights Procurator by the National Assembly in June. FSLN member Julián Corrales was appointed Deputy Procurator. Both appointments were widely criticized as political appointments contrary to the spirit of the law. The Procurator's office was still not fully operational at the end of the year.
Police use of rubber bullets
Police fired rubber bullets at students during a peaceful demonstration about university funding inside the Central Bank of Nicaragua in April. Twenty-one-year-old Roberto González Herrera was shot in the chest with a rubber bullet and died instantly. Several other students were injured and dozens were arrested; some were subsequently charged with Roberto González Herrera's murder, as was a member of the National Police.
President Amoldo Alemán stated in April that an investigation would be carried out. The member of the National Police charged with the killing was acquitted in November. AI wrote to the Attorney General expressing concern at Roberto Gonzalez Herrera's death and police use of rubber bullets. It had not received a reply by the end of the year.
Torture and ill-treatment by police
Reports of torture and ill-treatment in police custody continued. Detainees were beaten, handcuffed to objects in overcrowded cells and locked up for long periods without food, water or sanitary facilities. Tightly applied handcuffs also caused injury. Q In July police fired a rubber bullet at a young man, which wounded him, while he was running away from them. They reportedly kicked him and applied handcuffs tightly after he fell to the ground. The Centro Nicaragüense de Derechos Humanos(CEHIDH). Nicaraguan Centre for Human Rights, certified the injuries caused by the handcuffs.
