MAILAND
KINGDOM OFTHAILAND
Head of state: Bhumibol Adulyadej
Head of government Chuan Leekpai
Capital: Bangkok
Population: 60.6 million
OfHcial language: Thai
Death penalty: retentionist
1999 treaty ratifications/signatures: International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
Seventeen people were executed in 1999, the largest number since Thailand resumed executions in 1996. More than 100 people remained on death row. Prison conditions, particularly for Africans and non-Thai Asians, were poor and in some cases amounted to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment New legislation established an 11-member National Human Rights Commission designated as a government agency attached to Parliament More than 14,000 asylum-seekers from Myanmarentered Thailand; most of them were admitted to refugee camps which housed more than 105,000 people by the end oftheyear.
Death penalty
Seventeen people were executed in Bangkwang Prison by machine-gun fire. For the first time since executions were resumed, a woman was executed; she had been convicted of drug trafficking. The other 16 men had been convicted of murder. Although more than 100 people were believed to be under sentence of death, the government did not publish statistics or names, nor did it announce when executions were scheduled to take place. In December, to mark King Bhumibol Adulyadej's birthday, 30 death sentences were commuted to life imprisonment.
Impunity
In June the government released a summary of a Ministry of Defence report on the military's violent suppression of the May 1992 pro-democracy demonstrations in Bangkok in which more than 52 people were killed and nearly 700 others injured. However, despite appeals from the victims' families and others, the government refused to release the report itself. The fate and whereabouts of dozens of people who went missing during the demonstrations have never been revealed.
Prison conditions
Prolonged shackling of prisoners continued to be reported at Bangkwang Maximum Security Prison and at Chonburi Central Prison. Severe overcrowding was reported throughout the prison system — especially at Lard Yao Prison and Bang Khen Women's Prison—and in immigration detention centres. African and non-Thai Asian prisoners were most at risk of ill-treatment. In
Amnesty International Report 2000
233
THA
July a Burmese migrant worker was severely beaten by immigration police at Mae Sot Immigration Detention Centre, Tak Province.
Hostage-taking at the Myanmar embassy
In October, five heavily armed Myanmar nationals calling themselves the Vigorous Burmese Students Warriors forced their way into the Myanmar embassy in Bangkok and took 89 people hostage for 25 hours. The five men initially demanded the release of all political prisoners and the restoration of democracy in Myanmar. The hostages were released without casualties when the Thai government acceded to their demands for a helicopter to take them to an area reportedly held by an armed opposition group in the Myanmar border area. The Myanmar government closed the border for seven weeks and stated that they would not resume normal relations with Thailand until the five men were arrested by the Thai authorities. The Thai government subsequently issued arrest warrants for the men; however, none had been arrested by the end of the year.
Refugees and migrant workers from Myanmar
The population of Myanmar nationals living in Thailand was made up of three broad overlapping groups. Members of the Karen and Karenni ethnic groups, who were considered to be "displaced people" by the Thai authorities; migrant workers from all ethnic groups — but particularly the Shan people, some 100,000 of whom had fled human rights violations in Myanmar— who were considered to be "illegal immigrants" and were at risk of arrest and deportation; and Burmese political activists, who were required to register with the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
During 1999,14,000 Myanmar asylum-seekers from the Karen and Karenni ethnic groups arrived in Thailand, fleeing forcible relocations, forced labour and other human rights violations. However, thousands more Karen asylum-seekers were prevented from entering by the Thai army. The authorities, the UNHCR, and non-governmental organizations moved two refugee camps, which had been attacked by armed opposition groups from Myanmar in previous years, further inside Thailand for security reasons.
Following the hostage-taking at the Myanmar embassy, the government announced that all young political activists from Myanmar must register with the UNHCR and that those recognized by the UNHCR must enter the Maneloy Safe Area, Raatchburi Province, to await resettlement to third countries. By November 750 people had reportedly registered with the UNHCR. Also in November the police arrested over 20 Burmese political activists, some of whom were recognized by UNHCR, and held them in the Immigration Detention Centre in Bangkok.
In November the immigration authorities arrested thousands of Burmese migrant workers and deported them to the Myanmar-Thai border. Those who had enough money to bribe Thai officials were often allowed to remain on the Thai side of the border.
However, many others with well-founded fears of persecution in Myanmar were returned with no opportunity to claim asylum.
In July a member of the Thai Rangers, a paramilitary unit of the army, raped two Shan female migrant workers from Myanmar in Chiang Mai Province and in November the Border Patrol Police raped a female migrant worker from Myanmar near Mae Sot, Tak Province. No disciplinary action was known to have taken place in either of these cases.
Legal developments
Thailand's report to the UN Human Rights Committee on its implementation of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights had not been submitted by the end of the year.
In January, the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women considered Thailand's combined second and third periodic reports. The Committee expressed concern at the lack of effective law enforcement mechanisms and the lack of cases filed by women in the courts on the basis of constitutional guarantees.
Al country reports and visits Report
• Thailand: A human rights review based on the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Al Index: ASA39/001/99) Visits
Al delegates visited the country between January and March.
234
Amnesty Intemationai Report 2000
