HUNGARY
REPUBLICOFHUNCARY
Head of State: ArpSdGona
Head of government: ViktorOrb^n
Capital: Budapest
Population: 10,2 million
Ofhcial language: Hungarian
Death penalty: abolitionist for all crimes
1999 treaty ratifications/signatures: Rome Statute of
the Intemational Criminal Court
Roma were reportedly victims of racially biased policing and ill-treatment by police officers. Some asylum-seekers were deported without being allowed to submit an asylum claim. Many others were detained in poor conditions for long periods, and faced deficiencies in the asylum procedure. Many asylum^eekerswenton hunger strike to protest againsttheirdetention and against alleged unfair implementation of the asylum procedure.
Background
Roma continued to face multi-faceted discrimination, which has marginalized them socially and economically. The belief that Romani communities are inherently criminal appeared to be widespread among the public and police. The European Commission's annual report on Hungary's progress towards European Union accession was positive, yet identified treatment of Roma as a concern, along with corruption, press freedom, and refugee issues.
Ill-treatment of Roma by police
Reports of ill-treatment of Roma by police officers in Budapest and the eastern town of Hajdiihadhaz demonstrated a pattern of police violence against Roma.
Q In Hajdiihadhaz on 11 January, two police officers allegedly kicked and beat two Romani youths, Attila Rezes and D, B., with rubber truncheons. The youths
124
Amnesty Intemational Report 2000
IND
were taken to the police station, interrogated about the breaking of a shop window, reportedly beaten further, then released without charge. Attila Rezes fell into a coma the next day, and required an operation. Three police officers and a civilian were subsequently charged in connection with the alleged ill-treatment. Q On 5 September about 30 police officers reportedly beat and verbally abused six young Roma, aged from 13 to 21, in two apartments in a block in north Budapest. They also reportedly beat the mother of one of them. Police officers reportedly continued to beat three of the young Roma males, aged 16,17 and 21, on the street and then at a police station. All six were released without charge later that day.
Roma who filed complaints or who talked to the media about their alleged ill-treatment by police risked being further ill-treated or intimidated by police officers.
Q O.K., a Roma man who was interviewed in Hajdiihadhaz about the Attila Rezes case by the Fokusz TV documentary program in March, was reportedly beaten by a police officer who said he deserved "special treatment" for appearing in the TV program. A few days later the fdtosz program secretly filmed another police officer hitting O.K. in the face in a Hajdiihadhaz bar. Q Laszio SarkOzi, a Roma student who was reportedly beaten by police officers in Budapest's N6pliget park and at a police station in June, was visited and allegedly insulted and intimidated in his student hostel by police officers after he filed a complaint and appeared on a TV program.
Refugees
Non-admission to the asylum procedure
Border guards often ignored oral requests for asylum. At the eastern border many asylum-seekers were deported to Ukraine. Amendments to the asylum law were introduced in September to improve the special accelerated procedure used at the international airport, by suspending deportations of asylum-seekers whose claims were rejected if they appealed. However, officials reportedly circumvented the new rules. Q In September border guards at the international airport reportedly tried to prevent MEJOK, a Hungarian human rights organization, from gaining access to K.H., an asylum-seeker from the Democratic Republic of the Congo who had arrived from Lebanon. K.H. was deported to Lebanon two days later. Detention of asylum-seekers Asylum-seekers, including children, were detained for long periods, despite the Hungarian government's assertion to the UN Committee against Torture in 1998 that it did not detain asylum-seekers. The September amendments to the asylum law limited detention of asylum-seekers to 18 months. Ill-treatment of detained asylum-seekers In Szombathely detention centre cases of guards ill-treating detainees and spraying CS gas into their faces or their rooms were reported. Q In Nyirbator detention centre O.P., a Kurdish Turkish asylum-seeker, was reportedly taken into a room by seven guards, tied to a wall, beaten with
rubber batons, and injected against his will with an unknown substance to quell his screaming. Inadequacies of the asylum procedure The asylum procedure was often seriously deficient in its implementation. Superficial and inadequate interviews and poor translation often resulted in failure to elicit the substance of an asylum-seeker's fear of persecution. Negative decisions and the reasons for them were not always given in a language asylum-seekers could understand. Detained asylum-seekers' applications were not always passed on to the appropriate authorities by the guards. Access to detained asylum-seekers by lawyers and human rights groups was increasingly restricted.
Al country reports and visits Report
• Hungaiy Alleged ill-treatment of Roma in
Hajdùhadhâz (AI Index: EUR 27/001/99) Visit
An Al delegate visited Hungary in September for research. Permission to visit Szombathely and Nyirbâtor detention centres was denied to Al,
