TRI NI DAD AND TOBAGO
REPUBLICOFTRINIDADANDTOBACO
Head of state: Arthur Napoleon Raymond Robinson
Head of government Basdeo Panday
Capital: Port-of-Spain
Population: 1,3 million
Official language: English
Death penalty: retentionist
1999 treaty ratifications/signatures: Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
Ten men were hanged in the first executions in the countryfor five years. In May the government's withdrawal from the American Convention on Human Rights came into effect with the result that the people of Trinidad and Tobago no longer have the protection of many of the fundamental human rights contained in the Convention. Despite repeated calls for the government to reverse this decision, the authorities maintained that it was justified on the grounds that the Convention had prevented the state from implementing the death penalty and that this withdrawal would facilitate executions. Conditions of detention continued to cause grave concern.
Death penalty
Ten men were hanged, the first executions for five years. Nine of the men were hanged over three days in June, despite appeals to the government for their sentences to be commuted. The loth man was hanged in July in violation of an order of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights not to execute him until "such time as the court has considered the matter". There were approximately 80 people on death row at the end of 1999.
O Three men were released from death row in April after Trinidad and Tobago's Supreme Court ruled that their confession had been coerced. This overturned the ruling of the trial judge that allowed parts of the confession to be used as evidence, despite an acknowledgement that the men were beaten by police and that one of the confessions had been coerced. Q Russell Sankerali was one of the nine men hanged in June, After his execution it was discovered that on the eve of the execution the Attorney-General had received previously undisclosed evidence about the case. The new evidence cast serious doubt on Russell Sankerali's guilt and on the fairness of his trial. However, the Attorney-General failed to stay the execution in order to allow the courts to decide on the relevance of the evidence. Instead, he convened a meeting of the Prime Minister, the Minister of National Security and the Director of Public Prosecutions who decided, although it was not within their competence to make such a decision, that the evidence did not affect
Amnesty International Report 2000
237
TRI
Russell Sankerali's conviction and that the execution should proceed. Al called on the Attorney-General to establish an independent inquiry to examine why this evidence had not been disclosed to Russell Sankerali's lawyers at the trial and why the Attorney-General did not bring this evidence before the courts once it had been brought to his attention. Q Indravani Pamela Ramjattan's murder conviction was reduced to manslaughter in October. The Court of Appeal decided to reduce the conviction on the basis of a psychiatrist's report which showed that Indravani Pamela Ramjattan was suffering from Battered Women's Syndrome when the murder of her abusive common-law husband took place in 1995. The Court, however, sentenced her to serve another five years in prison, bringing the total to 13 years. Inter-American Commission on Human Rights In 199B the government issued execution warrants to \ i men, even though they had petitions pending before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. All 11 executions were stayed pending a decision by the national courts on whether it was constitutional to proceed. In January the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in the United Kingdom, Trinidad and Tobago's highest court of appeal, ruled that the execution warrants were issued unlawfully and ordered the government to stay all executions while the cases were still pending before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights.
UN Human Rights Committee
In November the UN Human Rights Committee ruled in the case of Rawle Kennedy that Trinidad and Tobago's reservation to the (first) Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), denying condemned prisoners the right to file complaints of violations of their rights under the ICCPR, was not permissible. The Committee stated that it "cannot accept a reservation which singles out a certain group of individuals for lesser procedural protection than that which is enjoyed by the rest of the population. In the view of the Committee, this constitutes a discrimination which runs counter to some of the basic principles embodied in the Covenant and its Protocols".
Corporal punishment
In July the Law Commission of Trinidad and Tobago recommended the use of corporal punishment on those convicted of rape or drug trafficking. In December, the Sexual Offences Amendment Bill proposedjudicial corporal punishment of 20 strokes with the cat-o'-ninetails (whip with nine knotted lashes) and life imprisonment for serial rapists.
At least one person was sentenced to corporal punishment. The government failed to supply information on how many people were sentenced to corporal punishment or on how many of the sentences were carried out during 1999.
Prison conditions
Prison conditions were so insanitary and overcrowded as to amount to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. The UN Human Rights Committee confirmed
this finding in six cases and recommended that the men involved be released because conditions were so deplorable. In April the Attorney-General addressed the UN Human Rights Committee and dismissed the recommendations as unreasonable. Q Betweenjuly and September, 10 men died in Port-of-Spain State Prison from unconfirmed diseases. The Prison Commissioner confirmed that up to 12 men were housed in cells designed for three people. Cases of tuberculosis and meningitis were reported in the prison.
Police brutality
There were a number of reported incidents of police brutality.
Q in June Dave Rodriguez, a television cameraman, was allegedly beaten by several officers in police custody and sustained a fractured skull as a result.
Inquest
The inquest into the deaths of three men shot by police on 5 August 1997 began in July. Lawyers for the deceased claimed that the men had been extrajudicially executed.
Intimidation and abuse of journalists
The government continued to criticize the press. Following such comments, members of the press were attacked. In May, Prime Minister Basdeo Panday refused to sign the 1994 Inter-American Press Association Declaration of Chapultepec, which outlines principles to promote freedom of expression and the press.
O In May, two journalists were beaten by the police while reportingon a demonstration. Constitutional motions were filed and remained pending at the end of the year.
Cay men and lesbians
The government drafted an Equal Opportunities Bill to protect people from discrimination; however, it contained a clause excluding discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or sexual preferences. Sexual acts between consenting people of the same sex remained illegal and gay and lesbian people were regularly subjected to discrimination and intimidation.
Domestic violence
In August an Amendment to the Domestic Violence Act was passed by parliament. This provides greater measures for the protection of victims and increases police powers in this area. However, despite this new legislation, there was little evidence of any decrease during the year in the extremely high occurrence of incidents of domestic violence.
238
Amnesty International Report 2000
